The Code
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Definitions and Word Usage
[Adopted as Secs. 1-2 and 1-3 of the 1973 Revised General
Ordinances]
§ 1-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Code, and in the interpretation and application of
all other ordinances heretofore or hereafter adopted, except as the context
may otherwise require:
CHARTER — Mayor-Council Plan E of the Optional Municipal Charter Law
(N.J. Laws of 1950, Ch. 210, as amended).[Amended 1-9-2006 by Ord. No.
38-2005]
CLERK or TOWNSHIP CLERK — The Municipal Clerk duly appointed
pursuant to law.
DEPARTMENT — An organizational unit of the Township government
established or designated by ordinance or this Code as a department,
together with any agency or instrumentality of the Township government
not allocated or assigned to such organizational unit.
GENERAL LAW — Statutes which are not inconsistent with the charter and
either are by their terms applicable or available to all municipalities or
relate to taxation, local courts, education, health, public authorities serving
more than one municipality, and municipalities in an unsound financial
condition.
LICENSED — Licensed in accordance with the appropriate section or
chapter of this Code.1
MONTH — A calendar month unless otherwise specifically provided.
ORDINANCE — Any act of local legislation heretofore or hereafter adopted,
and including this Code, so long as it shall have been adopted by the
procedure required for the adoption of an ordinance and so long as it shall
remain in force and effect pursuant to law.
PERSON — Any individual, natural persons, partnerships, joint ventures,
societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts, corporations or
unincorporated groups; or any officers, agents, employees, servants, factors
or any kind of personal representatives of any thereof in any capacity,
acting either for himself or for any other person, under either personal
appointment or pursuant to law.
STREET — Includes a street, avenue, road, alley, lane, highway, boulevard,
concourse, driveway, culvert, sidewalk and crosswalk, and every class of
road, square, place or municipal parking field used by the general public.
TOWNSHIP COUNCIL, MUNICIPAL COUNCIL or COUNCIL — The
governing body of the Township.
1. Editor's Note: Original definition of “Manager,” which previously followed this definition,
was deleted 1-9-2006 by Ord. No. 38-2005.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-1
1:3
TOWNSHIP, MUNICIPAL or MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Old Bridge
in the County of Middlesex and State of New Jersey.[Amended 1-9-2006
by Ord. No. 38-2005]
YEAR — A calendar year unless otherwise specifically provided.
§ 1-2. Word usage.
For the purpose of this Code and any other ordinances heretofore or
hereafter adopted, except as the context may otherwise require:
A. The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future,
the present.
B. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural, the singular.
C. "Shall" is mandatory, and "may" is permissive.
D. The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by
excluding the first and including the last day, and if the last day be a
Sunday, a legal holiday, or a day on which the offices of the Township
are closed, that day shall be excluded.
E. "Writing" and "written" shall include printing, typewriting and any
other mode of communication using paper or similar material which is
in general use, as well as legible handwriting.
F. Any citation of a statute, law or ordinance contained in this Code shall
be deemed to refer to such statute, law or ordinance as amended,
whether or not such designation is included in the citation.
G. Whenever a specific time is used in this Code, it shall mean the
prevailing and established time in effect in the State of New Jersey
during any day in any year.
§ 1-1 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 1-2
1:4
ARTICLE II
Penalty
[Adopted as Sec. 4-16 of the 1973 Revised General Ordinances;
amended in its entirety 1-27-1994 by Ord. No. 6-94]
§ 1-3. Maximum penalty. [Amended 1-9-2006 by Ord. No. 38-2005]
For violation of any provision of any chapter of this Code or any other
ordinance of the Township where no specific penalty is provided regarding
the section or sections violated, the maximum penalty, upon conviction,
shall be a fine not exceeding $1,250, imprisonment for a period not
exceeding 90 days or a period of community service for not more than 90
days, or any combination thereof.
§ 1-4. Separate violations.
Except as otherwise provided, each and every day in which a violation of
any provision of this chapter or any ordinance of the Township exists shall
constitute a separate violation.
§ 1-5. Application.
The maximum penalty stated in this article is not intended to state an
appropriate penalty for each and every violation. Any lesser penalty,
including a nominal penalty or no penalty at all, may be appropriate for a
particular case or violation.
§ 1-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-5
1:5

ARTICLE III
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 1-9-2006 by Ord. No. 38-2005]
§ 1-6. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the Township of Old Bridge
of a general and permanent nature adopted by the Township Council of
the Township of Old Bridge, as revised, codified and consolidated into
chapters and sections by General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of
Chapters 1 through 540, together with an Appendix, are hereby approved,
adopted, ordained and enacted as the "Code of the Township of Old Bridge,"
hereinafter known and referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-7. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, except
such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or
continued in force.
§ 1-8. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
§ 1-9. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Township Clerk and shall remain there for use and examination by the
public until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this ordinance
shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk of the Township
of Old Bridge by impressing thereon the Seal of the Township, as provided
by law, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Clerk
of the Township, to be made available to persons desiring to examine the
same during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the governing
body to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Township of Old
Bridge" shall be understood and intended to include such additions and
amendments. Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the
Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided
hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as
amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-11
1:7
§ 1-11. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the Township of Old Bridge, pursuant to law, shall cause
this Adopting Ordinance to be published, in the manner required, in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Township. Sufficient copies of the
Code shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk for inspection by the
public at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and
publication of this Adopting Ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of
the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered
to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-12. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk or someone authorized and directed by
the Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the
Code required to be filed in his or her office for the use of the public. All
changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the
Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until
such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code
book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-13. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the Clerk, or an authorized agent of the Clerk, upon the payment of a fee to
be set by the Township Council. The Clerk may also arrange for procedures
for the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-14. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Township
of Old Bridge to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section or
any part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to one or more
of the following: a fine of not more than $1,250, imprisonment for not more
than 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, in the
discretion of the Judge imposing the same.
§ 1-15. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed
to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts
thereof.
§ 1-11 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 1-16
1:8
§ 1-16. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-17. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance and
not contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the effective date of
this Adopting Ordinance, except as hereinafter provided. This ordinance
specifically repeals the Revised General Ordinances of the Township of
Madison (now Old Bridge), 1973, adopted 8-8-1973, as amended and
supplemented.
§ 1-18. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-17 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to 5-23-2005.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of
the Township's indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
§ 1-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-18
1:9
§ 1-19. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges or the approval
of the municipal budget.
J. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
K. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
L. Any ordinance adopting or amending the Zoning Map.
M. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees.
N. All zoning and land use legislation.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain grammatical
changes and other minor changes were made in one or more of said
ordinances. It is the intention of the Township Council that all such
changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so changed
had been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the changes, amendments or revisions as set forth in
Schedule A2 attached hereto and made a part hereof are made
herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance.
(Chapter and section number references are to the ordinances as they
have been renumbered and appear in the Code.)
2. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-19B, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article III. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, deleted) 1-9-2006 by Ord. No.
38-2005." Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in
the Township offices.
§ 1-18 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 1-19
1:10
ARTICLE IV
Adoption of Land Development Codification
[Adopted 6-25-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-10]
§ 1-20. Adoption of revised and renumbered legislation.
The Land Development Ordinance of the Township of Old Bridge, adopted
7-20-1992 by Ordinance No. 23-92, as amended, as revised and codified by
General Code, is hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as the
land development legislation of the Township of Old Bridge.
§ 1-21. Changes to land development legislation.
§ 1-22. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent herewith are
repealed to the extent of such inconsistencies.
§ 1-23. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance is
for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not
affect the remaining portions of this ordinance.
§ 1-24. Copies available to public.
Copies of Chapter 250, Land Development, shall be placed on file for public
examination and acquisition at the Township Clerk's office during regular
business hours, and upon final passage of Chapter 250, Land Development,
copies shall be made available to the public.
A. In compiling and preparing the land development legislation for
adoption and revision as part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4,
certain grammatical changes, numbering and other minor changes
were made in the ordinance. It is the intention of the Township Council
that such changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so
changed had been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the changes, amendments or revisions as set forth in
Schedule A3 and on file in the office of the Township Clerk are to
become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance. (Chapter
and section number references are to the ordinance as it has been
renumbered and appears in the Code.)
3. Editor's Note: Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-21B, the chapters, parts and sections
which were added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated
throughout the Code by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article IV.
During routine supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions
will be replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, deleted) 6-25-2007 by Ord.
No. 2007-10." Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file
in the Township offices.
§ 1-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-24
1:11
Chapter 5
ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Ethics — See Ch. 145.
Defense and indemnification of officers and
employees — See Ch. 119.
Personnel policies — See Ch. 351.
Public records — See Ch. 380.
Volunteer incentives — See Ch. 510.
§ 1-24 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 1-24
1:12
ARTICLE I
Purpose; Title; Definitions
§ 5-1. Declaration of purpose; short title.
§ 5-2. Definitions; word usage.
A. The Municipal Council adopts this chapter as an administrative code for
the organization and administration of the government of the Township,
pursuant to Mayor-Council Plan of the Optional Municipal Charter Law,
Laws of 1950, Chapter 210, as amended (N.J.S.A. 40:69A-1 et seq.).
B. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Administrative
Code of Old Bridge."
A. Terms defined. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
ADMINISTRATOR — The Director of the Department of Administration,
who shall be known and designated as the "Business Administrator,"
appointed pursuant to the Charter and this chapter, or any Assistant,
Deputy or Acting Administrator serving in place of the Business
Administrator pursuant to the Charter or this chapter.
CHARTER — Mayor-Council Plan of Chapter 210 of New Jersey Laws of
1950, as amended and supplemented.4
CLERK — The Municipal Clerk appointed pursuant to the Charter and
this chapter.
COUNCIL — The local legislative body of the municipality constituted
and elected pursuant to the Charter and this chapter and designated as
the "Municipal Council of the Township of Old Bridge."
DEPARTMENT — An organizational unit of the municipal government.
All of the administrative functions, powers and duties of the
municipality, other than those vested in the office of the Municipal
Clerk or office of the Municipal Tax Assessor, are allocated and assigned
among and within the departments which are established or designated
by or pursuant to this chapter.
DIRECTOR — The head of a department appointed by the Mayor with
the advice and consent of the Council.
GENERAL LAW — Any law or provision of law, not inconsistent with
the Optional Municipal Charters Law,5 heretofore or hereafter enacted
which is, by its terms, applicable or available to all municipalities,
and the following additional laws, whether or not such additional laws
are so applicable or available to all municipalities: legislation relating
to taxation, local courts, education, health, public authorities serving
4. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:69A-1 et seq.
5. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:69A-1 et seq.
§ 5-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-2
1:13
more than one municipality and to municipalities in unsound financial
condition.
GOVERNING BODY — The Municipal Council as constituted under the
Charter.
MONTH — A calendar month unless otherwise specifically provided.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Old Bridge in the County of
Middlesex.
ORDINANCE — An act of the Council as defined in N.J.S.A. 40:49-1 et
seq.
PERSON — Any corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization or other entity, as well as an individual.
PRESIDENT — The President of the Council.
YEAR — A calendar year unless otherwise specifically provided.
B. Construction. For the purpose of this chapter and any other ordinance
or resolution heretofore or hereafter adopted, except as the context
may otherwise require:
(1) The present tense includes the past and future tenses; and the
future, the present.
(2) The masculine gender includes the feminine and the neuter.
(3) The singular number includes the plural; and the plural, the
singular.
(4) "Shall" is mandatory, and "may" is permissive.
(5) The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by
excluding the first day and including the last day, and, if the last
day is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, that day shall be
excluded.
(6) "Writing" and "written" include any printing, typewriting and any
other mode of communication using paper or similar material
which is in general use, including but not limited to data sheets,
data processing cards, photographs, photographic negatives, photo
record, tape recordings, wire recordings, transcripts or recordings,
as well as legible handwriting.
§ 5-2 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 5-2
1:14
ARTICLE II
Office of the Mayor
§ 5-3. Organization of government.
The government of the Township of Old Bridge shall consist of the Mayor,
the Council and such other officers and employees as may be duly appointed
pursuant to the Charter, general law or ordinance.
§ 5-4. Executive power.
§ 5-5. Duties.
A. The executive power of the municipality shall be exercised by the
Mayor. The Mayor may assign and reassign, transfer and retransfer,
from time to time, either temporarily or permanently, any property or
personnel from one administrative unit to another as the efficient
management of the town government may require, subject to the
express provisions of the Charter, this chapter and other general law.
B. The Mayor shall assign or approve the assignment of space in public
buildings or other public places for the temporary or permanent use of
any department, body, officer, agency or instrumentality and shall,
through the Business Administrator, control the assignment, allocation
and use of furniture, equipment or other public property in the
Township government.
A. The Mayor shall:
(1) Enforce the provisions of the Charter, the Township ordinances and
all applicable general laws.
(2) Supervise all the departments of the Township government.
(3) Require each department to make an annual and such other reports
of its work as he may deem desirable.
(4) Report annually to the Council and the public on the condition and
requirements of the Township government.
(5) Make recommendations for action by the Council on such matters
as he believes are in the public interest.
(6) Appoint all officers and employees as required by the Charter, this
chapter and by general law.
B. The Mayor may attend meetings of the Council and may take part in
discussions of the Council but shall have no vote except in the case of a
tie on the question of filling a vacancy in the Council, in which case he
may cast the deciding vote.
§ 5-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-6
1:15
§ 5-6. Veto power.
Ordinances adopted by the Council shall be submitted to the Mayor, and
he shall, within 10 days after receiving any ordinance, either approve the
ordinance by affixing his signature thereto or return it to the Council by
delivering it to the Municipal Clerk, together with a statement setting forth
his objections thereto or to any item or part thereof. No ordinance or any
item or part thereof shall take effect without the Mayor's approval, unless:
§ 5-7. Appointment, removal and term of directors.
§ 5-8. Preparation of budget. [Amended 1-9-2006 by Ord. No.
38-2005]
A. The Mayor fails to return the ordinance to the Council within 10 days
after it has been presented to him; or
B. The Council, upon reconsideration thereof on or after the third day
following its return by the Mayor, shall, by a vote of 2/3 of the members,
resolve to override the Mayor's veto. Reconsideration shall occur at the
next regular Council meeting occurring on or after the third day
following its return by the Mayor.
A. The Mayor shall, with the advice and consent of the Council, appoint
the Business Administrator and the director of each department
established by this chapter. The Business Administrator and each
director shall serve during the term of office of the Mayor appointing
him and until the appointment and qualification of his successor.
B. Removal. The Mayor may, in his discretion, remove any department
head after notice and opportunity to be heard. Prior to removing a
department head, the Mayor shall first file written notice of his
intention with the Council, and such removal shall become effective on
the 20th day after the filing of such notice unless the Council shall, prior
thereto, have adopted a resolution, by a two-thirds vote of the whole
number of the Council, disapproving the removal.
A. The municipal budget shall be prepared by the Mayor with the
assistance of the Business Administrator. During the month of May, the
Mayor shall require all department heads to submit requests for
appropriations for the ensuing budget year and to appear before the
Mayor or the Business Administrator at public hearings, which shall be
held during that month, on the various requests.
B. On or before the 15th day of July, the Mayor shall submit to the Council
his recommended budget, together with such explanatory comment or
statement as he may deem desirable. The budget shall be in such form
as is required by law for municipal budgets and shall, in addition, have
appended thereto a detailed analysis of the various items of
expenditure and revenue.
§ 5-6 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 5-9
1:16
§ 5-9. Acting Mayor.
The Mayor shall designate the Business Administrator, any other
department head or the Municipal Clerk to act as Mayor whenever the
Mayor shall be prevented, by absence from the municipality, disability or
other cause, from attending to the duties of his office. During such time, the
person so designated by the Mayor shall possess all the rights, powers and
duties of the Mayor. Whenever the Mayor shall have been unable to attend
to the duties of his office for a period of 60 consecutive days for any of the
above-stated reasons, an Acting Mayor shall be appointed by the Council,
who shall succeed to all the rights, powers and duties of the Mayor or the
then Acting Mayor. Upon return of the Mayor to the duties of his office,
the term of the Acting Mayor shall immediately cease. In the event that a
Councilman is appointed Acting Mayor, he shall give up all duties, powers
and functions of Councilman during his term as Acting Mayor.
§ 5-10. Committees.
The Mayor may establish such advisory committees, from time to time, as
he believes advisable and abolish any such committees which he believes
are no longer necessary.
§ 5-11. Compensation.
A. The Mayor shall be compensated annually at the rate of 2 1/2 times that
of Councilman, to be paid as all other salaries are paid.
B. Where an ordinance provides for an increase, decrease or alteration in
the salaries, wages or compensation to be paid to the Mayor, the
ordinance or that portion thereof which provides for the increase,
decrease or alteration shall not become operative for the Mayor until
the first full term following the next respective election thereof. [Added
1-11-1985 by Ord. No. 36-84]
§ 5-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-11
1:17

ARTICLE III
Council
§ 5-12. Legislative power.
The legislative power of the municipality shall be exercised by the Municipal
Council, except as may be otherwise provided by general law.
§ 5-13. Powers and duties.
The Council, in addition to such other powers and duties as may be
conferred upon it by this chapter or otherwise by general law, may:
§ 5-14. Budget and control.
§ 5-15. Independent annual audit.
The Council shall cause to be made an annual audit of the Township's
accounts and financial transactions as required by law. Such annual audit
shall be made by a registered municipal accountant of New Jersey selected
by the Council.
A. Require any municipal officer, in its discretion, to prepare and submit
sworn statements regarding his official duties and the performance
thereof and otherwise investigate the conduct of any department, office
or agency of the municipal government.
B. Remove any municipal officer, other than the Mayor or a member of the
Council, for cause, upon notice and an opportunity to be heard.
A. Upon the submission of the budget to the Council by the Mayor, the
Council may reduce any item or items in the Mayor's budget by a vote of
a majority of the Council, but an increase in any item or items therein
shall become effective only upon an affirmative vote of 2/3 of the
members of the Council.
B. The Council shall, where practicable, provide for the maintenance of a
system of work programs and quarterly allotments for operation of the
budget. It shall be the duty of the officer or department administering
any such program to develop and report the appropriate unit cost of
budgeted expenditures.
C. The Council shall provide, by ordinance, for the exercise of a control
function in the management of the finances of the municipality by some
officer other than the Business Administrator. The control function shall
include provision for an encumbrance system of budget operation, for
expenditures only upon written requisition, for the preaudit of all
claims and demands against the municipality prior to payment and for
the control of all payments out of any public funds by individual
warrants for each payment to the official having custody thereof.
§ 5-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-16
1:19
§ 5-16. President and Vice President of Council. [Amended
1-26-1998 by Ord. No. 5-98]
Pursuant to the Charter, at its organization meeting, the Council shall elect
a President of the Council from among its members. At the same time, the
Council shall elect a Vice President of the Council to serve, who shall have
the functions, powers and duties of the President of the Council whenever
the President may be absent.
§ 5-17. Chairperson Pro Tem. [Added 1-26-1998 by Ord. No. 5-98]
In the event both the President of Council and the Vice President of Council
are absent from a particular meeting of Council, a Chairperson Pro Tem
shall be selected from among the members present. Such Chairperson Pro
Tem shall preside over the meeting at which he or she is selected only. In
the event of a deadlock in selecting a Chairperson Pro Tem, the Clerk shall
preside over the meeting.
§ 5-18. Duties of President.
§ 5-19. Clerk of the Council.
The Municipal Clerk shall serve as Clerk of the Council. He shall keep a
journal of its proceedings and record the minutes of every meeting and shall
have such other functions, powers and duties as are provided by the Code.
§ 5-20. Meetings of Council. [Amended 2-28-1985 by Ord. No. 8-85;
3-19-1990 by Ord. No. 6-90; 12-10-1992 by Ord. No. 48-92;
12-22-1994 by Ord. No. 90-94]
A. The President of the Council shall preside at its meetings.
B. He shall preserve order and decorum at all meetings of the Council.
C. He shall state every question coming before the Council.
D. He shall announce the decisions of the Council.
E. He shall decide all questions of order.
F. He shall appoint all special committees of the Council.
G. He shall sign all ordinances and resolutions adopted by the Council
during his presence.
H. For the purpose of receiving resumes, the Council President shall
announce to the Council and the public any vacancies or impending
vacancies on authorities, boards, commissions or committees, for which
the Council has appointment powers. The Council President shall give
copies of all resumes to the Council at the regular agenda meeting prior
to the public meeting at which the appointments are to be voted upon.
[Added 4-14-1984 by Ord. No. 6-84]
§ 5-16 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 5-20
1:20
A. Regular meetings. The Township Council shall, following a municipal
election, meet on January 1 at 12:00 noon for the purpose of
reorganization, unless that day is a Sunday, in which case it shall meet
in the next succeeding day. At other times, the Council shall reorganize
at its first regular meeting of the year. The Council shall meet regularly
on the second and fourth Monday of each month at 7:30 p.m., unless
otherwise specified; and shall meet for the general purposes of
formulating and discussing its agenda, local legislation and issues on
the first and third Monday of each month at 7:30 p.m., unless otherwise
specified. The Council may upon compliance with the Open Public
Meetings Act6 transact formal business at agenda meetings. Agenda
meetings shall be advertised together with regular meetings in the
schedule of regular meetings for purposes of the Open Public Meetings
Act. The Council may by resolution dispense with one or more
meetings. When the time for any regular meeting of the Council falls on
a legal holiday as prescribed by law, such meeting shall be held at the
same hour on the next succeeding day which is not a legal holiday or
such other date designated by resolution. Meetings shall be held at the
Old Bridge Township Municipal Building, One Old Bridge Plaza, or at
such place as may be designated by the Township Council. Nothing
herein shall preclude the Township Council from establishing a
convenient meeting schedule on dates other than those set forth in this
subsection. All Council meetings shall conclude no later then 11:00
p.m., except that the Council President may extend the meeting for the
purpose of concluding official business. No new business shall be
started after 10:30 p.m. so that sufficient time may be provided for
public comments and Council comments prior to adjournment.
[Amended 11-8-2004 by Ord. No. 40-04; 1-9-2006 by Ord. No.
38-2005]
B. Special meetings. The Mayor or Council President may at any time, and
upon the written request of any five Council persons shall, call a special
meeting. The request and call for a special meeting shall specify the
purpose of the meeting, and no business shall be transacted at any
special meeting other than that specified unless all nine members agree
to consider business not specified in the call of the meeting. Such other
business may also be considered notwithstanding the absence of
consent by all nine Council persons if the business qualifies under the
Open Public Meetings Act as being of such urgency and importance
that a delay for purposes of providing adequate notice would be likely to
result in substantial harm to the public interest. The call for a special
meeting by the Mayor or President of Council shall be filed with the
Municipal Clerk and served upon each Council person at least 24 hours
prior to the time for which the meeting is called, provided that the
Mayor may determine that an emergency exists affecting the health and
safety of the people which requires consideration by the Council within
a shorter time, and upon such determination, which the Mayor shall set
forth in the call, the call may be filed with the Municipal Clerk for any
6. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
§ 5-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-20
1:21
§ 5-21. Order of business; agenda. [Amended 6-4-1984 by Ord. No.
10-84]
time not less than three hours prior to the time set for the meeting.
Upon the filing of any call for a special meeting, the Municipal Clerk
shall forthwith give notice thereof by telephone or fax to each Council
person at such place at he or she has previously designated for that
purpose and shall also serve or cause to be served a written copy of
the call upon each Council person by delivery of a copy to him or her
personally or by the leaving of a copy at his or her usual place of
abode. The Police Department shall cooperate with the Municipal Clerk
in effectuating such service of notice. Upon written waiver of notice
executed by all the members of the Council, a special meeting may be
held without prior notice, notwithstanding the above provisions of this
subsection. [Amended 1-9-2006 by Ord. No. 38-2005]
C. Open to public attendance. All regular and special meetings of the
Council shall be open to the public. The Attorney and Clerk shall attend
regular and special meetings of the Council.7
D. Quorum. A majority of all the members elected to the Council shall
constitute a quorum at any regular or special meeting of the Council,
but a lesser number than a quorum may adjourn any meeting. If no
member of the Council is present 1/2 hour after the appointed time for
any meeting, the Clerk shall adjourn the meeting.
E. Executive sessions. The Township Council shall keep reasonably
comprehensive minutes of its executive sessions, showing the time and
place, the members present, the subjects considered, the actions taken,
and any other information required to be shown in the minutes by law.
The executive session minutes, which need not be verbatim, shall be
maintained by the Township Clerk. Executive session minutes that have
been approved by the Township Council shall, upon request, be publicly
released no later than seven business days following receipt of the
request. Prior to public release, however, the Township Attorney shall
redact or suppress its executive session minutes only to the extent
authorized by law. [Amended 9-12-2005 by Ord. No. 29-2005;
8-14-2006 by Ord. No. 38-2006]
A. Order of business. The business of the Council at regular meetings and
so far as applicable at special meetings shall be taken up for
consideration and disposed of in the following order: [Amended
10-21-1991 by Ord. No. 23-91; 12-10-1992 by Ord. No. 48-92;
8-28-1995 by Ord. No. 50-958;9-24-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-18]
(1) Salute to the flag, invocation by Council member and quorum roll
call.
7. Editor's Note: See also § 5-23, Addressing Council.
8. Editor's Note: Section 2 of this ordinance provided that the provisions of this ordinance
will terminate unless extended by Township Council on or before 3-1-1996.
§ 5-20 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 5-21
1:22
(2) Presentations.
(3) Approval of minutes of previous meetings.
(4) Bill list.
(5) Public hearings and/or adoption/amendment of those ordinances
for second reading.
(6) Preliminary public comments to Council, subject to the following
conditions and restrictions:
(a) During the preliminary public portion of the meeting, any
person may address the Township Council on any subject
matter(s) for a maximum period of five minutes; [Amended
2-26-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-03]
(b) Any such person desiring to speak during the preliminary
public portion shall first sign a list maintained by the Township
Clerk for such purpose; and
(c) Comments during the preliminary public comment portion of
the meeting shall not encompass second reading ordinances or
any other matter for which comment or a public hearing is to
occur at the meeting.
(7) Council member comments.
(8) Reports of Township Clerk and Township Attorney.
(9) Administrative report.
(10) Consent agenda.
(11) Ordinances for first reading.
(12) Public comments on any subject matter.
(13) Council member comments.
(14) Adjournment.
B. Agenda. The agenda for each regular and special meeting of the
Council shall be prepared by the Clerk. Except for emergency matters
which may be added to the agenda at any time with the approval of the
Mayor or the Council President, the agenda for each regular meeting of
the Council shall include only such matters of Council business as have
been presented or delivered to the Clerk no later than 10:00 a.m. on
Wednesday preceding the agenda meeting. As soon as the agenda for
each meeting has been prepared, the Clerk shall deliver a copy to each
Councilman, the Mayor and each department head. [Amended
12-10-1992 by Ord. No. 48-92; 7-29-1993 by Ord. No. 30-93;
1-9-2006 by Ord. No. 38-2005]
§ 5-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-21
1:23
§ 5-22. Conduct of meetings.
C. Consent agenda. Those items listed on the Council agenda which are
considered routine by the Township Council shall be listed under
consent agenda. Prior to voting upon any item on the consent agenda,
the presiding officer shall open the meeting to the public and the
Council to entertain requests for removal from the consent agenda.
There shall be no separate discussion of items on the consent agenda
unless a Council member so requests, in which event the item shall be
removed from the consent agenda and considered in its normal
sequence on the agenda. Items to be included in the consent agenda
may include but are not limited to approval of minutes, reports,
solicitation of bingos and raffles, conveyances, easements, leases and
agreements previously approved in principle. Those items which appear
on the consent agenda are not required to be read at the public meeting
in their entirety, but may be read by description only. Once a matter is
placed on the consent agenda, there shall be no separate discussion on
that item. Those items so approved under the consent agenda shall
appear in the Council minutes in their complete and proper form.
[Amended 1-9-2006 by Ord. No. 38-2005]
A. General procedure. Except as otherwise provided herein, meetings of
the Council shall be conducted according to Robert's Rules of Order,
latest update. [Amended 1-9-2006 by Ord. No. 38-2005]
B. Reading of the minutes. The minutes of the previous meeting of the
Council may be approved without reading if the Clerk has previously
furnished each Councilman with a copy thereof, but upon request of any
Councilman, the minutes or any part thereof shall be read prior to
approval.
C. Presiding officer may debate and vote. The presiding officer may move,
second and debate from the chair and may vote on any question, subject
only to limitations of debate as are, by these rules, imposed on all
members, and he shall not be deprived of any of the rights and
privileges of a Councilman by reason of his acting as the presiding
officer.
D. Closing debate. The Councilman moving the adoption of an ordinance
or resolution shall have the privilege of closing the debate.
E. Motion to reconsider. A motion to reconsider any action taken by the
Council may be made only at the meeting at which such action was
taken. It may be made either immediately during the same session or at
a recessed or adjourned session of such meeting. Such motion may be
made only by one of the prevailing side, but may be seconded by any
member and may be made at any time and have precedence over all
other motions, and it shall be debatable.
F. Remarks of Councilman. A Councilman may request, through the
presiding officer, the privilege of having an abstract of his statement on
§ 5-21 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 5-22
1:24
§ 5-23. Addressing Council.
Any person desiring to address the Council shall first seek to be recognized
by the presiding officer and, upon recognition of such person, shall confine
his statement to the order of business prescribed by the section.
§ 5-24. Decorum at meeting; Sergeant at Arms.
The Director of the Department of Police or such member or members of his
Department as he may designate shall be Sergeant at Arms of the Council
meetings and shall be in attendance at Council meetings when requested by
the Council President. The Sergeant at Arms shall carry out all orders and
instructions given by the presiding officer for the purpose of maintaining
order and decorum at the Council meeting. Any person making personal,
impertinent or slanderous remarks or who shall become boisterous while
addressing the Council shall be barred by the presiding officer from further
attendance at that meeting of the Council unless permission to continue
is granted by a majority vote of the Council. Any person who violates the
order and decorum of the meeting shall be guilty of an offense punishable
as provided by law. Upon instructions of the presiding officer, it shall be the
duty of the Sergeant at Arms to place such person under arrest and cause
any subject before the Council, not exceeding 100 words, entered in the
minutes. If the Council consents thereto, such abstract shall be entered
in the minutes.
G. Synopsis of debate. The Clerk may be directed by the presiding officer,
with consent of the Council, to enter in the minutes a synopsis of the
discussion on any question coming regularly before the Council.
A. Written communications. Under the order of business described as
"written communications," affected parties or their authorized
representatives may address the Council in regard to matters then
under discussion which are the subject of such communication.
B. Public portion. There shall be a public portion at all meetings of the
Township Council during which the public will be invited to speak on
any subject matter for a period not to exceed five minutes per person.
At regular meetings of the Township Council, an additional five-minute
opportunity to speak shall be permitted which shall be limited to items
listed on the agenda for action. If a statute, ordinance or Council
tradition permits a public hearing or public comment before a vote or
other action on any item at the meeting, such item shall not be subject
to this separate right to speak. Unless a different procedure is
established by vote of the Township Council, the public's right to speak
at agenda meetings shall be held at the end of the meeting. The public's
right to speak at regular meetings shall be held at a time established by
the Clerk on the published agenda unless the Township Council shall,
by majority vote, designate a different time for the public to make its
comments. [Amended 2-24-2003 by Ord. No. 05-03; 3-12-2012 by
Ord. No. 2012-08]
§ 5-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-24
1:25
him to be prosecuted pursuant to law, the complaint to be signed by the
presiding officer.
§ 5-25. Ordinances and resolutions.
§ 5-26. Procedure for adoption.
A. Procedure for introduction. Ordinances may be introduced and read on
first reading by reading the title only. After publication and notice of
hearing and upon the opening of the hearing, the ordinance shall be
given a second reading, which may also be by title only, and thereafter
it may be passed with or without amendments or rejected. Prior to the
second reading, a copy of the ordinance shall be posted on the bulletin
board or other public place upon which public notices are customarily
posted in the Municipal Building, and copies of the ordinance shall be
made available to members of the general public of the Township who
shall request such copies. Copies of each ordinance and resolution, in
printed or typewritten form and bearing a notation by the Department
of Law as to approval as to form and sufficiency, shall be mailed by the
Clerk to each Councilman at least 48 hours prior to introduction,
provided that the failure of the Clerk to make such mailing shall not
invalidate any action taken by the Council.
B. Prior approval or disapproval; drafting. Ordinances and resolutions
shall be drafted by the Department of Law upon motion of the Council
or request of the Mayor. It is understood that the ordinances requested
by the Mayor shall be through the Council President as all ordinances
must be sponsored by a Councilperson. Any ordinance or resolution
which affects the administration of any department of the municipal
government shall be submitted to the Mayor for his review and
comment prior to its introduction. [Amended 7-9-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-16]
C. All ordinances approved upon motion of Council or at the request of the
Mayor pursuant to Subsection B above shall first be listed for discussion
by the Council for the sole purpose of receiving an explanation
regarding the purpose and intent of said ordinance. In that regard,
debate regarding the ordinance shall not be permitted at this time, but
rather shall be reserved for the public hearing of the ordinance. In
addition, any ordinance approved by Council by motion to be drafted
may also be moved for first reading (introduction) at the same meeting
that it is listed for discussion by Council prior to it being introduced
upon motion approved by the majority of Council then present at such
meeting. [Added 7-9-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-16]
A. An ordinance may be adopted by the Council only by the affirmative
vote of at least a majority of all members of the Council. Each ordinance
shall be published by the Clerk, considered and adopted by the Council
and become effective according to the procedure prescribed by the
Charter.
§ 5-24 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 5-26
1:26
§ 5-27. Ordinances to be delivered to Mayor.
§ 5-28. Passage over veto.
The Council shall reconsider any ordinance returned by the Mayor within
the time permitted by the Charter, together with a statement setting forth
his objections. The recommendations of the Mayor shall be reconsidered
at the next meeting of the Council which occurs not less than three days
following the return of the ordinance by the Mayor. Whenever an ordinance
has been reconsidered by the Council following a veto by the Mayor, the
Clerk shall append to such ordinance a certification of the action of the
Council upon such reconsideration in substantially the following form:
I HEREBY CERTIFY that the above ordinance adopted by the Township
Council on the __________ day of __________, _____, was delivered to me
on the __________ day of __________ together with the Mayor's statement
of reasons for his veto of such ordinance, item or part thereof. On
reconsideration thereof, on the __________ day of __________ (the Council
duly resolved by the affirmative vote of 2/3 of its members to enact such
ordinance, item or part thereof notwithstanding the Mayor's veto) or (the
Mayor's veto was sustained).
Dated:
Township Clerk
B. Resolutions, unless laid over by a majority vote of the Council, shall be
acted upon at the same time at which they are introduced.
C. The vote of the Council upon every ordinance and resolution shall be
taken by the Clerk by roll call, and he shall record in the journal the
ayes and nays and not voting or abstains, as the case may be, on each
question put to vote.
D. Unless a member of the Council who is present states that he is not
voting or abstains, the Clerk shall record him as voting in the
affirmative.
A. All ordinances shall be introduced, read, heard and enacted in the
manner provided by general law. Each ordinance adopted by the
Council shall be promptly delivered by the Clerk to the Mayor. Each
ordinance shall be returned by the Mayor to the Township Clerk after
the Mayor has affixed his signature thereto or after the expiration of 10
days from the date of its delivery to the Mayor in any event.
B. No ordinance, other than the Local Budget Ordinance, shall take effect
less than 20 days after its final passage by Council and approval by the
Mayor, where such approval is required, unless the Council shall adopt
a resolution declaring an emergency and at least 2/3 of all the members
of the Council vote in favor of such resolution.
§ 5-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-29
1:27
§ 5-29. Ordinances not returned by Mayor.
When an ordinance shall take effect without the Mayor's signature by
reason of his failure to return it to the Council by filing it with the Clerk
within 10 days after it has been presented to him, the Clerk shall append to
such ordinance a certificate in substantially the following form:
I HEREBY CERTIFY that the above ordinance was adopted by the Township
Council on the__________ day of __________, _____ and was presented to the
Mayor duly certified on the __________ day of __________ and upon his failure
to sign it or to return and file it with the Clerk within 10 days thereafter,
the said ordinance took effect in like manner as if the Mayor had signed it.
Dated:
Township Clerk
§ 5-30. Filing of reports and resolutions.
All reports to the Council and all resolutions shall be filed with the Township
Clerk and entered in the minutes of the Council.
§ 5-31. Compensation.
§ 5-32. Mayoral appointments.
A. The compensation of each Councilman shall be $6,000 per annum,
unless and until otherwise provided by the Salary Ordinance, to be paid
as all other salaries are paid.
B. The President of the Council, by reason of his additional duties, shall
receive an additional $1,000 annually, to be paid as all other salaries
are paid.
C. Where an ordinance provides for an increase, decrease or alteration in
the salaries, wages or compensation to be paid to elected members of
the governing body, the ordinance or that portion thereof which
provides for the increase, decrease or alteration shall not become
operative for any member or members of the governing body until the
first full term following the next respective election thereof. [Added
1-11-1985 by Ord. No. 36-84]
A. Where the Council consent of a mayoral appointment is required by
statute, the same shall be read by the Clerk of the Council or his
designee and, unless otherwise ordered, shall be considered by the
Council under new business.
B. When the appointment is taken up for action, the President shall put the
question on each appointment as follows: "Will the Council confirm the
appointment?" On that motion, a vote shall be ordered. If five or more
members vote to confirm, the President shall announce. "The
§ 5-29 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 5-32
1:28
§ 5-32.1. Limitation on power of eminent domain. [Added 8-16-2010
by Ord. No. 2010-23]
The Township Council of the Township of Old Bridge shall not adopt an
ordinance using the Township’s power of eminent domain to acquire private
property against the wishes of the property owner for private development
solely to increase tax ratables or tax revenue derived from the property, and
this power shall only be used by the Township to acquire private property:
appointment is confirmed." If less than five members vote to confirm,
the President shall announce. "The appointment is rejected."
C. Action by confirmation or rejection upon any appointment made by the
Mayor shall not be postponed or delayed by the Council longer than for
one regular meeting following receipt from the Mayor.
D. Within two days after confirmation or rejection of an appointment, the
Clerk of the Council shall, in writing, notify the Mayor of that fact.
E. In the event that an appointment is rejected, the Mayor shall, within 90
days of receipt of the rejection, make another appointment to said
position, which shall be considered by the Council pursuant to this
section. The Council may at any time within the ninety-day period
reconsider an appointment which has been rejected.
A. When the property is to be opened to the public or for the public’s use
or necessary to support a public purpose, including infrastructure; or
B. When the acquisition is necessary to eliminate blight or another
existing use of the property that inflicts an affirmative harm on society;
or
C. Consistent with New Jersey Supreme Court opinion in Gallenthin.
§ 5-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-32.1
1:29

ARTICLE IV
Office of the Clerk
§ 5-33. Appointment; qualifications. [Amended 3-2-1992 by Ord. No.
7-92]
There shall be an office of the Municipal Clerk, the head of which shall be
the Municipal Clerk. The Municipal Clerk shall be appointed, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:69A-38, by the Council and shall, prior to his appointment obtain
certification as a registered municipal clerk in compliance with N.J.S.A.
40A:9-133 and shall receive such compensation as shall be provided by the
Salary Ordinance of the Township.
§ 5-34. Clerk of Council and committees.
The Clerk shall serve as Clerk of the Council and as secretary of any
special legislative committees of the Council appointed pursuant to the
Charter. He shall attend all meetings of the Council and of such committees
when required by the Chairman thereof and shall keep the minutes of
the proceedings of the Council and such committees. The minutes of each
meeting of the Council shall be signed by the officer presiding at the
meeting and by the Clerk.
§ 5-35. Ordinances and resolutions.
§ 5-36. Deputy Municipal Clerk. [Added 3-2-1992 by Ord. No. 7-92;
amended 2-13-1996 by Ord. No. 5-96]
There shall be an office of the Deputy Municipal Clerk in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40A:9-135. The Deputy Municipal Clerk shall be appointed by the
Council and shall serve a term of three years. During the absence or
disability of the Municipal Clerk, the Deputy Municipal Clerk shall have all
A. The Clerk shall record all ordinances and all resolutions of a permanent
character in books to be provided for that purpose. After each
ordinance, he shall also record and certify the proof of publication
thereof as required by law. Each ordinance so recorded shall be signed
by the Mayor, Attorney, Council President and the Clerk, who shall
attest that it was duly adopted upon a date stated, and when so signed,
the recorded copy shall be deemed to be a public record of the
ordinance. Any omission to record, sign or certify as herein required
shall not impair or affect the validity of any ordinance which has been
duly adopted. Each resolution so recorded shall be signed by the Clerk
and Township Council President. [Amended 6-12-2006 by Ord. No.
27-2006]
B. At the close of each year, the Clerk, with the advice and assistance of
the Municipal Attorney, shall bind, compile or codify all ordinances and
resolutions or true copies thereof which then remain in force and effect.
He shall also properly index the record books, compilation or
codification of ordinances and resolutions.
§ 5-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-36
1:31
powers of the Municipal Clerk and shall perform the functions and duties
of such office until such time as the Municipal Clerk returns to office or
the Council appoints a successor Municipal Clerk. The Deputy Municipal
Clerk shall receive such compensation as shall be provided by resolution
of the Township. The Deputy Township Clerk shall apply and obtain his/her
license as a registered municipal clerk according to the requirements of the
Department of Community Affairs and the NJ Municipal Clerks Association.
§ 5-37. Assistant Deputy Municipal Clerk. [Added 2-13-1996 by Ord.
No. 5-96; amended 1-9-2006 by Ord. No. 38-2005]
There shall be an office of the Assistant Deputy Municipal Clerk. The
Assistant Deputy Municipal Clerk shall serve during the absence or
disability of the Municipal Clerk and Deputy Municipal Clerk. The Assistant
Deputy Municipal Clerk shall receive such compensation as shall be
provided by resolution of the Township. The Assistant Deputy Municipal
Clerk shall apply and obtain his or her license as a registered municipal
clerk according to the requirements of the New Jersey Department of
Community Affairs and NJ Municipal Clerk's Association.
§ 5-38. Custodian of records. [Amended 1-9-2006 by Ord. No.
38-2005]
The Clerk shall have custody of and safely keep all records, books and
documents of the Township, except those committed by Charter or
ordinance to any other office. He shall, upon request and upon the payment
of the fees prescribed in Chapter 380, Records, Public, for the use of the
Township, furnish a certified copy of any such paper in his custody, under
the Corporate Seal of the Township.
§ 5-39. Corporate Seal.
The Clerk shall cause the Corporate Seal to be affixed to instruments and
writings when authorized by ordinance or resolution of the Council or when
necessary to exemplify any document on record in his office or to certify
any act or paper which from the records in his office appears to have been
a public act of the Township or a public document. He shall not affix the
Seal or cause or permit it to be affixed to any other instrument or writing or
other paper unless required by law or ordinance.
§ 5-40. Insurance; surety bonds; contracts.
The Clerk shall:
A. Be the depository and custodian of all official surety bonds furnished by
or on account of any officer or employee, except his own bond, which
shall be placed in the custody of the Township Treasurer; all insurance
policies upon or with respect to risks insured for the benefits of the
Township or to protect it against any claim, demand or liability
whatsoever; and all formal contracts for work, labor, services, supplies,
equipment and materials to which the municipality may be a party.
§ 5-36 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 5-40
1:32
§ 5-41. Other laws and ordinances.
In addition to such other functions, powers and duties as may be prescribed
by the Charter and ordinances, and subject to the supervision and direction
of the Mayor, the Clerk shall:
§ 5-42. Municipal mail.
Correspondence and other communications received shall be delivered to
the Clerk's office, where it shall be sorted and delivered immediately to
the proper department without opening when the address is to a specific
department or person. General municipal mail and mail addressed to the
Council shall be opened in the Clerk's office, and the Clerk shall either
reply to the correspondence and provide information requested or refer the
matter to the appropriate individual, department, board or body.
B. Have custody of all leases of property owned by the Township.
C. Be the depository for and have custody of all performance bonds
running to the Township as obligee or any other form of security given
by any contractor, subdivision developer or other person on account of
work done or to be done in or for the Township and maintain a
reference file on such items.
D. Report to the Mayor annually, at such time as the Mayor may require,
on the coverage, expiration date and premium of each surety bond and
contract of insurance, the nature and terms of outstanding leases, the
rent reserved by each and their respective expiration dates.
A. Perform all the functions required of municipal clerks by the General
Election Law (Title 19 of the Revised Statutes) and any other law or
ordinance.
B. Administer the provisions of the Township ordinances with reference to
the licensing of occupations and activities for which licenses are
required by law or ordinance to be obtained from the Clerk.
C. Issue such licenses as may be required by the State Alcoholic Beverage
Control Law9 and the ordinances of the Township.
D. Issue certificates as to approval of land subdivisions by the Planning
Board or the Council pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.), as amended. [Amended 1-9-2006 by Ord. No.
38-2005]
E. Have such other, different and additional functions, powers and duties
as may be prescribed by law or ordinance or delegated to him by the
Township Council. [Amended 1-9-2006 by Ord. No. 38-2005]
9. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq.
§ 5-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-43
1:33
§ 5-43. Tenure of office. [Added 3-2-1992 by Ord. No. 7-92]
A person holding the office of Municipal Clerk continuously for a period of
five years from the date of original appointment shall be granted tenure
in that office, in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:9-134. That person shall not
acquire tenure unless he holds a registered municipal certificate pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-133.2. A Municipal Clerk who acquires tenure shall not be
removed therefrom except for good cause shown after a fair and impartial
hearing.
§ 5-44. Vacancy. [Added 3-2-1992 by Ord. No. 7-92]
In the event that the Municipal Clerk's office is deemed vacant pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40A:9-12.1, the Council shall fill the office for the unexpired term
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-12.1 and N.J.S.A. 40:69A-38.
§ 5-43 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 5-44
1:34
ARTICLE V
Office of the Tax Assessor
§ 5-45. Appointment; qualifications.
There shall be an Office of Tax Assessor, the head of which shall be the
Tax Assessor, who shall be appointed by the Mayor. Vacancies in the office
of the Tax Assessor shall be filled for the unexpired term only. Prior to
his appointment, the Tax Assessor shall hold a New Jersey tax assessor's
certificate.
§ 5-46. Powers and duties. [Amended 1-9-2006 by Ord. No. 38-2005]
The Tax Assessor shall:
A. Have, perform and discharge all the functions, powers and duties
prescribed by law for a municipal assessor.
B. Maintain adequate assessment records of each separate parcel of real
property assessed or exempted and establish and maintain such files,
records and procedures as may be required for the valuation and
assessment of property pursuant to law.
C. Maintain a current Tax Map, in cooperation with the Division of
Engineering, of the Township as a public record as of October 1 of each
year and cause to be recorded thereon all changes in character of the
real property assessed, employing for that purpose the facilities of
other departments as provided by this chapter.
D. Maintain a current computerized “mod IV: database of residential
properties.
E. Appear, when required, as an expert regarding property values for the
municipality before the Middlesex County Tax Board or in Tax Court.
§ 5-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-46
1:35

ARTICLE VI
Administration Generally
§ 5-47. Administrative organization. [Amended 2-9-1998 by Ord. No.
14-98; 1-9-2006 by Ord. No. 38-2005]
The municipal government shall be organized into departments and offices
known and designated as follows:
A. Departments and offices.
(1) Office of the Municipal Clerk.
(2) Office of the Tax Assessor.
(3) Department of Law.
(4) Department of Finance.
(5) Department of Public Works.
(6) Department of Community Development.
(7) Department of Parks and Recreation.
(8) Department of Administration.
(9) Department of Police.
(10) Department of Health and Welfare.
B. Statutory boards and commissions.
(1) Local Assistance Board.
(2) Zoning Board of Adjustment.
(3) Planning Board.
(4) Municipal Utilities Authority.
(5) Environmental Commission.
(6) Library Board.
(7) Multiple-Dwelling Emergency Commission.
(8) Office of Consumer Affairs.
(9) Historic Preservation Commission.
C. Advisory committees.
(1) Transportation Committee.
(2) Ethics Committee.
§ 5-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-47
1:37
§ 5-48. Terms of office.
Except where otherwise expressly required by the Charter or general law,
department heads and subordinate officers and employees subject to
appointment by the Mayor shall be appointed for the term of the Mayor.
§ 5-49. Administrative rules and regulations; filing and publication.
No rule or regulation made by any department, officer, agency or authority
of the municipality, except such as relates to the organization or internal
management of the municipal government or part thereof, shall take effect
until it is filed with the Municipal Clerk. The Clerk shall maintain a current
compilation of all such rules and regulations, which shall be available for
public inspection in his office during business hours.
§ 5-50. Directors. [Amended 2-9-1998 by Ord. No. 14-98]
Each department shall be headed by a director, who shall be appointed by
the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council. Each department
head shall serve during the term of office of the Mayor appointing him and
until the appointment and qualification of his successor, unless otherwise
provided by law.
(3) Youth Guidance Committee.
(4) Health Advisory Committee.
(5) Human Resources Council.
(6) Human Relations Council.
(7) Economic Development Corporation.
(8) Affordable Housing Agency.
(9) Open Space Committee.
(10) Committee of Fair Rental Increases.
(11) Committee on Cable Television Review.
(12) Cultural Arts Committee.
(13) Film and Television Advisory Committee.
(14) Redevelopment Agency.
(15) Recreation Committee.
(16) Citizens Advisory Committee.
§ 5-47 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 5-51
1:38
§ 5-51. Subordinates.
Department heads shall appoint subordinate officers and employees within
their respective departments and may, with approval of the Mayor, remove
such officers and employees, subject to the provisions of the New Jersey
Revised Statutes or other general law.
§ 5-52. Duties of directors; internal organization.
§ 5-53. Vacancies in office of director of department.
Whenever a vacancy exists, by resignation, removal, unfilled or otherwise,
in the office of a director of any Township department, the Mayor may
A. The head of each department shall, subject to the supervision of the
Mayor, Business Administrator, this chapter and ordinances of the
Township:
(1) Devote his time as required for the proper and efficient discharge
of the duties of his respective office.
(2) Have, exercise and discharge the functions, powers and duties of
his respective office.
(3) Prescribe the internal organization of the department and the
duties of the subordinates and assistants, subject to approval of the
Mayor and Business Administrator.
(4) Administer the work of the department with respect to the
functions established by this chapter through the bureaus,
divisions and subdivisions established by this chapter and such
other units of administration as he may find necessary or desirable.
(5) Appoint officers and employees employed within the department
and, upon the basis of a written job description, assign functions,
powers and duties to them, subject to the provisions of the New
Jersey Revised Statutes or other general law.
(6) Delegate such of his powers as he may deem necessary for the
efficient administration of the department to be exercised under his
discretion and supervision by subordinate officers and employees.
(7) Report at least annually to the Mayor and Council, in such form as
may be approved by the Business Administrator, on the work of the
department during the preceding year.
B. Internal organization. The internal organization of each department
shall be determined by the director of the department and approved by
the Mayor and Business Administrator. Whenever an activity or
functional duty shall, by ordinance, be transferred from one department
to another department of the government, all the functions, powers and
duties thereof shall be and are transferred as of the effective date of the
ordinance.
§ 5-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-53
1:39
temporarily fill such vacancy by appointing either the Business
Administrator or another officer or employee of the Township as acting
director, who shall perform all the duties and functions of such department
head until the office shall be filled permanently. Any such appointment of an
acting director shall terminate not later than 90 days after the date of the
appointment unless the Council shall, by resolution, authorize one or more
extensions.
§ 5-53 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 5-53
1:40
ARTICLE VII
Department of Administration
§ 5-54. Department established.
There shall be a Department of Administration, the head of which shall be
the Business Administrator. He shall be responsible for the efficient and
economical administration of the Department and shall have the general
functions, powers and duties of a department head pursuant to this chapter.
§ 5-55. Functions, powers and duties.
The Business Administrator shall be a person of demonstrated executive
and administrative ability. He shall, prior to his appointment by the Mayor
with the advice and consent of the Council, be qualified in terms of
knowledge of and experience in accepted practice in respect to the duties
of his office as hereinafter stated. The Business Administrator need not be
a Township resident at the time of his appointment, but during his term of
office he may reside outside the Township only with approval of the Council.
His term of office shall coincide with the term of the Mayor, and his annual
compensation shall be fixed by ordinance of the Council. He shall, under the
direction and supervision of the Mayor:
A. Supervise the administration of each of the departments, offices and
agencies established by ordinance and, for this purpose, prescribe
standards and rules of administrative practice and procedure and
consult with the heads of departments of the Township government.
B. Study the organization and operation of any and all departments and
other spending agencies.
C. Prescribe and require each department and other spending agency for
which Township appropriations are made to maintain records and
produce reports of their respective workload and performance,
expressed in appropriate work units which he may prescribe or approve
for each of the departments and other spending agencies.
D. Develop and enforce, in cooperation with other department heads,
standards and procedures for the most efficient management of the
Township government, not inconsistent with the Charter and
ordinances of the Township.
E. Coordinate the operation and administration of the various
departments, divisions and subdivisions, offices and agencies of the
Township government.
F. Assist the Mayor in the preparation of the annual budget and maintain a
continuing review and analysis of budget operations work programs
and costs of municipal services.
G. Assign and reassign, transfer and retransfer, from time to time, either
temporarily or permanently, any property from one function to another
§ 5-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-55
1:41
§ 5-56. Acting Business Administrator.
Whenever and so long as there is a vacancy in the office of Business
Administrator, the Mayor may serve as Acting Business Administrator
without additional compensation, or the Mayor may appoint, with the advice
and consent of the Council, another suitable person to act as Acting
Business Administrator for a period of 90 days, unless the Council shall,
by resolution, authorize one or more extensions. The Acting Business
Administrator shall, for the time being, have all the functions, powers and
duties of the Administrator.
§ 5-57. Purchasing agent; policy to promote procurement of
recycled products. [Amended 8-15-1988 by Ord. No. 30-88;
5-13-1993 by Ord. No. 17-93]
or from one administrative unit to another, as the efficient management
of the Township government may require. [Amended 1-9-2006 by
Ord. No. 38-2005]
H. Be responsible for the development and administration of a sound
personnel system, acting as personnel administration, subject to the
express provisions of this chapter, of the New Jersey Revised Statutes,
as amended, and all other applicable general laws.
I. Report to the Council annually, at such time as it may require, on the
coverage, expiration date and premium of each surety bond and
contract of insurance, the nature and terms of outstanding leases
where the Township is landlord or tenant, the rent reserved by each
lease and their respective expiration dates.
A. Purchasing agent. [Amended 1-9-2006 by Ord. No. 38-2005;
12-8-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-24]
(1) There is hereby created the position of Purchasing Agent for the
Township of Old Bridge.
(2) The Purchasing Agent shall be appointed by the Mayor.
(3) The Purchasing Agent is required to possess a valid qualified
purchasing agent certificate, as issued by the New Jersey Division
of Local Government Services, Department of Community Affairs.
(4) The Purchasing Agent shall have, on behalf of the Municipal
Council of the Township of Old Bridge, the authority, responsibility
and accountability for the purchasing activity pursuant to Local
Public Contracts Law (N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.); to prepare public
advertising for and to receive bids and requests for proposals for
the provision or performance of goods, services and construction
contracts; to award contracts pursuant to New Jersey law in
accordance with the regulations, forms and procedures
promulgated by state regulatory agencies; and conduct any
§ 5-55 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 5-57
1:42
activities as may be necessary or appropriate to the purchasing
function of the Township of Old Bridge.
B. Recycled product procurement policy.10
(1) Purpose. This subsection shall be known as the "Recycled Product
Procurement Policy." Its purpose is to promote the reduction of
waste, and development of markets for recycled products and
recyclable products by establishing preferential purchase
programs applicable to all departments and contractors, thereby
diverting materials from the solid waste stream and avoiding the
costs of disposal for those materials.
(2) Definitions. The following terms shall have the assigned definitions
for all purposes under this subsection:
CONSUMER — One who uses goods or services for his, her or
its own needs rather than to produce other goods. This does not
include providers of value-added processes such as printers and
converters.
DESIGNATED RECYCLED PRODUCT — A product designated in
this subsection, or designated by the purchasing agency pursuant
to this subsection, that meets or surpasses the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) minimum recycled content
standards and other criteria for qualification as specified in this
subsection.
END PRODUCT — An item having completed the manufacturing
or converting process and having been distributed or sold to its
consumer.
MINIMUM RECYCLED CONTENT STANDARDS — Standards that
specify the minimum levels of preconsumer waste material and
postconsumer waste material content established pursuant to
§ 5-57B(6) of this chapter that is necessary for designated products
to qualify as designated recycled products.
NON-CHLORINE-BLEACHED PAPER PRODUCTS — Paper
products for which the manufacturer certifies that elemental
chlorine or chlorine-containing compounds have not been used
to bleach or otherwise process the paper used in the final end
product. In the case of manufacturers who use preconsumer waste
material and postconsumer waste material to be used in end
products, such manufacturers shall certify that chlorine-containing
compounds have not been used in the processing and production of
the end product.
POSTCONSUMER WASTE MATERIAL — Only those materials
generated by a consumer which have served their intended end
use, and which have been separated or diverted from solid waste.
Wastes generated during production of an end product are
10.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 429, Art. I, for provisions related to recycling.
§ 5-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-57
1:43
excluded. All materials collected from residential sources in a
municipal recycling program shall be considered postconsumer.
PRECONSUMER WASTE MATERIAL — Materials or by-products
generated after manufacturing of a product is completed, but
before the product reaches the end-use consumer. Preconsumer
waste material does not include home scrap, which are those scrap
materials or by-products generated by a company that can be used
by the generating company or parent company.
PURCHASING AGENCY — The department or agency responsible
for executing contracts for the supply of goods and services and
shall include any joint purchasing agreements the Township may
enter.
RECYCLABLE PRODUCT — A product which, after its intended
end use, 25% of the product has been diverted from the solid
waste stream for use as a raw material, in the manufacture of
another consumer or procurable product. For the purposes of this
definition, burning or composting of products shall not be
considered diversion.
RECYCLED PAPER — A paper product with the minimum recycled
content established by the purchasing agency pursuant to
§ 5-57B(6). "Recycled paper" means a paper product with not less
than 50% of its total weight consisting of preconsumer waste
materials or postconsumer waste materials with not less than 10%
of its total weight consisting of postconsumer waste materials.
REUSABLE PACKAGING OR PRODUCT — A package, product, or
container, which can be used in place of an alternative disposable
package or product, and which contains or holds a depletable
resource or which can be refurbished for resale, and can be refilled
or reused a minimum of five times by a consumer. Examples
include, but are not limited to, laser and copy machine toner
cartridges, typewriter cartridges and shipping containers.
(3) Designated recycled products. The following products shall be
considered as designated recycled products that can be procured if
they meet the minimum recycled content standards in accordance
with the policies of this Subsection B:
(a) Recycled paper and paper products (including, but not limited
to, writing and copying paper, napkins, towels, toilet tissue and
facial tissue);
(b) Compost products;
(c) Cement and asphalt concrete containing recycled aggregate,
tire rubber or glass cullet;
(d) Recycled concrete aggregate and asphalt;
(e) Lubricating oil and hydraulic oil with rerefined oil content;
§ 5-57 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 5-57
1:44
(f) Recycled antifreeze;
(g) Plastic lumber;
(h) Retreated and remolded tires;
(i) Products made from recycled tire rubber, including rubber
mats and playfield surfaces;
(j) Building insulation products manufactured using recycled
materials;
(k) Recycled paint;
(l) Recharged laser printer toner cartridges;
(m) Reusable products or products in reusable packaging where
the reusable products or packaging are alternatives to
disposable products or packaging;
(n) Lead acid batteries or rechargeable, reusable batteries; and
(o) Plastic traffic cones.
(p) Other recycled products as designated by the purchasing
agency.
(4) Policies. The following policies are hereby adopted by the Township
of Old Bridge:
(a) All departments shall practice waste reduction wherever
possible. All departments shall use reusable products and
recycled products or recyclable products whenever
practicable.
(b) The purchasing agency may offer a price-preference for any
designated recycled product or reusable product. Agencies
using this option must obtain products containing the highest
percentage of postconsumer content available.
(c) Departments may, at their option, require procurement of
designated reusable, or recycled and recyclable products.
(d) Departments shall require their contractors and consultants
(including private printers, food service vendors, etc.) to use
recycled products and recyclable products in fulfilling
contractual obligations.
(e) Departments shall promote the use of recycled products and
recyclable products by publicizing its procurement program
and by disseminating information about recycled products.
(f) When purchasing recycled products, all departments shall
maximize the procurement of recycled products that contain
the highest percentage of postconsumer waste materials.
§ 5-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-57
1:45
(g) The purchasing agent shall revise product procurement
specifications to eliminate any specifications that require the
use of virgin products or exclude the use of recycled products,
unless it can be demonstrated that such specifications are
necessary to protect health or safety or that recycled products
could not meet necessary performance standards.
(5) Paper and paper products.
(a) The recycled paper procurement goal for each user
department, expressed as a percentage of the total value of
paper purchased, shall be not less than 25% by 1994, not less
than 30% by 1995, and not less than 40% by 1996.
(b) The purchasing agency and departments shall ensure that the
title page of all reports printed on recycled paper bears an
imprint identifying the paper as recycled, and contains the
percentage of preconsumer and postconsumer content used.
(c) All imprinted letterhead paper, copy paper, envelopes and
business cards used by all departments shall be recycled
paper, and shall bear an imprint identifying the paper as
recycled.
(d) To reduce the volume of paper purchased, departments shall
use both sides of paper sheets used for copying and printing
purposes on documents that exceed five pages in length.
Departments shall ensure that all staff are informed of this
requirement.
(e) The Township's purchasing agent shall review existing
standards or specifications for tissue products, including but
not limited to, towels, toiler paper and napkins, and coffee
filters. The agency shall only purchase non-chlorine-bleached
tissue products, provided such products fall within the pricepreference
established by the purchasing agent.
(f) All requests for bids and proposals issued shall require that
contractors and consultants use recycled paper for documents
submitted to the Township of Old Bridge. Contractors doing
business with the municipality shall be advised of the
municipality's policies regarding reusable, recycled and
recyclable materials. All bids, proposals, reports and other
printed materials submitted to the Township of Old Bridge or
its agents pursuant to contractual obligations or rules and
regulations promulgated by the Township shall be submitted
on recycled paper and recyclable paper and utilize doublesided
printing. A contractor may request a waiver from this
rule if compliance would be technically impractical.
(6) Responsibilities of the purchasing agent. The purchasing agent
shall:
§ 5-57 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 5-57
1:46
(a) Establish, update, and promulgate a list of designated recycled
products that shall be purchased by the Township whenever
practicable. This list shall, at a minimum, contain the products
specified in § 5-57B(3). The purchasing agent may add to the
list required by this subsection designated recycled products
that are not specifically listed in § 5-57B(3). For purposes of
this subsection, "whenever practicable" means that recycled
products that meet quality standards set by the purchasing
agency.
(b) Adopt minimum recycled content standards for designated
recycled products. Except for reusable products or packaging,
minimum recycled content standards established for
designated recycled products shall require no less than 10%
postconsumer waste material content. The purchasing agency
may raise the postconsumer content standard above 10% when
such an increase will result in an increase in the total
utilization of postconsumer material within the products
purchased, used or submitted. For goods, supplies, and
materials and for which the United States Environmental
Protection Agency has adopted procurement guidelines under
the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (P.L.
94-580, 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq., 40 CFR Parts 248-250, 252,
253) as amended, the minimum recycled content standard may
not be less than content standards specified in such guidelines.
EPA guidelines for the purpose of procuring fly ash in concrete
are specifically limited to the ash generated from coal-burning
plants. In the case of printing and writing paper, the
purchasing agent shall set minimum recycled content
standards with not less than 50% of the paper's total weight
consisting of preconsumer waste materials or postconsumer
waste materials and with not less than 10% of its total weight
consisting of postconsumer waste material.
(7) Responsibilities of the Mayor. The Mayor shall:
(a) Designate, amongst existing, a recycled product procurement
coordinator who shall:
[1] Assure that copiers procured after enactment of this
subsection must be able to accept recycled paper and
reusable toner cartridges, and make double-sided copies.
[2] Inform departments of their responsibilities under this
Subsection B and provide implementation assistance.
[3] Compile and disseminate to departments information on
recycled product specifications and procurement
opportunities.
[4] Assist departments in resolving problems with recycled
product availability or performance.
§ 5-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-57
1:47
[5] Coordinate periodic meetings with representatives of
departments to review policy requirements, communicate
new procurement opportunities to departments and
monitor the status of policy implementation efforts and
product research results.
[6] Publicize the successes of the procurement policy.
[7] Evaluate supply and material usage by the department and
encourage department employees to reduce waste and
hence reduce generation of solid waste.
[8] Submit an annual report to the Mayor and Council
reflecting the implementation status of the procurement
program within 60 days following the end of each calendar
year, including:
[a] A compilation of procurement data collected from all
departments and parties charged with implementation
responsibility under this Subsection B.
[b] Evaluation of minimum recycled content standards
and procurement specifications, including
specification revisions made over the previous year
and future specification revisions to be made.
[c] A summary of program promotional efforts.
[d] An assessment of the effectiveness of the procurement
program and an evaluation of program goals.
[e] Descriptions and projections of future procurement
plans and opportunities.
[f] Recommendations for changes in procurement policy.
(8) Responsibilities of departments. Each department shall:
(a) Ensure that contracts issued by the department require
recycled material content wherever practicable and that
contractors provide certification of both recycled and
postconsumer content, and report the amount used.
(b) Report the progress of policy implementation by the
department at periodic meetings with the procurement
coordinator, including status of product evaluations being
conducted by the department and types of recycled products
purchased.
(c) Report total purchases of recycled products and nonrecycled
alternative products annually to the procurement coordinator.
(d) Report total quantities of nonrecycled goods in both tons and
dollars to the procurement coordinator.
§ 5-57 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 5-57
1:48
§ 5-58. Assignment and allocation of Planning Board and Board of
Adjustment.
For purposes of purchasing, the Planning Board and the Zoning Board
of Adjustment are allocated and assigned within the Department of
Administration.
§ 5-59. Division on Aging.
(e) Report total quantities of nonrecycled goods in both tons and
percentages of recycled content to the procurement
coordinator.
(f) Prepare an annual report containing the above information to
be submitted to the Mayor within 30 days following the end of
each calendar year. The said report shall be made available to
the Council and to the public upon request.
(9) Exemptions.
(a) Nothing contained in this Subsection B shall preclude user
departments from requiring recycled material content as a bid
specification.
(b) Nothing in this Subsection B shall be construed as requiring a
department or contractor to procure products that do not
perform adequately for their intended use, nor shall the
Township be required to pay for a recycled product a price
greater than 10% of the cost of a nonrecycled product.
A. There shall be a Division on Aging, the head of which shall be the
Director of Aging. The Director shall be appointed by the Mayor for a
term of one year.
B. The Division on Aging shall maintain a central source of information
and programs and services for older people; circulate current
knowledge related to aging to the public at large and to individuals and
groups to which such knowledge would be of benefit; and stimulate
expansion of existing service to more adequately meet the needs of
older people and, where desirable, encourage new programs to meet
these needs.
§ 5-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-59
1:49

ARTICLE VIII
Department of Law
§ 5-60. Office created. [Amended 3-2-1992 by Ord. No. 5-1992;
7-13-1998 by Ord. No. 56-98; 1-26-2004 by Ord. No. 02-04; 1-9-2006
by Ord. No. 38-2005; 1-23-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-01]
There shall be a Department of Law, the head of which shall be the Director
of Law and Municipal Attorney. The Municipal Attorney shall be appointed
by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Council, and shall serve
during the term of office of the Mayor and until the appointment and
qualification of his successor. The Municipal Attorney shall receive such
compensation as shall be provided by ordinance, subject to § 5-64 below, or
by contractual agreement. Prior to his appointment, he shall have been duly
admitted to the practice of law in this state for at least five years. He shall
be permitted to engage in the private practice of law.
§ 5-61. Powers and duties generally.
The Municipal Attorney shall be the legal advisor to the Mayor, to the
Council and to all departments, except as may be otherwise provided by
the Charter. He shall prosecute and defend actions and proceedings by and
against the Township and every department thereof. In furtherance of these
general powers, and without limitation thereto, he shall:
§ 5-62. Assistant Municipal Attorney and Special Counsel.
A. Advise the Council as to the form and sufficiency of all ordinances and
resolutions prior to their passage.
B. Review and approve all contracts, deeds, documents and instruments
prior to the execution thereof by or on behalf of the Township.
C. Conduct appeals from orders, decisions or judgments affecting any
interests of the Township as he may, in his discretion, determine to be
necessary or desirable or as directed by the Mayor or Council.
D. Subject to the approval of Council, have power to enter into any
agreement, compromise or settlement of any litigation in which the
Township is involved.
E. Render opinions, in writing, upon any question of law submitted to him
by the Mayor, the Council, the Business Administrator, the Town Clerk
or the head of any department with respect to their official powers and
duties.
F. Maintain a record of all actions, suits, proceedings and matters which
relate to the Township's interest and report thereon, from time to time,
as the Mayor or Council may require.
G. Have such other and different functions, powers and duties as may be
provided by the Charter or ordinance.
§ 5-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-62
1:51
A. Assistant Municipal Attorney. The Director of Law shall appoint the
Assistant Municipal Attorney, who shall serve for the term of the Mayor.
Prior to his appointment, any Assistant Municipal Attorney shall have
been admitted to the practice of law in the State of New Jersey for at
least five years. He shall receive such compensation as shall be
provided by ordinance or by contractual agreement to be authorized by
the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Council. He shall be
permitted to engage in the private practice of law. The Assistant
Municipal Attorney shall assist the Municipal Attorney in all of the
duties of his office with respect to such matters as should be assigned to
him, from time to time, by the Municipal Attorney. The Assistant
Municipal Attorney shall, during the absence or disability of the
Municipal Attorney, possess all the powers and perform all the duties of
the Municipal Attorney, and in the event of the death or resignation of
the Municipal Attorney or of the occurrence of a vacancy in the office
for any such reason, the Assistant Municipal Attorney shall act as
Municipal Attorney until the office is duly filled pursuant to law.
[Amended 3-2-1992 by Ord. No. 5-92; 1-14-1993 by Ord. No.
2-93; 1-23-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-01]
B. Municipal Prosecutor. [Amended 1-14-1993 by Ord. No. 2-93;
1-23-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-01]
(1) There shall be a Municipal Prosecutor who shall be responsible for
the conduct of prosecutions and appeals involving crimes and
offenses cognizable by the Municipal Court of the Township of Old
Bridge, except such crimes as may be the duty of the County
Prosecutor or Attorney General to prosecute. The Prosecutor shall
also prosecute violations of ordinances of the Township and
complaints of any department under state law.
(2) The Prosecutor shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice
and consent of the Council and shall serve for a term of one year or
until his or her successor takes office. Such appointment shall be
made for a calendar year term to expire on December 31 of the
year of the appointment. The Prosecutor shall be compensated by
contractual agreement, as determined by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the Council as stated herein.
(3) The Prosecutor shall exercise independent prosecutorial discretion
and shall not be supervised by the Director of Law.
C. Whenever the Municipal Attorney believes the interests of the Township
require, the Mayor may appoint special counsel to assist him in
specialized legal matters and in the preparation, trial or argument of
such legal matters or proceedings as may be determined. The
employment of special counsel shall be on a contractual basis and shall
be within the limits of available appropriations, with the approval of the
Mayor and subject to contractual approval by the Council as required
by the Local Public Contracts Law.11
§ 5-62 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 5-62
1:52
§ 5-63. Records and papers.
All papers, documents, memoranda, reports and other materials relating
to the administration of the office of the Municipal Attorney shall remain
the property of the Township. Upon the termination of his service with the
Township, the Municipal Attorney shall promptly surrender to his successor
all such property, together with a written consent to substitution of his
successor in all legal actions and proceedings then pending in which the
Township is a party. Any Assistant Municipal Attorney or special counsel
shall have a like duty and obligation upon the termination of his service with
the Township.
§ 5-64. Compensation. [Amended 2-21-1989 by Ord. No. 8-89;
3-2-1992 by Ord. No. 5-92; 1-14-1993 by Ord. No. 2-93; 7-13-1998
by Ord. No. 56-98; 1-23-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-01]
D. If the Municipal Attorney and Assistant Municipal Attorney should be
disqualified with respect to any matter, the Mayor, upon request of the
Municipal Attorney, shall appoint special counsel. Such appointments
by the Mayor shall be on a contractual basis and shall be subject to
contractual approval by the Council as required by the Local Public
Contracts Law.
A. Unless otherwise established by contractual agreement, the
compensation of the Director of Law shall be such sum annually as shall
be fixed by the Council pursuant to its authority under N.J.S.A.
40:69A-180(c).
B. Unless otherwise established by contractual agreement, the
compensation shall cover the following services:
(1) Attendance at public meetings of the Council.
(2) Attendance at caucus meetings of the Council as well as special
workshop meetings and any additional committee meetings as
requested.
(3) Conferences with the Mayor and Council.
(4) Conferences with the administrative staff.
(5) Conferences with consultants and other professionals.
(6) Legal advice and rendering written opinions to the Mayor, Council,
administrative staff, boards, commissions, committees, consultants
and professionals.
(7) Drafting of ordinances and resolutions.
(8) Representation of the Tax Assessor if requested before the Boards
of Taxation.
11.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.
§ 5-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-64
1:53
(9) Review and approval of all contracts, deeds and similar documents.
(10) Advice and oversight as requested by the Administrator with
regard to bidding procedures.
(11) Real property sales, including publications, bidding and services
involved in passage of title.
(12) Personal property sales, including publications, bidding and
services involved in passage of ownership.
(13) Alcoholic beverage control matters at the municipal level.
(14) Federal and state aid matters at the municipal level.
(15) Personnel matters, excluding labor negotiations and collective
bargaining agreements.
(16) Legal advice on capital improvement projects.
(17) Planning Board appeals to the Township Council.
(18) Zoning Board of Adjustment appeals to the Township Council.
(19) Rendering of such legal opinions as may be requested by Bond
Counsel.
(20) Administrative functions required of the Director of the
Department of Law.
(21) Tax foreclosures.
(22) Land acquisitions.
(23) Ordinary litigation (those actions venued in Superior Court, Special
Civil Part).
C. Unless otherwise established by contractual agreement, the
compensation shall not include services such as:
(1) Extraordinary litigation, which shall include any matter other than
ordinary litigation, including but not limited to matters regarding
the constitutionality of the municipal land use ordinance; class
action suits; discrimination suits; appearances before the Supreme
Court of New Jersey, all federal courts and the Appellate Division of
the Superior Court of New Jersey or such other matters resulting in
three or more consecutive trial days. In the event that
extraordinary litigation is required, the responsible attorney shall
be compensated by the Township at a rate of $135 per hour for
such matter. No lawsuit which could be covered by appropriate
insurance shall be handled by the Director, Assistant Director or
Special Counsel unless and until the Director has submitted the
claim to JIF and has been notified in writing that coverage has been
denied.
§ 5-64 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 5-64
1:54
§ 5-65. Benefits. [Added 3-2-1992 by Ord. No. 5-92; 1-9-2006 by
Ord. No. 38-2005; 1-23-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-01]
§ 5-66. Staff. [Added 3-2-1992 by Ord. No. 5-92]
In addition to the Municipal Attorney and the Assistant Municipal Attorney,
the Department of Law shall consist of such paralegal, clerical and
secretarial personnel as appointed by the Mayor.
(2) Legal research and drafting of major ordinances, i.e., PUD, major
zoning revisions, codification of ordinances, etc. The major nature
of the ordinance will be determined by the Council. Compensation
for such matters will be at a rate of $135 per hour.
D. Unless otherwise established by contractual agreement, the Director of
Law and the Assistant Township Attorney shall be reasonably
compensated on a voucher basis for all out-of-pocket expenses, such as
filing fees, postage, duplication, etc., incurred by the responsible
attorney in connection with the performance of his or her duties.
A. Unless otherwise established by contractual agreement, there shall be
payment by the Township on a voucher basis for all traveling,
miscellaneous business expenses, continuing legal education fees and
legal reference books and periodicals incurred in the course of the
official duties of the Township Attorney.
B. Unless otherwise established by contractual agreement, there shall be
payment by the Township on a voucher basis for all legal and filing fees
and court costs in connection with any legal matter or proceeding for
which the Municipal Attorney may be liable in his official capacity.
C. Unless otherwise established by contractual agreement, all employee
and personnel benefits, rules, regulations and policies of the Township
of Old Bridge relating to vacation, sick leave, holiday and other fringe
benefits as they now exist or shall hereafter be amended shall apply to
the Municipal Attorney.
§ 5-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-66
1:55

ARTICLE IX
Department of Finance
§ 5-67. Director of Finance. [Amended 9-6-1988 by Ord. No. 39-88]
There shall be a Department of Finance, the head of which shall be the
Director of Finance. He shall be appointed by the Mayor and, prior to his
appointment, shall be qualified by training and experience in municipal
budgeting, accounting and finance. He shall be certified as a municipal
finance officer by the Director of the Division of Local Government Services
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.1 et seq. or shall be licensed by the State
of New Jersey or any other state within the United States as either a
certified public accountant or a registered municipal accountant, in which
case he shall, as a condition of continued employment, have a period of
one year from the date of appointment and confirmation to become certified
as a municipal finance officer by the Director of the Division of Local
Government Services.
§ 5-68. General powers and duties of Director of Finance. [Amended
9-5-1989 by Ord. No. 26-89]
The Director of Finance, subject to the direction and supervision of the
Mayor, shall:
A. Serve as the Chief Financial Officer of the municipality, when appointed
to such position.
B. Supervise the work of the Department and its divisions.
C. Through the divisions established by this article and otherwise subject
to the requirements of the State Division of Local Government and of
the Charter and this Code:
(1) Have the authority to review and monitor the accounting,
preauditing and control of all municipal revenues and expenditures
and the custody, receipt and disbursement of municipal funds.
(2) Be responsible for the safety and investment of the Township's
investments and management of the Township's debt.
(3) Be responsible for the development of financial policies for
recommendation to the Mayor and the safeguarding of the
Township's financial interests to the fullest.
D. Be responsible for all personnel matters regarding department
employees, including but not limited to their hiring, discipline,
termination, assignment and management, together with developing
and implementing departmental policies for such personnel.
§ 5-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-69
1:57
§ 5-69. Specific powers and duties of Director of Finance. [Amended
9-5-1989 by Ord. No. 26-89]
The Director of Finance shall:
§ 5-70. Division of Treasury.
There shall be a Division of the Treasury, the head of which shall be the
Township Treasurer. He shall, prior to his appointment, be qualified by
training and experience in municipal tax and revenue administration. The
Treasurer shall:
A. Compile the current expense estimates for the budget for the Mayor.
B. Supervise the disbursement of all funds and review all proposed
expenditures.
C. Compile the capital estimates for the budget for the Mayor.
D. Supervise the establishment and maintenance of a general accounting
system for each of the Township's officers, departments and agencies;
exercise financial budgetary control over each office, department and
agency, and supervise the bookkeeping, keep separate accounts for the
item of appropriation contained in the budget, each of which accounts
shall show the amount of the appropriation, the amounts paid
therefrom, the unpaid obligations against it and the unencumbered
balance; require reports of receipts and disbursements from each
receiving and spending agency of the municipal government, to be
made daily or at such intervals as he may deem expedient.
E. Submit to the Council, through the Mayor, a monthly statement of all
receipts and disbursements in sufficient detail to show the exact
financial condition of the municipality.
F. Review and comment upon the complete financial statement and report
prepared for the Mayor by the Chief Financial Officer as of the end of
each fiscal year.
G. When so directed by the Mayor, serve as the Treasurer, Deputy
Treasurer or Assistant Treasurer and perform all the duties set forth in
§ 5-70.
A. Administer the work of the Division.
B. Have charge of the collection, receipt, custody, deposit and
disbursement of all funds belonging to or under the control of the
Township or of any department, office or agency of the municipal
government.
C. Disburse funds from the municipal treasury only upon warrant of the
Mayor or his designee.
§ 5-69 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 5-70
1:58
§ 5-71. Central Cashier; fee for returned check. [Amended 9-5-1989
by Ord. No. 27-89; 6-28-1993 by Ord. No. 24-93]
§ 5-72. Custody and disbursement functions.
The Treasurer, through the Division of the Treasury, shall:
D. Render regular accountings of his cash receipts and disbursements in
such form and at such intervals as shall be required by the Mayor.
E. Serve as the Chief Financial Officer of the municipality, when appointed
to such position. [Added 9-5-1989 by Ord. No. 27-89]
A. Within the Division of Treasury, there shall be a Central Cashier's office.
All cash receipts of the municipal government, except fines imposed for
traffic violations or in the Municipal Court, shall be received and
accounted for by the Cashier.
B. In the event a check is issued and delivered to the Township of Old
Bridge for any purpose which is returned unpaid because the payor
bank refused payment due to insufficient funds, uncollected funds,
closed account or similar reason, the issuer thereof shall pay a returned
check fee of $20 to the Township of Old Bridge.
A. Deposit all funds received by the Division in such depositories as may
be designated by resolution of the Council. All moneys of the Township
not required for current operations shall be invested pursuant to law or
shall be deposited in interest-bearing accounts. All such interest shall
be accounted for in the municipality's books of account.
B. Have custody of all investments and invested funds of the Township or
in its possession in a fiduciary capacity, except as otherwise provided by
law, and have the safekeeping of all bonds and notes for transfer,
registration or exchange.
C. Disburse all moneys due to the Board of Education pursuant to the
provisions of Title 18 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey.
D. Make disbursement of Township funds upon warrant of the Mayor by an
individual warrant check for each bill or claim and not otherwise. Wage
and salary payments shall be made upon the sole signature of the
Mayor. [Amended 9-5-1989 by Ord. No. 27-89]
E. Keep a full and systematic account of all cash receipts and
disbursements by the Division of the Treasury in proper books approved
by the Director of Finance. He shall, at least once every month and
more often if the Council requires, furnish the Council with a statement
of all moneys received and expended by the decision of the Treasurer,
including school moneys, subsequent to his last report to the Council of
his receipts and expenditures during the preceding calendar year and
shall whenever required lay before the Council for examination and
audit all books, papers and vouchers pertaining to his office.
§ 5-70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-72
1:59
§ 5-73. Commitments and disbursements. [Amended 9-5-1989 by
Ord. No. 27-89]
§ 5-74. Division of Tax Collection.
The head of the Division of Tax Collection shall be the Tax Collector. The Tax
Collector shall:
F. Maintain a central payroll system and all social security, pension and
insurance records required for municipal personnel.
A. No department, office or agency of the municipal government shall
expend or commit any funds to the Township unless the Treasurer shall
first certify that there is an unencumbered balance of appropriation and
funds available for the purpose.
B. Prior to payment of any bill, claim or demand against the Township, the
Treasurer shall ascertain that all materials, supplies or equipment have
been received according to the purchase order or that the work, labor
or services have been rendered according to the order or contract and
appropriate delivery slips, receipts and other appropriate documents
are attached to the payment voucher and verified as being correct.
C. Disbursements in payment of bills, claims and demands shall be made
by the Treasurer upon preaudit and warrant of the Mayor or his
designee and the Director of Finance. Every check shall be payable to
the order of the person entitled to receive it and shall specify the
purpose for which it is drawn and the account or appropriation to which
it is chargeable. Each check, except payroll checks, shall bear the
signature of the Mayor or his designee, the Director of Finance and the
Treasurer or Acting Treasurer, as the case may be. Payroll checks shall
be signed only by the Mayor.
A. Receive and collect all current and delinquent real and personal
property taxes, charge and receive penalties and interest pursuant to
law and account for all collections in such form and manner at such
times as may be prescribed or approved by the Director of Finance.
B. Make or cause to be made and certify searches for tax and other liens
on real property in the Township as may be authorized by law and
charge and collect, for the use of the municipality, the fee required
pursuant to law for any such searches.
C. Perform the functions of a Collector of Taxes under general law,
including, without limitation thereto, the preparation and mailing of tax
bills and the maintenance of tax accounting records in such manner as
may be prescribed or approved by the Director of Finance. [Amended
1-9-2006 by Ord. No. 38-2005]
D. Deposit daily, through the Township Treasurer, all moneys received to
the credit of the Township, in one or more depositories selected by the
Council, maintain full and complete records and accounts of all sums
§ 5-72 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 5-74
1:60
collected and received according to such procedures and systems as
may be prescribed or approved by the Director of Finance and make
sure periodic reports and accountings of the funds of the Township
collected, received and deposited as the Mayor may require, which
reports and accountings shall be filed as a public record with the
Municipal Clerk.
E. Charge $5 for the first duplicate copy and $25 for each subsequent
duplicate copy of the same tax bill in the same year, for any requests for
a duplicate copy of a tax bill or payment made without the original tax
bill, a duplicate copy thereof or a property tax replacement bill
approved by the Division of Local Government Services and made
pursuant to its regulations, from the mortgagee, servicing organization
or property tax processing organization. [Amended 1-29-1985 by
Ord. No. 3-85; 5-18-1992 by Ord. No. 15-92]
F. Charge a penalty of 6% to any taxpayer with a delinquency in excess of
$10,000 who fails to pay that delinquency prior to the end of the fiscal
year.12 [Added 5-18-1992 by Ord. No. 15-92]
12.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 2-9.8g, which included a service charge for a returned check
(added 5-18-1992 by Ord. No. 15-92) and original Sec. 2-9.8f, which also contained a
charge for a returned check (added 6-28-1993 by Ord. No. 24-93), which previously
followed this subsection, were deleted 1-9-2006 by Ord. No. 38-2005. For current
provisions regarding a returned check fee, see § 5-71B.
§ 5-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-74
1:61

ARTICLE X
Department of Public Works
§ 5-75. Public Works Director.
There shall be a Department of Public Works, the head of which shall be the
Public Works Director. He shall be appointed by the Mayor and shall receive
such salary as may be provided by the Salary Ordinance of the Township.
§ 5-76. Division of Streets and Roads; Division of Recycling.
[Amended 1-9-2006 by Ord. No. 38-2005]
Within the Department of Public Works shall be two divisions, a Division of
Streets and Roads and a Division of Recycling, both headed by the Public
Works Director. The Public Works Director shall serve as the supervisor of
both Divisions at no additional compensation.
§ 5-77. General powers and duties of Public Works Director.
The Public Works Director shall be responsible for the proper and efficient
conduct of all public works functions of the Township government. He shall
have the power, with the approval of the Mayor and within the limits of
available appropriations, to engage such specialized equipment and labor
for specific projects and purposes as he may deem necessary for the proper
administration and functions of the Department. He shall:
A. Supervise all construction and maintenance work pertaining to public
streets, drains, public buildings and property and parking lots.
B. Provide for the maintenance of all public buildings.
C. Plan, administer and control snow removal on Township streets and
roads and Township parking lots as need appears, within limits of
available appropriations. [Amended 1-9-2006 by Ord. No. 38-2005]
D. Supervise the performance of any public contracts for scavenger
services and the maintenance of existing streetlights and the operations
of scavengers engaged in private contract work within the Township.
E. Issue such certificates as may be necessary and approve all bills with
respect to work performed under his supervision.
§ 5-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-77
1:63

ARTICLE XI
Department of Community Development
[Amended 6-19-1989 by Ord. No. 21-89]
§ 5-78. Department of Community Development.
There shall be a Department of Community Development which shall consist
of three divisions: the Division of Engineering, the Division of Planning and
the Division of Code Enforcement.
§ 5-79. Director of Community Development.
The Director of Community Development shall be the head of the
Department of Community Development. The Director shall be appointed
by the Mayor and shall serve during the term of office of the Mayor and
until the appointment and qualification of his successor. The Director shall
be paid a salary as provided by ordinance.
§ 5-80. Powers and duties of Director.
The Director of Community Development shall:
§ 5-81. Division of Engineering.
There shall be a Division of Engineering, the head of which shall be the
Township Engineer, who shall be appointed by the Mayor and who shall be
paid a salary as provided by ordinance.
§ 5-82. Powers and duties of Township Engineer. [Amended
1-9-2006 by Ord. No. 38-2005]
The Township Engineer shall:
A. Supervise and administer the work of the Department of Community
Development.
B. Review all applications for development in the Township.
C. Serve as a technical advisor to the Township Council, Planning Board,
Zoning Board, Environmental Commission and Mayor to provide such
advice and assistance as requested.
D. Make recommendations regarding the Subdivision, Zoning and Land
Use Ordinances and regulations within the Township.
E. Assist in the preparation and amendment of the Land Development
Ordinance, Master Plan and development, conservation and planning
regulations and ordinances.
F. Attend all meetings of the Planning Board and Township Council.
G. Fulfill the duties of the Township Planner in his absence.
§ 5-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-82
1:65
§ 5-83. Duties of Division of Engineering.
The Division of Engineering shall:
§ 5-84. Division of Planning.
There shall be a Division of Planning, the head of which shall be the
Township Planner. He shall be appointed by the Mayor and, prior to his
appointment, shall be qualified by training and experience in the planning
field. He shall have or be eligible to apply for and obtain a State of New
Jersey license as a professional planner. He shall be paid a salary as
provided by ordinance. The Mayor may appoint such staff and employees
for the Division as are required for it to fulfill its functions.
§ 5-85. Powers and duties of Planner.
The Township Planner shall:
A. Issue such certificates as may be necessary and approve all bills with
respect to the work performed under his supervision.
B. Oversee preparation of plans and specifications, surveys and maps in
cooperation with the Assessor and maintain the Tax Map as a public
record as of October 1 of each year and cause to be recorded therein all
changes in ownership or character of the real property assessed.
C. Administer, supervise and operate the Division of Engineering.
A. Prepare all plans and specifications for public works and improvements
undertaken by the Township either on force account or by contract.
B. Provide and maintain maps, plans and specifications, surveys and
records with respect to public property, works and facilities owned or
operated by the Township government.
C. Provide engineering services to the various departments, boards and
agencies of the Township as directed by the Mayor or other authorized
authority.
A. Administer and supervise the work of the Division.
B. Serve as technical advisor to the Township Council, Planning Board,
Zoning Board, Environmental Commission and Mayor, conducting such
studies as requested.
C. Attend all meetings of the Planning Board and meetings of the Council
and other boards or agencies as may be required for the proper
planning of the Township.
D. Provide all staff assistance to the Planning Board in all matters under
its jurisdiction.
§ 5-82 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 5-85
1:66
§ 5-86. Duties of Division of Planning.
The Division of Planning shall:
E. Conduct continuous studies and collect statistical and other data to
serve as the basis for planning recommendations.
F. On all applications for zoning appeals, secure data and analyze zoning
problems for the purpose of making reports to the Zoning Board.
G. Recommend and assist in the writing of amendments to the Land
Development Ordinance, Master Plan and other development,
conservation and planning regulations and ordinances.
H. Review and analyze the ordinances and plans of surrounding
municipalities, counties and states, analyze and report on proposed
development in adjacent municipalities as it may affect the Township
and coordinate planning, development and conservation with
Middlesex County and with the adjoining municipalities, counties and
states.
I. Act as liaison with federal, state and county offices for procurement and
administration of planning grants.
J. Make recommendations regarding subdivision, zoning and other land
use development within the Township.
K. Exercise initiative and professional judgment in providing the Township
with guidance in planning within the framework of a Master Plan.
L. Study and analyze matters, such as but not limited to transportation,
land use, natural and human resources, housing and capital
improvements, and prepare and submit findings and recommendations
to the Township Council, Planning Board, Zoning Board, Environmental
Commission and Mayor.
M. Make recommendations regarding the Master Plan of the Township so
that it reflects the needs and wishes of the Township consistent with the
good and welfare of the Township.
A. Assist in the preparation and maintenance of an Official Zoning Map of
the Township.
B. Provide secretarial and such staff assistance as the Planning and
Zoning Boards may require in the performance of their functions.
C. Investigate and prepare reports and recommendations on all
subdivision applications and site plans as well as all other assignments
as may be required by the Planning Board.
D. Receive plans of proposed developments within the Township, review
site plans design and coordination with surrounding properties and
recommend redesign of site plans, as required.
§ 5-85 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-87
1:67
§ 5-87. Division of Code Enforcement.
There shall be a Division of Code Enforcement, the head of which shall be
the Construction Official.
A. Construction Official. There shall be a Construction Official appointed
by the Mayor. He shall be paid such salary and compensation as
specified by the Salary Ordinance of the Township. Prior to his
appointment, he shall be qualified by training and experience to
perform the duties of his office.
B. Powers and duties of the Construction Official. The Construction
Official shall administer the provisions of the Township Land
Development Ordinance, Building Code and such other provisions of
law or ordinance as may vest powers, functions or duties in the
Construction Official.
C. Subcode officials and inspectors. Subcode officials and inspectors may
be appointed by the Mayor as may be required.
D. Organization. The Division of Code Enforcement shall be organized in
compliance with the provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.4 and shall comply
with the requirements therein.13
13.Editor's Note: Former Section 2-12, Article XX, Department of Code Enforcement, which
previously followed this section, was repealed 6-19-1989 by Ord. No. 21-89. See now Art.
XI, Department of Community Development, of this chapter.
§ 5-87 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 5-87
1:68
ARTICLE XII
Department of Parks and Recreation
§ 5-88. Director of Parks and Recreation.
There shall be a Department of Parks and Recreation, the head of which
shall be the Director of Parks and Recreation. He shall be appointed by the
Mayor and shall be paid such salary and compensation as specified and shall
be qualified by education, training and experience to perform the duties of
his office.
§ 5-89. Powers and duties of Director.
The Director of Parks and Recreation shall:
A. Administer the work of the Department and administer and operate
playgrounds, facilities for indoor and outdoor sports, athletic, cultural
and recreational programs and activities for children, youth and adults
of the Township and, where authorized by law and by resolution of the
Council, charge and collect on behalf of the Township a reasonable fee
for each person for admission to or use of facilities, programs or
activities provided for under this Code.
B. Use public school property by agreement with the Board of Education.
C. Plan and develop additional public recreational areas and facilities.
D. Cooperate with other municipal departments, service clubs and
organizations in furthering recreational and cultural interests in the
Township.
E. Have charge of the care and maintenance of the lawn, paths, shrubs
and plants within the public parks, playgrounds, public grounds and
athletic fields and the care and maintenance of playground and park
equipment of the Township, as well as designated bus shelters,
cemeteries and snow removal areas.
F. Adopt reasonable rules, regulations and bylaws, subject to approval of
the Mayor, for the conduct of all persons participating in programs and
activities or utilizing recreational facilities or equipment sponsored by
the Department.
G. Study, investigate, develop and recommend recreation programs in
conjunction with the Recreation Committee.
H. Conduct studies of the present and future park and recreational needs
of the Township and develop immediate and long-range plans in
consultation with the Recreation Committee for recommendation to the
Mayor and the Township Council.
I. Maintain such records as may be required to control departmental
receipts, property and personnel and provide information to the Mayor
§ 5-88 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-89
1:69
§ 5-90. Assistant Director of Parks and Recreation.
§ 5-91. Program Director.
There may be employed Program Directors, who shall be responsible for:
§ 5-92. Recreation Committee. [Added 8-8-1984 by Ord. No. 21-84]
for budgeting and financing of recreational programs. Such records
shall include time cards for part-time and seasonal personnel.
J. Be responsible to the Council for the proper custody and preservation
of the books, records and property under his control and for the faithful
performance of his duties.
K. Submit to the Mayor monthly reports concerning the conduct and
progress of the Department and receipts and moneys.
L. Administer the expenditure of funds in accordance with the annual
budget.
M. Ensure that the Department operates in accordance with the aboveenumerated
powers and duties.
A. There may be an Assistant Director of Parks and Recreation, who shall
assist the Director in the administration and operation of the programs
and activities of the Department. The Assistant Director shall be
appointed by the Mayor and shall be qualified by education, training
and experience to perform the duties of the office.
B. The Assistant Director shall carry out such duties as specifically
designated by the Director and, in the absence of the Director, shall
assume all of the duties, responsibilities and powers of the Director as
designated in this article.
A. Determining that individual recreation programs are being run
satisfactorily.
B. Ensuring that such recreation programs are properly supervised.
C. Ensuring that accurate records relating to attendance of participants
and staff are properly maintained.
A. Membership. Within the Department of Parks and Recreation there
shall be an advisory council on recreation known as the Old Bridge
Township Recreation Committee (the "Committee"). An effort shall be
made to represent all age groups on the Committee. The Committee
shall consist of 15 members appointed by the Township Council who
shall serve without compensation. The terms of the initial 15 members
appointed by the Township Council pursuant to this section shall be
staggered, with eight members serving terms of two years and seven
members serving terms of one year. Thereafter, each member
appointed by the Township Council shall serve for a two-year term. In
§ 5-89 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 5-92
1:70
the event of a vacancy, the Township Council shall appoint a person to
fill such vacancy for the unexpired term only. There shall be a Chairman
and a Vice Chairman of the Committee appointed from among its
membership. [Amended 4-3-1989 by Ord. No. 13-89; 6-16-1994 by
Ord. No. 41-94; 1-27-1997 by Ord. No. 4-97; 1-28-2002 by Ord.
No. 03-02; 7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 33-0214]
B. There shall be two associate members of the Recreation Committee
who shall be students at the Township high school. The Mayor shall
appoint two associate members from Old Bridge Central High School.
Associate members shall serve one-year terms without compensation
and shall be nonvoting members of said Committee. [Amended
1-9-2006 by Ord. No. 38-2005; 4-24-2006 by Ord. No. 12-2006]
C. The Recreation Committee shall study, investigate, develop and
organize programs in conjunction with the Director of Parks and
Recreation.
D. The Recreation Committee shall investigate, study and advise the
Department of Parks and Recreation with respect to the work of the
Department and the acquisition, establishment, improvement,
maintenance and administration of new and existing public parks,
playgrounds, places of public recreation, recreational facilities and
programs within the Township.
14.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that the term length set forth in this
ordinance shall be instituted upon the expiration of the terms of all current Recreation
Committee members on 1-1-2003.
§ 5-92 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-92
1:71

ARTICLE XIII
Department of Police
[Amended 3-16-1987 by Ord. No. 6-87; 3-2-1987 by Ord. No. 7-87;
1-19-1988 by Ord. No. 2-88; 3-21-1988 by Ord. No. 10-88; 6-16-1988
by Ord. No. 20-88; 9-19-1988 by Ord. No. 45-88; 1-3-1989 by Ord.
No. 70-88; 2-6-1989 by Ord. No. 3-89; 9-5-1989 by Ord. No. 30-89;
12-4-1989 by Ord. No. 45-89; 3-2-1992 by Ord. No. 4-92; 6-1-1992
by Ord. No. 21-92; 3-13-1995 by Ord. No. 10-95; 8-28-1995 by Ord.
No. 49-95; 3-10-1997 by Ord. No. 7-97; 12-8-1997 by Ord. No. 43-97;
11-24-1997 by Ord. No. 45-97; 1-26-1998 by Ord. No. 11-98;
2-9-1998 by Ord. No. 14-98; 4-6-1998 by Ord. No. 22-98; 10-13-1998
by Ord. No. 76-98; 2-22-1999 by Ord. No. 7-99; 10-23-2000 by Ord.
No. 49-00; 1-28-2002 by Ord. No. 04-02; 1-26-2004 by Ord. No.
03-04; 1-24-2005 by Ord. No. 02-05; 1-9-2006 by Ord. No. 38-2005;
9-24-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-20]
§ 5-93. Establishment; head.
There shall be a Department of Police in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40A:14-118. The Director of the Department shall be appointed by the
Mayor with advice and consent of the Council.
§ 5-94. Table of organization.
§ 5-95. Composition.
A. Within the Department of Police there shall be four bureaus:
[Amended 10-4-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-26]
(1) Patrol Bureau.
(2) Detective Bureau.
(3) Professional Standards Bureau.
(4) Administration Bureau.
B. Each bureau shall consist of as many officers as the Chief of Police shall
deem necessary.
A. Personnel.
(1) The Department of Police shall consist of the following sworn
personnel, within the guidelines of the budget: [Amended
10-4-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-26]
(a) A Chief of Police.
(b) Captains, not to exceed four in number.
(c) Lieutenants not to exceed eight in number. [Amended
2-27-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-07]
§ 5-93 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-95
1:73
§ 5-96. Emergency management.
The Emergency Management Coordinators shall be appointed by the Mayor
in accordance with N.J.S.A. Appendix A:9-33 et seq. and shall operate under
the Police Department.
§ 5-97. Testing procedures for entry level officers; applications;
qualifications. [Amended 7-28-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-12]
(d) Sergeants not to exceed 16 in number. [Amended 2-27-2012
by Ord. No. 2012-07; 7-9-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-19]
(e) Patrol officers not to exceed 87 in number. [Amended
2-27-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-07]
(2) Nothing herein shall be deemed to compel the termination (by
layoff or otherwise) of any sworn officer.
B. Appointment to the position of police officer shall be made by the
Director in accordance with the procedures in this article. The Director
shall select from the list of qualified candidates established in
accordance with this article, in order of ranking. All promotions to the
rank of Sergeant, Lieutenant, Captain and Chief of Police shall be made
in accordance with this article.
C. All civilian employees performing police functions within the
Department of Police shall be hired by the Director.
D. The Chief of Police shall report to the "appropriate authority," who shall
be the Mayor, and as the appropriate authority shall promulgate rules
and regulations in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118.
A. Eligibility.
(1) No person shall be appointed as a member of the Old Bridge
Township Police Department unless he or she:
(a) Is a citizen of the United States and a resident of New Jersey
and meets the age requirements pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:14-127.
(b) Is sound in body and of good health sufficient to satisfy the
Board of Trustees of the Police and Fireman's Retirement
System of New Jersey as to his or her eligibility for
membership in the retirement system.
(c) Is able to read, write and speak the English language well and
intelligently.
(d) Is of good moral character and has not been convicted of any
criminal offense involving moral turpitude.
§ 5-95 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 5-97
1:74
(e) Is appointed without political influence from anyone (state,
local or federal).
(f) Has the mental stability, free of any abnormalities, needed to
satisfactorily perform the job of a police officer.
(g) Has completed and passed a written examination, physical
fitness testing, medical screening, psychological evaluation,
oral interview, complete background investigation and drug
testing.
(h) Education requirements. All college degrees and/or credits
must be from a college or university nationally recognized
accredited institution or agency by the U.S. Department of
Education.
[1] Bachelor's degree; or
[2] Possess a minimum of 60 credits and two years of full time
civilian employment; or
[3] Thirty credits and two years of military experience; or
[4] Two years of active duty military service or serve in a
"combat zone" as defined under the State of New Jersey
Department of Military and Veterans Affairs, civil service
preference clause, Numbers 1 through 14, and as may be
amended in the future, with an honorable discharge.
B. Required tests.
(1) All applicants for the position of entry level police officer will be
administered the following tests, which will be weighted as
indicated:
(a) Written test, 50%: to be administered by an outside agency in
compliance with the standards and guidelines set forth by the
New Jersey Police Training Commission. A minimum score of
75% must be attained in order to qualify for the next phase,
physical agility.
(b) Physical agility, 50%: to be administered by the New Jersey
State Association of Chiefs of Police (NJSACOP). A minimum
score of 75% must be obtained in order to qualify for the next
phase, oral board. The independent agency is to administer a
test to comply with the current ADA regulations.
(2) Residency.
(a) Residency shall be determined at the time the applicants sign
up for the testing procedure.
(b) For purposes of this section, a person shall be considered a
resident if he or she has established a bona fide principal
§ 5-97 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-97
1:75
residence within the Township of Old Bridge for at least 24
consecutive months immediately preceding the date of his
application. It is recognized that the list will be reclassified
prior to each appointment or batch of appointments to insure
that the applicant has continued to reside in the Township of
Old Bridge since his application.
(c) All applicants determined to be a resident of Old Bridge
Township pursuant to Subsection B(2)(a) and (b) above will
receive one point which will be added to the final cumulative
combined score of the written exam and physical exam. This is
the only stage of the application process that the residency
point is added.
(3) Only applicants that meet the minimum eligibility requirements as
outlined in Subsection A of this section and those who have
successfully passed both testing phases (written and physical
agility) and have a combined average grade of 80% or better will be
eligible for hiring.
(4) The Chief of Police will meet with the Mayor to determine the
number of eligible candidates that will advance to the next stage of
the application process based on the needs of the Police
Department at the time of the test. The candidates will be notified
as to their final number on the list and the number of eligible
candidates that will be provided applications. Nothing herein shall
prevent the Chief and Mayor from requesting additional
applications from the list if it is determined that there are not
enough candidates to fulfill the needs of the Department from the
original list. This process will avoid the need to perform
unnecessary extensive backgrounds and draw from the
department's limited resources.
C. Application.
(1) Applicants as determined by the aggregate scores of the written
and physical agility exam scores plus any additional points which
the applicant is entitled to and are being offered the opportunity to
continue in the process as determined pursuant to Subsection B(4)
above will be notified. The applicant shall complete a detailed
application which will be thoroughly investigated. Each applicant
will be required to complete a waiver form allowing the release of
all information concerning the candidate.
(2) Failure to pass the background investigation will disqualify an
applicant. Major areas of concern which can lead to disqualification
are:
(a) Criminal history including local, state and federal;
(b) Continuous poor driving record;
§ 5-97 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 5-97
1:76
(c) Falsification of any information required to be provided by the
applicant (given at any time);
(d) Verification of eligibility credentials under Subsection A(1) et
seq. above.
(e) Negative information uncovered by investigators.
(f) Verification of at least three personal references.
(g) Random drug urine screening analysis throughout the entire
process.
(3) A Detective shall prepare a background investigation report which
shall be forwarded to the Chief of Police for review.
(a) Final determination as to the passage or failure of the
background investigation will be made by the Chief of Police.
(b) Upon completion of all background investigations, all
successful candidates will have a formal interview scheduled
before an interview panel. The formal interview panel shall
consist of the Mayor or Mayor's Designee, Chief of Police or his
designee and one Captain.
(c) Panel members shall list the candidates based on their overall
performance in the interview process and provide a list of no
less than five and no more than 20 at the Mayor's request,
along with any related documentation and forward that on to
the Mayor for review and approval in accordance with the law.
D. Applicants which have been approved by the Mayor and offered a
position will be required to pass a medical examination and a
psychological examination prior to appointment.
(1) The Chief of Police may remove any applicant from the applicant
list due to disqualification for medical or psychological reasons that
would preclude the applicant from effectively performing the duties
of a police officer.
(2) The Chief of Police shall furnish to the Mayor any documentation or
reports supporting the removal request, prepared and signed by a
physician, psychologist or psychiatrist who is licensed in the State
of New Jersey.
(3) The Chief of Police's submission shall include a finding that the
applicant is not qualified due to medical or psychological reasons
for police officer.
E. New appointees will be required to attend the Police Academy and
serve a probationary period for one year. The Police Academy shall be
approved and authorized by the Police Training Commission in the
Department of Law and Public Safety of the State of New Jersey.
§ 5-97 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-97
1:77
F. The eligibility hiring list will be in rank order from highest to lowest of
the top candidates. The list shall be in effect two years from the date of
the written examination.
G. The Mayor shall have the sole discretion to utilize the list that is in
existence at any time during the two-year period or initiate a new
testing process.
H. Alternate police testing and hiring. [Amended 7-28-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-13]
(1) The Alternate Route Program is a discretionary program that
allows the Mayor or his designee to hire individuals who have
successfully completed the Basic Course for Police Officers (BCPO)
as set forth by the Police Training Commission under the direction
of the New Jersey Division of Criminal Justice. The individual who
successfully completes the academy portion of the Alternate Route
Program will be eligible to apply for a regular full time position
under this provision of the Old Bridge Township Code. This enables
the Township of Old Bridge to consider candidates already trained
without incurring the significant financial and time commitment to
train officers to supplement the Old Bridge Township Police
Department ranks.
(a) The Alternate Route Program was established pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 52:17B-69.2, which allows a person who completes a
training course pursuant to Section 2 of P.L. 1998, c. 146
(N.J.S.A. 52:17b-69-1) shall only be eligible for appointment as
a permanent full-time member of a department or force.
(b) Additionally, the Township of Old Bridge recognizes the ever
changing demographics of the state and the community at
large. The diversity-related component of this hiring process is
one factor which the Mayor and/or his designee shall consider
but is not determinative.
(c) This process will allow the Chief of Police to target and
recommend, and the Mayor, his designee or Director of Police
to hire, individuals who will contribute to overall Police
Department excellence and have an immediate impact on the
manpower and/or diversity of the department. The Alternate
Route Program is purposely flexible so as to allow for
consideration of many varied candidates and allows this
premised on the need to diversify the Old Bridge Police
Department and maintain an appropriate number of officers on
the street.
(d) The diversity-related component includes but is not limited to
race, gender, ethnicity, unique cultural background, bilingual
language skills, prior law enforcement experience in diverse
communities. This will support the need for diversity within the
§ 5-97 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 5-97
1:78
§ 5-98. Qualifications. [Amended 7-28-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-12]
police force to further gain the trust and confidence of the
entire community, which in turn will increase police
effectiveness in serving and protecting the Township of Old
Bridge.
(e) No person shall be hired under the Alternate Route Program
unless the candidate has completed the necessary Alternate
Route Basic Course (BCPO) requirements or SLEO II training
with a waiver from the Police Training Commission (PTC).
Successfully completes agency training and firearms
qualifications by Old Bridge Township Police Department or
other qualified agency. The candidate, once hired, must receive
the Police Training Commission BCPO certificate from the
school director within his probationary period as so designated
by the Chief of Police or the employment will be terminated on
or before the one-year anniversary. No officer shall remain
employed with the Old Bridge Township Police Department
without the PTC certificate.
(2) Notwithstanding the eligibility hiring list process, the Mayor,
Director of Police or Mayors' designee, upon written
recommendation from the Chief of Police, may make appointments
to fill vacancies in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
52:17B-69.1 and N.J.S.A. 52:17B-69.2 for not more than six
individuals each calendar year who have previously completed a
police training course certified by the New Jersey Police Training
Commission and have been individually recommended by the Chief
of Police.
(3) The purpose of this subsection is to permit the hiring of individuals
who are sworn officers in other jurisdictions or who have been or
are eligible to be certified by the New Jersey Police Training
Commission under the Alternate Route Program. These appointees
must meet all standards set forth under § 5-98, Qualifications, of
this article.
(4) The following screening process will be utilized:
(a) Alternate hiring candidates upon submission of an application
and an invitation from the Chief of Police will participate in the
oral interview process with the Chief of Police, Mayor or his
designee and one Captain; a background investigation;
physical examination, medical examination, and a
psychological examination.
(b) Any alternate hiring applicant failing any phase of the hiring
process as outlined above will cease to be a candidate for the
position of Police Officer in the Old Bridge Township Police
Department.
§ 5-97 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-98
1:79
A. Each applicant shall comply with all the laws of the State of New Jersey
pertaining thereto. No person shall be given or accept a permanent
appointment as a police officer in the Township of Old Bridge unless
such person has first been given a probationary or temporary
appointment to such office for a period of one year and has successfully
completed a police training course at a school approved and authorized
by the Police Training Commission in the Department of Law and Public
Safety of the State of New Jersey, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter
56 of the Laws of 196115 and Township ordinances.
B. No person shall be appointed to the Department of Police as a regular
or probationary member unless, at the time of making application, he
shall meet the age requirements of the New Jersey statutes, except as
provided by law in the case of veterans and meet the following
qualifications:
(1) Is a citizen of the United States and a resident of New Jersey and
meets the age requirements pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-127.
(2) Is sound in body and of good health sufficient to satisfy the Board of
Trustees of the Police and Fireman's Retirement System of New
Jersey as to his or her eligibility for membership in the retirement
system.
(3) Is able to read, write and speak the English language well and
intelligently.
(4) Is of good moral character and has not been convicted of any
criminal offense involving moral turpitude.
(5) Is appointed without political influence from anyone (state, local or
federal).
(6) Has the mental stability, free of any abnormalities, needed to
satisfactorily perform the job of a police officer.
(7) Has completed and passed a written examination, physical fitness
testing, medical screening, psychological evaluation, oral
interview, complete background investigation and drug testing.
(8) Education requirements. All college degrees and/or credits must be
from a college or university nationally recognized accredited
institution or agency by the U.S. Department of Education.
(a) Bachelor's degree; or
(b) Possess a minimum of 60 credits and two years of full time
civilian employment; or
(c) Thirty credits and two years of military experience; or
15.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:17B-66 et seq.
§ 5-98 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 5-98
1:80
§ 5-99. Chief of Police.
§ 5-100. Functions of Department of Police.
The Department of Police, through its Chief of Police and his staff, shall:
(d) Two years of active duty military service or serve in a "combat
zone" as defined under the State of New Jersey Department of
Military and Veterans Affairs, civil service preference clause,
Numbers 1 through 14, and as may be amended in the future,
with an honorable discharge.
C. Each member of the Police Department shall, before entering upon the
performance of his or her duties, take and subscribe to an oath to bear
true faith and allegiance to the government established in this state, to
support the Constitution of the United States of America and the State
of New Jersey and to faithfully, impartially and justly discharge and
perform all duties of his office, which oath or affirmation shall be filed
with the Clerk.
A. The internal control and discipline of the Department of Police and of its
members shall be vested in the Chief of Police and he shall have the
power to enforce all the rules and regulations herein provided and any
general and special orders or instructions which he may, from time to
time, promulgate. He shall enforce the Rules and Regulations, orders or
instructions and may punish for their violation as provided in the Rules
and Regulations adopted as set forth in § 5-95, Composition.
B. The Chief of Police, with the assistance of other members of the
Department detailed for such purpose, shall keep a complete record as
prescribed in the Rules and Regulations, and the Chief shall report to
the appropriate authority all matters of importance pertaining to the
Department and make sure recommendations, as in his opinion, will
increase the efficiency of the Department.
C. The Chief of Police shall, pursuant to all applicable laws and purchasing
procedures established by the Township of Old Bridge, from time to
time, purchase new equipment or repair or rearrange such old
equipment as will increase the efficiency of the Department. He shall
have full charge and control of all the apparatus and equipment and
office space of the Department and its assignment and use and shall be
held responsible for its care, cleanliness and safekeeping.
D. In the temporary absence or disability of the Chief of Police, an Acting
Chief of Police shall act in his place.
E. The Chief of Police will be responsible for establishing and maintaining
a list of qualified applicants for the position of regular police officer. He
shall also perform all other duties as prescribed in this article.
A. Preserve the public peace, protect life and property, prevent crime,
detect and arrest offenders against the penal laws and ordinances
§ 5-98 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-100
1:81
§ 5-101. Special law enforcement officers.
effective within the Township, suppress riots, mobs and insurrections,
disperse unlawful or dangerous assemblages and preserve order at all
elections and public meetings and assemblages.
B. Administer and enforce laws and ordinances to regulate, direct, control
and restrict the movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic and the
use of the streets by vehicles and persons to protect the safety and
facilitate the convenience of motorists and pedestrians and to make and
enforce rules and regulations not inconsistent with the ordinances and
resolutions of the Township for such purposes.
C. Remove or cause to be removed all nuisances in the public streets,
parks and other public places of the Township, inspect and observe all
places of public amusement or assemblage and all places of business
requiring any state or municipal license or permit and report, thereon,
to the appropriate department.
D. Provide proper police attendance and protection at fires.
E. Provide for the attendance of its members in court as necessary for the
prosecution and trial of persons charged with crimes and offenses and
cooperate fully with the law enforcement and prosecuting authorities of
federal, state and county governments.
F. Operate a training program to maintain and improve the police
efficiency of the members of the Department.
A. Establishment. The position of Special Law Enforcement Officer is
hereby established.
B. Placement. Special law enforcement officers shall be assigned within
the Bureau of Administration.
C. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
COURT EMERGENCY — Any sudden, unexpected or unforeseeable
event requiring the immediate use or deployment of law enforcement
personnel as shall be determined by the Chief of Police, or, in the
absence of the Chief, other chief law enforcement officers to whom the
authority of designating an emergency has been prescribed by local
ordinances.
SPECIAL LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Any person appointed
pursuant to this article to temporarily or intermittently perform duties
similar to those performed regularly by members of the Police
Department or to provide assistance to the Police Department during
unusual or emergency circumstances or at individual times during
intermittent peak periods.
D. Application and appointment.
§ 5-100 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 5-101
1:82
(1) A person may apply for the position of special law enforcement
officer by submitting a written application for appointment to the
Human Resources Director or for reappointment to the Chief of
Police. Said application shall be on a form prescribed by the Chief
of Police. [Amended 7-22-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-12]
(2) No person shall be appointed as a special law enforcement officer
unless that person meets the qualifications of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.8
et seq. and specifically N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.10, as amended, and
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.11, as amended, and N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.14, as
amended, and N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.16, as amended. [Amended
3-19-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-08]
(3) Every applicant for the position of special law enforcement officer
shall have his or her fingerprints taken, which fingerprints shall be
filed with the Division of State Police and the Federal Bureau of
Investigation.
(4) If appointed, such appointment shall be for a period of one year,
beginning January 1 and terminating December 31, or for such part
of any year beginning upon date of appointment and terminated on
December 31.
(5) After appointment, no special law enforcement officer may
commence his duties as a special law enforcement officer unless he
has successfully completed a training course established by the
municipality and approved by the New Jersey Police Training
Commission.
(6) A maximum of 100 special law enforcement officers may be
appointed in any one calendar year.
(a) There shall be three classes of special law enforcement
officers: [Amended 3-19-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-08]
[1] Class One special law enforcement officers shall be
authorized to perform routine traffic detail, spectator
control and similar duties. Class One special law
enforcement officers shall have the power to issue
summonses for disorderly persons offenses, petty
disorderly persons offenses, violation of municipal
ordinances and violations of Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes (motor vehicle offenses). The use of a firearm by a
Class One special law enforcement officer is strictly
prohibited.
[2] Class Two special law enforcement officers are authorized
to exercise full powers and duties of a municipal police
officer. Class Two special law enforcement officers are
authorized to carry firearms.
§ 5-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-101
1:83
[3] Class Three. Officers of this class shall be authorized to
exercise full powers and duties similar to those of a
permanent, regularly appointed full-time police officer
while providing security at a public or nonpublic school or
a county college on the school or college premises during
hours when the public or nonpublic school or county
college is normally in session or when it is occupied by
public or nonpublic school or county college students or
their teachers or professors. While on duty in the
jurisdiction of employment, an officer may respond to
offenses or emergencies off school or college grounds if
they occur in the officer's presence while traveling to a
school facility or county college, but an officer shall not
otherwise be dispatched or dedicated to any assignment
off school or college property. [Added 3-19-2018 by Ord.
No. 2018-08]
(b) The number of Class One special law enforcement officers shall
be limited to 100 in any one calendar year.
(c) The number of Class Two special law enforcement officers shall
be limited to 25% of the total number of regular Old Bridge
Township police officers or the number of special police
officers appointed by Old Bridge Township as of March 1, 1985,
whichever number is greater.
(d) All special law enforcement officers shall be under the
supervision and direction of the Chief of Police or his direct
designee and shall perform all of their duties only in Old Bridge
Township unless they are in fresh pursuit of any person who
has committed an offense in Old Bridge.
(e) Each special law enforcement officer shall be compensated as
a clothing allowance, at the rate of $250 per year, conditioned
on each individual law enforcement officer working as a special
law enforcement officer a minimum of 100 hours during his or
her period of appointment. The compensation shall be paid
only upon the above condition having been met.
(f) Residency. All special law enforcement officers first appointed
after July 1, 2013, shall be residents of the State of New Jersey.
[Amended 7-22-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-12]
(g) Carrying firearms.
[1] Class Two special law enforcement officers, when so
authorized, may carry a firearm, but only when authorized,
in writing, by the Chief of Police and only when on duty as
a special law enforcement officer.
[2] The Chief of Police may authorize any Class Two special
law enforcement officer to arrest, subject to all applicable
§ 5-101 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 5-101
1:84
rules and regulations. Such authorization to arrest shall
be limited to times when the authorized special law
enforcement officer is on duty as a special law
enforcement officer.
[3] If a special law enforcement officer is authorized to carry a
firearm and a firearm is utilized by a special law
enforcement officer while on duty, he shall return such
firearm utilized to the officer in charge at the end of the
special law enforcement officer's workday, unless the
firearm so utilized by the special law enforcement officer is
owned by the special law enforcement officer and was
acquired in compliance with a condition of employment
prior to October 1, 1986. Any special law enforcement
officer first appointed after October 1, 1986, shall use only
a firearm supplied by the Old Bridge Police Department.
[4] No special law enforcement officer may carry a firearm
until he has satisfactorily completed the basic firearms
course required by Old Bridge Township and the New
Jersey Police Training Commission for regular police
officers and shall annually requalify as required for regular
Old Bridge police officers.
[5] The use of a firearm by an officer of Class Three shall be
authorized pursuant to the provisions of Subdivision b of
this Section 7 of P.L. 1985, c. 439 (N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.14).
An officer of this class shall not be authorized to carry a
firearm while off duty unless the officer complies with the
requirements set forth in Subdivision l of N.J.S.A. 2C:39-6
authorizing a retired law enforcement officer to carry a
handgun. [Added 3-19-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-08]
(h) A special law enforcement officer shall be deemed to be on
duty while he is performing the public safety function on behalf
of Old Bridge Township and when he is receiving
compensation, if any, from Old Bridge Township at a rate
hereinafter established. Special law enforcement officers may
not be compensated from private sources.
(i) Uniform. All special law enforcement officers appointed by Old
Bridge Township shall not commence their duties until they
have obtained a uniform authorized by the Township of Old
Bridge, which uniform shall include the uniform state insignia
issued by the New Jersey Police Training Commission. The cost
of said uniform shall be paid by the individual special law
enforcement officer after his or her appointment.
(j) Employment status. All special law enforcement officers shall
be considered part-time employees of the Township of Old
Bridge. No vacation or sick leave shall accrue during periods of
§ 5-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-101
1:85
employment as a special law enforcement officer, nor shall the
special law enforcement officer be entitled to receive other
benefits which accrue to full-time employees of the Township of
Old Bridge except those required to be provided by state law,
including but not limited to workers' compensation insurance
and liability insurance.
(k) Compensation.
[1] All special law enforcement officers shall be paid at the
minimum of $16 per hour. All special law enforcement
officers shall be paid at the minimum of $24 per hour on
the following designated holidays: New Year's Day, Martin
Luther King Day, Lincoln's Birthday, Washington's
Birthday, Good Friday, Memorial Day, Primary Election
Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, General Election Day,
Veteran's Day, Thanksgiving Day, Thanksgiving Day
(following Friday) and Christmas Day. All special law
enforcement officers shall be paid for all hours actually
worked or the sum of four hours, whichever is greater.
[2] In addition to the amount of compensation received by the
special law enforcement officer, which amount is being
received by the Township of Old Bridge from third parties
for the public services rendered by the special law
enforcement officers, the third parties shall pay to the
Township of Old Bridge an amount equal to the actual cost
of insurance and other benefits which must be paid by the
Township of Old Bridge on behalf of the special law
enforcement officers, which in no event shall be less than
10% of the present hourly rate.
[3] The actual cost of insurance and other benefits shall be
estimated by the Chief Financial Officer on the effective
date of this chapter and on the first day of each succeeding
year. The Chief Financial Officer shall estimate said costs
by reference to the cost of workers' compensation
insurance, disability insurance, pension contributions and
any other costs or benefits that must be paid by the
Township on behalf of part-time employees.
(l) Except for one special law enforcement officer who shall be
designated "Administrative Law Enforcement Officer" and all
special three officers, all special law enforcement officers shall
be limited to a maximum of 20 hours of special law
enforcement officer work in any one week. The hours of the
Administrative Special Law Enforcement Officer and Class
Three shall be unlimited. [Amended 3-19-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-08]
§ 5-101 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 5-101
1:86
§ 5-102. Hours of employment.
The hours of employment for all sworn members of the Police Department
shall not exceed the contractual agreement between the bargaining units
and the Township of Old Bridge except that, in the case of an emergency,
the Chief of Police shall have full authority to summon and keep on duty any
and all such members during the period of emergency.
§ 5-103. Removal and suspension.
Discipline shall be in accordance with the established Rules and
Regulations and the contractual agreements between the bargaining units
and the Township of Old Bridge.
§ 5-104. Promotion to Sergeant.
(m) All special law enforcement officers may be required to work
traffic safety assignments. The Chief of Police shall assign each
special law enforcement officer one traffic safety assignment
per month, as needed. This section shall in no way be
interpreted as limiting any special law enforcement officer
from requesting traffic safety assignments. Notwithstanding
the above, any traffic safety assignment shall not interfere with
the regular employment of a special law enforcement officer or
interfere with any regular assignment as a special law
enforcement officer. All traffic assignments shall be made part
of the monthly schedule to be prepared by the Chief of Police
or his designee.
(n) No full-time Township of Old Bridge employee shall be first
appointed as a special law enforcement officer for the
Township of Old Bridge after February 1, 2005.
A. "Promotion" as used in this section, shall mean advancement to
Sergeant. All applicants for promotion shall take competitive written
and oral examinations, except as otherwise indicated herein.
B. Only such officers who have completed five years of service as a
patrolman shall be eligible for promotion to the rank of Sergeant.
[Amended 2-27-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-07]
C. When a vacancy for a Sergeant exists and is to be filled, a notice of such
vacancy and the time and place where application for examination for
promotion to fill same is to be made shall be posted in a conspicuous
place in the squad room of the police headquarters. The Chief of Police
shall also advise candidates of recommended study materials relevant
to the promotion examinations.
D. All promotions shall be based on merit and fitness. All promotions to
Sergeant shall be made from the membership of the Department as
constituted at the time of such promotion. No person shall be eligible
§ 5-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-104
1:87
for promotion to a superior position unless he has first served in the
grade of patrolman in the Department.
E. The candidate for promotion must achieve a passing grade on tests
administered by the New Jersey State Chiefs of Police Association or an
equivalent agency approved by the Policemen's Benevolent Association,
Local 127, in order to be considered for promotion. Each candidate
shall be examined, in a written examination and an oral examination,
under similar conditions, and performance shall be measured by the
same standard and criteria. The Chief of Police shall receive the test
results from the outside testing agency and shall certify the score of
each candidate.
F. Candidates for promotion who receive a passing score on the oral and
written examination shall be interviewed by a Local Interview
Committee. In the case of promotions from the rank of patrolman to
Sergeant, the Interview Committee shall consist of the Mayor or his
designee, the Chief of Police or his designee and one superior officer
from another Police Department chosen by the Police Benevolent
Association, Local 127, from a list of five names submitted by the Chief
of Police. Each candidate shall be interviewed by the Local Interview
Committee under similar conditions in order to evaluate the merit and
fitness of such candidate for promotion.
(1) The Committee shall consider the following factors for each
candidate:
(a) Appearance, manner and bearing;
(b) Self expression;
(c) Judgment;
(d) Decisiveness;
(e) Education and specialized training; and
(f) Scope and level of experience, including merit commendations.
(2) Each factor shall be uniformly considered and applied to all
candidates. Each member of the Committee shall score the
candidates concerning the above-referenced facts, and the total
shall be calculated to achieve the candidate's average interview
score.
G. Candidates for promotion shall be assigned points for years of service
within the Township of Old Bridge Police Department as follows: one
point for each year of service, as computed as of the day of the year in
which the promotional list is first posted.
H. Test scores.
§ 5-104 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 5-104
1:88
(1) The Chief of Police shall calculate each candidate's composite
grade by giving the oral examinations, the written examination and
the Local Interview Committee scores the following relative
weights:
(a) Written examination: 1/3;
(b) Oral examination: 1/3; and
(c) Local committee interview: 1/3.
(2) Test scores shall be calculated to the nearest tenth of a percentage
point. After calculation of the candidate's score for the written
examination, oral examination, and local interview, the Chief of
Police shall then add thereto the number of points assigned for
years of service as calculated in accordance with Subsection G
hereinabove. No candidate shall be certified as eligible for
promotion unless he has achieved a grade of at least 70 out of 100
on the written examination as well as the oral examination and the
local committee interview, excluding seniority points.
I. The Chief of Police shall certify the composite score of each candidate
and shall post the same in a conspicuous place in the squad room of the
police headquarters, indicating the order of finish of the candidates;
such list shall be posted within 30 days after the completion of all tests
and interviews.
J. Any candidate, upon written request of the Chief of Police within five
working days of the posting of such results, shall be entitled to review
his test score and ranking with the Chief or his designee. No promotion
shall be made until each such candidate has had an opportunity to
exercise his right of review.
K. Upon completion of the above-mentioned procedure, the Chief of Police
shall consider for promotion only those candidates who have been
certified to be eligible for promotion. For each promotion, the Chief
shall consider the first three names of candidates standing highest on
the list of eligible and certified candidates. The Chief shall select one of
the three so certified. In the event the candidates have the same score,
preference shall be given to Old Bridge residents, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:14-122.6.
L. A list of candidates for promotion to the appropriate position shall be
valid for a period of not more than three years from its first posting.
[Amended 2-27-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-07]
M. No candidate shall be promoted to the next higher rank until and unless
he or she passes a medical (physical) examination and a psychiatric
examination certifying his or her fitness to discharge the functions and
responsibilities of the next higher rank.
§ 5-104 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-104
1:89
§ 5-105. Promotion to Lieutenant.
N. Promotions may be made following the posting by the Chief of Police
that a vacancy for the rank of Sergeant exists. Promotions, if made,
shall be made by the Chief of Police in consultation with and subject to
approval by the Mayor and subject to § 5-95 herein and the financial
impact on the Township of Old Bridge. [Amended 2-27-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-07]
O. Appeals of process. Within 10 days of the posting of the ranking of
candidates, a candidate may file a written letter of appeal. Said letter
must contain the reason(s) or justification(s) for an appeal and must be
submitted to the Chief of Police, through the appropriate chain of
command. The Chief of Police will assess the request, and make a
determination of how the request will be addressed on a case-by-case
basis. Such requests may address the following areas of the promotion
process: [Added 11-19-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-19]
(1) Review and retabulation of the scored elements of the selection
process.
(2) Review any evaluation or internal document that is not otherwise
privileged or subject to disclosure that was used in the selection
process related to the appellant.
(3) If the appeal impacts upon the results of the promotional ranking
as determined by the Chief of Police, the candidate may be
permitted to be reevaluated.
A. "Promotion" as used in this section, shall mean advancement to the
rank of Lieutenant.
B. Only such officers who have held the rank of permanent Sergeant for
one year with the Township of Old Bridge Police Department shall be
eligible for promotion to the rank of Lieutenant.
C. Promotion to the rank of Lieutenant by the Chief of Police shall be
based on merit and fitness as required in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40A:14-129. The permanent Sergeant with the most seniority in that
rank will be promoted first. The permanent Sergeant with the second
most seniority shall be promoted second, and so on.
D. Promotions may be made following the posting by the Chief of Police
that a vacancy for the rank of Lieutenant exists. Promotions, if made,
shall be made by the Chief of Police in consultation with and subject to
approval by the Mayor and subject to § 5-95 herein and the financial
impact on the Township of Old Bridge. [Amended 2-27-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-07]
E. Appeals of process. Within 10 days of the posting of the ranking of
candidates, a candidate may file a written letter of appeal. Said letter
must contain the reason(s) or justification(s) for an appeal and must be
§ 5-104 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 5-105
1:90
§ 5-106. Promotion to Captain.
submitted to the Chief of Police, through the appropriate chain of
command. The Chief of Police will assess the request, and make a
determination of how the request will be addressed on a case-by-case
basis. Such requests may address the following areas of the promotion
process: [Added 11-19-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-19]
(1) If applicable, review and retabulation of the scored elements of the
selection process.
(2) Review any evaluation or internal document that is not otherwise
privileged or subject to disclosure that was used in the selection
process related to the appellant.
(3) If the appeal impacts upon the results of the promotional ranking
as determined by the Chief of Police, the candidate may be
permitted to be reevaluated.
A. "Promotion" as used in this section, shall mean advancement to the
rank of Captain.
B. Only such officers who have completed one year of service as a
permanent Lieutenant with the Township of Old Bridge shall be eligible
for promotion to the rank of Captain.
C. The Chief of Police shall consider the merit and fitness of all eligible
Lieutenants for possible promotion to the rank of Captain as required
and in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-129. The Chief of Police shall
then select the eligible Lieutenant of his choice to be promoted to the
rank of Captain.
D. Promotions may be made following the posting by the Chief of Police
that a vacancy for the rank of Captain exists. Promotions, if made, shall
be made by the Chief of Police in consultation with and subject to
approval by the Mayor and subject to § 5-95 herein and the financial
impact on the Township of Old Bridge. [Amended 2-27-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-07]
E. Appeals of process. Within 10 days of the posting of the ranking of
candidates, a candidate may file a written letter of appeal. Said letter
must contain the reason(s) or justification(s) for an appeal and must be
submitted to the Chief of Police, through the appropriate chain of
command. The Chief of Police will assess the request, and make a
determination of how the request will be addressed on a case-by-case
basis. Such requests may address the following areas of the promotion
process: [Added 11-19-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-19]
(1) If applicable, review and retabulation of the scored elements of the
selection process.
§ 5-105 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-106
1:91
§ 5-107. Promotion to Chief of Police.
§ 5-108. Firearms.
All firearms, which may be provided by the Township, shall remain the
property of the Township.
§ 5-109. Extra-duty assignments.
Extra-duty assignments of regular or special police personnel for thirdparty
requests for traffic control, crowd control or other police-type duty
shall be made with the approval and through the Office of the Chief of
Police. Such extra duty shall be voluntary. While on such duty, the members
so assigned shall be under the supervision and control of the Chief of
Police and superior officers of the Department and shall be subject to the
provisions of this section. For this service, the person requesting quasipublic
police service shall compensate the Township for services rendered
at an hourly rate in accordance with state and/or federal law, regulations or
guidelines.
(2) Review any evaluation or internal document that is not otherwise
privileged or subject to disclosure that was used in the selection
process related to the appellant.
(3) If the appeal impacts upon the results of the promotional ranking
as determined by the Chief of Police, the candidate may be
permitted to be reevaluated.
A. "Promotion" as used in this section, shall mean advancement to the
rank of Chief of Police.
B. Only such officers who have completed one year of service as a
permanent Captain or permanent Lieutenant with the Township of Old
Bridge Police Department, and have at least five years in an
administrative position, shall be eligible for promotion to the rank of
Chief of Police.
C. The Mayor shall interview all eligible candidates for possible promotion
to the rank of Chief. The Mayor shall then select the candidate of his
choice to be promoted to the rank of Chief of Police.
§ 5-106 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 5-109
1:92
ARTICLE XIV
Department of Health and Welfare
§ 5-110. General organization.
§ 5-111. Division of Health; Health Officer.
§ 5-112. Citizens Advisory Committee. [Amended 1-9-2006 by Ord.
No. 38-2005]
There shall be a Citizens Advisory Committee of the Department of Health
and Welfare consisting of nine members who shall be appointed by the
Council. The terms of office, duties, residency requirements and vacancy
provisions shall be as indicated below. The Committee shall elect one of its
members as Chairman by majority vote.
A. There shall be a Department of Health and Welfare. The Department
shall be organized into two divisions:
(1) The Division of Health.
(2) The Division of Welfare.
B. The head of the Department of Health and Welfare shall either be the
Director of the Department of Health and Welfare, who shall be
responsible to the Mayor; or the person who is the head of the Division
of Health, who shall serve as head of the Department without additional
compensation and shall be responsible to the Mayor. [Amended
1-19-1988 by Ord. No. 2-88]
A. Organization. The Director of the Division of Health shall be the
Township Health Officer, appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the Council, who shall serve for the term of the Mayor and
until his successor is duly appointed and qualifies. The Health Officer
shall receive such annual compensation as shall be fixed by ordinance.
B. Powers and duties. The Division of Health shall:
(1) Administer general laws and Township ordinances conferring
functions, powers and duties upon a board or department of health
or a local health officer.
(2) Enforce laws and ordinances providing for the prevention and
control of disease and conduct related inspections.
(3) Administer general laws and ordinances relating to vital statistics.
(4) Administer a public health nursing service and health educational
programs.
(5) Operate public health clinics as authorized by ordinances and
general law.
§ 5-110 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-112
1:93
§ 5-113. Division of Welfare; Local Assistance Board.
A. Terms. Two members shall be appointed for terms of four years, two for
terms of three years, two for terms of two years, two for terms of one
year, and the ninth member shall be the Director of the Department of
Health and Welfare, whose term shall be concurrent with his term of
office as Director of the Department of Health and Welfare.
B. Duties. The duties of the Citizens Advisory Committee shall be
promulgated by the Department of Health and Welfare, which duties
shall include recommendations from time to time to the Department of
Health and Welfare concerning matters generally affecting public
health and safety within the Township. Meetings shall be scheduled by
the Citizens Advisory Committee at such times and places as its
Chairman designates, and a majority thereof shall constitute a quorum.
Such recommendations shall be made to the Department of Health and
Welfare at a regular or special meeting as may be fixed by the
Chairman.
C. Residency requirement. The members of the Citizens Advisory
Committee shall be residents of the Township prior to their
appointment, and they shall serve without compensation.
D. Vacancy. Any vacancy created by death or resignation or inability of a
member to perform his duties shall be filled for the unexpired term of
the member, subject to the approval of the Mayor.
A. Organization of Board; appointment and terms of members.
(1) The Division of Welfare shall be the Local Assistance Board,
consisting of five members, one of whom shall be a woman,
appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Council, and shall
serve without compensation [Amended 4-18-1988 by Ord. No.
12-88]
(2) The term of one member shall be for one year, and such member
only may be appointed from among the members of the Council.
The terms of the other four members shall be for four years, one
term expiring in each year. [Amended 4-18-1988 by Ord. No.
12-88]
(3) The Local Assistance Board shall select a Chairman and a
Secretary and shall appoint a Director of Welfare, who shall be the
executive and administrative officer of the Board and perform the
duties specified in Laws of 1947, Chapter 156, § 12, N.J.S.A.
44:8-118, and other provisions of general law and the Township
ordinances.
(4) The Director of Welfare shall hold office for a term of five years
from the date of appointment and shall be paid such salary as may
be fixed by the Board, subject to the approval of the Council. The
Director of Welfare shall make monthly reports to the members of
§ 5-112 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 5-113
1:94
the Local Assistance Board and to the Director of Health and
Welfare concerning the activities of the Division of Welfare. An
Acting Director may be appointed for a term of 90 days.
B. Powers and duties of Division. The Division of Welfare shall:
(1) Administer programs of assistance to needy persons in cooperation
with federal, state, county and municipal agencies.
(2) Grant public assistance on a budget-deficit basis for living
expenses, medical services and supplies, hospitalization,
convalescent and dental care and boarding care for children.
(3) Provide social services for family adjustment and rehabilitation,
preventive and protective.
(4) Participate in general community welfare interests, such as local
unemployment, child care and prevention of delinquency.
(5) Maintain complete social case records, comply with state
regulations and make such reports and analyses of welfare
problems and grants as are necessary or desirable.
§ 5-113 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-113
1:95

ARTICLE XV
Zoning Board of Adjustment
§ 5-114. Establishment.
A Zoning Board of Adjustment is hereby established, consisting of seven
regular members and two alternate members to be appointed by the
governing body for terms of office pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69. Alternate
members shall be designated at the time of appointment as "Alternate No.
1" and "Alternate No. 2." A vacancy occurring otherwise than expiration of
term shall be filled for the unexpired term only.
§ 5-115. Removal.
A member may, after public hearing if he requests it, be removed by the
governing body for cause.
§ 5-116. Powers.
The Board of Adjustment shall possess the powers enumerated in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70.
§ 5-117. Meetings and records.
Meetings of the Board shall be held at regular intervals and on such
dates as determined by the Board at its annual meeting and at the call of
the Chairman. The Board may also fix, by rule, the manner in which the
Chairman may issue any such call for a meeting and the amount of notice
required of any such call, as well as the manner, including the amount of
notice, in which meetings other than those at the call of the Chairman may
be held.
§ 5-118. Procedures.
All procedural matters shall be handled pursuant to and in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., the Land Development Ordinance and such rules
and regulations adopted by the Board not inconsistent with state law, the
Land Development Ordinance and the Code of Old Bridge.
§ 5-119. Appeal stays all proceedings.
An appeal stays all processing in furtherance of the action on which the
decision appealed from was made, unless the Zoning Officer certifies to the
Board of Adjustment, after the notice of appeal has been filed with him,
that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion,
cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not
be stayed other than by a restraining order, which may be granted by the
Superior Court or any Judge thereof on application and notice to the Zoning
Officer and on due cause shown.
§ 5-114 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-120
1:97
§ 5-120. Rules and regulations.
The Board may adopt and enforce rules and regulations governing its
internal operation, the conduct of its members, appellants, attorneys and
citizens necessary to carry into effect the provisions and purposes of the
Zoning Ordinance and not inconsistent with law or the code.
§ 5-120 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 5-120
1:98
ARTICLE XVI
Planning Board
§ 5-121. Establishment.
Pursuant to the provisions of the N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23, a Planning Board
consisting of nine regular members is hereby established and created.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23.1, said Planning Board shall have two
alternate members, who shall be designated at the time of appointment by
the Mayor as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2."
§ 5-122. Membership classes.
The membership shall consist of four classes and alternates pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23 and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23.1.
§ 5-123. Conflicts; removal.
No member of the Planning Board shall be permitted to act on any matter in
which he has, either directly or indirectly, any personal or financial interest.
Any member other than a Class I member, after a public hearing if he
requests one, may be removed by the governing body for cause.
§ 5-124. Organization.
The Planning Board shall be organized in accordance with and pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-24.
§ 5-125. Powers.
The Planning Board shall have such powers and referral powers as are
enumerated in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-25 and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26.
§ 5-126. Procedures.
All procedural matters shall be handled pursuant to and in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., the Land Development Ordinance and such rules
and regulations adopted by this Board not inconsistent with state law, the
Land Development Ordinance and the Code of Old Bridge.
§ 5-127. Meetings and records.
Meetings of the Board shall be held at regular intervals and on such
dates determined by the Board at its annual meeting and at the call of
the Chairman. The Board may also fix, by rule, the manner in which the
Chairman may issue any such call for a meeting and the amount of notice
required of any such call, as well as the manner, including the amount of
notice, in which meetings other than those at the call of the Chairman may
be held.
§ 5-121 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-128
1:99
§ 5-128. Rules and regulations.
The Board may adopt and enforce rules and regulations governing its
internal operation, the conduct of its members, appellants, attorneys and
citizens necessary to carry into effect the provisions and purposes of the
Zoning Ordinance and not inconsistent with law or the Code.16
16.Editor's Note: Original § 2-18, Sewerage Authority, which previously followed this section,
was repealed 1-9-2006 by Ord. No. 38-2005.
§ 5-128 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 5-128
1:100
ARTICLE XVII
Municipal Utilities Authority
§ 5-129. Establishment; composition; membership.
The Old Bridge Township Municipal Utilities Authority is hereby
established, which shall consist of five regular members and two alternates
appointed by the Council, whose terms shall be set by resolution of the
Council in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:14B-1 et seq. The members of the
Utilities Authority shall receive compensation by way of a salary in the sum
to be designated by a majority vote of the members of the Utilities Authority,
but in no event to exceed the sum of $1,500 per member per year.
§ 5-129 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-129
1:101

ARTICLE XVIII
Environmental Commission
§ 5-130. Establishment.
There shall be an Environmental Commission in the Township consisting
of seven members, established for the protection, development and use of
natural resources, including water resources, located within the territorial
limits of the Township of Old Bridge. The Commission shall be known as the
"Environmental Commission of the Township of Old Bridge."
§ 5-131. Appointment; membership; terms; organization; removal;
conflicts. [Amended 7-11-1984 by Ord. No. 18-84]
A. The regular members of the Environmental Commission shall be
appointed by the Mayor. One shall be a member of the Planning Board,
and all shall be residents of the Township, and they shall serve without
compensation except as otherwise provided herein. The Mayor shall
designate one of the members to serve as Chairman and presiding
officer of the Commission. The Commissioners first appointed shall
serve for staggered one-, two- or three-year terms. The Mayor may
remove any member of the Commission for cause, on written charges
served upon the member and after a hearing thereon at which the
member shall be entitled to be heard in person by the Council. A
vacancy on the Commission occurring other than by expiration of a
term shall be filled for the expired term in the same manner as an
original appointment.
B. There shall be two associate members of the Environmental
Commission who shall be members of a Township youth organization.
The Mayor shall appoint one associate member, and the Township
Council shall appoint one associate member. Associate members shall
serve one-year terms without compensation and shall be nonvoting
members of said Commission. [Amended 3-12-2001 by Ord. No.
09-01]
C. There shall be two alternate members on the Environmental
Commission, who shall be appointed by the Mayor. Alternate members
shall be designated at the time of appointment by the Mayor as
"Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2." The terms of the alternate
members shall be for two years, except the terms of alternate members
first appointed shall be two years for Alternate No. 1 and one year for
Alternate No. 2. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of
term shall be filled by the Mayor for the unexpired term only. An
alternate member shall not be permitted to act on any matter in which
he or she has, either directly or indirectly, any personal or financial
interest. An alternate member may, after public hearing if he or she
requests one, be removed by the governing body for cause. An alternate
member may participate in discussions of the proceedings but not vote
except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member. A vote
§ 5-130 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-131
1:103
§ 5-132. Powers and duties.
The Environmental Commission shall:
§ 5-133. Acquisition of lands.
Subject to the prior approval of the Planning Board and Council, the
Environmental Commission may acquire property, real and personal, in
the name of the Township, by gift, pledges, grants, bequests, devises or
lease, for any of the purposes of the Commission, and it shall administer
the same for such purposes, subject to the terms of such conveyance
or gift. The interest so acquired may be the fee or any lesser interest,
development right, easement, including conservation easement, covenant
or other contractual right, including a conveyance on conditions or with
limitations or reversions as may be necessary to acquire, maintain, improve,
protect, limit the future use of or otherwise conserve and properly utilize
open space and other land and water areas in the Township.
shall not be delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead
of an alternate member. In the event that a choice must be made as
to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote first.
[Added 3-16-1992 by Ord. No. 8-92]
A. Conduct research into the use and possible use of the open land areas
of the Township.
B. Coordinate the activities of unofficial bodies organized for similar
purposes.
C. Advertise, prepare, print and distribute books, maps, charts, plans and
pamphlets which, in its judgment, it deems necessary for its purposes,
within the limits of funds appropriated to the Commission.
D. Keep an index of all open areas, publicly and privately owned, including
open marshlands, swamps and other wetlands, and obtain information
on the proper use of such areas.
E. Recommend to the Planning Board, from time to time, plans and
programs for inclusion in the Master Plan of the Township for
development and use of such areas.
F. Do such other acts and things as are reasonably related to and
designated to carry out the purposes and objectives of the Commission,
including, without limitation, the payment of such clerks and other
employees as the Commission may from time to time require within the
limits of the funds appropriated to the Commission.
G. Review and comment on site plans and specifications.
H. Keep records of the meetings and activities of the Commission and
make an annual report to the Council.
§ 5-131 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 5-133
1:104
ARTICLE XIX
Multiple-Dwelling Emergency Commission
§ 5-134. Establishment; membership; meetings. [Amended
8-22-2005 by Ord. No. 23-2005]
There shall be a Multiple-Dwelling Emergency Commission in the Township.
Its members shall be appointed by the Township Council and shall serve
without compensation at the pleasure of the Council. The membership of
the Commission shall consist of the Health Officer, the Construction Code
Official, the Finance Director, one member of the Rent Stabilization Board
and one member of the Township Council, who shall be Chairman. Any
conduct or action of the Commission authorized by this section and Chapter
290, Multiple Dwellings, shall be deemed valid and effective when taken by
any three members of the Commission. At any meeting of the Commission,
a quorum shall consist of a majority of the membership of the Commission.
§ 5-135. Duties.
The duties of the Commission shall consist of the following:
A. Receiving, administering and expending security funds deposited
pursuant to the terms of Chapter 290, Multiple Dwellings.
B. Examining those circumstances and conditions alleged to constitute
emergency conditions and declaring, where applicable, an emergency
condition to exist.
C. Arranging, in accordance with the terms of Chapter 290, Multiple
Dwellings, for the prompt repair, maintenance, supply or replacement
of those items of structure, equipment or supplies which are necessary
to correct, eliminate or alleviate the emergency condition.
§ 5-134 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-135
1:105

ARTICLE XX
Public Parking and Transportation Utility
[Amended 2-16-1988 by Ord. No. 3-8817]
§ 5-136. Establishment.
The Township Council of the Township of Old Bridge, County of Middlesex,
New Jersey, hereby creates and establishes in the Township of Old Bridge,
County of Middlesex, State of New Jersey, in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:48-2 and 40:60-25.1, a utility, the official name of which shall be the "Old
Bridge Public Parking and Transportation Utility," hereafter referred to as
the "Utility."
§ 5-137. Functions.
The Utility shall have the power to exercise public and essential
governmental functions, including the powers necessary or convenient to
carry out and effectuate the purpose and provisions of the New Jersey
statutes, including the right of eminent domain; the power to issue bonds;
the right to enter into contracts for the purchase and/or lease of real and/or
personal property, including labor and materials; the right to borrow money;
the right to accept gifts and contributions; the power to receive grants and
other financial assistance from the state or federal government; the right
to cooperate with any other municipality or the county or other agencies
in taking over and leasing or managing any parking facility; the right to
purchase any and all insurance necessary for the protection and safety of
the operation of the Utility; and the right to enter into such agreements
or other instruments as may be necessary for the efficient operation of the
Utility.
§ 5-138. Governing regulations.
§ 5-139. Disposition of funds.
A. The administration of the Utility will be the responsibility of a
Committee, which shall consist of all members of the Township Council,
who shall serve without additional compensation.
B. The Utility shall be organized in accordance with the Code of the
Township of Old Bridge and in accordance with relevant municipal
ordinances, approved by the Mayor and Township Council, and under
the direction of the Township Administrator according to the
Administrative Code and further operated as follows:
(1) Located in the Department of Administration will be a division of
the Utility responsible for maintenance, construction and
improvement of all operations of the Utility. [Amended 1-9-2006
by Ord. No. 38-2005]
17.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of former Ch. 2, Art. XXII,
Transportation Committee, as amended 7-11-1984 by Ord. No. 18-84.
§ 5-136 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-139
1:107
§ 5-140. Utility charges.
The Utility shall have the authority to charge and collect moneys for the
use of the Utility facilities in accordance with the municipal ordinances
and to use those moneys to defray the cost of the acquisition of land
rights and interests therein, to equip the facilities, to pay the Utility's
current expenses, to develop the facilities and to maintain and/or repair the
facilities.
§ 5-141. Employees, salaries and compensation.
The employment and salaries of all employees will be in accordance with
the ordinances of the Township of Old Bridge.
§ 5-142. Advisory Committee to the Utility.18
There shall further be established an Advisory Committee to the Utility,
consisting of seven members. The initial terms of the membership shall be
three for three years, two for two years and two for one year, five of whom
shall be appointed by the Council and two who shall be appointed by the
Mayor. The two appointments by the Mayor, of the seven regular members,
shall be one three-year appointee and one two-year appointee. The Advisory
Committee shall have the following powers and duties:
A. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:5-15, all moneys received by or on
behalf of the Utility shall be paid to the Treasurer, who shall deposit all
such receipts within 48 hours. [Amended 1-9-2006 by Ord. No.
38-2005]
B. An annual budget shall be prepared in accordance with relevant
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:4-1 et seq.
C. The Utility shall further comply with any provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:62 et
seq. which are applicable to the creation, establishment and operation
of the Utility.
A. To conduct studies and prepare reports and recommendations for the
Mayor concerning the establishment, maintaining and operating of
various means of transportation within the Township and surrounding
area.
B. To investigate and establish a liaison with all appropriate federal, state
and county agencies concerning the transportation problems, systems
and routes as they affect the Township and to serve as a spokesman
before appropriate governmental agencies regarding transportation
matters that affect the Township.
18.Editor's Note: This section was amended 4-13-1998 by Ord. No. 33-98 to increase the
membership of the Advisory Committee to the Utility from seven members to nine
members, both of which shall be appointed by Council. This section was further amended
7-8-2002 by Ord. No. 30-02 to decrease the membership from nine members to seven
members, through the elimination of two Council appointments.
§ 5-139 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 5-142
1:108
C. To develop an overall transportation policy which shall consider not
only present but future transportation needs of the region and to
cooperate with commuter, senior citizen and other groups to ensure
that their needs are fully and adequately integrated within the overall
transportation policy.
D. To devise necessary guidelines and methods to determine means of
nonmunicipal funding of transportation programs for the benefit of area
residents.
§ 5-142 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-142
1:109

ARTICLE XXI
Historic Preservation Commission
§ 5-143. Establishment. [Amended 2-28-1985 by Ord. No. 9-85]
There is hereby established an Historic Preservation Commission,
consisting of nine members, with the purpose being to develop and
implement the official local historic preservation plan for the Township of
Old Bridge.
§ 5-144. Appointment of membership.
The members of the Historic Preservation Commission shall be appointed
by the Township Mayor for three-year terms. The Commissioners first
appointed shall serve for staggered one-, two- or three-year terms. All
members shall be residents of the Township of Old Bridge, and they shall
serve without compensation, except as otherwise provided herein. The
Mayor and Township Planner shall serve as ex officio members of the
Commission.
§ 5-145. Powers and duties.
The Historic Preservation Commission shall:
A. Compile an inventory of properties of historic, archaeological or
architectural significance.
B. Establish an Official Local Register of Historic Places and transmit such
information to the New Jersey Office of Historic Preservation for
possible inclusion on the State and National Registers of Historic
Places.
C. Coordinate local preservation activities and act as spokesman for the
Township in dealing with state and federal agencies on matters
affecting the Township's historic resources.
D. Advertise, prepare, print and distribute books, maps, charts, plans and
pamphlets which, in its judgment, it deems necessary for its purpose,
within the limits of funds appropriated to the Commission.
E. Recommend to the Planning Board, from time to time, plans and
programs for inclusion in the Master Plan of the Township for
development and use of such historic places.
F. Do such other acts and things as are reasonably related to and designed
to carry out the purposes and objectives of the Commission, including,
without limitation, the payment of such clerks and other employees as
the Commission may from time to time require, within the limits of the
funds appropriated to the Commission.
G. Keep records of the meetings and activities of the Commission and
make an annual report to the Council.
§ 5-143 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-146
1:111
§ 5-146. Acquisition of historic places.
Subject to the prior approval of the Planning Board and Council, the
Historic Preservation Commission may acquire property, real and personal,
in the name of the Township, by gift, pledges, grants, bequests, devices or
lease, for any of the purposes of the Commission, and it shall administer
the same for such purposes, subject to the terms of such conveyance
or gift. The interest so acquired may be the fee or any lesser interest,
development right, easement, including conservation easement, covenant
or other contractual right, including a conveyance on conditions or with
limitations or reversions, as may be necessary to acquire, maintain,
improve, protect, limit the future use of or otherwise conserve and properly
utilize historic places and other land and water areas in the Township.
§ 5-147. Local Register of Historic Places. [Amended 1-29-1986 by
Ord. No. 59-85]
From time to time, the Commission shall recommend to the Township
Council the inclusion of historic places on an Official Local Register of
Historic Places. Upon such historic designation by action of the Township
Council, no alterations or additions which are deemed to materially change
the characteristics of the historic place shall be undertaken nor approved
by any local official of the Township and no demolition of said historic
place shall occur until prior approval has been obtained from the Historic
Preservation Commission. The following sites are hereby designated
historic places:
A. Provost Family Burial Ground, Block 1, Lot 44, 0.64 acre.
B. Mount Hebron Cemetery Association, Inc., Block 3231, Lot 13, 4.93
acres.
C. New Methodist Cemetery of 1805, Block 4230, Lot 4, 0.77 acre.
D. Baptist Cemetery, Block 3230, Lot 12.
E. Steamboat Landing.
F. Warne's Store, Route 516, Block 11251, Lot 17.
G. Hezekiah Warne Estate, Route 516, Block 11252, Lot 11.
H. Elmer Warne House, Route 516, Block 11251, Lot 21B.
I. Brown Homestead, Route 516, Block 9000, Lots 16A and 16B.
J. Oswald Brick Works, Laurence Harbor Parkway, Block 2150.
K. J. Burlew House and Woodwork Shop, Cottrell Road, Block 10252, Lot
19.
L. Farrington Farm, Farrington Road, Block 10252, Lot 46.
M. J. Forman House, Old Schoolhouse Lane, Block 3230, Lot 3 (Alice Kerr).
§ 5-146 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 5-147
1:112
N. J.T. Fountain House, Throckmorton Lane, Block 15518, Lot 905A (St.
Ambrose Convent).
O. Perth Amboy Water Works, Block 8004, Lot 10.
P. Owens House, Springhill and Old Mill Road, Block 10254, Lot 4
(Schulmesiter).
Q. Morgan Site, Route 34, Block 4187, Lot 6.
R. Morristown School, Schoolhouse Lane, Block 3230, Lot 5.
S. C. Brown House, Throckmorton Lane, Block 15549, Lot 5A (Gaub
Farm).
T. E. Hennel House, Morganville Road, Block 11251, Lot 18A (Eifert).
U. Water Works Road.
V. East Greystone Road.
W. West Greystone Road.
X. Old Cheesequake Road.
Y. The foundation of Dill's Snuff Mill, along Deep Run, north of Banton's
Bridge.
§ 5-147 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-147
1:113

ARTICLE XXII
Human Resources Council19
§ 5-148. Establishment; terms; organization. [Amended 7-11-1984
by Ord. No. 18-84]
§ 5-149. Purpose and function.
The Human Resources Council shall have as an overall purpose the
improvement of the quality of life for residents of the Township of Old
Bridge through fostering a comprehensive integrated community-based
system of human services accessible to all residents of the Township. In
order to accomplish this, the Human Resources Council will:
A. There is herewith established a Human Resources Council consisting of
nine regular members composed of individuals who have expressed
interest in broad areas of human services and community affairs,
governmental and/or voluntary, who shall serve without compensation.
The regular members shall be appointed for three-year terms, except
for the first year, where 1/3 shall be appointed for one year, 1/3 for two
years and the remaining 1/3 for three years. Members may be removed
for cause by majority vote of the Township Council. The Human
Resources Council shall annually select from among its regular
members a Chairperson, Vice Chairperson and Secretary.
B. There shall be two associate members of the Human Resources Council
who shall be students at the Township high schools. The Mayor shall
appoint one associate member from Old Bridge Central High School
and another associate member from Old Bridge Central High School.
Associate members shall serve one-year terms without compensation
and shall be nonvoting members of said Council. [Amended 1-9-2006
by Ord. No. 38-2005]
A. Provide an effective mechanism through which representatives of
government, voluntary agencies, professionals, providers, consumers
and other community interests can coordinate their efforts to build a
better life for the Township of Old Bridge residents.
B. Provide assistance to institutions, organizations, agencies and groups
or individuals dedicated to the provision of services in the planning and
the delivery of services.
C. Foster the involvement and liaison of those agencies in the Township
which are providers of services to enhance coordination, exchange
information or any other developments which will affect planning
activities.
19.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 15-93, adopted 4-15-1993, and Ord. No. 38-93, adopted
9-17-1993, which both amended this article, were repealed 5-12-1994 by Ord. No. 19-94.
Said Ord. No. 19-94 also readopted and ratified this article, to continue in effect without
interruption as it appeared in the Code prior to the adoption of Ord. No. 15-93.
§ 5-148 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-149
1:115
§ 5-150. Meetings and reports.
The Human Resources Council shall hold regular meetings as set forth in its
bylaws, at which time a quorum shall be required for decisionmaking and
shall consist of a majority of those appointed. In December of each year, an
annual report and interim reports, as required, shall be submitted to the
Township Council.
§ 5-151. Membership.
D. Assist in the mobilization of new resources and funding to fill service
gaps.
E. Provide a mechanism for identifying and making known the unmet
needs and gaps in services.
F. Recommend goals, planning and services priorities and policies for
improving the system and assist in the recommendation and approval
as well as in the implementation of projects which will meet the area's
needs.
G. Review and comment upon applications for new facilities or preparing
for approval previous to submission to the Township Council.
H. Provide technical assistance to individuals and public and private
entities for the development of projects.
I. Contribute to county and state efforts in the development of
comprehensive social services planning.
J. Conduct periodic evaluations of all human resources activities.
K. Establish, annually review and amend a human resources plan pursuant
to these bylaws, county, state or federal statutes or regulations.
L. Establish a system for gathering and analyzing data on the
characteristics of the social human problems in the Township, as well as
the needs and the resources.
M. To promote awareness, understanding, educational programs and the
dissemination of information to agencies, organizations and individuals
to meet the needs of the residents of the Township of Old Bridge.
A. The Human Resources Council shall be by appointment by the Township
Council in accordance with the statutory provisions of the State of New
Jersey and the Administrative Code of the Township of Old Bridge.
B. Efforts shall be made to ensure substantial representation from groups
representing consumers and recipients of appropriate human services,
and recommendations to said effort shall be given to the Township
Council.
§ 5-149 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 5-151
1:116
C. One member of the Township Council shall be designated to serve as
liaison to the Human Resources Council.
D. Township staff shall be available to serve as resource people to the
Human Resources Council, and requests at reasonable intervals for
assistance shall be given the Human Resources Council.
E. The Human Resources Council shall, from time to time, call upon
Township agencies, organizations and individuals to serve as resource
people.
F. Any Human Resources Council member missing three consecutive
meetings without providing the Township Council with valid reasons for
such action will be discontinued by the Township Council from Human
Resources Council membership, provided that notice of said absent
meetings is forwarded to the Township Council.
§ 5-151 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-151
1:117

ARTICLE XXIII
Economic Development Corporation
[Added 10-19-1992 by Ord. No. 39-92; amended 6-22-1998 by Ord.
No. 51-98]
§ 5-152. Corporation continued; elimination of members; election
of trustees.
The Old Bridge Economic Development Corporation is hereby continued
in existence. The Certificate of Incorporation and Bylaws thereof shall be
amended as follows:
§ 5-153. Participation. [Added 11-23-1998 by Ord. No. 86-98]
Any person claiming authority to vote and participate in the Economic
Development Authority as a designee may not so act unless such a person
presents a resolution of the Old Bridge Township Planning Board or Old
Bridge Township Municipal Utilities Authority, as the case may be.
§ 5-154. Elimination of voting rights.
A. The Corporation shall have no members.
B. The Corporation shall be governed by the following trustees (15 in
number):
(1) The Mayor of the Township of Old Bridge.
(2) Two members of the Township Council of the Township of Old
Bridge to be selected by the Township Council. Such trustee may
only continue to serve while he or she holds the position of member
of the Township Council.
(3) The Chairperson of the Old Bridge Township Planning Board or his
or her designee with the approval of the Old Bridge Township
Planning Board. [Amended 11-23-1998 by Ord. No. 86-98]
(4) The Chairperson of the Old Bridge Township Municipal Utilities
Authority or his or her designee with the approval of the Old Bridge
Township Municipal Utilities Authority. [Amended 11-23-1998 by
Ord. No. 86-98]
(5) Ten private persons, prominent in the community and/or
knowledgeable about business and economic affairs. Except as
otherwise provided hereinbelow, three of the private person
trustees shall be appointed by the Mayor, and seven such trustees
shall be appointed by the Township Council.
A. The following trustees who have heretofore served on the Board of the
Corporation are eliminated as voting trustees:
(1) The Business Administrator of the Township of Old Bridge.
§ 5-152 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-154
1:119
§ 5-155. Appointment to new positions; terms.
Of the 10 trustee positions authorized to be held by private persons, six
such positions represent those positions held by filled and existing trustees.
The four (new) positions shall be appointed as follows:
§ 5-156. Impact on current terms.
This article shall not be construed to eliminate or reduce the term of office
of any member except that of the Township Business Administrator and the
Township Director of Community Development, who shall be advisory staff
to the Corporation without voting rights.
§ 5-157. Personal liability for actions.
The Certificate of Incorporation shall be amended to provide that a trustee
or officer of the Old Bridge Township Economic Development Corporation
shall not be personally liable to the Corporation or any third party for the
breach of any duty owed to the Corporation except:
(2) The Director of the Department of Community Development.
B. Such persons may continue to attend meetings of the Trustees and may
participate in the discussions of the Corporation; provided, however,
that such persons shall have no vote.
A. Of the four additional appointments which shall become effective as a
result of this amendment, all four shall be appointed by the Council.
After the Council's selection of these four trustees, any vacancies
thereafter will be filled in such manner as to preserve the ratio of three
Mayoral appointments and seven Council appointments.
B. Each trustee is to serve for a three-year term; provided, however, that
of the four additional appointments which shall become effective after
the effective date of this amendment, two trustees will each serve twoyear
terms, and two trustees will each serve one-year terms. Selection
of the trustees who will serve a particular term will be by mutual
consent of the parties or by lot if mutual consent cannot be obtained.
A. For breaches of the duty of loyalty to the Corporation;
B. For acts undertaken which were not in good faith and which involved a
violation of the law; or
C. For actions resulting in receipt of the trustee or officer of an improper
personal benefit.
§ 5-154 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 5-157
1:120
ARTICLE XXIV
Township Auditor
§ 5-158. Appointment; qualifications.
There shall be a Township Auditor appointed by the Council for a term
of one year. He shall receive such compensation as may be hereafter
determined and approved by the Council. The Auditor shall be a registered
municipal accountant of the State of New Jersey but need not be a resident
of the Township. In lieu of appointing an individual auditor, the Council
may appoint a firm of auditors, one member of which shall be a registered
municipal accountant of the State of New Jersey.
§ 5-159. Powers and duties.
The Auditor shall make the annual audit and shall have such other powers
and duties as may be prescribed by law or ordinance or as may be directed
by the Council.
§ 5-158 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-159
1:121

ARTICLE XXV
Municipal Court
§ 5-160. Establishment; powers. [Amended 1-9-2006 by Ord. No.
38-2005]
There shall be a Municipal Court in the Township pursuant to the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1 et seq., to be known as the "Municipal Court of the
Township of Old Bridge." The Municipal Court shall have a Seal bearing
the impress of the name of the Court. The Court shall be held in the
Township Hall or such other places as the Council shall designate from time
to time and shall exercise all the functions, powers, duties and jurisdiction
conferred by law upon municipal courts.
§ 5-161. Chief Municipal Judge; Municipal Judge; appointment;
qualifications; powers and duties. [Amended 2-16-1988 by Ord. No.
4-88; 3-13-1995 by Ord. No. 13-95; 5-12-1997 by Ord. No. 18-97]
A. Designation of judges.
(1) Appointment.
(a) There shall be a Chief Municipal Judge and a Municipal Judge
of the Municipal Court appointed by the Mayor with the advice
and consent of the Council. The Chief Municipal Judge and the
Municipal Judge shall serve for terms of three years from the
date of appointment and until a successor is appointed and
qualified. Vacancies must be filled for the unexpired term only.
(b) Procedures for Council advice and consent. In support of any
request for advice and consent as to any Municipal Court
Judge, the Mayor shall provide the Township Council with the
following information:
[1] The name of the Mayor's appointee shall be filed with the
Township Clerk at least 30 days prior to action by the
Township Council granting or denying advice and consent.
[2] The Mayor shall provide a resume to the Township Council
together with a judicial information questionnaire
containing the following information:
[a] Any civil or criminal proceedings to which the
appointee has been a party during the preceding 20
years.
[b] Any negative ethical determinations made against the
appointee as an attorney at law during the preceding
20 years.
§ 5-160 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-161
1:123
[c] Any and all judicial conduct proceedings challenging
the appointee's fitness for judicial office during the
preceding 20 years.
[d] Any complaints challenging the appointee's fitness to
practice law or fitness for judicial office which are
then pending.
[3] Prior to the adoption of any resolution granting advice and
consent to the Mayor's appointment of a Municipal Judge,
the Township Clerk shall cause specific notification to be
given to the Township's official newspaper(s) that such
action will be considered. At the time and place of the
meeting at which such a resolution is to be considered, a
reasonable period of public comment shall be entertained
prior to the Council's vote on advice and consent.
(2) There shall also be an Acting Municipal Judge appointed by the
Mayor with the consent of the Council for a term not to exceed one
year pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2B:12-5. [Amended 1-9-2006 by Ord.
No. 38-2005]
(3) The Mayor shall designate which Municipal Judge shall be the
Chief Municipal Judge.
B. The Chief Municipal Judge, the Municipal Judge and the Acting
Municipal Judge shall have and possess the qualifications and shall
have, possess and exercise all the functions, duties, powers and
jurisdiction conferred by law or ordinance. He or she need not be a
resident of the Township. He or she shall be an attorney at law in the
State of New Jersey. Whenever either the Chief Municipal Judge,
Municipal Judge or Acting Municipal Judge is unable to sit as such, he
or she may designate any other judge of any municipal court to sit for
him or her temporarily. Any such designation shall be made in writing
and shall be filed in the Court, and any person so designed, while sitting
temporarily, shall possess all the powers of the Municipal Judge.
C. The Chief Municipal Judge shall possess ultimate authority and
supervision of all matters related to the Municipal Court for the
Township of Old Bridge, subject to any provisions of law or ordinance,
as well as any rules and regulations promulgated by either the
Administrative Office of the Court or the Assignment Judge of
Middlesex County.
D. Compensation. The salary of the Chief Municipal Judge shall be
$55,775, effective January 18, 2009, provided that said Judge is the only
sitting Judge for the Township of Old Bridge Municipal Court. In the
event that any additional Municipal Judge or Acting Judge is appointed
by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Township Council, the
salaries of all judges shall be adjusted accordingly. [Added 4-6-2009
by Ord. No. 2009-09]
§ 5-161 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 5-162
1:124
§ 5-162. Municipal Court Administrator. [Amended 12-21-1987 by
Ord. No. 10-87; 1-9-2006 by Ord. No. 38-2005]
§ 5-163. Assistant Municipal Court Administrator; Deputy Court
Administrator. [Amended 12-21-1987 by Ord. No. 40-87; 1-9-2006
by Ord. No. 38-2005]
There shall be an Assistant Municipal Court Administrator, and Deputy
Court Administrators of the Municipal Court, who shall be employees hired
by the Mayor and who shall perform the functions assigned to them by
the Municipal Court Administrator and the Municipal Judge. The Assistant
Court Administrator and Deputy Court Administrator shall be entitled to
all benefits which are provided to Township employees pursuant to the
A. There shall be an Administrator of the Municipal Court who shall be a
Township employee hired by the Mayor and who shall perform all of the
functions and duties prescribed by state law, the rules applicable to
municipal courts and by the Municipal Judge. The Administrator's
duties shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) Carrying out the rules, regulations, polices and procedures relating
to the operation of the Court.
(2) Interviewing and speaking to persons wishing to file criminal
complaints or wishing information in this regard, and receiving
complaints and dispensing information relating to the Court
matters.
(3) Maintaining the financial records of the Court.
(4) Attending court; recording pleas, judgments and dispositions;
arranging trial calendars; signing court documents; and preparing
and issuing warrants and commitments.
(5) Taking and preparing bail bonds, recognizances and securities in
lieu thereof; making inquiry concerning their sufficiency and
equity; and receiving and accounting for fines and costs.
(6) Interviewing persons on informal police court matters to determine
if there is a basis for formal action and, if necessary, issuing
summonses requiring court appearances; and maintaining and
classifying records and files.
(7) Maintaining, forwarding, receiving and reporting such records,
reports and files as are required by the State Director of Motor
Vehicles.
B. The compensation for the Municipal Court Administrator shall be set by
the Township Council, as with other Township employees. The
Municipal Court Administrator, as a Township employee, shall be
entitled to all benefits which are provided by the Personnel Code of the
Township of Old Bridge.
§ 5-162 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-163
1:125
Personnel Code of the Township of Old Bridge. The compensation for the
Assistant Municipal Court Administrator and Deputy Court Administrators
shall be set by the Township Council as in the case of other municipal
employees.
§ 5-164. Municipal Public Defender; fee for representation. [Added
12-22-1997 by Ord. No. 46-97]
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to create the position of
Municipal Public Defender, as required by P.L. 1997, Chapter 256,20
supplementing Title 2B of the New Jersey Statutes and repealing
N.J.S.A. 2B:12-28.
B. Effective January 1, 1998, the Municipal Court of the Township of Old
Bridge shall have a Municipal Public Defender, appointed by the Mayor
with advice and consent of the Township Council. Such Public Defender
shall be compensated by contractual agreement, as determined by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council as stated herein. The
term for this position shall be one year. [Amended 1-23-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-01]
C. Application fees. Any person applying for representation by the
Municipal Public Defender shall be required to pay an additional
application fee of $200, to defray the cost of the Municipal Public
Defender services, in accordance with all applicable guidelines. The
Municipal Court shall have the discretion to waive the aforementioned
fee, upon a clear and convincing showing of need. Said funds shall be
maintained by the Department of Finance in a manner consistent with
all applicable laws, ordinances and resolutions.
20.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 2B:24-1 et seq.
§ 5-163 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 5-164
1:126
ARTICLE XXVI
Services on Unaccepted Roads; Reimbursement for Services to
Qualified Private Communities
§ 5-165. Authorization to extend Township services to certain roads
and streets.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:67-23.1 et seq., which permit
municipalities to repave, maintain, provide for the removal of snow, ice and
other obstructions from and provide for the lighting of any roads or streets
upon which travel is sufficient, in the opinion of the Township Council, to
warrant such expenditures, even though such roads and streets shall not
have been taken over by the Council or dedicated and accepted as public
highways, the following places within the Township shall have the services
described herein extended to them:
§ 5-166. Reimbursement for certain services. [Added 7-24-1995 by
Ord. No. 42-95]
The Township of Old Bridge shall reimburse all qualified private
communities, as defined in N.J.S.A. 40:67-23.2e, for ice and snow removal,
lighting of roads and streets but only the extent of payment for electricity,
and collection of leaves, recyclable materials and garbage along roads and
streets, unless such services are provided by the Township or otherwise
provided for privately for all other residential properties in the Township.
§ 5-167. Qualified private community service agreements. [Added
7-24-1995 by Ord. No. 42-95]
The Township is hereby authorized to enter into a qualified private
community service agreement with each qualified private community, the
terms and conditions of which shall be determined by the Mayor and
submitted to the Township Council for approval pursuant to provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:69A-36(l).
§ 5-168. Commencement of reimbursement. [Added 7-24-1995 by
Ord. No. 42-95]
Reimbursement to each qualified private community shall commence with
fiscal year 1996. Reimbursement for prior years has been in accordance
with Ordinance Nos. 37-88 and 51-88.21 All actions taken by the Township
in providing services, or reimbursing such communities for such qualified
A. All streets and roadways within Cheesequake Village shall have electric
service paid for streetlighting and ice, snow and obstructions removed
as follows: all of Haven Road; Galewood Drive from Haven Road to
Valery Road, and Valery Road.
21.Editor's Note: Ordinance Nos. 37-88 and 51-88 (Sec. 15-1, Maintenance and lighting of
eligible streets, of the 1973 Revised General Ordinances) were specifically repealed by
Ord. No. 42-95.
§ 5-165 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-168
1:127
services, prior to the effective date of this section are hereby ratified and
approved.
§ 5-168 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 5-168
1:128
ARTICLE XXVII
Arena and Recreation Utility
[Added 2-28-1985 by Ord. No. 7-85]
§ 5-169. Establishment.
The Township Council of the Township of Old Bridge, County of Middlesex,
New Jersey, hereby declares and establishes that a municipal selfliquidating
public utility be formed, as provided by the Local Bond Law and
Local Budget Law of the State of New Jersey (N.J.S.A. 40A:2-1 et seq. and
40A:4-1 et seq., respectively). Said utility shall be operated under the title
of "Old Bridge Arena and Recreation Utility."
§ 5-170. Official name.
The name by which the Utility shall be known is the "Old Bridge Arena and
Recreation Utility," hereafter named the "Utility."
§ 5-171. Functions.
It shall be the function of the Utility to purchase real property, construct,
operate and maintain recreation facilities and to provide enterprises in
support of those facilities.
§ 5-172. Governing regulations.
The Utility shall be governed by the ordinances, the Administrative Code
and resolutions adopted by the Council and by administrative directives.
§ 5-173. Financial affairs.
The financial affairs of the Utility shall be governed in accordance with
the laws applying to the financial affairs of the municipality and utilities in
general.
§ 5-174. Acquisition of property.
The Utility may, from time to time, acquire such real property as may
be authorized by the Township Council by duly adopted resolutions or
ordinances in accordance with the laws of the State of New Jersey.
§ 5-175. Management; duties.
A. The administration of the Old Bridge Recreation Utility will be the
responsibility of a Committee, which shall consist of all members of the
Township Council.
B. No additional compensation will be received by the membership of the
Utility Committee.
C. The duties of the Committee shall be:
§ 5-169 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-175
1:129
§ 5-176. Director; employees; salaries and compensation.
There shall be a head of the Utility known as the "Director." Prior to his
appointment, the Director shall be qualified by training or experience, or a
combination thereof, for the duties of his office. The Director of Parks and
Recreation shall also serve as Director without additional compensation.
The employment and salaries of the Director and the other employees will
be in accordance with the ordinances of the Township of Old Bridge.
§ 5-177. Utility charges.
The Utility shall have the authority to charge and collect moneys for the use
of Utility facilities in accordance with municipal ordinances and to use these
moneys to defray the cost of the acquisition of land, rights and interest
therein, to equip the facilities, to pay the Utility's current expenses, to
develop the facilities and to maintain and/or repair the facilities.
(1) To meet from time to time to conduct utility business.
(2) To formulate plans for the establishment, development and
improvement of recreational facilities.
(3) To be responsible for the care and maintenance of the recreational
facilities under its supervision.
(4) To formulate rules and regulations for public use of such
recreational facilities.
(5) To maintain a separate book of account and accounting records for
the operation of the Utility.
(6) To present to the Township Council by January 10 of each year a
proposed budget for the forthcoming year and a summary of
operations for the preceding year.
§ 5-175 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 5-177
1:130
ARTICLE XXVIII
Transitional Provisions
§ 5-178. Ordinances.
All ordinances of the municipality in effect on January 1, 1984, to the extent
that they are not inconsistent with the Charter or the Code, shall remain in
full force and effect until modified or replaced pursuant to law.
§ 5-179. References in prior ordinances.
All references in any other ordinance to any board, body, department or
office shall be taken and construed to mean such body, officer or office
to which the respective functions, powers and duties are allocated and
assigned by this chapter.
§ 5-180. Temporary procedures.
The Mayor may suspend, until July 1, 1984, the application of any
administrative procedures required by this chapter whenever he finds and
determines that personnel, equipment, forms or space are insufficient
pending reassignment or appointment of personnel, acquisition of
necessary items or relocation of departments.
§ 5-181. Position abolished.
Any function, office or employment not specifically transferred as provided
in this article or otherwise by this chapter shall be deemed abolished.
§ 5-182. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect on January 31, 1984, after adoption and
publication according to law, the Council having duly adopted a resolution
declaring an emergency in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:69A-181.
§ 5-178 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-182
1:131

ARTICLE XXIX
(Reserved)22
§ 5-183. through § 5-187. (Reserved)
22.Editor's Note: Former Art. XXIX, added 12-19-1985 by Ord. No. 54-85, as amended, was
repealed 3-1-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-07.
§ 5-183 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-183
1:133

ARTICLE XXIXA
Housing Authority
[Added 4-20-1987 by Ord. No. 47-86]
§ 5-187.1. Findings.
§ 5-187.2. Creation.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 55:14A-1 et seq.,23 and because of
the need for more adequate housing specifically found therefor, there shall
be the Housing Authority of the Township of Old Bridge, subject to all the
rights, powers and duties vested in and conferred upon it by the terms and
provisions of the aforesaid state statutes.
§ 5-187.3. Authority to act as Redevelopment Agency.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55C-1 et seq.,24 and the Federal
Housing Act,25 authorizing public agencies to redevelop blighted areas, and
because of the need specifically found therefor, the Housing Authority of the
Township of Old Bridge be and the same is hereby designated, constituted,
authorized and empowered to act as the Old Bridge Redevelopment Agency
A. There exists in the Township of Old Bridge a need for safe and sanitary
dwelling accommodations for persons of low income, especially senior
citizens. There is a shortage of safe and sanitary dwelling
accommodations available at rents which persons of low income can
afford and such persons are forced to occupy overcrowded and
congested dwelling accommodations; and the aforesaid conditions
constitute a detriment to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of
the Township of Old Bridge and impair economic values.
B. The shortage of safe and sanitary dwellings for persons of low income
cannot be relieved through the operation of private enterprise; and the
construction of housing accommodations for persons of low income,
including senior citizens, by a Housing Authority would not be
competitive with private enterprise.
C. The clearance, replanning and reconstruction of the areas in which
unsanitary or unsafe housing conditions exist and the providing of safe
and sanitary dwelling accommodations by any public body for persons
of low income are public uses, and purposes for which public money
may be spent and private property acquired are governmental
functions. It is in the public interest that work on projects for such
purposes be commenced as soon as possible in order to relieve the
housing shortage.
23.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 55:14A-1 to 55:14A-4 were repealed by L. 1992, c. 79, § 59. See now
N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq.
24.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:55C-1 to 40:55C-39 were repealed by L. 1992, c. 79, § 59. See
now N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq.
25.Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 3601 et seq.
§ 5-187.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-187.3
1:135
for the purpose of redeveloping and rehabilitating blighted areas in the
Township of Old Bridge.
§ 5-187.3 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 5-187.3
1:136
ARTICLE XXX
Open Space Committee
[Added 4-17-1989 by Ord. No. 14-89]
§ 5-188. Establishment; membership; appointment; terms; removal.
[Amended 4-24-2000 by Ord. No. 21-00]
There is herewith established an Open Space Committee consisting of 11
regular members who shall serve without compensation.
§ 5-189. Purposes and function.
A. The Mayor and the Township Planner shall be members of the
Committee.
B. The Township Council shall elect by majority vote two members of the
Township Council who shall serve as members of the Committee, each
for a one-year term.
C. The Township Council shall appoint four Township residents as
members of the Committee. Each member appointed by the Township
Council shall serve for a three-year term; however, the terms of the first
four members appointed by the Township Council shall be staggered
with one member serving a one-year term, one member serving a twoyear
term, and two members serving a three-year term.
D. The Mayor shall appoint three members of the Committee who are
residents. Each member appointed by the Mayor shall serve for a threeyear
term; however, the terms of the first three members appointed by
the Mayor shall be staggered with one member serving a one-year
term, one member serving a two-year term, and one member serving a
three-year term.
E. Members of the Committee appointed by the Township Council and the
Mayor may be removed for cause by a majority vote of the Township
Council.
F. Any Open Space Committee member appointed by the Mayor and
Township Council missing four consecutive meetings without providing
the Township Council with valid reasons for such absences may be
removed for cause by a majority vote of the Township Council.
G. The Open Space Committee shall annually select from among its
regular members a Chairperson, Vice Chairperson and Secretary.
H. In addition to the 11 regular members of the Open Space Committee,
the Environmental Commission shall appoint one nonvoting member to
the Open Space Committee who shall serve as liaison between the Open
Space Committee and the Environmental Commission for a one-year
term.
§ 5-188 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-189
1:137
§ 5-190. Meetings and reports.
The Open Space Committee shall hold its regular meetings as set forth in its
bylaws, at which time a quorum shall be required for decisionmaking and
shall consist of a majority of the regular members. Quarterly reports shall
be submitted to the Township Council. In the event that no property for use
as open space is acquired by the Township for three consecutive years, the
Mayor and Council shall review the activities of the Open Space Committee.
A. The Open Space Committee shall have as its overall purpose the
improvement of the quality of life for the residents of the Township of
Old Bridge through fostering the preservation of open spaces within the
Township for active and passive recreational purposes. In order to
accomplish this purpose, the Open Space Committee shall:
(1) Seek properties for purchase or acquisition by the Township for
active or passive recreational purposes.
(2) Research various techniques for the Township to acquire property
for passive or active recreational use.
(3) Make recommendations to the Township Council to acquire
properties for use as passive or active recreational purposes.
(4) Recommend goals, planning, priorities and policies for the
acquisition and preservation of open spaces within the Township.
B. The powers of this Committee are limited to such functions as
contained herein, and the actual acquisition of property by the
Township shall be accomplished only in accordance with law as
authorized by the Township Council through the Open Space Trust
Fund and any other means authorized by law. Any property acquired
through the Open Space Trust Fund shall not be acquired unless and
until authorized by a binding public referendum.
§ 5-189 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 5-190
1:138
ARTICLE XXXI
Committee on Fair Rental Increases
[Added 5-4-1987 by Ord. No. 11-87]
§ 5-191. Establishment; membership. [Amended 7-20-1987 by Ord.
No. 26-87]
There is hereby established a Committee on Fair Rental Increases,
consisting of nine members, appointed by the Mayor on January 1 of each
year for one-year terms. All members shall serve without compensation.
The Committee shall consist of three homeowners, three tenants and three
landlords or agents, owning apartment-rental property within the Township
of Old Bridge. Each homeowner shall reside within the Township of Old
Bridge.
§ 5-192. Powers and duties.
A. The Committee shall conduct meetings, whenever necessary, in order to
determine the amount of a fair rental increase pursuant to § 388-2A(1)
of the Code of the Township of Old Bridge and shall thereafter, by
March 15 of each year, recommend to the Township Council of the
Township of Old Bridge the amount of percentage increase in rent for
the twelve-month period commencing on June 1 of each year. The
determination of the Committee shall be advisory only and shall not be
binding upon the Township Council. [Amended 2-21-1989 by Ord.
No. 6-89]
B. In order to determine the amount of fair rental increase, the Committee
shall review, in addition to other relevant data, the following:
(1) The statement showing the amount of rentals charged for each
rental unit as of October 1 of the preceding year.
(2) The income and expense statement attached hereto as Schedule
A26 shall be filed by each landlord for said landlord's immediately
preceding fiscal tax year no later than November 15 of each year.
[Amended 2-21-1989 by Ord. No. 6-89; 4-20-1992 by Ord. No.
12-92]
(3) Any and all information submitted by the landlord to the Township
Tax Assessor regarding property value assessment.
C. In order for the Committee to make a fair determination of the rental
increase, each landlord shall be required to register with the Rent
Stabilization Board for delivery to the Committee the information
indicated in Subsection B no later than November 15 of each year. A
copy of the required information shall also be provided to the office of
the Tax Assessor. [Amended 2-21-1989 by Ord. No. 6-89; 4-20-1992
by Ord. No. 12-92]
26.Editor's Note: Schedule A is on file in the office of the Township Clerk.
§ 5-191 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-192
1:139
D. Any landlord who shall violate a provision of this Article XXXI shall,
upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not less than $100 but
not exceeding the penalty set forth in Chapter 1, Article II, Penalty. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues. [Added 2-21-1989 by Ord. No.
6-89; amended 1-9-2006 by Ord. No. 38-2005]
E. No landlord shall be entitled to the percentage of increase set forth by
the Committee on fair rental increases unless said landlord has
complied with all the disclosure requirements set forth in the Code of
the Township of Old Bridge, including but not limited to Subsections B
and C of this section on fair increase. [Added 2-21-1989 by Ord. No.
6-89]
§ 5-192 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 5-192
1:140
ARTICLE XXXII
Committee on Cable Television Review27
[Added 2-21-1989 by Ord. No. 5-89]
§ 5-193. Establishment; membership; term.
There is hereby established a Committee on Cable Television Review,
consisting of five members appointed by the Mayor on January 1 of each
year for one-year terms. All members shall reside within the Township of
Old Bridge and shall serve without compensation.28
§ 5-194. Powers and duties.
A. The Committee shall conduct meetings, whenever necessary, in order to
determine the quality of cable television services provided to cable
television subscribers within the Township of Old Bridge and make such
recommendations as it deems necessary and appropriate relative to the
nature and quality of cable television services provided to the residents
of the Township of Old Bridge, including but not limited to any
recommendation relative to any application by any cable television
operator for an increase in rates or renewal of any contract with the
Township of Old Bridge.
B. The Committee shall report quarterly to the Mayor and Council on the
quality of cable service to the community, survey and report on citizens'
comments and complaints and make recommendation for improvement
of service.
C. The Committee on Cable Television Review shall review agreements
between the Township and the cable franchise, both contractual and
verbal, monitor compliance and report to the Mayor and Council.29
27.Editor's Note: See also Ch. A600, Cable Television Franchise.
28.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 2-33A.1b, regarding the term of the initial members appointed
to the Committee on Cable Television Review, which previously followed this subsection,
was deleted 1-9-2006 by Ord. No. 38-2005.
29.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 2-35, Solid Waste Utility, added 3-4-1991 by Ord. No. 6-91,
which previously followed this section, was deleted 1-9-2006 by Ord. No. 38-2005.
§ 5-193 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-194
1:141

ARTICLE XXXIII
Human Relations Council
[Added 5-12-1994 by Ord. No. 19-94]
§ 5-195. Establishment; membership; term; organization.
§ 5-196. Duties and functions.
A. There shall be a Human Relations Council consisting of 12
Commissioners. Nine Commissioners shall be appointed by the Mayor
and three Commissioners by the Council. Each Commissioner shall
serve without compensation. Each Commissioner shall serve for a
period of three years. Three of the first appointees shall serve for terms
of three years, three of the first appointees shall serve for terms of two
years, and three of the first appointees shall serve for terms of one year.
The initial terms of the Commissioners shall be decided by the drawings
of lots by the Township Clerk. A separate lottery shall be held to
designate each of the initial Township Council appointees to a one-year,
two-year or three-year term. The Human Resources Council shall
annually select from among its regular members a Chairperson, Vice
Chairperson and Secretary.
B. There shall be two associate members of the Human Resources Council
who shall be students at the Township high schools. The Mayor shall
appoint two associate members from a high school. Associate members
shall serve one-year terms without compensation and shall be
nonvoting members of said Committee.
A. The Council shall attempt to foster, through community effort or
otherwise, good will, cooperation and conciliation among the groups
and elements of the inhabitants of the community. The Council is hereby
empowered to make recommendations to the Township Council for the
development of policies and procedures in general and for programs of
formal and informal education that will aid in eliminating all types of
discrimination based on race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry,
age, marital status or sex.
B. The Council shall offer aid to the Township administration in
implementing the New Jersey Law Against Discrimination, N.J.S.A.
10:5-1 et seq.
§ 5-195 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-196
1:143

ARTICLE XXXIV
Cultural Arts Committee
[Added 10-3-1988 by Ord. No. 44-88; amended 3-27-2000 by Ord.
No. 09-00]
§ 5-197. Committee established.
Within the Office of the Mayor, there shall be a Cultural Arts Committee
whose purpose shall be to foster and encourage the arts of music, theater,
dance, cinema, and visual arts.
§ 5-198. Composition; appointment; terms. [Amended 4-24-2006 by
Ord. No. 13-2006; 2-7-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-06]
The Cultural Arts Committee shall consist of 12 members to be appointed
by the Mayor for staggered terms of three years each.
§ 5-199. Initial terms.
The initial terms of the members shall be one year for two members, two
years for two members, and three years for three members.
§ 5-200. Responsibilities.
The responsibilities of the Cultural Arts Committee shall be:
§ 5-201. Recommendations.
The Cultural Arts Committee shall advise and make recommendations to the
Mayor and Council concerning cultural arts affairs and programs conducted
by the Township.
§ 5-202. Representation and reporting.
The Chairman of the Cultural Arts Committee shall report annually to
the Mayor and Council as to the progress made and goals set for the
Committee.
§ 5-203. Organization; meetings; rules and regulations.
The Committee shall organize annually and select a Chairman. The
Committee shall meet as regularly as the Chairman shall determine. The
A. To establish short- and long-range cultural objectives for the Township;
B. To develop and recommend programs for the appreciation of the arts in
the Township;
C. To approve a proposed budget and revisions as prepared by the
Chairman;
D. To serve as coordinating body of cultural arts programs.
§ 5-197 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-203
1:145
Committee shall establish rules and regulations concerning its efficient
operation of the Committee. Such rules include but are not limited to:
A. Establishing necessary quorums for conducting business.
B. Minimum votes for passage of resolution and recommendation.
C. Removal from the Committee for excessive absence from meetings.
§ 5-203 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 5-203
1:146
ARTICLE XXXV
Film and Television Advisory Committee
[Added 10-28-2002 by Ord. No. 53-02]
§ 5-204. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish the Film and Television Advisory
Committee.
§ 5-205. Establishment; purpose of Committee.
There shall be a Film and Advisory Committee (the "Committee") whose
purpose shall be to advise the Mayor and Township Council on all matters
relating to film and television productions in the Township of Old Bridge.
§ 5-206. Composition; appointment; term.
The Film and Television Advisory Committee shall consist of three members
to be appointed by the Township Council for terms of three years.
§ 5-207. Organization; meetings.
The Committee shall organize annually and select a Chairman and
Secretary. The Committee shall meet as regularly as the Chairman shall
determine.
§ 5-208. Responsibilities.
The responsibilities of the Committee shall be:
§ 5-209. Reporting.
The Chairman of the Film and Television Advisory Committee shall report
annually to the Mayor and Township Council as to the progress made and
goals set for the Committee.
A. Advise the Mayor and Township Council concerning matters related to
film and television production in the Township of Old Bridge.
B. Recommend to the Mayor and Township Council appropriate
regulations for film and television production in the Township of Old
Bridge.
C. Maintain information on resources and locations available to film and
television productions in the Township of Old Bridge.
§ 5-204 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-209
1:147

ARTICLE XXXVI
Golf Course Utility
[Added 4-14-2003 by Ord. No. 18-03]
§ 5-210. Establishment.
The Township Council of the Township of Old Bridge, County of Middlesex,
State of New Jersey ("Township") does hereby declare and establish that
a Golf Course Utility of the Township shall hereafter be operated and
maintained as a self-liquidating public utility for all purposes of the Local
Bond Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:2-1 et seq., and Local Budget Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:4-1
et seq. of the State of New Jersey with respect to the ownership and
operation of certain golf course facilities in the Township ("Utility").
§ 5-211. Funding.
The Utility is hereby authorized to receive such fees, rents, rates or other
charges for or in connection with the use or services of such Utility, which
sums shall be held, used and applied in accordance with the Local Bond
Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:2-1 et seq. and the Local Budget Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:4-1 et
seq. of the State of New Jersey, as well as other applicable statutes.
§ 5-212. Management.
Management of the Utility hereinabove established shall be vested in the
governing body of the Township of Old Bridge as that term is described at
N.J.S.A. 40:69A-32b.
§ 5-210 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-212
1:149

ARTICLE XXXVII
Redevelopment Agency
[Added 9-13-2004 by Ord. No. 29-04]
§ 5-213. Establishment.
Under and pursuant to the provision of the Local Redevelopment and
Housing Law,30 there is hereby created a body corporate and politic and
an instrumentality of the Township, to be knows as the "Old Bridge
Redevelopment Agency (the "Redevelopment Agency").
§ 5-214. Membership; appointment; term.
A. The Redevelopment Agency shall consist of seven Commissioners,
consisting of one Class A Commissioner and six Class B Commissioners.
B. The Class A Commissioner shall be appointed by resolution of the
Municipal Council from among the membership of the Municipal
Council. The one Class A Commissioner shall serve a term of one year.
C. The Class B Commissioners shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
advise and consent of the Municipal Council from among Township
residents, only one of which may be officers or employees of the
Township.
D. Terms.
(1) The term of the office of the initial Class A Commissioner shall
begin on the date such Commissioner is appointed and qualified;
(2) The term of office of any Class A Commissioner shall terminate if
such Commissioner is no longer a member of the Municipal
Council;
(3) The terms of office of the initial Class B Commissioners shall begin
on the date(s) such Commissioners are appointed, confirmed and
qualified; and
(4) The term of office of any Class B Commissioner shall terminate if
more than one such Commissioner shall thereafter become an
officer or employee of the Township.
E. Each Commissioner shall hold office for the term of his appointment
according to statute, N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-11, and until his successor shall
have been appointed and qualified.
F. Any vacancy occurring in the office of Commissioner, from any cause,
shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment, but for
the unexpired term.
30.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq.
§ 5-213 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-215
1:151
§ 5-215. Future appointments; role of Mayor.
If the form of government of the Township shall hereafter be changed from
the Mayor-Council Plan, under N.J.S.A. 40:69A-31 et seq., to a new form of
government, appointments of the Class B Commissioners shall thereafter be
made in the manner generally required for appointments by such new form
of government. In addition, for so long as the Township is governed by the
Mayor-Council Plan under N.J.S.A. 40:69A-31 et seq., the Mayor shall be an
ex officio, nonvoting member of the Redevelopment Agency.
§ 5-216. Designation as redevelopment entity.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-4c, the Township hereby designates the
Redevelopment Agency as the "redevelopment entity" responsible for
implementing redevelopment plans and carrying out redevelopment
projects pursuant to the Local Redevelopment and Housing Law.31
31.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq.
§ 5-215 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 5-216
1:152
ARTICLE XXXVIII
Annual Remembrances
[Added 11-25-1996 by Ord. No. 48-96]
§ 5-217. Pearl Harbor.
§ 5-218. Independence of the Nation of India. [Added 9-22-1997 by
Ord. No. 34-97]
A. The purpose of this section is to establish a permanent requirement in
the Township ordinances that the attack upon Pearl Harbor which
resulted in the sacrifice of so many American lives be remembered by
the adoption of a resolution each year at the Council meeting closest in
time to December 7.
B. The Administrative Code of the Township of Old Bridge is hereby
modified and amended by addition. Each year the Township Council
shall consider a resolution commemorating, remembering and honoring
the sacrifices at Pearl Harbor, Hawaii, on December 7, 1941. Such
resolution shall be substantially in the following form:
WHEREAS, December 7, 1941, was the day on which the United States
Naval Base at Pearl Harbor, Hawaii, was attached by the Empire of
Japan;
WHEREAS, on December 8, 1941, one day after the sneak attack by
the Japanese on Pearl Harbor, President Franklin Delano Roosevelt
called it "a day that will live in infamy"; and
WHEREAS, the attack on Pearl Harbor resulted in the first loss of any
naval vessel of World War II, the Arizona, entombing 1,103 young men;
and
WHEREAS, the remains of the Battleship Arizona, together with its
entombed sailors and crew, has become a national memorial, and a
reminder of the unprovoked attack; and
WHEREAS, the war which followed the attack upon Pearl Harbor
caused the loss of 292,000 lives and 670,000 casualties; and
WHEREAS, the Township Council of the Township of Old Bridge
believes that the attack upon Pearl Harbor should be remembered both
for its infamy and by reason of the sacrifice made by so many;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED by the Township Council of the
Township of Old Bridge that December 7, 1941, is hereby remembered,
and the sailors and servicemen killed or injured are hereby honored
and remembered for their sacrifices.
A. The purpose of this section is to establish a permanent requirement in
the Township ordinances that the Independence of the Nation of India
be remembered by the adoption of a resolution each year at the Council
meeting closest in time to August 15.
§ 5-217 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-218
1:153
B. The Administrative Code of the Township of Old Bridge is hereby
modified and amended by addition. Each year the Township Council
shall consider a resolution commemorating, remembering and honoring
the anniversary of the Independence of the Nation of India on August
15, 1947. Such resolution shall be in the following form:
WHEREAS, the Nation of India, through nonviolent means, was able to
obtain its independence from the British Empire on August 15, 1947;
and
WHEREAS, this nonviolent revolution has been an inspiration to
peoples seeking freedom all over the world, especially during the
struggle for civil rights for all citizens of the United States;
WHEREAS, the Nation of India remains to this day the largest
democracy in the world; and
WHEREAS, the Township Council of the Township of Old Bridge
believes that the anniversary of the Independence of the Nation of
India should be remembered for its nonviolent origins and for the
contributions of its peoples to this nation as a whole and to the
Township of Old Bridge in particular;
NOW, THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED by the Township Council of the
Township of Old Bridge that August 15, 1947, the anniversary of the
Independence of the Nation of India, is hereby remembered.
§ 5-218 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 5-218
1:154
ARTICLE XXXIX
Parking Enforcement Officer
[Added 12-15-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-39]
§ 5-219. Creation of position; powers and authority.
§ 5-220. Definition; when on duty; eligibility for retirement system.
§ 5-221. Qualifications.
No person shall be appointed as a parking enforcement officer unless, at a
minimum, the person:
A. The position of parking enforcement officer is hereby created in order
to enforce state, county or municipal statutes, resolutions, ordinances
or regulations related to the parking of vehicles within the Township of
Old Bridge pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-154.7 et seq.
B. A parking enforcement officer shall possess the power and authority to:
(1) Issue a parking ticket for a parking offense, as those two terms are
defined in the Parking Offenses Adjudication Act (N.J.S.A.
39:4-139.2 et seq.)
(2) Serve and execute all process for any parking offense issuing out of
the court in the municipality having jurisdiction over the complaint;
and
(3) Cause any vehicle parked, stored or abandoned in the municipality
in violation of a statute, resolution, ordinance or regulation to be
towed away from the scene of the violation and to collect from the
vehicle owner or the owner's agent, on behalf of the Township, the
costs of the towing and subsequent storage of the vehicle before
surrendering the vehicle to the owner or agent.
A. For purposes of this article, a "parking enforcement officer" is not a
special law enforcement officer within the meaning of the Special Law
Enforcement Officers' Act (N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.8 et seq.) and is not a
member of the Old Bridge Police Department. No parking enforcement
officer may carry or use a firearm while on duty.
B. A parking enforcement officer is deemed to be on duty while the officer
is performing the public safety functions enumerated in this article and
for which the officer is receiving compensation, if any, from the
municipality.
C. A parking enforcement officer is not eligible for membership in the
Police and Firemen's Retirement System established pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 43:16A-1 et seq.
A. Is a resident of this state during the term of appointment;
§ 5-219 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-221
1:155
§ 5-222. Fingerprints required; determination of eligibility and
qualifications.
§ 5-223. Completion of training course; waiver.
No person appointed after the effective date of this article may commence
duties as a parking enforcement officer unless that person has successfully
completed a training course conducted or approved by the municipality. The
Business Administrator may waive this training requirement for any person
otherwise eligible to be appointed as a parking enforcement officer under
this article if the person possesses substantially equivalent training and
background, as determined by the Chief of Police.
§ 5-224. Uniform; fee.
B. Is able to read, write and speak the English language well and
intelligently;
C. Is of sound mind and in good health;
D. Is of good moral character; and
E. Has not been convicted of any offense involving dishonesty or which
would make the person unfit to perform the duties of his office.
A. An applicant for the position of parking enforcement officer appointed
pursuant to this article shall have fingerprints taken, which fingerprints
shall be filed with the Division of State Police and the Federal Bureau of
Investigation.
B. Before any parking enforcement officer is appointed pursuant to this
act, the Chief of Police or his designee shall ascertain the eligibility and
qualifications of the applicant and report these determinations in
writing to the Business Administrator.
A. Prior to the commencement of duties, every parking enforcement
officer shall be furnished with a uniform which shall clearly identify the
officer's function. The uniform shall include, but not be limited to, a hat
and appropriate badges which shall bear an identification number or
name tag and the name of the municipality in which the officer is
employed. The uniform shall also include an insignia issued by the
Township which clearly indicates the officer's status as a parking
enforcement officer. The uniform shall be distinct in color from the
uniform of a regular police officer or special law enforcement officer.
B. The Township shall issue a permanent insignia not later than 90 days
following its first appointment of a parking enforcement officer. The
Township may issue a temporary insignia for use prior to the issuance
of permanent insignia.
§ 5-221 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 5-224
1:156
§ 5-225. Designation of employees currently performing duties.
All persons employed by the Township, other than regular police officers
and special law enforcement officers, who are performing the functions
enumerated in this article on the effective date of this article, are hereby
designated as "parking enforcement officers" and are deemed to be
governed by the provisions of this article.
§ 5-226. Establishment within Department of Administration.
The position of parking enforcement officer shall be established within the
Department of Administration and shall be subject to the direct supervision
of the Business Administrator.
C. The Township may charge a reasonable fee for uniforms supplied
pursuant to this article but shall not charge a fee for the costs of
required training.
§ 5-224 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-226
1:157

ARTICLE XL
Shade Tree Commission
[Added 4-12-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-13]
§ 5-227. Establishment.
A Shade Tree Commission is hereby established, which shall consist of not
less than five nor more than seven members.
§ 5-228. Appointment.
The members of the Shade Tree Commission shall be appointed by the
Mayor and shall be residents of the Township. They shall serve without
compensation, except as provided in N.J.S.A. 40:64-3.
§ 5-229. Terms of office.
The first Commissioners shall be appointed within 60 days after this section
providing for the Commission shall become effective, and their terms of
office shall commence upon the day of their appointment and shall be
for the respective periods of one, two, three, four and five years, if the
Commission consists of five members, beginning on January 1 next
succeeding such appointment. If the Commission is to consist of six
members, the first Commissioners shall be appointed as above, except that
two shall be appointed for five years; and if the Commission is to consist
of seven members, two shall be appointed for five years and two shall be
appointed for four years. In the event that membership of any Commission
is increased, the new members shall be appointed in such manner that
the terms shall expire in accordance with the foregoing. The terms of
each appointee shall be designated in his appointment. All subsequent
appointments, except to fill vacancies, shall be for the full term of five years,
to take effect on January 1.
§ 5-230. Organization; compensation of employees.
The Shade Tree Commission shall organize annually by the election of one
of its members as Chairman and the appointment of a Secretary, who need
not be a member of the Commission. The compensation of the Secretary
shall be fixed by the governing body.
§ 5-231. Powers.
The Shade Tree Commission shall have power to exercise full, sole and
exclusive control over the regulation, planting and care of shade and
ornamental trees and shrubbery planted in or upon any public highway,
park or parkway of the Township, including the planting, trimming,
spraying, care and protection of the same for the public good; the right to
regulate and control the use of the grounds surrounding the same so far as
may be necessary for their proper growth, care and protection; the right to
remove or require the removal of any tree, or any part thereof, dangerous
§ 5-227 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-231
1:159
to the public safety, following notice to the property owners as required by
statute, at the expense of the owner of such tree; the encouragement of
arboriculture; and such other powers vested in Shade Tree Commissions by
state law.
§ 5-232. Disposition of moneys collected.
All moneys collected as fines or penalties for violation of a rule or regulation
of the Shade Tree Commission, or as a charge against real property under
the provisions of the statute in such case made and provided, shall be
forthwith paid over to the Chief Financial Officer of the Township of Old
Bridge, shall be placed to the credit of the Commission and shall be subject
to be withdrawn by the Commission for the conduct of its work.
§ 5-233. No liability for death or injury.
Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to make any Shade
Tree Commission or any member thereof, or any volunteer participating in
a community forestry program as provided for by Section 4 of P.L. 1996, c.
135 (N.J.S.A. 13:1L-17.4), responsible for the death or injury of any person,
or for any injury to any property or highway tree or shrub. Liability for any
such death or injury shall be governed by the provisions of Section 16 of P.L.
1996, c. 135 (N.J.S.A. 59:4-10) and any other relevant provisions of the New
Jersey Tort Claims Act, N.J.S.A. 59:1-1 et seq.
§ 5-231 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 5-233
1:160
Chapter 10
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapter 14
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 30. Obscene materials — See Ch. 314.
§ 5-233 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 5-233
10:161

ARTICLE I
Live Adult Entertainment at Premises Licensed to Serve Alcohol
[Adopted 8-28-1995 by Ord. No. 40-95]
§ 14-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to eliminate live adult entertainment
(commonly known as "go-go") from premises licensed to sell alcoholic
beverages within the Township of Old Bridge. Premises which presently
conduct such entertainment are temporarily exempted from this article. In
the event the license of any such premises is transferred person-to-person
or place-to-place, the provisions of this article shall then apply.
§ 14-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LIVE ADULT ENTERTAINMENT (COMMONLY REFERRED TO AS "GO-GO
DANCING") — Dancing by males or females, wherein clothing in the nature
of bathing suit or other scant attire is worn. Go-go dancers so attired
perform suggestive dance while patrons consume alcoholic beverages at
licensed facilities. (The Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control has
promulgated regulations banning "lewd or immoral activity" at licensed
premises.)
§ 14-3. Live adult entertainment prohibited.
Except as otherwise allowed under this article, no premises within the
Township of Old Bridge which are licensed for the sale of alcoholic
beverages for consumption ("C" licenses, "Broad C" licenses, or club
licenses) may present, conduct, or permit the presentation of live adult
entertainment.
§ 14-4. Temporary exemption of certain premises.
Those premises within the Township of Old Bridge which are licensed to sell
alcoholic beverages for consumption ("C" licenses, "Broad C" licenses, or
club licenses) which conducted live adult entertainment on or before June
19, 1995, may, notwithstanding § 14-3 of this article, continue to conduct
such live adult entertainment. Premises which qualify for this temporary
exemption shall be prohibited from conducting, presenting, or permitting
the presentation of live adult entertainment upon a transfer of the license
authorizing alcoholic beverages for consumption (whether such transfer be
a person-to-person transfer or a place-to-place transfer).
§ 14-5. Conditions on transfer of any license.
Any transfer of a license which permits the consumption of alcoholic
beverages ("C" license, "Broad C" license, or club license) shall hereafter be
made only upon the express condition that no live adult entertainment (as
§ 14-1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 14-5
10:163
defined in § 14-2 of this article) shall be permitted at the licensed premises.
This section shall not preclude the Township Council from imposing such
additional conditions as it deems appropriate at the time of voting on such
proposed transfer.
§ 14-6. Notification of licensees.
Following adoption, a true copy of this article shall be mailed by certified
and regular mail to every licensee of a licensed premises at which alcoholic
beverages are delivered for on-premises consumption ("C" type license,
"Broad C" type license, and club licensee).
§ 14-5 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 14-6
10:164
Chapter 21
AIR POLLUTION
§ 21-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Air Pollution Control Code of the
Middlesex County Health Department for the Township of Old Bridge."
§ 21-2. Findings and declaration of policy.
It is hereby declared that air pollution is a menace to the health, welfare
and comfort of the inhabitants of the Township of Old Bridge and a cause of
substantial damage to property. For the purpose of preventing and reducing
or otherwise controlling atmospheric pollution as herein defined, it is
hereby declared to be the policy of the Township of Old Bridge to establish
standards governing the installation, maintenance and operation of
equipment and appurtenances relating to combustion, to effect and
maintain control of stationary point and other sources of air pollution
by whatever means appropriate and to develop and process data of both
a qualitative and quantitative nature with reference to all point sources
of emissions within the confines of the municipality for the purpose of
environmental impact assessment, evaluating conformance to standards
and requiring emissions reduction where it can be demonstrated that an
undue risk to public health exists or appropriate control procedures are not
in operation.
§ 21-3. Definitions.
Meaning of certain words. The following terms, wherever used hereinafter,
shall have the respective meanings assigned to them, unless a different
meaning clearly appears from the context:
AGENCY — Hereinafter abbreviated "EPA," means the United States
Environmental Protection Agency.
AIR CONTAMINANT — Solid particles, liquid particles, vapors or gases,
exclusive of water vapor or air, as they exist in their natural state, which are
discharged into the outdoor atmosphere.
AIR POLLUTION — The presence in the outdoor atmosphere of one or
more air contaminants of any composition whatsoever in such quantities
and duration as are or tend to be injurious to the human health or welfare,
animal or plant life or property or would unreasonably interfere with the
enjoyment of life or property throughout the Township of Old Bridge.
(Health and safety hazards, as they apply to the employer-employee
relationship, are specifically excluded.)
ASBESTOS — Actinolite, amosite, anthophyllite, chrysotile, crocidolite and/
or tremolite.
§ 14-6 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 21-3
10:165
ASPHALT — A solid, semisolid or liquid material of which the main
constituents are bitumens.
CONSERVATION VENT — Any valve designed and used to reduce
evaporation losses of volatile organic substances by limiting the amount of
air admitted to or vapors released from the vapor space of a closed storage
vessel.
CONTROL APPARATUS — Any device which prevents or controls the
emission of any air contaminant.
CUTBACK ASPHALT — Any paving asphalt which has been liquefied by
blending with petroleum solvents or produced directly from the distillation
of petroleum and having vaporization properties similar to the blended and
liquefied asphalt.
DELIVERY VESSEL — Any mobile storage tank, including but not limited to
tank trucks or railroad tank cars.
DEPARTMENT — Hereinafter abbreviated "DEP," means the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection.
DIESEL-POWERED ENGINE — A mechanism for converting energy into
electrical and/or mechanical force and motion by using a compressionignition-
type of internal-combustion engine.
DIESEL-POWERED MOTOR VEHICLE — A self-propelled vehicle designed
primarily for transporting person or property on a public street or highway,
which is propelled by a compression-ignition-type of internal combustion
engine.
DILUTION GAS — Air or gas from any source whatsoever added to the
source gas emitted from a source of operation.
DIRECT HEAT EXCHANGER — Equipment in which heat from the
combustion of fuel is transferred to a substance being heated so that the
latter is contacted by the products of combustion and may contribute to the
total effluent.
DIRECTOR — The Director of the Middlesex County Health Department or
his or her designated agent.
DOUBLE-SEAL FLOATING ROOF — A floating roof with two complete and
separate seal-envelope combinations, one above the other, containing an
enclosed space between them. At least one of the seals must be supported
by a mechanism which maintains constant seal contact with the inner
surface of the vessel walls, despite surface and attitude irregularities.
ECONOMIC POISONS — Those chemicals used as insecticides,
rodenticides, fungicides, herbicides, nematocides or defoliants.
EMULSIFIED ASPHALT — Asphalt which has been liquefied by mixing with
water and an emulsifying agent.
EQUIPMENT — Any device capable of causing the emission of air
contaminant into the outdoor atmosphere and any stack, chimney, conduit,
flue, duct or similar device connected or attached to or serving the
§ 21-3 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 21-3
10:166
equipment. This shall include equipment in which the preponderance of the
air contaminants emitted is caused by manufacturing process.
EXTERNAL FLOATING ROOF — Movable roof in an otherwise open top
storage vessel, consisting of a floating deck resting on the surface of the
liquid contents, a continuous seal supported against the inner surface of the
tank shell and an envelope closing the gap between the floating deck and
the seal, the entire deck-seal-envelope combination free to rise and fall with
the surface of the liquid during filling and emptying of the storage vessel.
FACILITY — The combination of all structures, buildings, equipment,
storage vessels, source operations and other operations located on one or
more contiguous or adjacent properties owned or operated by the same
person.
FLOATING ROOF — An external or internal pontoon-type or double-decktype
roof resting on the surface of the liquid contents in a storage vessel and
equipped with a mechanism providing one or more tight seals in the space
between the floating roof rim and the vessel shell throughout the entire
vertical travel distance of the roof or any other floating-type mechanism
approved by the DEP for the purpose of preventing air contaminants from
being discharged into the outdoor atmosphere.
FRIABLE MATERIAL — Any material which can be crumbled, pulverized or
reduced to powder by hand pressure.
FUEL — Solid, liquid or gaseous materials used to produce useful heat by
burning.
FUEL-BURNING EQUIPMENT — Any furnace, boiler, water heater, device,
mechanism, stoker, burner, stack, oven, stove, kiln, still or other apparatus
used in the process of fuel-burning for the generation of heat or power.
Refuse-burning equipment shall be considered to be incinerators, as herein
defined, and shall not be considered to be "fuel-burning equipment" under
this definition. Ovens, stoves or ranges used exclusively for domestic
cooking purposes are not included within this definition.
FUGITIVE EMISSION — Any emission of an air contaminant into the open
air other than through any stack, chimney, conduit, flue or other device.
GARBAGE — Animal or vegetable waste matter from homes, kitchens,
restaurants, hotels, produce markets or from any other source or food of
any kind that is to be discarded.
GASOLINE — Any petroleum distillate having a Reid vapor pressure of four
pounds (207 millimeters of mercury) or greater and used as an automotive
fuel.
HEALTH DEPARTMENT — The Health and Welfare Department of the
Township of Old Bridge and/or the Middlesex County Health Department.32
HEALTH OFFICER — The licensed Health Officer of the Township of Old
Bridge.
32.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 21-3 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 21-3
10:167
HEAT INPUT RATE — The rate at which the aggregate heat content, based
on the higher heating value of the fuel, is introduced into the fuel-burning
equipment.
INCINERATOR — Any device, apparatus, equipment or structure used for
destroying, reducing or salvaging by fire any material or substances,
including but not limited to refuse, rubbish, garbage, debris or scrap, or any
facility for cremating human or animal remains.
INDIRECT HEAT EXCHANGER — Equipment in which heat from the
combustion of fuel is transferred by conduction through a heat-conducting
material to a substance being heated so that the latter is not contacted by
and adds nothing to the products of combustion.
INTERNAL CROSS-SECTIONAL DIMENSION — Any maximum linear
perpendicular distance from an inside wall of a stack or chimney to the
inside of an opposite wall, such as the diameter of a circular cross section
or width of a rectangular cross section.
LIQUID PARTICLES — Particles which have volume but are not of rigid
shape and which, upon collecting, tend to coalesce and create uniform
homogeneous films upon the surface of the collecting media.
MANUFACTURING PROCESS — Any action, operation or treatment
involving chemical, industrial, manufacturing or processing factors,
methods or forms, including but not limited to absorbers, classifiers,
columns, condensers, converters, conveyors, cookers, crucibles, crushers,
cupolas, digesters, dryers, filters, furnaces, grinders, kettles, kilns, mills,
mixers, ovens, quenchers, reactors, reboilers, regenerators, roasters,
screens, scrubbers, separators, stills, towers or washers.
MANUFACTURING PROCESS VESSELS — Any container wherein a
manufacturing process, or any part thereof, takes place.
MARINE INSTALLATION — Equipment for propulsion, power or heating on
all types of marine craft and floating equipment.
MOBILE SOURCE — Equipment designed or constructed to be portable or
movable from one location to another, including but not limited to aircraft,
locomotives operating on rails, tractors, earthmoving equipment, hoists and
mobile power generators.
MONITOR — Check, test, observe, survey or inspect to determine
compliance with environmental health standards.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicle propelled other than by muscular power,
except such vehicles as run only upon rails or tracks.
MULTIPLE-CHAMBER INCINERATOR — An incinerator with two or more
refractory-lined combustion chambers in series, physically separated by
refractory walls, interconnected by gas passages and employing adequate
design parameters necessary for maximum combustion of the waste
material.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Old Bridge.
§ 21-3 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 21-3
10:168
ODOR — Property of a substance which affects the sense of smell.
OPACITY — The property of a substance which is partially or wholly
obstructive to the transmission of visible light, expressed as the percentage
to which the light is obstructed.
OPEN BURNING — Any fire wherein the products of combustion are
emitted into the open air and are not directed thereto through a stack or
chimney.
OPEN TOP TANKS — Any vessel in which a manufacturing process, or
any part thereof, takes place during which there is an opening to the
atmosphere greater than 25% of the surface area of any liquid substance
contained therein.
OPERATOR — Any person who has care, custody or control of buildings or
premises or a portion thereof, whether with or without knowledge of the
owner thereof.
ORGANIC SUBSTANCE — Any chemical compound or mixture of chemical
compounds of carbon, excluding carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, carbonic
acid, metallic carbonates, metallic carbides and ammonium carbonate.
OUTDOOR ATMOSPHERE — Air space outside of buildings, stacks or
exterior ducts.
OWNER — Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others, shall
have legal or equitable title to any premises, with or without accompanying
actual possession thereof, including but not limited to a dwelling unit, as
owner or agent of the owner or as a fiduciary, including but not limited
to executor, administrator, trustee, receiver, guardian or as a mortgagee in
possession, regardless of how such possession was obtained. Any person
who is lessee or sublessee of all or part of any premises, including but
not limited to dwelling or dwelling unit, shall be deemed to have a joint
responsibility with the owner over the premises or portion thereof so leased
or subleased.
PARTICLES — Any material, except uncombined water, which exists in
finely divided form as liquid particles or solid particles at standard
conditions.
PENETRATING PRIME COAT — A low-viscosity liquid asphalt applied to a
surface in order to prepare it for paving an asphalt concrete.
PERSON — Includes associations, authorities, companies, corporations,
firms, joint-stock companies, partnerships, societies as well as individuals,
and shall also include all political subdivisions of this state and/or any
agencies or instrumentalities thereof.
PETROLEUM DISTILLATE — Any mixture of volatile organic substance
produced by condensing vapors of petroleum during distillation, including
but not limited to naphthas, aviation gasoline, motor gasoline, kerosene,
diesel oil, domestic fuel oil and petroleum solvents.
PLANT LIFE — Vegetation, including but not limited to trees, tree branches,
leaves, yard trimmings, shrubbery, grass, weeds and crops.
§ 21-3 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 21-3
10:169
POINT SOURCE — Any stationary, discernible, confined and discrete
conveyance or conduit, including but not limited to any stack, chimney,
duct, exhaust, ventilator, flue, breather or pressure-release valve, so
arranged or designed as to conduct an effluent into the outdoor air.
POSITIVE PRESSURE VENTILATION — Any ventilation system in which
pressurized air from a compressed air manifold, fan or similar device is
blown into a work area.
POTENTIAL EMISSION RATE — The mass of air contaminants emitted or to
be emitted through a stack or chimney into the outdoor air, exclusive of any
type of control apparatus.
RECEIVING VESSEL — Any vessel into which a volatile organic substance is
introduced, including but not limited to storage tanks, delivery vessels and
manufacturing process vessels.
REFUSE — Air putrescible and nonputrescible waste (except body waste),
including but not limited to garbage, rubbish, yard trimmings, leaves, ashes,
street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles and trade waste.
RINGELMANN SMOKE CHART — Ringelmann's scale for grading the
density of smoke, published by the United States Bureau of Mines, or any
chart, recorder, indicator or device for the measurement of smoke density
which is approved by the DEP as the equivalent of said Ringelmann's scale
for the measurement of smoke density.
RUBBISH — Solids not considered to be highly flammable or explosive,
including but not limited to rags, old clothes, leather, rubber, carpets, wood,
excelsior, paper, ashes, tree branches, yard trimmings, furniture, tin cans,
glass, crockery, masonry or other similar materials.
SALVAGE OPERATION — Any business, trade or industry engaged, in whole
or in part, in salvaging or reclaiming any product or material, including but
not limited to metal, chemicals, shipping containers or drums.
SEAL-ENVELOPE COMBINATION — A barrier to the passage of volatile
organic substance vapors between a floating roof and the inner surface of
a storage vessel wall, consisting of a seal which maintains constant contact
with the wall as the floating roof rises and descends with the level of the
stored volatile organic substance, and a membrane, diaphragm, fabric or
blanket, known as an "envelope," which spans the gap between the floating
roof and the seal and which is vapor-tight.
SINGLE FLUE-FED INCINERATOR — An incinerator provided with a single
flue which serves as both the charging chute and the flue to transport
products of combustion to the atmosphere.
SMOKE — Small gasborne and airborne particles, exclusive of water vapor,
arising from a process of combustion in sufficient manner to be observable.
SOLID PARTICLES — Particles of rigid shape and definite volume.
SOURCE GAS — Air or gases passed through or generated by a source
operation and discharged from the source operation.
§ 21-3 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 21-3
10:170
SOURCE OPERATION — Any manufacturing process or any identifiable part
thereof emitting an air contaminant into the outdoor atmosphere through
one or more point sources.
SPACE HEATERS — A self-contained, vented, fuel-burning appliance
complete with grills or their equivalent, designed for incorporation in or
permanent attachment to a wall, floor, ceiling or partition and furnishing
heated air, circulated by gravity, radiation or by fan, directly into the space
to be heated through openings in the casing.
STACK or CHIMNEY — A flue, conduit or opening designed, constructed
and/or utilized for the purpose of emitting air contaminants into the outdoor
air.
STANDARD CONDITIONS — Seventy degrees Fahrenheit and one
atmosphere pressure (14.7 pounds per square inch absolute or 760
millimeters of mercury).
STORAGE TANK — Any tank, reservoir or vessel which is a container for
liquids or gases, wherein no manufacturing process or part thereof takes
place.
SUBMERGED FILL PIPE — A fill pipe whose point of discharge into the
receiving vessel is entirely submerged when the liquid level is no more than
six inches (15.2 centimeters) above the vessel bottom, or, in the case of a
top- or side-entering fill pipe, when the liquid level is no more than three
times the inside radius of the fill pipe, plus five inches (12.7 centimeters),
but no more than 42 inches (106.7 centimeters) above the vessel bottom.
SURFACE CLEANER — A device to remove unwanted foreign matter from
the surfaces of nonporous or nonabsorbent materials by using volatile
organic substance solvents in liquid or vapor state.
SURFACE COATING FORMULATION — The material, including but not
limited to paint, varnish, ink and adhesive, applied to a solid surface in
order to achieve a finished coating.
SURFACE COATING OPERATION — The application and solidification of a
surface coating formulation.
TANK — Any container whose walls are constructed of material which is
rigid and self-supporting.
TRADE WATER — All solid or liquid material or rubbish resulting from
construction, building operations or business, trade or industrial
production, including but not limited to any plastic products, cartons,
paints, grease, oil and other petroleum products, chemicals, cinders and
other forms of solid or liquid waste products.
TRANSFER OPERATION — The moving of any substance from any storage
tank, manufacturing process vessel or delivery vessel into any receiving
vessel.
VAPOR — The gaseous form of substances which, under standard
conditions, are in the solid or liquid state and which can be changed to these
states by either increasing the pressure or decreasing the temperature.
§ 21-3 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 21-3
10:171
VAPOR-BALANCE SYSTEM — The system for controlling vapor losses
during the transfer of volatile organic substance liquid from one vessel
to another vessel or tank by means of the simultaneous counter-transfer
of displaced vapors from the receiving vessel to the vessel supplying the
liquid.
VAPOR-CONTROL SYSTEM — A system for preventing the emission of
organic vapors into the outdoor atmosphere.
VAPOR PRESSURE — The pressure of the vapor phase of a substance or the
sum of the partial pressures of the vapor phases of individual substances in
a mixture of substances which is in equilibrium with the nonvapor phase of
the substance or substances.
VAPORTIGHT — Not capable of allowing the passage of gases at the
pressure encountered.
VISIBLE SMOKE — Smoke which obscures light to a degree readily
discernible by visual observation.
VOLATILE ORGANIC SUBSTANCE — Hereinafter abbreviated as "VOS,"
means any organic substance, mixture of organic substances or mixture
of organic or inorganic substances, including but not limited to petroleum
crudes, petroleum fractions, petrochemicals, solvents, dilutents and
thinners (excluding methane, trichlorofluoromethane,
dichlorodifluoromethane, chlorodifluoromethane, trifluoromethane, 1,1,2
trichloro-1,2,2 trifluoroethane, 1,2 dichloro-1,1,2,2 tetrafluoroethane, and
chloropentafluoroethane), which has vapor pressures or partial pressures of
organic substances of 0.02 pound per square inch absolute (one millimeter
of mercury) or more measured at standard conditions; and, in case of
surface coating formulations, includes any coalescing or other agent,
regardless of vapor pressure, which evaporates from the coating during the
drying phase.
§ 21-4. Air pollution prohibited.
§ 21-5. Open burning.
A. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit to be emitted into the
open air substances in such quantities as shall result in air pollution.
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the use of economic
poisons where their application is conducted or supervised by a duly
licensed person, as certified by the DEP.
A. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit:
(1) A salvage operation by open burning.
(2) The disposal of rubbish, garbage or trade waste or buildings or
structures by open burning.
(3) The disposal of any type of plant life by open burning.
§ 21-3 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 21-5
10:172
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
(1) A variance approved and issued by the DEP in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 7:27-2 et seq.
(2) Open burning exercises for training or research, as provided for in
Subsection C.
(3) The use of open burning and/or smoke-causing products or agents
for motion-picture, television or other artistic special effects,
provided that application, in writing, is presented 72 hours in
advance to the Health Department, stating the date, location, time,
nature and duration of said activity and such measures as will
ensure the safety of said activity and provide a minimum of
emissions to produce such an effect.
(4) An air pollution emergency declared by the Governor or adverse
meteorological conditions nullify all allowances for open burning.
C. Open-burning exercises for training or research.
(1) Permit required. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit open
burning for training in fire protection, prevention or suppression or
research exercises without first having obtained a permit issued by
the Health Department. Permits shall be issued for either a
permanent or a temporary facility, as defined in Subsection C(2).
(2) Types of facilities.
(a) A "permanent opening-burning exercise facility" shall be
considered a facility and/or site constructed and used
exclusively for training or research in practical fire evolutions
on a continual basis for 15 days or more per permit year. The
facility shall be constructed in a remote area of the property,
with an impervious material pad and dike to contain all fuel
and extinguishing agents utilized. Discharge and disposal
systems for unused fuel and extinguishing agents shall comply
with all local and state codes. A permanent facility permit shall
be valid for one year from its date of issuance, unless revoked
by reason of noncompliance with any condition or restriction
as set forth in the permit. A permit must be renewed by
application between 30 and 90 days prior to its expiration date.
(b) A "temporary open-burning exercise facility" shall be
considered a portable or single-day event used exclusively for
training or research in fire-extinguishment methods where
burning is performed at a facility less than 15 days per year.
Such permits shall be valid for a specified single day, or
specified alternate day should the exercise be canceled by
reasons beyond the control of the applicant and/or facility. The
alternate-day exercise must be completed within 30 days of the
original specified exercise date. A temporary facility permit
§ 21-5 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 21-5
10:173
may be revoked by reason of noncompliance with any condition
or restriction as set forth in the permit. Applications for
temporary facility permits must be submitted between 30 and
90 days prior to the burn date.
(3) Application. Application for a permit shall be made to the Health
Department on forms provided by the Health Department.
(4) Information to be supplied. The Health Department may require
such details regarding the open-burning exercise and facility as it
considers necessary to determine that the exercise is carried out
and facility designed so as not to violate any of the provisions of
this code or of any rules or regulations promulgated hereunder and
that the exercise is carried out and facility maintained in a manner
which minimizes emissions of air contaminants. An application for
a permit shall supply the following information:
(a) A detailed plan describing the facility and a plot plan, to scale,
with North orientation and plant property lines where the
facility is located.
(b) The name, address and telephone number of the person(s)
responsible for the operation and maintenance of the facility
and exercise.
(c) The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the
premises where the exercise is to take place.
(d) The name, address and telephone number of the person,
contractor or demonstrator responsible for or actually
performing the exercise.
(e) The type of fuel(s) to be used is restricted to:
[1] Commercial grade fuel oil.
[2] Combustible material approved by the Health Department.
(f) The type of fuel-storage facility.
(g) The method of disposal for materials used.
(h) A description of safety and fire-protection devices.
(i) A schedule of dates and times that the exercises are to be
carried out.
(j) Such other information as the Health Department may require.
(5) Conditional approval. Upon receipt of an application for the
issuance of a permanent facility permit or any renewal thereof, the
Director may issue a temporary permit valid for a period not to
exceed 90 days and conditioned upon specified improvements or
restrictions being made within the prescribed time.
§ 21-5 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 21-5
10:174
§ 21-6. Smoke emissions.
(6) Time limitation. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit an
exercise at any facility prior to 7:00 a.m. or after 5:00 p.m. of any
day. All operations, including complete extinction of the fire and
removal of materials in a safe manner, shall be terminated by 5:00
p.m.; provided, however, that, by a special permit provision, the
Health Department may, because of exceptional circumstances,
permit different hours of operation.
(7) Inspections. All facilities may be inspected by the Director or his
agent prior to the issuance of a permit and shall be subject to
inspection at any time by the Director or his agent during the term
of the permit.
(8) Display of permit. Any person in possession of a permit shall
maintain said permit readily available on the premises where the
open-burning exercise is approved to be conducted.
(9) Notification of open-burning exercises. In addition to the
notification/schedule format required in the permit application, the
following shall also be duly notified of the exercise by the applicant
and/or facility manager:
(a) The local Fire Department.
(b) The local Police Department.
(c) The DEP field office.
(d) The area forestry, forest fire service office.
(10) Compliance with other provisions. The possession of an openburning
exercise facility permit does not relieve any person from
the obligation to comply with all other provisions of this code, nor
does it in any way void the applicant's obligation to obtain
necessary permits from any other governmental agencies.
(11) Fees.
(a) The permit fee for each type of facility shall be as follows:
[1] Permanent facility: $100 annually.
[2] Temporary facility: $10 daily.
(b) Said fee shall be made payable to Treasurer, Middlesex County,
and submitted with the application to the Health Department.
A. Smoke emissions from stationary indirect heat exchanger.
(1) No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit visible smoke to be
emitted into the outdoor air from the combustion of fuel in any
§ 21-5 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 21-6
10:175
stationary indirect heat exchanger, except as provided in
Subsection A(2) of this section.
(2) No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit smoke, the shade or
appearance of which is darker than No. 1 on the Ringelmann
Smoke Chart or greater than 20% opacity, exclusive of visible
condensed water vapor, to be emitted into the outdoor air from the
combustion of fuel in any stationary indirect heat exchanger having
a rated hourly capacity of 200,000,000 Btu's or greater gross heat
input and discharging through a stack or chimney having all
internal cross-sectional dimensions of 60 inches or greater.
(3) The provisions of Subsections A(1) and (2) of this section shall not
apply to smoke which is visible for a period of not longer than three
minutes in any consecutive thirty-minute period.
B. Smoke emissions from marine installations.
(1) No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit smoke, the shade or
appearance of which is darker than No. 1 on the Ringelmann
Smoke Chart or greater than 20% opacity, exclusive of visible
condensed water vapor, to be emitted into the outdoor air from the
combustion of fuel in the indirect heat exchanger of any marine
installation.
(2) The provisions of Subsection B(1) of this section shall not apply to
smoke which is visible for a period of not longer than three minutes
in any consecutive thirty-minute period.
C. Smoke emissions from the combustion of fuel in mobile sources. No
person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit smoke, the shade or
appearance of which is darker than No. 2 on the Ringelmann Smoke
Chart or greater than 40% opacity, exclusive of visible condensed water
vapor, to be emitted into the outdoor air from the combustion of fuel in
any mobile source for a period of more than 10 consecutive seconds.
D. Smoke emissions from stationary internal-combustion engines and
stationary turbine engines. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or
permit smoke, the shade or appearance of which is darker than No. 1 on
the Ringelmann Smoke Chart or greater than 20% opacity, exclusive of
visible condensed water vapor, to be emitted into the outdoor air from
the combustion of fuel in any stationary internal-combustion engine or
any stationary turbine engine for a period of more than 10 consecutive
seconds.
E. Smoke emissions from diesel-powered engines. No person shall cause,
suffer, allow or permit smoke, the shade or appearance of which is
darker than No. 1 on the Ringelmann Smoke Chart or greater than 20%
opacity, exclusive of visible condensed water vapor, to be emitted into
the outdoor air from the combustion of fuel in any diesel engine for a
period of more than 10 consecutive seconds.
§ 21-6 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 21-7
10:176
§ 21-7. Solid particle emissions from manufacturing industrial
sources.
§ 21-8. Idling of vehicles not in motion limited.
A. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit particles to be emitted
into the outdoor air from any stack or chimney, the shade or appearance
of which is greater than 20% opacity, exclusive of water vapor.
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
(1) Particles, the shade or appearance of which are greater than 20%
opacity, exclusive of water vapor, for a period of not longer than
three minutes in any consecutive thirty-minute period.
(2) Source operations issued a variance by the DEP in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 7:27-6.5.
(3) Indirect heat exchangers.
(4) Incinerators.
C. Fugitive emissions prohibited. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or
permit:
(1) The operation of construction sites without adequate mud- and
dust-control measures on all roadways and/or traveled areas.
(2) Demolition activities unless watering is done twice daily at 0.5
gallon per square yard or the equivalent wetting power using other
acceptable means at the active demolition area.
(3) The demolition or renovation of an institutional, industrial or
commercial building containing friable asbestos material, unless:
(a) A report to the EPA Region II Enforcement Division is received
by them at least 10 days prior to commencement, in
accordance with 40 CFR 61.22(d)(2); and
(b) Removal procedures are conducted in compliance with 40 CFR
61.20 through 61.24.
(4) Unpaved roadways or parking lots without adequate mud- and
dust-control measures.
(5) Storage piles where particulate matter is entrained and deposited
onto neighboring properties.
(6) Fugitive emissions from charging doors, ductwork, vents, windows
and doors, outdoor industrial operations and materials handling
whereby particulates are deposited onto neighboring properties.
A. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the motor of a dieselpowered
or gasoline-powered vehicle to be in operation for more than
§ 21-7 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 21-8
10:177
§ 21-9. Control and prohibition of air pollution from asbestos
surface coatings.
§ 21-10. Control and prohibition of air pollution by volatile organic
substances.
three consecutive minutes if the vehicle is not in motion, except that,
where the ambient temperature is 32° F. or less, then the permitted
period for idling shall be five consecutive minutes.
B. The provisions of Subsection A shall not apply to:
(1) Buses discharging or picking up passengers.
(2) Vehicles stopped in a line of traffic.
(3) Electric motor vehicles.
(4) Emergency vehicles in performance of their prescribed function.
(5) Vehicles whose primary and/or secondary power source is utilized,
in whole or in part, for necessary and definitively prescribed
mechanical operation other than propulsion.
A. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit surface coating by
spraying, on all buildings, structures, facilities, installations or internal
or external portions thereof, asbestos or friable materials containing in
excess of 0.25% (by weight) asbestos.
B. No person shall engage in demolition or renovation activity involving
asbestos unless such activity is in accordance with § 21-7C(3).
C. Tests.
(1) Any person responsible for the manufacture, application or use of
any coating which the Director has reason to believe contains
asbestos shall, when requested by the Director, conduct such tests
as are necessary in the opinion of the Director to determine the
presence and the amount and/or kinds of asbestos in the coating.
Such tests shall be conducted in a manner approved by the Director
and shall be made at the expense of the person responsible.
(2) The Director may waive the testing requirements of Subsection
C(1) of this section upon receipt of a materials specification report
from the material manufacturer certifying that the asbestos
content of the surface coating for which testing is required
complies with the provisions of Subsection A hereof.
A. Storage of volatile organic substances.
(1) No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the storage of a
volatile organic substance in any stationary storage tank of 2,000
gallons (7,570 liters) or greater exposed to the rays of the sun,
§ 21-8 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 21-10
10:178
unless the external surface of the tank is painted and maintained
white. The provisions of this section shall not apply to words and
logograms applied to the external surface of a storage tank for
purposes of identification, provided that such symbols do not cover
more than 20% of the external surface area of the tank's sides and
top or more than 200 square feet (18.6 square meters), whichever
is less.
(2) No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the storage of a
volatile organic substance in any stationary storage tank having a
maximum capacity of 10,000 gallons (37,850 liters) or greater,
unless such stationary tank is equipped with control apparatus as
determined in accordance with the procedure for using Table 1 or
as approved by the DEP as being equally or more effective in
preventing the emission of volatile organic substances into the
outdoor atmosphere.
Procedure for Using Table 1
Step 1: Determine the vapor pressure at standard
conditions, in pounds per square inch absolute, of
the volatile organic substances to be stored.
Step 2: Select the appropriate line in Table 1 for the vapor
pressure determined in Step 1.
Step 3: Determine the maximum tank capacity in thousands
of gallons.
Step 4: Find the tank capacity range classification for the
vapor pressure determined under Step 1.
Step 5: Determine the control requirements in accordance
with the following schedule:
Range I: No control apparatus required under this subsection
Range II: Conservation vent required
Range III: Floating roof required
§ 21-10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 21-10
10:179
TABLE 1
Determinants of Type Control Apparatus Required for
Storage of Volatile Substances
Vapor Pressure
(pounds per
square inch
absolute at 70°
F.)
Tank Capacity
(thousands of gallons)
Range I Range II Range III
Greater
Than
But Not
Greater
Than
Not
Greater
Than
Greater
Than
But Not
Greater
Than
Greater
Than
*0.02 0.03 4,500 4,500 14,000 14,000
0.03 0.04 4,500 4,500 11,000 11,000
0.04 0.06 3,500 3,500 8,000 8,000
0.06 0.08 2,500 2,500 6,000 6,000
0.08 0.10 2,000 2,000 4,500 4,500
0.10 0.15 1,600 1,600 3,500 3,500
0.15 0.2 1,050 1,050 2,500 2,500
0.2 0.3 750 750 1,600 1,600
0.3 0.4 550 550 1,250 1,250
0.4 0.5 475 475 1,075 1,075
0.5 0.6 400 400 900 900
0.6 0.7 350 350 750 750
0.7 0.8 300 300 650 650
0.8 1.0 260 260 550 550
1.0 1.2 210 210 475 475
1.2 1.4 190 190 400 400
1.4 1.6 170 170 350 350
1.6 1.8 150 150 300 300
1.8 2.1 125 125 260 260
2.1 2.4 110 110 225 225
2.4 2.7 100 100 200 200
2.7 3.0 90 90 180 180
3.0 3.5 80 80 160 160
3.5 4.0 70 70 145 145
4.0 4.5 60 60 130 130
4.5 5.0 50 50 115 115
§ 21-10 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 21-10
10:180
TABLE 1
Determinants of Type Control Apparatus Required for
Storage of Volatile Substances
Vapor Pressure
(pounds per
square inch
absolute at 70°
F.)
Tank Capacity
(thousands of gallons)
Range I Range II Range III
Greater
Than
But Not
Greater
Than
Not
Greater
Than
Greater
Than
But Not
Greater
Than
Greater
Than
5.0 5.5 50 50 105 105
5.5 6.0 50 50 95 95
6.0 6.5 40 40 85 85
6.5 7.0 40 40 75 75
7.0 7.5 40 40 70 70
7.5 8.0 35 35 65 65
8.0 8.5 35 35 60 60
8.5 9.5 30 30 55 55
9.5 10.5 25 25 50 50
10.5 11.5 20 20 45 45
11.5 13.0 10 10 40 40
*NOTE: VOS which have a vapor pressure of 0.02 pound per
square inch absolute at 70° F. shall be included in this
line.
(3) No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the storage of a
volatile organic substance having a vapor pressure of greater than
13.0 pounds per square inch absolute (672 millimeters of mercury)
at the actual temperature existing at or near the liquid surface in
any stationary storage tank having a maximum capacity of 1,000
gallons (3,785 liters) or greater, unless such tank is equipped with a
vapor-control system to reduce the rate of volatile organic
substance emissions to the outdoor atmosphere by at least 90%, by
weight, of the process emission rate.
(4) No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the storage of a
volatile organic substance in any stationary storage tank subject to
the provisions of either Subsection A(2) in Ranges II and III or
Subsection A(3) of this section and equipped with gauging and/or
sampling systems, unless such systems are vaportight, except
when gauging or sampling is taking place.
§ 21-10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 21-10
10:181
(5) The provisions of Subsections A(2) and (3) of this section shall not
apply to a stationary storage tank in Range II located underground
at a depth no less than eight inches (20.3 centimeters) below the
surface, measured to the highest point of the tank shell, or installed
in another manner approved by the DEP as being equally or more
effective in preventing the emission of VOS into the outdoor
atmosphere.
(6) The provisions of Subsection A(1) of this section shall not apply to
any storage tank:
(a) Maintained under a controlled elevated temperature.
(b) Equipped with a vapor-control system reducing by at least
98%, by weight, the volatile organic substance emissions to the
outdoor atmosphere.
(7) Any stationary storage tank in Range III, as determined from Table
I, constructed or installed on or after December 17, 1979, shall be
provided with a double-seal floating roof or other control apparatus
approved by the DEP as being equally or more effective in
preventing the emission of volatile organic substances into the
outdoor atmosphere.
(8) No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the storage of a
volatile organic substance in any stationary storage tank having a
maximum capacity of 40,000 gallons (151,400 liters) or greater and
equipped with an external floating roof, unless such stationary
storage tank is equipped with control apparatus as determined in
accordance with the procedure for using Table 1A or as approved
by the DEP as being equally or more effective in preventing the
emission of volatile organic substances into the outdoor
atmosphere.
Procedure for Using Table 1A
Step 1: Determine the vapor pressure at standard
conditions in pounds per square inch absolute
of the volatile organic substance to be stored.
Step 2: Select the appropriate line in Table 1A for the
vapor pressured determined in Step 1.
Step 3: Determine the type of construction of the tank
shell or walls, whether riveted or welded.
Step 4: Determine the maximum tank capacity, in
thousands of gallons.
Step 5: Find the tank capacity range classification for
the vapor pressure determined under Step 1
and for the type of construction determined
under Step 3.
§ 21-10 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 21-10
10:182
Procedure for Using Table 1A
Step 6: Determine the control requirements in
accordance with the following:
Range R-1
and
Range W-1:
A single seal-envelope combination is required.
Range R-2
and
Range W-2:
A second seal-envelope combination must be
added.
TABLE 1A
Determinants of Requirements for Second Seal Retrofits on
Floating Roof Storage Tanks Containing Volatile Organic
Substances
Vapor Pressure
(pounds per
square inch
absolute at 70° F.)
Tank Capacity
(thousands of gallons)
Riveted Tanks
Welded
Tanks
Range
R-1
Range
R-2
Range
W-1
Range
W-2
Greater
Than
But Not
Greater
Than
Not
Greater
Than
Greater
Than
Not
Greater
Than
Greater
Than
*0.02 1.0 -- -- -- --
1.0 1.2 470 470 -- --
1.2 1.4 400 400 -- --
1.4 2.6 350 350 -- --
1.6 1.8 300 300 -- --
1.8 2.0 265 265 -- --
2.0 2.2 230 230 1,030 1,030
2.2 2.4 200 200 930 930
2.4 2.6 175 175 840 840
2.6 2.8 155 155 770 770
2.8 3.0 135 135 720 720
3.0 3.2 120 120 665 665
3.2 3.4 105 105 620 620
3.4 3.6 90 90 580 580
§ 21-10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 21-10
10:183
TABLE 1A
Determinants of Requirements for Second Seal Retrofits on
Floating Roof Storage Tanks Containing Volatile Organic
Substances
Vapor Pressure
(pounds per
square inch
absolute at 70° F.)
Tank Capacity
(thousands of gallons)
Riveted Tanks
Welded
Tanks
Range
R-1
Range
R-2
Range
W-1
Range
W-2
Greater
Than
But Not
Greater
Than
Not
Greater
Than
Greater
Than
Not
Greater
Than
Greater
Than
3.6 3.8 80 80 545 545
3.8 4.0 75 75 510 510
4.0 4.4 65 65 450 450
4.4 4.8 60 60 405 405
4.8 5.2 50 50 360 360
5.2 5.6 45 45 320 320
5.6 6.0 40 40 280 280
6.0 6.4 40 40 245 245
6.4 6.8 40 40 210 210
6.8 7.2 40 40 180 180
7.2 7.6 40 40 155 155
7.6 8.0 40 40 130 130
8.0 8.4 40 40 110 110
8.4 8.8 40 40 90 90
8.8 9.6 40 40 65 65
9.6 10.4 40 40 50 50
10.4 -- 40 40 40 40
*NOTE:VOS which have a vapor pressure of 0.02 pound per
square inch absolute at 70° F. shall be included in this
line.
(9) No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the storage of a
volatile organic substance having a vapor pressure of greater than
1.5 pounds per square inch absolute (75 millimeters of mercury) at
standard conditions in any stationary storage tank having a
§ 21-10 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 21-10
10:184
maximum capacity of 40,000 gallons (151,400 liters) or greater and
equipped with a second seal-envelope combination. The gap area of
gaps exceeding 1/8 inch (0.32 centimeter) in width shall not exceed
one square inch per foot of tank diameter (6.5 square centimeters
per 0.3 meter of tank diameter).
(10)No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the storage of a
volatile organic substance in any stationary storage tank equipped
with an external floating roof unless all openings in such roof,
excluding emergency roof drains, are covered when not in active
use.
(11) Any delivery vessel, excluding a railroad tank car, used for storing
volatile organic substances for more than one month shall be
considered a stationary storage tank for the purposes of this
section.
B. Transfer operations of volatile organic substances.
(1) No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the transfer of any
volatile organic substances into any receiving vessel of 2,000
gallons (7,570 liters) or greater capacity, unless such transfer is
made through a submerged fill pipe or by other means approved by
the DEP as being equally or more effective in preventing the
emission of volatile organic substances into the outdoor
atmosphere during transfer.
(2) The provisions of Subsection B(1) of this section shall not apply to
manufacturing process vessels installed before December 17,
1979.
(3) No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the transfer of
gasoline from any delivery vessel into any stationary storage tank
of 2,000 gallons (7,570 liters) or greater capacity, unless such
storage tank is equipped with and operating one of the following
controls:
(a) A vapor-balance system with all atmospheric vents positively
closed during transfer.
(b) A vapor-balance system with a conservation vent adjusted to
remain closed during the transfer.
(c) A vapor-balance system with a drilled cap on the atmospheric
vent, the drilled hole not to exceed 1/4 inch (6.4 millimeters) in
diameter.
(d) A vapor-control system which prevents emissions of more than
6.7 pounds of volatile organic substance per 10,000 gallons (80
milligrams per liter) of gasoline transferred.
(e) A floating roof or equivalent approved by the DEP.
§ 21-10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 21-10
10:185
(4) No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the transfer of
gasoline into any delivery vessel of 2,000 gallons (757 liters) or
greater capacity, unless such delivery vessel is connected to control
apparatus installed and operating in accordance with the
provisions of Subsection B(5) of this section.
(5) No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the transfer or
loading of gasoline from a gasoline-loading facility unless such
facility is equipped with and operating a control apparatus in
accordance with the following provisions:
(a) Facilities loading more than 4,000 gallons (15,140 liters) per
day but not more than 15,000 gallons (56,775 liters) per day
shall be equipped with and operating a vapor-balance system
or other control apparatus of equal or higher control efficiency.
Such vapor-balance system shall have no open operating vent
to the atmosphere during transfer and shall not return the
vapors to any tank equipped with a floating roof.
(b) Facilities loading more than 15,000 gallons (56,775 liters) per
day shall be equipped with and operating a vapor-control
system which:
[1] Prevents volatile organic substance emissions to the
outdoor atmosphere from exceeding the maximum
allowable emissions as determined from Table 2; or
[2] Reduces the total emissions of volatile organic substances
to the outdoor atmosphere by no less than 90% by weight.
TABLE 2
Emission Standards for Gasoline-Loading Facilities
Loading More Than 15,000 Gallons (56,775 Liters)
Per Day
Concentration of Volatile
Organic Substances in
Gas Displaced from
Delivery Vessel(volume
percent)
Maximum Allowable
Emissions per Volume
Unit Loaded
Greater
Than
But Not
Greater
Than
Pounds Per
10,000
Gallons
Milligrams
per Liter
50 -- 6.7 80
40 40 5.8 70
30 40 5.0 60
20 30 4.2 50
15 20 3.8 45
0 15 3.3 40
§ 21-10 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 21-10
10:186
The daily loading rate shall be calculated on the basis of
the daily average rate during the month with the highest
throughput in the last 12 months operated.
(6) After December 21, 1982, no person shall cause, suffer, allow or
permit any delivery vessel having a maximum total capacity of
2,000 gallons (7,570 liters) or greater to contain gasoline, unless
such delivery vessel:
(a) Sustains a pressure change of less than three inches of water
(six millimeters of mercury) in five minutes when pressurized
to 18 inches of water (34 millimeters of mercury) and
evacuated to six inches of water (11 millimeters of mercury), as
tested at least once in every twelve-month period of leaks in
accordance with test procedures specified by the DEP; and
(b) Has a DEP-approved certificate fastened to the vessel in a
prominent location which indicates the identification number
of the vessel and the date the vessel last passed the pressure
and vacuum tests.
(7) After December 31, 1982, no person shall cause, suffer, allow or
permit a transfer of gasoline subject to the provisions of Subsection
B(3), (4) and (5) of this section if the delivery vessel being loaded is
under a pressure in excess of 18 inches of water (34 millimeters of
mercury) gauge or the delivery vessel being unloaded is under a
vacuum in excess of six inches of water (11 millimeters of mercury)
gauge.
(8) No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit volatile organic
substances to be emitted into the outdoor atmosphere during a
transfer of gasoline, subject to the provisions of Subsection B(3),
(4) and (5) of this section, from leaking components of gasoline
vapor-control systems or delivery vessels being loaded or unloaded
if:
(a) The concentration of the emissions to the outdoor atmosphere
is greater than or equal to 100% of the lower explosive limit of
propane when measured at a distance of one inch (2.54
centimeters) from the source; or
(b) The emissions are in the liquid state.
(9) The provisions of Subsection B(4) of this section shall not apply to
delivery vessels used for less than one month for the purpose of
holding gasoline from a storage tank during a period in which the
storage tank is undergoing repair or maintenance.
(10)No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the transport of any
volatile organic substance in a delivery vessel of 2,000 gallons
(7,570 liters) or greater capacity, unless such vessel is vaportight at
all times while containing volatile organic substances, except:
§ 21-10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 21-10
10:187
§ 21-11. Registration of fuel-burning equipment.
(a) Under emergency conditions;
(b) While gauging; or
(c) While venting through a vapor-control system approved by the
DEP.
(11) The provisions of this section shall not apply to the transfer of
volatile organic substances into marine delivery vessels.
C. Cutback and emulsified asphalts. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or
permit the use of cutback asphalt or emulsified asphalt containing a
volatile organic substance unless:
(1) The material is applied during the periods January 1 through April
15 or October 15 through December 31;
(2) The use is solely as a penetrating prime coat;
(3) The emulsified asphalt contains no greater than 80% of volatile
organic substances by volume and is used for mixed-in-place
construction;
(4) The material is a cold-mix, stockpile material used for pavement
repair; or
(5) The user can demonstrate that there are no emissions of volatile
organic substance from the asphalt under conditions of normal use.
D. Exceptions.
(1) The provisions of the control of volatile organic substances shall
not apply to any stationary vessel or delivery vessel maintained
under a pressure greater than one atmosphere, provided that any
vent serving such vessel has the sole function of relieving pressure
under abnormal emergency conditions.
(2) The provisions of the control of volatile organic substances shall
not apply to the emissions of volatile organic substances from the
following operations:
(a) Glass-manufacturing furnaces.
(b) Fiberglass-manufacturing furnaces.
(c) Fuel burning for steam generation or space heating.
(d) Incinerators.
(e) Asphalt plant dryers.
A. Certificate of registration. No person shall use or cause to be used any
fuel-burning equipment without first having obtained a certificate of
§ 21-10 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 21-11
10:188
registration. Such certificates shall be valid for three years from their
date of issuance, unless revoked by reason of noncompliance with any
condition or restriction as set forth in the registration. A registration
must be renewed by application between 30 and 90 days prior to its
expiration date. Information on either new installations being placed
into service or existing installations which have been altered shall be
submitted to the Director within three months after their introduction
to service.
B. Compliance with other provisions. The possession of a certificate of
registration does not relieve any person from the obligation to comply
with all other provisions of this code, nor does it in any way void the
applicant's obligation to obtain necessary permits from any other
governmental agencies.
C. Display of certificate. Any person in possession of a certificate of
registration shall maintain said certificate readily available on the
operating premises.
D. Exemption. The provisions of § 21-11 shall not apply to:
(1) A fuel-burning unit in a structure used exclusively for residential
occupancy of six dwelling units for less.
(2) Motor vehicles operating on the public highways, mobile or marine
sources.
(3) A building where the rated capacity of the fuel-burning unit is less
than or equal to 140,000 Btu's per hour gross heat input.
(4) Fuel-burning equipment used exclusively for incinerator emissions
control, such as primary and secondary burners, provided that the
equipment is covered by an incinerator permit, as provided for in
§ 21-13 of this code.
E. Application. Applications for certificates of registration shall be made to
the Health Department on forms provided by the Health Department.
F. Information to be supplied. The Health Department may require such
details regarding the fuel-burning equipment as it considers necessary
to determine that the equipment is designed to operate without causing
a violation of any of the provisions of this code or of any rules or
regulations promulgated hereunder and that the equipment
incorporates advances in the art of air-pollution control developed for
the kind and amount of air contaminant emitted by the applicant's
equipment and that the equipment is being maintained and operated in
a manner which minimizes emissions of air contaminants.
G. Any person applying for a certificate of registration for fuel-burning
equipment shall supply the following information:
§ 21-11 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 21-11
10:189
(1) The location of the stack or chimney from which are discharged
into the open air products of combustion from the burning of solid,
liquid or gaseous fuel.
(2) The type of fuel burned.
(3) The heat content of the fuel burned.
(4) The quantity of fuel burned per hour and/or year.
(5) A description of the combustion equipment configuration.
(6) The usual period of operation.
(7) The height and size of the outlet.
(8) A description of the air-pollution control equipment, including but
not limited to smoke alarms, bolometers, transmisometers or
opacity meters.
(9) The name, address and business hours telephone number of the
owner and/or person responsible for the maintenance of the
equipment and at least two nonbusiness hour telephone numbers
to be used in an emergency situation.
(10) The name, address and business hours telephone number of the
owner and/or person responsible for the day-to-day operation of the
equipment and at least two nonbusiness hour telephone numbers
to be used in an emergency situation.
(11) Certification as to maintenance, repair or inspection activity which
would serve to ensure minimal levels of contaminants emitted.
(12) The DEP permit/certificate and/or owner identification number
attached to the unit.
(13) Such other information as the Health Department may require.
H. Inspections. All fuel-burning equipment may be inspected by the
Director or his agent prior to the issuance of a certificate and shall be
subject to inspection at any time by the Director or his agent during the
term of the certificate.
I. Fees. The certificate fee for each fuel-burning unit shall be made
payable to Treasurer, Middlesex County, at the beginning of each
renewal period as follows:
(1) Thirty dollars from 140,001 to 499,999 Btu's per hour gross heat
input.
(2) Sixty dollars from 500,000 to 999,999 Btu's per hour gross heat
input.
(3) Seventy-five dollars over 1,000,000 Btu's per hour gross heat input.
§ 21-11 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 21-11
10:190
§ 21-12. Incinerator regulations.
(4) Space heaters in excess of 140,000 Btu's per hour shall be
registered as per Categories 1 to 3 above. In no case shall the
collective listing of individual space-heating units below 140,000
Btu's per hour require more than a Category 3 registration.
A. Single flue-fed incinerator prohibited. No person shall construct,
install, use or cause to be used any single flue-fed incinerator.
B. Operating incinerators. No person shall construct, install, use or cause
to be used any new incinerator or use or cause to be used any existing
incinerator unless such incinerator:
(1) Is of the multiple-chamber type or is of a type approved by the DEP
and rated by it as being equally effective for the purpose of airpollution
control.
(2) Has a Health Department permit as provided for in § 21-13 of this
code.
(3) Is in use with all components connected or attached or serving the
equipment functioning properly in accordance with the Health
Department permit.
(4) Fulfills all conditions and provisions of the Health Department
permit.
C. Smoke emissions. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit smoke
from any incinerator, the shade or appearance of which is darker than
No. 1 on the Ringelmann Smoke Chart or greater than 20% opacity,
exclusive of water vapor, to be emitted into the open air.
D. New fires. The provisions of Subsection E shall not apply to smoke
emitted into the open air during the building of a new fire, the shade or
appearance of which is darker than No. 2 on the Ringelmann Smoke
Chart or greater than 40% opacity, exclusive of water vapor, for a
period of not longer than three consecutive minutes.
E. Visible particles. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the
emission of particles of unburned waste or ash from any incinerator
which are individually large enough to be visible while suspended in the
atmosphere.
F. Odors. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the use of any
incinerator which will result in odors being detectable by sense of smell
in any area of human use or occupancy.
G. Time of operation. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit in the
municipality the operation of any incinerator prior to 7:00 a.m. or after
5:00 p.m. of any day. All operations, including complete extinction of the
fire and removal of materials in a safe manner from the firebox to a
noncombustible container, shall be completely terminated by 5:00 p.m.;
§ 21-11 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 21-12
10:191
§ 21-13. Incinerator permits.
provided, however, that, by a special permit provision, the Health
Department may, because of exceptional circumstances, permit
different hours of operation under such conditions as it shall deem
necessary for the health, safety and welfare of the public or persons in
the vicinity.
H. Sealing of an incinerator. Where the operation of an incinerator
constitutes an immediate and substantial menace to public health and
safety or is a substantial source of air pollution, causing irritation and
discomfort to persons in the vicinity, and the owner or operator fails,
upon written or oral notice, to take immediate corrective measures, the
Director may take all necessary measures to abate the condition,
including but not limited to ordering the cessation of use of the
equipment and sealing of the same, pending a hearing in the Municipal
Court.
I. Exceptions. Resource recovery and hazardous waste disposal units
shall be classified as point sources and required to comply with § 21-14
of this code.
A. Permit required. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the use
of any incinerator equipment without first having obtained a permit
issued by the Health Department. Such permits shall be valid for three
years from their date of issuance, unless revoked by reason of
noncompliance with any condition or restriction as set forth in the
permit. A permit must be renewed by application between 30 and 90
days prior to its expiration date. Information on either new installations
being placed into service or existing installations which have been
altered shall be submitted to the Director within three months after
their introduction to service.
B. Conditional approval. Upon receipt of an application for the issuance of
a permit, or any renewal thereof, the Director may issue a temporary
permit valid for a period not to exceed 90 days and conditioned upon
specified improvements or restrictions being made within the
prescribed time.
C. Compliance with other provisions. The possession of an incinerator
permit does not relieve any person from the obligation to comply with
all other provisions of this code, nor does it in any way void the
applicant's obligation to obtain necessary permits from any other
governmental agencies.
D. Display of permit. Any person in possession of a permit shall maintain
said permit readily available on the operating premises.
E. Application. Application for a permit shall be made to the Health
Department on forms provided by the Health Department.
F. Information to be supplied.
§ 21-12 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 21-13
10:192
§ 21-14. Registration of a point source.
(1) The Health Department may require such details regarding the
incinerator as it considers necessary to determine that the
incinerator is designed to operate without causing a violation of
any of the provisions of this code or of any rules or regulations
promulgated hereunder and that the incinerator incorporates
advances in the art of air-pollution control developed for the kind
and amount of air contaminant emitted by the applicant's
incinerator and that the incinerator is being maintained and
operated in a manner which minimizes emissions of air
contaminants.
(2) An application for an incinerator permit shall supply the following
information:
(a) The nature of the installation.
(b) The type and quantity of waste to be burned.
(c) A description of safety and fire-protection devices.
(d) A description of the equipment configuration.
(e) A description of the devices that are incorporated with the
incinerator to ensure against the emission of air pollutants.
(f) The name, address and business hours telephone number of
the owner and/or person responsible for the day-to-day
operation of the equipment and at least two nonbusiness hour
telephone numbers to be used in an emergency situation.
(g) The name, address and business hours telephone number of
the owner and/or person responsible for the maintenance of
the equipment and at least two nonbusiness hour telephone
numbers to be used in an emergency situation.
(h) The DEP permit/certificate and/or owner identification number
assigned to the unit.
(i) Such other information as the Health Department may require.
G. Inspections. All incinerators may be inspected by the Director or his
agent prior to the issuance of a permit and shall be subject to inspection
at any time by the Director or his agent during the term of the permit.
H. Fees. The permit fee for each incinerator shall be $75, payable to
Treasurer, Middlesex County, at the beginning of each renewal period.
A. Registration requirements.
(1) Any person operating a point source within the Township of Old
Bridge must obtain a certificate of registration from the Health
Department.
§ 21-13 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 21-14
10:193
(2) Application for a point source certificate of registration shall be
made to the Health Department on forms provided by the Health
Department.
(3) All existing point sources must be registered within three years of
the effective date of this code.
(4) Registration of fuel-burning equipment and incinerator permits are
required only by §§ 21-11 and 21-13 of this code.
B. Registration application information pertaining to point sources shall
include but not be limited to:
(1) A plot plan, to scale, with North orientation and plant property
lines where the facility is located.
(2) The plan will include the height above ground level of all point
sources (e.g., stacks or other points which discharge air
contaminants into the outdoor atmosphere).
(3) The plan will delineate the location of all existing and proposed
point sources, including stationary combustion installations and
incinerators. A facility designated identification number, not
exceeding five digits, is to be assigned to each point source.
(4) The plan will include the shortest straight line distance from the
point source to:
(a) The property line where the facility is located.
(b) The nearest building at or beyond the property line, including a
description of the building(s) as residential, light commercial,
industrial, hospital, retirement home, health-care, school, etc.
(5) A description of all equipment and control devices.
(6) The identification numbers of all existing permits and certificates
issued by the DEP.
(7) The name of the facility owner for which the application is being
prepared. For a corporation, include the division or subsidiary
name.
(8) The mailing address of the owner and the facility.
(9) The name of designated facility contact to be contacted regarding
the application and who is authorized by the owner to represent the
owner.
(10) The business hours telephone number of designated facility contact
and at least two off-hour telephone numbers to be used in an
emergency situation.
§ 21-14 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 21-14
10:194
§ 21-15. Provisions for rescissions.
(11) The maximum emission rate, in pounds per hour, for each air
contaminant.
(12) The maximum number of hours per day the contaminant will be
emitted.
(13) The maximum number of days per year the contaminant will be
emitted.
(14) Other pertinent information relative to the point source as deemed
appropriate by the Director.
C. Compliance with other provisions. The possession of a certificate of
registration does not relieve any person from the obligation to comply
with all of the provisions of this code, nor does it in any way void the
applicant's obligation to obtain all other necessary permits, certificates
and licenses from any other governmental agency.
D. Display of certificate. Any person in possession of a certificate of
registration shall maintain said certificate readily available on the
operating premises.
E. Inspections. All point sources requiring registration with the Health
Department may be inspected by the Health Department or its agent
prior to the issuance of a certificate of registration, and the registered
point source shall be subject to inspection at any time by the Health
Department or its agent during the effective term of the certificate of
registration.
F. Fees.
(1) The certificate of registration fee for each point source subject to
this section shall be $30, made payable to Treasurer, Middlesex
County, and is renewable every three years at a fee of $30.
(2) Renewals shall be submitted 90 days prior to the expiration of an
existing certificate of registration.
G. Exemptions. Registration of a point source is not required for dwelling
units used exclusively for residential occupancy.
A. A certificate of registration for a point source or fuel-burning
equipment or a permit for an open-burning exercise facility or an
incinerator may be denied or rescinded under the following conditions:
(1) The owner has failed to provide information as required.
(2) A source is found to be operating in contravention to what has been
stated or set forth on registration or permit application forms.
(3) A process is altered or relocated without due notification.
§ 21-14 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 21-15
10:195
§ 21-16. Inspection and right of entry.
B. A certificate of registration or permit shall be rescinded or denied only
at such time after the owner or operator shall have been notified, in
writing, of the findings and determinations made by the Middlesex
County Health Department. The owner or operator shall then have 10
days after written notification to appeal said decision to the Director.
A. All buildings and premises subject to this code are subject to inspection
from time to time by the Director or his duly authorized
representatives. All rooms and areas in the buildings or on the
premises, except private residences, shall be available and accessible
for such inspection, which shall be made during usual business hours;
provided, however, that inspection may be made at other times if the
premises is not available during the foregoing hours for inspections,
there is reason to believe that violations are occurring on the premises
which can be determined and proved by inspection only during other
than the prescribed hours or there is reason to believe a violation exists
of a character which is an immediate threat to life, health or safety
requiring inspection and abatement without delay, where the time
taken to apply for and secure the issuance of a warrant would render
ineffective the immediate action necessary to abate the condition.
B. Emergency inspections may also be authorized by the Governor in
times of air-pollution emergencies in accordance with N.J.S.A.
26:2C-32.
C. Where the Director or his agent is refused entry or access or is
otherwise impeded or prevented by the owner, occupant or operator
from conducting the inspection of the premises, such person shall be in
violation of this code and subject to the penalties hereunder.
D. Search warrant or access warrant.
(1) The Director may, upon affidavit, apply to the Judge of the
municipality where the facility, equipment or process is located for
a search warrant, setting forth factually the actual conditions and
circumstances that provide a reasonable basis for believing that a
violation of the code may exist on the premises, including one or
more of the following:
(a) That the premises requires inspection according to the cycle
established by the Township for periodic inspections of
premises of the type involved.
(b) That observation of external conditions (smoke, ash, soot,
odors) of the premises and its public areas has resulted in the
belief that violations of this code exist.
(c) Circumstances such as age and design of fuel-burning
equipment and/or system, type of incinerator, particular use of
premises or other factors which render systematic inspection
§ 21-15 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 21-16
10:196
§ 21-17. Violations and penalties.
§ 21-18. Construal of provisions.
§ 21-19. Enforcement authority.
The Air Pollution Control Code of the Township of Old Bridge shall be
enforced by the Director of the Middlesex County Health Department and
authorized agents thereof. All health officers of municipalities not
contracted with the Middlesex County Health Department are hereby
designated officers for purposes of the enforcement of this code.
§ 21-20. Emissions banking procedures.
of such buildings necessary in the interest of public health and
safety.
(2) If the Judge of the municipality is satisfied as to the matter set forth
in the said affidavit, he shall authorize the issuance of a search
warrant permitting access to and inspection of that part of the
premises on which the nuisance or violation may exist.
A. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this code or who
shall fail to comply therewith or with any of the requirements thereof
shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,500 for each violation.
Each day that such violation shall continue shall constitute a separate
offense.33
B. The violation of any section or subsection of this code shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense independent of the violation of any other
section or subsection or of any order issued pursuant to this code.
A. This code is to be liberally construed to effectuate the purpose herein
described. Nothing herein is to be construed as repealing or abridging
the emergency powers of any agency of government except to the
extent expressly set forth herein.
B. This code is promulgated and adopted in accordance with N.J.S.A.
26:2C-8 of P.L. 1954, c. 212 (Title 26:2C-1 to 2C-23); as amended; and
nothing contained herein or any action taken hereunder is to be
interpreted as being in conflict with the New Jersey Air Pollution
Control Act and the New Jersey Administrative Code.34
A. Purpose. The purpose of this rule is to establish procedures for the
creation, storage and transfer of emission reduction credits (ERC's) in
Middlesex County, New Jersey.
33.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
34.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 21-16 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 21-20
10:197
B. Scope. This rule applies to all criteria pollutants regulated by the state
and county agencies.
C. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ACTUAL HISTORICAL EMISSION — The average rate, in tons per year
(or applicable measurement), that the facility actually emitted during
the most representative year in the last five years of operation, as
determined by the state agency.
ADMINISTRATOR — The Administrator of the United States
Environmental Protection Agency or any person authorized to act for
him or her.
ALLOWABLE EMISSIONS — The rate which an air contaminant may
be emitted into the outdoor atmosphere. For the purposes of these
procedures, the allowable emissions shall be based on the maximum
rated capacity of the equipment or on enforceable permit conditions
which limit the operating rate, hours of operation, or both, and on the
most stringent of the following:
BANKING — Procedures established by the county agency which allow
facilities that have created emission-reduction credits and had them
approved by the state agency to store them for further use subject to
rights and conditions specified in these banking procedures and the
Clean Air Act.
BASELINE — The required level of emissions beyond which reduction
must occur in order for an emission-reduction credit to be created.
COUNTY AGENCY — The Middlesex County Planning Board and the
Middlesex County Health Department, which are authorized to
administer these procedures.
CRITERIA POLLUTANT — Ozone (03), total suspended particulate
matter (TS), sulfur oxides measured as sulfur dioxide (SO2), nitrogen
dioxide (NO2), volatile organic substances (VOS) measured as
nonmethane hydrocarbons, or carbon monoxide (CO) or any other air
contaminant for which national ambient air quality standards have been
adopted.
Applicable new source performance standards as set forth in 40
CFR 60.
(1)
Applicable standards for hazardous pollutants as set forth in 40
CFR 61.
(2)
Applicable emission, equipment and operating standards as set
forth in N.J.A.C. 7:27 et seq.
(3)
The maximum emission rate specified as a condition of the last
applicable DEP permit in effect prior to an emission reduction
approved by the state agency for an emission offset or for banking.
(4)
§ 21-20 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 21-20
10:198
EMISSION OFFSET — A legally enforceable reduction, approved by the
state agency, in the rate of actual emissions from an existing facility to
offset the increase in the allowable emissions of air contaminants from
a new or altered facility.
EMISSION-REDUCTION CREDIT (ERC) — A surplus emission
reduction approved by the state agency, which represents a permanent
and enforceable decrease in the quantity of a pollutant discharged from
a source below the applicable baseline.
EMPLOYEE COMMUTER TRAVEL CONTROL MEASURES — Methods
used by an employer to reduce the amount of air contaminant emissions
due to travel of his employees getting to and from the place of
employment. Such methods may include but are not limited to ridesharing
programs (car-pooling or van-pooling), preferential parking
programs, employee incentives to use mass transportation, staggered
work hours and vehicle emission-control programs.
EMPLOYER BUSINESS TRAVEL CONTROL MEASURES — Methods
used by an employer to reduce the amount of air contaminant emissions
due to company-related travel. Such methods may include but are not
limited to ride-sharing programs, optimization of delivery schedules,
staggered work hours, vehicle emission-control programs, alternative
fuel and alternative propulsion systems.
FACILITY — The combination of all structures, buildings, equipment
and other operations located on one or more contiguous or adjacent
properties owned or operated by the same person.
FUGITIVE EMISSION — Any emission of an air contaminant into the
open air other than through any stack, chimney, conduit, flue or other
device.
MINIMUM OFFSET RATIO — The minimum acceptable ratio of
emission offsets from an existing facility to increase in allowable
emissions from a new or altered facility.
PERSON — Includes associations, authorities, companies, corporations,
firms, joint-stock companies, partnerships, societies, as well as
individuals, and shall also include all political subdivisions of this state
and/or any agencies or instrumentalities thereof.
POINT SOURCE — Any stationary, discernible, confined and discrete
conveyance or conduit, including but not limited to any stack, chimney,
duct, exhaust, ventilation, flue, breather or pressure-release valve, so
arranged or designed as to conduct an effluent into the outdoor air.
REASONABLE AVAILABLE CONTROL TECHNOLOGY (RACT) — The
lowest emission limit that a particular course is capable of meeting
by the application of control technology that is reasonably available,
considering technological and economic feasibility.
REASONABLE FURTHER PROGRESS — Annual incremental reductions
in emissions to the outdoor atmosphere of a criteria pollutant which are
sufficient, in the judgment of the state agency, to provide for attainment
§ 21-20 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 21-20
10:199
of the National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS), as required by
the Clean Air Act, as amended August 1977 (42 U.S.C. § 7401 et seq.).
REGISTRY — Refers to the public recordkeeping system maintained by
the county for recording the creation and transfer of emission-reduction
credits.
SOURCE OPERATION — Any manufacturing process or any identifiable
part thereof emitting an air contaminant into the outdoor atmosphere
through one or more stacks or chimneys.
STATE AGENCY — The New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection (DEP).
STATE IMPLEMENTATION PLAN (SIP) — The state's current plan, as
required by 42 U.S.C. § 7410, for achieving Clean Air Act objectives.
D. Administering authority. The Middlesex County Planning Board and the
Middlesex County Health Department are responsible for the
administering of these procedures.
E. Application for creation of emission-reduction credits (ERC's).
(1) A person who owns or operates a source operation at which a
reduction in emissions has occurred or will occur may apply for the
registration of an ERC. An ERC will be registered only after the
reduction has taken place.
(2) Application for the registration of an ERC shall be made on forms
supplied by the county agency. No application to register an ERC
shall be approved unless accompanied by a service fee of $100, to
be paid to the Treasurer, Middlesex County.
(3) Copies of applications will be retained by the county agency, and
the originals will be forwarded to the state agency.
(4) A minimum deposit of one ton per year of emission reductions of a
single criteria pollutant at a facility is required in order to be
eligible to receive emission-reduction credit.
F. Creation of emission-reduction credits (ERC's).
(1) No emission-reduction credit (ERC) may be created unless the
following criteria are met:
(a) The emission level after the reduction shall be incorporated in
a valid state certificate to operate (CTO) and shall be
enforceable by the county agency and the state agency through
either a valid certificate condition or a consent order.
(b) The emission reduction must represent a real and permanent
decrease in emissions below the applicable baseline level.
(c) The baseline used for reviewing emission reductions under this
section shall be actual historical emissions emitted by the
§ 21-20 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 21-20
10:200
facility or the current level of allowable emission, whichever is
lower. If this emissions data is not available, then the baseline
shall be DEP's applicable reasonable available control
technology (RACT) level for the source category.
(2) The provisions of this rule shall not apply to emission reductions
created prior to six months of the effective date of these
procedures, unless documentation of emission reductions has been
received by the state agency pursuant to banking procedures set
forth at N.J.A.C. 7:27 - 18:7. Firms that have submitted
documentation to the state agency pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:27 - 18.7
may apply to the county agency for verification of emissions
reductions within six months of the effective date of these
procedures.
(3) Complete applications to register ERC's must be submitted to the
county agency within six months after the emission reduction
occurs.
(4) All applications to bank emission reductions with the county
agency are subject to approval by the state agency pursuant to
Subpart (a) and Subchapter 18 of Title 7, Chapter 27, of the New
Jersey Administrative Code.
G. Means of creating emission reductions eligible to receive credit.
Emission reductions secured from the following measures are eligible
to receive emission-reduction credit:
(1) Installing air-pollution control equipment which reduces the rate of
actual emissions at a facility.
(2) Applying fugitive emission-control measures which reduce the
actual rate of emissions to less than that of the allowable emissions,
provided that the facility agrees to install post-reduction
monitoring equipment to assure that the reduction is maintained.
(3) Reducing production rate of operating hours to less than the actual
rate or hours for the year immediately preceding such reductions
or for any representative year within five years of the reductions
for volatile organic substances (VOS); winter reductions may not be
used to offset summer increases in allowable emissions.
(4) Establishing and supporting employer business travel-control
measures or employee commuter travel-control measures,
provided that the reductions are quantifiable, permanent, and
enforceable and that they are not already required by the New
Jersey SIP for attaining and maintaining national ambient air
quality standards.
(5) Effecting shutdowns of source operations, provided that:
§ 21-20 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 21-20
10:201
(a) The emission reductions are permanent and enforceable and a
report from the Middlesex County Health Department and/or
the field office of NJDEP, Bureau of Air Pollution Control,
requests that the source operation or entire facility which has
been shut down be deleted from the air pollution emissions
data system (APEDS).
(b) The emission reductions are not already included in New
Jersey's SIP demonstration for attaining and maintaining the
national ambient air quality standards.
(c) The person who owns or operates a facility such as a drycleaning
establishment or a service station at which the
emission reduction is created demonstrates that the reduction
will not be negated by countervailing increases of the same
criteria pollutants from the same type of facilities in the area.
(d) Written notice of the intent to shut down source operations
must be received by the county agency prior to the shutdown
and removal of equipment.
(e) Owners or operators of source operations that achieve
emission reductions from shutdowns shall receive credit for
50% of the registered emission reductions certified by the
county agency and approved by the state agency. The
remaining 50% of the registered emission-reduction credit
shall be owned by the county agency to be allocated to air
quality or economic development, as determined by the Board
of Chosen Freeholders with the advice of the Middlesex County
Air Quality Planning Committee. This section shall not affect
emission reductions for which firms file documentation to the
state agency, pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:27 - 18:7, prior to the
effective date of these banking procedures.
(f) The baseline used for reviewing emission reductions under this
section shall be actual historical emissions emitted by the
facility or the current level of allowable emissions, whichever
is lower. If this emissions data is not available, then the
baseline shall be DEP's applicable reasonable available control
technology (RACT) level for the source category.
H. Approval and verification of credits; respective responsibilities of the
state and county agencies.
(1) The county agency shall verify that emission reductions have
occurred at the applicant's facility and confirm information
submitted by the applicant regarding the nature and quantity of
those reductions in accordance with procedures required by the
state agency.
(2) To verify emission reductions, the county agency may recommend
to the state agency source tests or any other acceptable means of
§ 21-20 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 21-20
10:202
measurement. The applicant must follow state-approved
procedures involving who performs the tests, how they are to be
performed and how they are to be financed.
(3) All applications to bank emission reductions with the county
agency are subject to inspection/validation, which may be
performed by the county or state agency. Where inspection/
validation is provided by the county, an inspection/validation fee of
$100 shall be paid to the Treasurer, Middlesex County, for each
source operation associated with the source operation's emissionreduction
application, not to exceed any fee established by the
state. Inspection/validation performed by the state shall be subject
to the state fee schedule. No certificate of registration shall be
issued under Subsection I of this section until such inspection/
validation fee has been paid.
(4) Within 30 days of receipt of the application form and service fee,
the county agency shall verify the emission reduction and shall
notify the applicant of its recommendation to the state agency on
the eligibility of the emission reduction for credit.
(5) Once approved by the state agency and incorporated into the
source operating certificates, the emission reduction shall become
an enforceable operating restriction for the facility.
I. Registration procedures.
(1) ERC's may be used at the time they are registered or may be stored
in the county bank for future transfer or use.
J. Conditions affecting the ownership of emission-reduction credits.
(1) If the banked ERC's are not used within 10 years, they will revert to
the ownership of the county agency. The Board of Chosen
Freeholders or its designated agent shall determine whether the
unused ERC will be used to produce an air quality benefit for the
region or used for economic development.
(2) Registered ERC's shall be discounted by 5% at the time of deposit
in the bank, except as set forth in § 21-20G(5)(e). The 5% of the
banked ERC's will be deemed owned by the county agency, to be
used to produce an air quality benefit to economic development, as
the Board of Chosen Freeholders or its designated agent shall
determine. This section shall not affect emission reductions for
which firms file applications to the state agency pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 7:27 - 18.7 prior to the effective date of these banking
procedures.
(3) Registered ERC's shall be discounted when the state adopts a
control requirement which mandates greater emission reductions
of the same pollutant from sources in the same industrial category.
The reduction shall equal the difference between the original
§ 21-20 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 21-20
10:203
baseline emissions and the new baseline emissions for source
operation. For banked credits, other than VOS, source-specific
modeling may be required to allocate the discount necessary to
demonstrate attainment.
(4) If new information becomes available to the county or state agency
which results in more accurate estimates of emission-reduction
credits stored in the emissions banking system, the county agency
shall adjust the value of the affected ERC's accordingly, subject to
procedures for public hearing as required by the New Jersey
Administrative Code.
(5) If a person who registers an ERC fails to comply with the
requirements attendant to its creation, the county agency may
adjust the value of the ERC accordingly. Once an ERC is transferred
to a source other than the one that created it, any violation of the
conditions under which the ERC is created will result in
enforcement against the source producing the emission reduction
and not the source using the ERC.
(6) Once an ERC is applied at a facility, the facility will be subject to all
future additional control requirements imposed by the
Administrator or the state agency.
K. Use and transfer of emission-reduction credits; procedural
requirements.
(1) An ERC may be used or transferred, in whole or in part, by any
means of conveyance permitted by the laws of New Jersey, in
accordance with the following procedures:
(a) Applications to use or transfer ERC's shall be made on forms
provided by the county agency.
(b) The application to use or transfer ERC's shall be accompanied
by a fee of $100.
(c) No use or transfer of an ERC shall be effective until the county
and state agencies are notified thereof, in writing, confirm
receipt of notice and approve the use or transfer.
(d) Before an ERC may be used or transferred, the new owner
must obtain a new or revised certificate to operate from the
state agency reflecting the new emission limit resulting from
the application of the ERC's.
(2) Emission-reduction credits created in Middlesex County pursuant
to these banking procedures shall be used or transferred in
conformance with applicable state regulations. An existing facility
utilizing ERC's to come into compliance with state regulations shall
only utilize ERC's generated under § 21-20G(1), (2) and (4). Any
§ 21-20 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 21-20
10:204
Chapter 26
ALARMS AND ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 108.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 185.
Multiple dwellings — See Ch. 290.
Noise — See Ch. 300.
banked ERC's may be used or transferred as offsets for new source
growth.
L. Internal county procedures for notifying the state of action taken with
regard to emission-reduction credits in the county. The county agency
will transmit copies of the following documents to the state agency:
(1) Copies of applications for registration or transfer of ERC's received
by the county agency and all other accompanying information
received by it from the applicant.
(2) Recommendations for state agency action to be taken with regard
to applications for emission-reduction credit and the
documentation supporting the recommendations.
(3) Copies of any documents prepared by the county agency in
verifying that an emission reduction has occurred and supporting
its recommendation to the Commissioner on the issue of the
emission reduction's approval.
(4) Any other public notice related to proposed county agency action
with respect to any banked ERC's.
§ 21-20 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 21-20
10:205

ARTICLE I
Smoke Detectors
[Adopted 9-15-1980 by Ord. No. D-317 (Sec. 4-25 of the 1973
Revised General Ordinances)]
§ 26-1. Requirements for residential units.
§ 26-2. Certificates of occupancy.
No certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the Construction Official
unless the applicant shall have first complied with all the conditions of this
article.
A. Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum of one electric or batteryoperated
smoke detector device for each sleeping area. Any such
detector shall bear a seal, tested and listed by an approved rating
organization, and shall comply in design to all applicable state, federal
or industrial requirements. Smoke detectors shall be capable of being
installed and maintained by the person responsible for the occupancy of
the family dwelling unit. They shall consist of an assembly
incorporating the detector, control equipment and the alarm-sounding
device in one unit. They shall have a power supply consisting of a
monitored battery or a cord connection to an electrical receptacle
which is fitted with a plug restrainer device. The plug-in receptacle
shall not be controlled by any switch other than that of the main power
supply. Two or more single-station smoke detector assemblies may be
interconnected so that actuation of one causes all integral or separate
audible alarms to operate.
B. No residential unit shall be sold, rented or occupied unless and until the
residential unit has been brought into compliance with this article.
C. The Tax Collector of the Township of Old Bridge shall provide to each
person requesting a tax search from his or her office a statement calling
attention to the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code with respect to
smoke detectors. The Tax Collector shall further inform the recipient of
each and every tax search that the seller of real estate located in a
residential zone is required by the Fire Prevention Code to provide a
certification to the Township of Old Bridge certifying his or her
compliance with this article.
D. The making and submission of a willfully false certification, pursuant to
this article, shall be punishable by the penalties set forth in Chapter 1,
Article II, Penalty, and enforceable within the Municipal Court of the
Township of Old Bridge by the Fire Official of the Township.35
35.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 26-1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 26-3
10:207
§ 26-3. Certificates of continued use.
The issuance of a certificate of continued use shall constitute evidence of
compliance with the terms of this article.
§ 26-4. Definitions.
Whenever the following terms are used in the Fire Prevention Code, they
shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
APPROVED RATING ORGANIZATION — Any of the following:
CONSTRUCTION OFFICIAL — A qualified person appointed by the
municipal appointing authority or the Commissioner pursuant to the Act36
and the regulations to enforce and administer the regulations within the
jurisdiction of the enforcing agency.
FIRE PROTECTION SUBCODE OFFICIAL — The Fire Inspector and the
Fire Protection Subcode Official prescribed by the Uniform Construction
Code.37[Amended 1-3-1989 by Ord. No. 70-88]
MISDEMEANOR — Shall be construed to mean "a violation of this article"
and shall not be construed as an attempt to constitute such offense a
misdemeanor as the same is defined by the law of the State of New Jersey.
§ 26-5. Modifications. [Amended 1-3-1989 by Ord. No. 70-88]
The Fire Protection Subcode Official, with the advice of the Construction
Official, shall have power to modify any of the provisions of the Fire
Prevention Code upon application therefor, in writing, by the owner or
lessee or his duly authorized agent when there are practical difficulties in
the way of carrying out the strict letter of the Code, provided that, in any
such event, the spirit of the Code shall be observed, public safety secured
and substantial justice done, provided that any such modification shall be in
writing, a copy of which shall be forwarded to the appropriate Fire Official.
A. Underwriters' Testing Laboratories.
B. Factory Mutual Research Corporation.
C. National Bureau of Standards.
D. NFPA No. 74, 1975.
36.Editor's Note: "The Act" refers to the Uniform Construction Code Act. See N.J.S.A.
52:27D-119 et seq.
37.Editor's Note: See Ch. 108, Construction Codes, Uniform, and Ch. 185, Fire Prevention, of
the Code of the Township of Old Bridge.
§ 26-3 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 26-5
10:208
ARTICLE II
Alarm Systems
[Adopted 7-21-1986 by Ord. No. 32-86 (Sec. 5-14 of the 1973
Revised General Ordinances)]
§ 26-6. Findings and declarations.
The Township Council does hereby find and declare that:
§ 26-7. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide standards and regulations for
various types of local alarms, burglar, fire and other emergency alarm
devices, whether by direct line, telephone or other means, actuating devices
at the Old Bridge Police Headquarters requiring a response by the Police
Department or Fire Department.
§ 26-8. Scope.
The provisions of this article shall apply to any person, other than the
municipality, who operates, maintains or owns any alarm device or local
alarm designed to summon the Police or Fire Department to any location in
response to any type of alarm signal. The terms of this article shall in no
way prohibit alarm companies from providing services by private sources to
other offices within or without the Township of Old Bridge so long as such
activity is not connected to the alarm panel. Any person having premises
protected by a local alarm shall be responsible for the registration thereof.
A. The occupants of numerous residential, commercial and industrial
establishments in the Township of Old Bridge have found it desirable to
make provision for the installation, upon their premises, at their own
cost and expense, of alarm systems for emergencies, such as burglar,
fire and like alarms.
B. There is a growing number of alarm companies that sell or lease such
alarm systems entering into contracts with such occupants for the
installation, operation and maintenance of such alarm systems and
providing for the connection to the individual alarm system so installed
by them to a central location or to an alarm panel installed in the
Township of Old Bridge Department of Police.38
C. The number of private enterprises engaged in the alarm business, each
with its own system and equipment, has resulted in conditions that, if
not remedied, will lead to an unnecessary drain on the manpower, time,
space facilities and finances of the Township of Old Bridge and its Police
Department and the deterioration of the quality of service to persons
subscribing to the alarm services and inequities among the alarm
businesses in the Township of Old Bridge.39
38.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
39.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 26-6 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 26-9
10:209
§ 26-9. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM DEVICE — Any type of alarm system actuating equipment in the
alarm panel or alarm register providing warning of intrusion, fire, smoke,
flood or other peril.
ALARM PANEL — That component installed in the console of the law
enforcement building containing alarm indications and designations.
ALARM SYSTEM — The installation in one or more buildings of one or
more devices or local alarms for the express purpose of giving visual or
audible warning, or both, of an emergency such as burglary, intrusion, fire
or smoke.
CENTRAL OFFICE ALARM — Any alarm device which, when activated,
transmits a signal to a remote location indicating an alarm condition. This
type of alarm may or may not have a local bell, depending on its design.
COMMUNICATIONS CONSOLE — The console or control panel of devices
giving visual or audio indications, or both, and general communications
located within the confines of the Department of Police.40
DIAL ALARM — That type of device that employs an automatic dialing
system precoded to connect with a special telephone in the law enforcement
building rather than to the alarm panel.
DIRECT ALARM CONNECTION — Any alarm device which, when activated,
transmits a signal directly to the alarm panel at police headquarters via
telephone lease lines.
FALSE ALARM — The actuation of an alarm system by causes other than
those to which the alarm system was designed or intended to respond.
Testing of the alarm system without prior approval of the Department of
Police shall be considered a "false alarm."41
LICENSEE — The person obtaining the license to install, operate and
maintain the alarm panel at the Old Bridge Police Headquarters.
LOCAL ALARM — Any alarm device which, when activated, sounds a
warning bell at the location of the alarmed premises and does not transmit
any type of signal to another location.
PERMITTEE — Any person owning or leasing an alarm device of any type
within the Township of Old Bridge.
PERSON — Includes any natural person, partnership, corporation or
association or any other legal entity.
§ 26-10. Alarm panel licensee.
40.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
41.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 26-9 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 26-10
10:210
§ 26-11. Issuance of permits.
A. There is hereby established an alarm panel licensee which will be
granted a license upon the recommendation of the Township Council.
B. Any such licensee shall have exclusive use and control of the alarm
panel which shall be installed in the communications console in the law
enforcement building in accordance with the specifications, except for
use by the Police Department of the Township of Old Bridge. Such
licensee shall be responsible, at no cost to the Township of Old Bridge,
for the furnishing, installing, operating and maintaining of said panel
containing equipment and being of a design approved by the Director of
Police of the Township of Old Bridge. Said licensee shall locate said
panel, if necessary, under the supervision of the Director of Police at no
cost to the Township of Old Bridge.42
A. Every person desiring to install an alarm system within the Township of
Old Bridge shall make application to the Director of Police for a permit
to do so. The application shall be in such form as the Director of Police
shall prescribe and shall set forth all information required by the
Director to enable him to effectively carry out his public safety
responsibilities. As part of said application, the permittee shall provide
an agreement to release the Township of Old Bridge and its officers,
agents and employees from any and all liability or damages which may
flow or result from any and all actions of said Township of Old Bridge
and its agents, servants or employees and, further, to indemnify and
save harmless the Township of Old Bridge and its officers, agents and
employees for or on account of any acts or omissions directly or
indirectly related to the installation, operation or maintenance of the
alarm panel and alarm register and the connection of the applicant's
alarm system thereto.43
B. Upon compliance by the applicant with all of the provisions of this
section, the Director of Police shall issue to the applicant a permit for
the alarm system applied for.44
C. The permittee shall pay to the Township of Old Bridge a processing fee
of $10 with each alarm application submitted. If any person has an
alarm system in existence at the time of passage of this subsection, said
person shall have until December 31, 1986, to make application to the
Director of Police for a permit for said alarm system without payment of
the processing fee. [Amended 9-2-1986 by Ord. No. 41-8645]
42.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
43.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
44.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
45.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 26-10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 26-11
10:211
D. Every permittee shall, by acceptance of the permit, be deemed as
having consented to the inspection of the alarm system, by appointment
at reasonable hours, by the Director of Police or his designated
representative and shall accept the responsibility for the proper
operation of the alarm system up to and including the line connection, if
any, to the Public Safety Building.46
E. Any person installing or maintaining unauthorized equipment shall be
prosecuted for violation of this section, and each and every day the
equipment is in operation shall be considered a separate violation.
F. Any licensee and/or permittee for an alarm shall provide for a
representative to be on call for emergency repair service. In each case
wherein the alarm is connected directly to police headquarters, the
service shall be provided within eight hours of notification by the Police
Department of any malfunction of any equipment.
G. In the case of false alarms, any person having knowledge thereof shall
immediately notify the Police Department. In addition, in the case of
false alarms, the Director of Police shall cause an investigation to be
made and keep a record of said alarms on file. For such false alarms, the
following penalties shall be imposed: [Amended 9-21-1992 by Ord.
No. 38-9247]
(1) For three false alarms in any given calendar year, a warning may be
issued.
(2) For the fourth and subsequent false alarms in the same calendar
year, an administrative charge may be made in the amount of $50
for each such false alarm.
(3) Where the investigation of the Police Department discloses
continued abuse of the privilege of connection to the alarm panel,
the Director of Police reserves the right to order a disconnection
from the alarm panel for a limited or permanent time, provided that
no such permit shall be revoked or suspended without giving the
permittee an opportunity to show cause before the Director of
Police why such action should not be taken.
(4) A person shall be excused from liability for a false alarm if it can be
demonstrated to the investigating officer or the court that the
alarm occurred because of telephone line interference or other
similar reason beyond the control of the licensee and/or permittee.
Failure to make necessary repairs to an alarm system shall not be
an adequate excuse for a false alarm, nor shall the negligence of
employees in setting or disarming the system be considered an
adequate excuse for false alarms.
46.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
47.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 26-11 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 26-11
10:212
§ 26-12. Direct alarm connections to alarm panel at police
headquarters.
§ 26-13. Central office alarm systems and local on-site alarm
systems.
§ 26-14. Dial alarms.
H. Reasons for rejection of application are a prior history of excessive false
alarms and/or failure to pay fees or charges.
I. An alarm system within the Township of Old Bridge may be equipped
with a bell in accordance with § 26-12C. Nothing in this article shall
prohibit the use of a siren or horn, in compliance with § 26-12C,
installed prior to the effective date of this article.
A. Applicants desiring to connect directly to the alarm panel at police
headquarters shall be accommodated on a first-come, first-serve basis.
Commercial or residential alarms may be accepted.
B. An additional fee for this service must be paid to the alarm panel
licensee at the following rates: Connection, $70; monthly maintenance,
$7; high security line connection, $125; and monthly maintenance, $7.
C. If this system is equipped with a local bell, it shall have a time-relay or
other device which will limit the operation of said bell to not more than
15 minutes.
A. All alarm systems which are connected directly to a central office
operated by various alarm companies or local, on-site, alarm systems
shall be required to submit an approved application and payment of a
processing fee of $10, made payable to the Township of Old Bridge.
B. All central office alarm systems, when equipped with a local bell, and all
local alarm systems shall have a time-relay or other device which will
limit the operation of said bell to 15 minutes or less.
C. If any person has a central office or local alarm system in existence at
the time of passage of this article, he or she shall have 60 days from the
effective date of this article to register said alarm and pay the
appropriate fee.
A. All dialer-type alarm systems shall be required to submit an approved
application and payment of a processing fee of $10, payable to the
Township of Old Bridge.
B. Dialer alarms must be the type accepted by the Federal
Communications Commission and connected in a manner approved by
Federal Communications Commission regulations.
C. All dial alarms shall be coded to dial a specific number provided by the
Department of Police. In addition, the system must be coded to notify a
§ 26-11 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 26-14
10:213
third party, who shall be named in the registration required by this
article.48
D. All dial alarms shall be capable of being disconnected by the owner to
permit a call to the police switchboard in the event that a false alarm
occurs.
E. Owners of dial alarms shall be governed by the false alarm procedures
and penalties set forth in this article.
F. If any person has a dial alarm system in existence at the time of passage
of this article he shall have 60 days in which to reprogram his
equipment to comply with the terms of this article and to register the
system with the Department of Police and submit the required tendollar
processing fee.49
G. If any dial alarm shall hereafter be found to be in operation without
being registered, the occupant of the building or other person in whose
name the telephone is listed shall be sent a notice, in writing, by the
Director of Police requiring compliance with the terms of this article. If
the occupant or telephone subscriber shall fail to comply within 10 days
after receipt of such notice, he shall be liable to the penalties as set
forth in this article.50
H. The contents of any recorded message from a dial alarm must be
intelligible and in a format approved by the Director of Police. No such
message shall be transmitted more than three times as a result of a
single stimulus of the mechanism. Messages shall not exceed 15
seconds, and the time gap between delivery shall be approximately 10
seconds.51
I. The sensory mechanism of dial alarms shall be adjusted so as to
suppress false indications and not to be actuated by impulses due to
pressure changes in water pipes, short flashes of light, wind, noises,
rattling or vibration of doors or windows or other forces unrelated to
general alarms.
J. All components of dial alarms shall be maintained by the owner in good
repair. When evidence exists that there has been a failure to comply
with the operational requirements of this article, the Director of Police
is then authorized to demand that such device be disconnected until
such time as compliance with such requirements is reestablished.52
48.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
49.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
50.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
51.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
52.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 26-14 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 26-14
10:214
§ 26-15. Limitations of Township obligations.53
The Township of Old Bridge shall be under no duty or obligation to any
permittee hereunder or to any alarm panel licensee hereunder, the alarm
panel and allied equipment being maintained at will and subject to
termination at any time by cancellation of the system by the Director of
Police, provided that 10 days' notice is given, in writing, to said permittees.
§ 26-16. Appeals.54
Whenever, under the provisions of this article, the Director of Police or any
authorized representative he may have designated is empowered to make a
decision with respect to the installation, operation and maintenance of any
alarm equipment or with respect to the issuance or denial of any application
relating thereto, any person aggrieved by said decision may, within 10 days
following said decision, file a written appeal therefrom with the Business
Administrator of the Township of Old Bridge, who shall conduct a hearing
and affirm, modify or reverse the decision appealed from.
§ 26-17. Rule-making authority.
The Township Council may, from time to time, promulgate rules and
regulations supplementing this article in order to provide for recordkeeping
and efficient management of said system.
§ 26-18. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-21-1992 by Ord. No.
38-9255]
Any person, firm or corporation which shall violate any of the terms of this
article, other than the provisions governing false alarms, shall be subject to
the issuance of a summons, returnable in Old Bridge Municipal Court, and
shall be subject to a fine of not less than $25 nor more than the penalties
set forth in Chapter 1, Article II, Penalty.
§ 26-19. Enforcement.56
This article shall be enforced by the Department of Police, Township of Old
Bridge.
K. This device should provide an automatic line seizure feature in the
event that this line is busy with an incoming or outgoing call.
53.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
54.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
55.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
56.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 26-14 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 26-19
10:215

ARTICLE III
Fire Alarm Systems in Older Multi-Unit Residential Dwellings
[Adopted 5-11-1998 by Ord. No. 41-98]
§ 26-20. Purpose.
The Township Council believes that requiring monitored central-stationtype
fire alarms in multi-resident buildings such as apartment buildings
is necessary to protect the public interest. The Township Council believes
that such buildings if constructed under the Uniform Construction Code
(1977 to present) meet minimum acceptable fire safety standards. Buildings
constructed prior to January 1, 1977, should be required to install
monitored alarms as set forth herein.
§ 26-21. Statutory authority.
The requirements imposed by this article are authorized by the Uniform
Fire Safety Act57 and specifically N.J.S.A. 52:27D-202b which permits a
municipality to adopt a more restrictive ordinance dealing with fire safety
than required by the Fire Safety Act or regulations promulgated thereunder
(the Uniform Fire Code of the State of New Jersey).
§ 26-22. Applicability.
§ 26-23. Buildings to have centrally monitored fire alarms.
For all buildings to which this article applies, the following requirement is
imposed:
A. The requirements of this article shall apply to all buildings within the
Township of Old Bridge described in the Uniform Construction Code as
Use Group R-2, including multiple dwellings if such buildings were
constructed in whole or in part prior to January 1, 1977.
B. This article shall not be deemed to apply to any building for which a
construction permit authorizing initial construction was issued
pursuant to the Uniform Construction Code.
C. This article shall not apply to any building conforming in all respects to
the requirements of the Uniform Construction Code Act, P.L. 1975, c.
217 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.).
A. Such buildings shall have fire alarm initiating devices as that term is
defined in NFiPA 72 in all common areas, laundry areas and storage/
maintenance areas.
B. The said fire alarm initiating devices shall be connected to a UL listed
central station.
57.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq.
§ 26-20 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 26-23
10:217
C. The fire alarm initiating devices shall be connected to an on-site system
which is equipped with interior and exterior mounted audible/visual
devices.
D. The installation, testing and maintenance of the fire alarm system
described above shall be in accordance with NFiPA 72.
E. Installation and testing. This subsection provides the requirements for
the installation of an addressable analog alarm and fire detection
systems. The systems shall include, but shall not be limited to, control
panels, alarm initiating and indicating peripheral devices, annunciators
and also all conduit, wire and accessories required to furnish a
complete operational system.
(1) Installers' qualifications. All installations under this article shall be
performed by a licensed New Jersey State alarm contractor or a
licensed electrician. [Amended 1-25-1999 by Ord. No. 4-99]
(2) Standards. The equipment and installations shall comply with the
current provisions of the following standards:
National Fire Protection Association Standards:
NFPA 70 National Electrical Code
NFPA 72 National Fire Alarm Code
Local Authorities Having Jurisdiction:
Township of Old Bridge, New Jersey
Underwriters Laboratories Inc.:
The systems and all components shall be listed by Underwriters
Laboratories Inc. for use in fire protective signaling systems under
the following standards as applicable:
UL 864 UOJZ, APOU Control Units for Fire Protection Signaling
Systems
UL 268 Smoke Detectors for Fire Protective Signaling Systems
UL 268A Smoke Detectors for Duct Applications
UL 521 Heat Detectors for Fire Protective Signaling Systems
UL 464 Audible Signaling Appliances
UL 1971 Visual Signaling Appliances
UL 346 Waterflow Indicators for Fire Protective Signaling
Systems
UL 1481 Power Supplies for Fire Protective Signaling Systems
(3) General requirements.
(a) Design and prints.
§ 26-23 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 26-23
10:218
[1] The contractor shall insure that the system is installed in
accordance with all applicable codes and referenced
standards for the required devices and locations as well as
insuring the system is installed in strict conformance with
the equipment manufacturer's instructions.
[2] No one circuit, signaling line, data line, power supply,
output, input or database shall be loaded to more than
70% of its manufacturer's specified capacity.
[3] Each initiating device must be individually addressable.
Any off normal status must be displayed at the main
control panel or annunciator with an English language
description. Display must be capable for programming a
minimum of 40 characters. All text to be displayed shall be
approved by the Fire Subcode Official. A numeric zone
indication with a printed zone list shall not be acceptable.
[4] System shall be equipped with a UL listed fire alarm digital
communicator installed in compliance with the most
recent edition of NFPA 72.
[5] Alarm reports to the monitoring station shall be of
sufficient detail to isolate an alarm to a specific building
within the complex. The alarm signaling shall be sent to
the UL listed monitoring station upon the activation of any
two alarms in the system.
(4) Plans and specifications required.
(a) The contractor shall be responsible for developing all required
system prints and shop drawings for plan review. All such
prints shall be developed and signed by a licensed fire
protection engineer who has at least four years of current
experience in the design of multiplex networked fire protection
and detection systems or a NICET Level IV or a senior
engineering technician with at least 10 years' experience in the
subfield of fire alarm systems.
(b) The contractor shall submit three complete sets of all
documentation. The documentation shall include the type, size,
rating, style, catalog number, manufacturer's names, photos
and catalog data sheets for all items to be utilized to ensure
compliance with these requirements. This equipment shall be
subject to approval by the Fire Subcode Official. The following
items shall be included in the plan and specification package:
[1] Complete one-line riser diagram showing all equipment
and the size, type and number of all conductors.
[2] A detailed drawing of the fire control panel, including all
proposed module/component locations and panel point-to-
§ 26-23 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 26-23
10:219
point wiring diagram, including all field circuit termination
points.
[3] Calculations to support the size of standby batteries
submitted for the panel.
[4] Calculations for signal circuit and power supply loading
showing the amount of devices per circuit, the alarm
current per circuit and alarm current per power supply
output.
[5] A complete list of all system points to be monitored and
controlled as they relate to the individual fire alarm
control panel's initiating, signaling and control circuits.
[6] Documentation of intent to provide the complete life safety
software in both hardcopy and disk format to the building
owner and the Fire Subcode Official 10 days prior to
checkout for verification of system software routines and
functions.
(5) Acceptance testing.
(a) Upon the completion of the system's installation, a
comprehensive acceptance test shall be conducted by the
contractor. The inspection shall comply with the requirements
of the applicable NFPA standards and in addition a complete
list of each and every initiation, signaling, control, supervisory
and auxiliary device shall be provided to the facility and the
Fire Subcode Official with information as to the location of the
device, the date tested, the status of the device and the circuit
or point as related to the system.
(b) The report shall also include the following:
[1] A total inventory of all system field devices, including the
manufacturer, model number and manufacturer's date
codes for each device.
[2] A complete set of battery test results for the panel:
[a] Charger output voltage under normal conditions.
[b] Charger output current under normal conditions.
[c] Open battery voltage.
[d] Supply voltage under primary power failure.
[e] Support current under primary power failure.
[f] Supply current under primary power failure and a
system alarm that has activated all of the panel's
audible, visual and control circuits.
§ 26-23 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 26-23
10:220
[3] Calculations utilizing the battery test data obtained to
determine a minimum battery capacity of 60 hours under
normal conditions and a five-minute alarm condition.
[4] A system-generated printout of the analog field devices
printed by address.
(c) Provide two copies of the following to the owner's
representative and Fire Subcode Official at the time of final
acceptance testing:
[1] Installation and programming manuals covering all
components utilized on the project.
[2] Point-to-point diagrams of the entire system as installed,
including the number of all conductors with indications of
all terminations and splices.
[3] The final life safety program as loaded into system in both
hard copy and disk format. Program listings must be
generated from actual files loaded into systems.
[4] A complete control panel generated and printed system
sensitivity report shall be provided showing all sensors
with their address, associated sensitivity levels.
[5] A full acceptance test report of inspection shall be
provided. The report shall contain the complete
information as specified above.
(6) Products.
(a) Equipment manufacturers. Acceptable manufacturers shall be
engaged in the manufacture of multiplexed audio/fire panels
for at least seven years and have a fully equipped, factory
trained and authorized service organization.
(b) Approved equipment suppliers. Equipment, materials and
system engineering shall be provided by factory authorized
systems distributors that have on their local office staff a fulltime
NICET Level III or greater certified technician in the fire
protection engineering technology subfield of fire alarm
systems, certified AET or CET. The name or names of the
individuals along with their certification numbers shall be
provided when submitting permits.
(c) General equipment and material requirements. All equipment
shall be new and unused. All components and systems shall be
designed for uninterrupted duty. All equipment, materials,
accessories, as devices, shall be the best suited for the
intended use and shall be provided by a single manufacturer
or, if provided by different manufacturers, recognized as
compatible by both manufacturers.
§ 26-23 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 26-23
10:221
§ 26-24. Deadline to install system.
The owner(s) of any building to which this article is applicable shall comply
with the following minimum timetable and deadlines for the installation of
the fire alarm system described in § 26-23:
(7) Control panel requirements.
(a) Description.
[1] Control panels shall be of a multiplex type providing point
annunciation of all initiating devices.
[2] Communication loop shall be capable of operating on any
type of UL listed FPL, FPLR, FPLP or MC cables. Systems
requiring special wire or home run connection shall not be
acceptable. "T" tapping shall be permitted.
[3] No volatile software or firmware. All system programming
shall be permanently stored in EEPROM memory to ensure
no programming is lost during momentary power loss.
(b) Installation.
[1] Methods and materials.
[2] All wire and terminating hardware and equipment shall be
installed in a workmanlike manner in accordance with
approved manufacturer's instructions. The contractor
shall furnish all conduit, wiring, outlet boxes, junction
boxes, cabinets and similar devices necessary for the
complete installation.
[3] The protection afforded by existing fire alarm systems
shall not be compromised in any way during the
installation of the required system without the contractor's
staff working at the project. Full protecting must be
restored prior to the contractor's personnel leaving the
site for any period of time.
[4] All penetration of floor slabs and fire walls shall be fire
stopped in accordance with applicable fire code.
[5] The equipment shall be installed and fully tested under the
supervision of the Fire Subcode Official. All wiring circuits
shall be demonstrated to be continuous from terminal
point to terminal point with circuit resistance and
capacitance in line with the length of the wire run. All
circuits, including audible circuit shields, shall be free
from grounds.
A. Within six months of the effective date of this article, owner(s) must
have secured a contract for installation of the fire alarm system
§ 26-23 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 26-24
10:222
§ 26-25. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
described in § 26-23 which shall specifically obligate the contractor to
diligently and continuously prosecute all work necessary to complete
installation of the said system.
B. Within 12 months from the effective date of the permit issuance from
Code Enforcement, owner(s) must have the said fire alarm system fully
installed, tested and operational.
C. A copy of the permit and contract must be forwarded to the applicable
local enforcing agency upon issuance.
A. The "local enforcing agency" as that term is defined in N.J.A.C. 5:70 et
seq. (the agency charged with enforcing the Uniform Fire Code) shall
enforce the requirements of this article.58
B. Failure to comply with the provisions of this article shall be punishable
by the penalties set forth in Chapter 1, Article II, Penalty.59
C. Each day during which a failure to comply with this article continues
shall be deemed and considered a separate violation.
58.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
59.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 26-24 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 26-25
10:223
Chapter 30
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Live adult entertainment at premises licensed
to serve alcohol — See Ch. 14, Art. I.
Alcohol in parks and beaches — See Ch. 52,
Art. I.
Drug- and drunk-driving-free zones — See Ch.
124.
§ 26-25 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 26-25
10:224
ARTICLE I
Consumption and Possession
[Adopted by Ord. No. D-109 (Sec. 4-18 of the 1973 Revised General
Ordinances)]
§ 30-1. Consumption and possession in private and public places;
open containers. [Amended 10-20-1980 by Ord. No. D-327]
No person shall consume any alcoholic beverage on any private place
without permission of the owner or person in lawful possession or joint
possession thereof or within or outside any motor vehicle on any public
street or public place other than a place licensed to sell alcoholic beverages
and dispense alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises in the
Township. Nor shall any person have in his possession or in the joint
possession with another or others any open container containing alcoholic
beverages at, within or outside any motor vehicle or on any public street
or public place other than a place licensed to sell alcoholic beverages and
dispense alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises.60
60.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 4-18.2, Special waivers, which previously followed this section,
was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 30-1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 30-1
10:225

ARTICLE II
Licensing, Sale and Transportation61
[Adopted as Ch. VI of the 1973 Revised General Ordinances]
§ 30-2. Purpose.
This article is enacted to regulate the sale and transportation of alcoholic
beverages in the Township of Old Bridge in accordance with the provisions
of an act of the Legislature of the State of New Jersey entitled "An Act
Concerning Alcoholic Beverages," comprising Chapter 436 of the Laws of
1933, its supplements and amendments, and also comprising N.J.S.A. 33:1-1
et seq. and in accordance with the rules and regulations of the State
Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 30-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, words and phrases herein shall have the
same meanings as in N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq. and the rules and regulations of
the Director of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 30-4. Statutory regulations.
All applications for licenses, all licenses issued and all proceedings under
this article shall be in accordance with the Act, rules and regulations
referred to in § 30-2 and all other applicable laws of the State of New Jersey
or the United States.
§ 30-5. Issuing authority.
All licenses required by this article shall be issued by the Township Council,
which shall also administer the provisions of this article.
§ 30-6. License required.
No person shall sell or distribute alcoholic beverages within the Township
without having obtained a license in accordance with the Act referred to in
§ 30-2 and the provisions of this article.
§ 30-7. License fees; maximum number. [Amended 2-20-1979 by
Ord. No. D-259]
A. The annual license fees and maximum type and number of licenses for
the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages in the Township shall be
as follows: [Amended 3-16-1981 by Ord. No. 9-81; 3-16-1987 by
Ord. No. 12-87; 5-18-1987 by Ord. No. 20-87; 2-11-1993 by Ord.
No. 10-93; 8-28-1995 by Ord. No. 46-95; 6-23-1997 by Ord. No.
61.Editor's Note: Laws concerning alcoholic beverage control are contained in Title 33 of the
New Jersey Revised Statutes. All ordinances must be in conformity with these provisions
and approved by the Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control, N.J.S.A. 33:1-40. State law
prescribes the types of licenses that may be issued, their number, permissible license fees
and the regulation of licensed premises, N.J.S.A. 33:1-40.
§ 30-2 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 30-7
10:227
§ 30-8. Limitations on transfers and issuance of new licenses.
23-97; 8-16-1999 by Ord. No. 23-99; 4-9-2001 by Ord. No. 15-01;
7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 34-02; 1-13-2003 by Ord. No. 01-03;
9-8-2003 by Ord. No. 42-03; 1-9-2006 by Ord. No. 38-2005;
3-12-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-05]
Class of License
Annual License
Fee Number of Licenses
Plenary retail
consumption license
$2,500 1 per 3,000 residents
Plenary retail distribution
license
$2,500 1 per 7,500 residents
Club license $188 N/A
B. The provisions of this section with respect to the limitation on the
number of licenses shall not apply to the renewal or transfer of licenses
presently issued.
C. Township fees for transfers are nonrefundable. [Added 1-9-2006 by
Ord. No. 38-2005]
A. No new licenses or transfers of existing plenary retail distribution
licenses, plenary retail consumption licenses, seasonal consumption
licenses or limited distribution licenses for the sale of alcoholic
beverages shall hereafter be issued for or transferred to premises
within 2,000 feet of premises for which a plenary retail distribution
license, plenary retail consumption license, seasonal consumption
license or limited distribution license for the sale of alcoholic beverages
is outstanding, provided that this limitation shall not prevent the
renewal or person-to-person transfer of a license for premises licensed
prior to July 11, 1960. Nothing herein shall be deemed to prevent
transfer of a license to within 750 feet of the premises licensed prior to
July 11, 1960. The above issuance and transfer restriction shall not
apply to premises located in nonresidential zoning districts with
frontage of 100 feet or more along State Highways 9, 18, 34 and 35.
[Amended 2-11-1993 by Ord. No. 10-93; 6-23-1997 by Ord. No.
24-97]
B. The first distance hereinabove set forth shall be measured in the normal
way that a pedestrian would properly walk from the nearest entrance of
licensed premises to the nearest entrance of the premises sought to be
licensed.
C. The second distance hereinabove set forth shall be measured in the
normal way that a pedestrian would properly walk from the nearest
entrance of the premises from which transfer is sought to the nearest
entrance of the premises to which transfer is sought.
§ 30-7 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 30-8
10:228
§ 30-9. Hours of sale. [Amended 12-27-1984 by Ord. No. 39-84]
No licensee shall sell, serve, deliver or allow, permit or suffer the sale,
service or delivery of any alcoholic beverage or allow the consumption
of any alcoholic beverage on the licensed premises between the hours of
2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m., except for Saturday, Sunday and New Year's Day,
wherein the hours shall be between 3:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.
§ 30-10. Sales to certain persons.
No licensee or employee of a licensee shall sell, serve or deliver, directly
or indirectly, any alcoholic beverages to any habitual drunkard, intoxicated
person or minor, nor permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages on any
licensed premises by any of the above-named classes of persons or permit
any such persons to congregate in or about the licensed premises.
§ 30-11. Minors.
D. No new licenses or transfers of existing licenses shall hereafter be
issued or transferred to premises within 750 feet of a private or public
school, church, synagogue or place of worship. [Added 2-21-1981 by
Ord. No. 3-81]
E. For special reasons shown, the Township Council may grant a variance
to allow departure from the above regulations but only by affirmative
vote of at least 2/3 of the full authorized membership of the Council.
Notice of hearing concerning the issuance or transfer shall be given by
certified mail, return receipt requested, to all owners of licensed
premises within 2,000 feet in all directions of the premises which is the
subject of such hearing. [Added 6-3-1985 by Ord. No. 25-85]
F. No new license or transfer of existing license shall hereafter be issued
or transferred unless a surveillance system is installed and maintained
which covers the interior of the bar or establishment and also covers
the front and rear exits and parking lot. The surveillance system shall
be digital and run continuously with the capacity to retain the images
for seven days. Upon request, the licensee shall produce any requested
surveillance to the police within 24 hours. [Added 11-14-2011 by
Ord. No. 2011-16]
A. Presence. No minor shall be allowed in any premises where alcoholic
beverages are sold or served for consumption on the premises unless
accompanied by his parent or guardian.
B. Purchase of alcoholic beverages by a minor. No minor shall purchase,
attempt to purchase or have another purchase for him any alcoholic
beverage on any premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages.
C. Purchase of alcoholic beverages for a minor. No person shall purchase
or attempt to purchase alcoholic beverages for a minor. It shall be
unlawful for any person to induce or attempt to induce any licensee or
§ 30-8 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 30-11
10:229
§ 30-12. Revocation of licenses.
any employee of a licensee to sell, serve or deliver alcoholic beverages
to a minor.
D. Misstating age. No person shall misrepresent his age or the age of
another person for the purpose of inducing any licensee or his employee
to sell, serve or deliver any alcoholic beverage to a person under 21
years or to permit a person under 21 years to remain on any premises in
violation of Subsection A. [Amended 1-9-2006 by Ord. No. 38-2005]
E. Presumption. Any parent or guardian of a minor who accompanies such
minor into a premises in which alcoholic beverages are served and who
permits the minor to possess or consume alcoholic beverages shall be
presumed to have misrepresented the age of the minor.
F. Possession. No minor shall possess, serve, sell or consume any alcoholic
beverage in any public place within the Township.
A. Any license issued under this article may be suspended or revoked for
violation of any of the provisions of this article or any provision of any
applicable statute or any of the rules or regulations of the State
Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
B. Proceedings for suspension or revocation shall be in accordance with
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 33:1-31 by service of a five-day notice of
charges preferred against the licensee and affording a reasonable
opportunity for hearing.
C. Suspension or revocation of a license shall be in addition to any other
penalty which may be imposed for a violation of this article.62
62.Editor's Note: Former Sec. 6-7, Identification of liquor establishment personnel, added
9-2-1986 by Ord. No. 40-86, which previously followed this section, was repealed
11-17-1986 by Ord. No. 49-86.
§ 30-11 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 30-12
10:230
ARTICLE III
Possession or Consumption on Private Property by Underage
Persons
[Adopted during codification (upon enactment, adoption
information will be inserted here)]
§ 30-13. Underaged possession or consumption.
It shall be unlawful for any person under the legal age to, without legal
authority, knowingly possess or knowingly consume an alcoholic beverage
on private property.
§ 30-14. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth:
GUARDIAN — A person who has qualified as a guardian of the underaged
person pursuant to testamentary or court appointment.
RELATIVE — The underaged person's grandparent, aunt or uncle, sibling or
any other person related by blood or affinity.
§ 30-15. Violations and penalties; suspension of driving privileges.
A. Any person violating the provisions of this article shall, in accordance
with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-1.2, be punished by a fine of $250
for a first offense and $350 for any subsequent offense.
B. In addition to the fine authorized for this offense, the court may
suspend or postpone for six months the driving privileges of the
defendant. Upon the conviction of any person and the suspension or
postponement of that person's driver's license, the court shall forward a
report to the Division of Motor Vehicles stating the first and last day of
the suspension or postponement period imposed by the court pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:48-1.2. If a person at the time of the imposition of
sentence is less than 17 years of age, the period of license
postponement, including a suspension or postponement of the privilege
of operating a motorized bicycle, shall commence on the day the
sentence is imposed and shall run for a period of six months after the
person reaches the age of 17 years.
C. If a person at the time of the imposition of a sentence has a valid
driver's license issued by this state, the court shall immediately collect
the license and forward it to the Division of Motor Vehicles along with
the report. If for any reason the license cannot be collected, the court
shall include in the report the complete name, address, date of birth,
eye color and the sex of the person, as well as the first and last date of
the license suspension period imposed by the court.
D. The court shall inform the person orally and in writing that if the person
is convicted of operating a motor vehicle during the period of license
suspension or postponement, the person shall be subject to the
§ 30-13 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 30-15
10:231
§ 30-16. Exceptions.
penalties set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:3-40. A person shall be required to
acknowledge receipt of written notice in writing. Failure to receive
a written notice shall not be a defense to a subsequent charge of a
violation of N.J.S.A. 39:3-40.
E. If a person convicted under this article is not a New Jersey resident, the
court shall suspend or postpone, as appropriate, the nonresidential
driving privilege of the person based on the age of the person and
submit it to the Division of Motor Vehicles on the required report. The
court shall not collect the license of a nonresident convicted under this
article. Upon receipt of a report from the court, the Division of Motor
Vehicles shall notify the appropriate officials in the licensing
jurisdiction of the suspension or postponement.
A. Nothing contained in this article is intended, nor shall it be construed,
as prohibiting an underaged person from consuming or possessing an
alcoholic beverage in connection with a religious observance, ceremony
or rite or consuming or possessing an alcoholic beverage in the
presence of and with the permission of a parent, guardian or relative
who has attained the legal age to purchase and consume alcoholic
beverages.
B. Nothing contained in this article is intended nor shall it be construed as
prohibiting possession of alcoholic beverages by any such person while
actually engaged in the performance of employment by a person who is
licensed under Title 33 of the Revised Statutes or while actively
engaged in the preparation of food while enrolled in a culinary arts or a
hotel management program at a county vocational school or postsecondary
educational institution; provided, however, that this article
shall not be construed to preclude the imposition of a penalty under this
article, N.J.S.A. 33:1-81 or any other section of law against a person who
is convicted of unlawful alcoholic beverage activity on or at premises
licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages.
§ 30-15 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 30-16
10:232
Chapter 32
ALLIANCE COMMITTEE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 5.
§ 32-1. Reestablishment.
The Old Bridge Municipal Alliance Committee ("Alliance Committee") is
hereby reestablished.
§ 32-2. Membership.
§ 32-3. Purposes.
The purposes of the Alliance Committee are to:
A. The membership of the Alliance Committee shall include broad
representation of no fewer than 20 persons from the Township.
B. Membership may include, but shall not be limited to: a Mayoral
representative; the Chief of Police or his/her representative; the
President of the School Board or his/her representative; the
Superintendent of Schools or his/her representative; a student
assistance coordinator; a representative from each of the Parent
Teacher Associations; a representative of the Chamber of Commerce,
including, but not limited to, local business and industry
representatives; a Municipal Court judge or a representative of the
court system; representatives of local civic associations;
representatives of local mental health agencies and local treatment and
prevention providers; a representative of local religious groups; and
private citizens, including youth representatives and youth and adults
recovering from drug and/or alcoholic abuse.
C. Members shall be appointed by the Mayor for alternately arranged
terms of one to three years. The Mayor shall approve of the
Chairperson, Vice Chairperson and Secretary selected by the Alliance
Committee from among its members each to serve for one calendar
year.
D. Regular meetings shall be held with a calendar of meetings established
in advance. A quorum consisting of a majority of the full Alliance
Committee is required for decisions. Minutes shall be taken to serve as
a record.
E. Standing and ad hoc committees may be established as needed.
F. By-laws shall be maintained and updated as needed.
§ 30-16 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 32-3
10:233
§ 32-4. Functions.
The functions of the Alliance Committee shall include, but not be limited to:
A. Organize and coordinate efforts involving schools, law enforcement,
business groups and other community organizations for the purpose of
reducing alcoholism and drug abuse.
B. In cooperation with local school districts, develop comprehensive and
effective alcoholism and drug abuse education programs in grades
Kindergarten through 12.
C. In cooperation with local school districts, develop procedures for the
intervention, treatment-referral and discipline of students abusing
alcohol and drugs.
D. Develop comprehensive alcoholism and drug abuse education, support
and outreach efforts for parents in the community.
E. Develop comprehensive alcoholism and drug abuse community
awareness programs.
A. Creating a network of community leaders, private citizens, and
representatives from public and private human service agencies who
are dedicated to a comprehensive and coordinated effort to promote
and support drug alcohol prevention and education programs and
related activities with an emphasis on youth.
B. Conducting an assessment of the Township to determine the needs of
the Township in relation to alcoholism and drug abuse issues.
C. Identifying existing efforts and services acting to reduce alcoholism and
drug abuse.
D. Coordinating projects within the Township to avoid fragmentation and
duplication.
E. Developing programs and/or projects to be implemented at the
Township level or participate in regionally developed programs that
accomplish the purpose of the Alliance Committee.
F. Assisting the Township in acquiring funds for Alliance programs.
G. Cooperating with the Governor's Council on Alcoholism and Drug
Abuse and the County Local Advisory Committee on Alcoholism and
Drug Abuse Alliance Steering Subcommittee to provide municipal data,
reports or other information which may be required for the County
Annual Alliance Plan or needed to assist the Alliance effort.
H. Reporting to the Old Bridge Township Council on a quarter-annual
basis.
§ 32-3 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 32-5
10:234
§ 32-5. Relationships with other groups.
Since cooperative relationships are necessary to effectively develop the
Alliance Committee, in order to maximize coordination and avoid
duplication of efforts, and to assure effective use of resources including
volunteers and funds, the Alliance Committee shall determine how to best
work with and/or join municipal groups such as drug and alcohol task
forces, municipal youth services commissions, youth task forces or other
groups compatible with the purposes and functions of the Alliance
Committee. These interrelationships may involve shared memberships, joint
subcommittees or joined groups.
§ 32-6. Application for DEDR funds.
The Alliance Committee may apply for mandatory Drug Enforcement and
Demand Reduction (DEDR) funds through the request for proposal process
initiated annually through the County Local Advisory Committee on
Alcoholism and Drug Abuse Alliance Steering Subcommittee.
§ 32-7. Teen/Youth Advisory Committee.
Chapter 35
A. The Old Bridge Township Council hereby finds that it should establish a
Youth Teen Alliance Committee in order to address requests by Old
Bridge Township teens for organized supervised drug-and-alcohol-free
activities within Old Bridge Township and in order to provide a
continuity of activities and programs from year to year as well as to
provide an adult base of support and guidance for teen activities
throughout the Township.
B. The functions of the Teen Alliance Committee shall include, but not be
limited to:
(1) Holding monthly meetings to assess the needs of the youth of the
Township.
(2) Planning, and implementing supervised, organized drug-andalcohol-
free activities and programs to meet the needs of the youth
of the Township.
(3) Involving a cross-section of the high school-aged youth from the
entire Township population in the planning and implementation of
the activities of the Teen Alliance Committee.
(4) Promoting positive interaction between students and all segments
of the Township through social service activities.
(5) Providing a clearing house for ideas, inspiration and action to all
segments of the Township's population in an effort to make the
teens of the Township more involved in drug/alcohol/other drugs
abuse prevention efforts.
§ 32-5 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 32-7
10:235
AMUSEMENT DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adult entertainment — See Ch. 14.
Beach and recreation areas — See Ch. 52.
Carnivals and circuses — See Ch. 95.
Festivals; mass gatherings — See Ch. 169.
Games of chance — See Ch. 210.
§ 32-7 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 32-7
10:236
ARTICLE I
Amusement Devices and Vending Machines
[Adopted as Secs. 5-4.1 through 5-4.9 of the 1973 Revised General
Ordinances]
§ 35-1. License required.
No person shall install, place, maintain, operate or possess in any store,
building or place wherein the public is invited or may enter, or in any
building, store or other place wherein any club or organization meets
or maintains quarters, any automatic or mechanical machine, game or
device of skill or entertainment, music vending machine and motion-picture
machine, which is or are operated or set in motion by the deposit therein
of any coin or any token or slug or the like which are purchased for
cash, or any coin-operated vending machine within the Township without
first applying for and obtaining a license. Machines owned by nonprofit
organizations shall be exempt from the provisions of this article.
§ 35-2. Issuance of licenses; fees. [Amended 4-6-1981 by Ord. No.
10-81; 1-9-2006 by Ord. No. 38-2005; 9-22-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-29]
The license for the placing, operation, maintenance or use of such
amusement devices or vending machines shall be issued to and in the name
of the proprietor of the premises where the machine is to be installed. The
license fee for each machine licensed, for the calendar year or any portion
thereof, shall be as follows:
§ 35-3. License application requirements. [Amended 1-9-2006 by
Ord. No. 38-2005]
A separate application for each machine shall be filed on a form to be
furnished by the Township Clerk, which form shall show the name of the
applicant and his post office address. The fee for the license shall be payable
with the filing of the application, and, if the application is rejected, the fee
shall be returned to the applicant, less a service fee of 25% which shall be
retained by the municipality for rejected applications.
A. Amusement devices or machines: $100.
B. Nonalcoholic beverage machines: $100.
C. Ice, food and milk machines: $100.
D. Penny and nickel machines: $50.
E. Instant lottery machines: $500 per year. [Added 10-25-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-30]
§ 35-1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 35-4
10:237
§ 35-4. Device location; license display.
No device or machine as specified in this article, except for coin-operated
vending machines, shall be placed, operated, maintained or used in any
back room of the premises where the machine is licensed or within 200
feet of a school or church. The license issued by the Township for all coinoperated
machines shall be affixed thereto in a conspicuous place so that
the same shall be easily and quickly identified. The license shall, on its face,
disclose the name and post office address of the licensee and the amount
of the license fee and briefly state that the machine or device to which the
same is affixed is licensed for operation by the Township.
§ 35-5. License transfer restrictions.
The holder of a license shall be permitted to transfer the license within the
period for which it is issued to another like machine operated in the same
premises. The licensee may also transfer a license from one premises to
another, provided that he immediately notifies the Township Clerk of such
transfer. The license shall not be transferable from one person to another.
§ 35-6. Gambling prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to install, maintain or operate or use any machine,
game or device in the Township for the purpose of gambling, wagering or
betting, either for cash, merchandise or other property of any nature. Any
licensee, his agents, servants or employees who willfully permit the use of
any machine for such a purpose shall be guilty of a violation of this article.
§ 35-7. Prizes prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to install, maintain or use any machine, game or
device in the Township for the purpose of giving directly or indirectly any
prize, return or profit. Any licensee, his agents, servants or employees who
willfully permit the use of any machine for such a purpose shall be guilty of
a violation of this article.
§ 35-8. License revocation.63
Upon any conviction for a violation of this article, the license issued for
the machine, game or device, concerning which there was a conviction,
shall be subject to revocation by the Township Clerk, after hearing upon
reasonable notice to the interested parties, if upon presentation of the
record of conviction to the Township Clerk, the Township Clerk deems such
action advisable.
63.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 35-4 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 35-9
10:238
§ 35-9. Automatic picture-showing device.
Automatic picture-showing amusement devices which are designed for
viewing by patrons other than those seated in a theater-type auditorium are
specifically prohibited from licensing, installation, possession or operation
under this chapter, section, subsection, or other ordinance of the Township.
§ 35-9 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 35-9
10:239

ARTICLE II
Redemption Amusement Games
[Adopted 4-14-1997 by Ord. No. 9-97 (Secs. 5-4.10 through 5-4.18
of the 1973 Revised General Ordinances)]
§ 35-10. Definitions.
For all purposes of this article, the following terms have the meanings
hereinbelow ascribed to them.
AMUSEMENT GAMES LICENSING LAW — N.J.S.A. 5:8-78 through N.J.S.A.
5:8-130 and N.J.A.C. 13:3-1.1 through N.J.A.C. 13:3-6.6, including any
amendments thereto duly enacted subsequent to the effective date of this
article.
AMUSEMENT RIDE — Any mechanical device or devices which carry or
convey passengers along, around, or over a fixed or restricted route or
course for the purpose of giving its passengers amusement, pleasure, thrills
or excitement, and as otherwise defined and regulated under the Carnival-
Amusement Rides Safety Act, N.J.S.A. 5:3-31 et seq.
CERTIFICATION — A certification of permissibility granted by the
Commissioner pursuant to N.J.A.C. 13:3-7.1 et seq.
COMMISSIONER — The Amusement Games Control Commissioner as that
office is created and empowered under N.J.S.A. 5:8-78 et seq. and
Reorganization Plan No. 004-1992, 24 N.J.R. 4462, November 30, 1992.
PERSON — Any natural person and any legal person, the existence of
which is authorized by statute, including but not limited to any corporation,
limited liability company and limited or general partnership.
PRINCIPAL — Any natural person exerting actual or beneficial control over
any person other than a natural person, even if that control is shared with
others. As to corporations, all of the following are principals: (1) any person
owning or otherwise controlling at least 5% of the authorized and issued
voting stock of the corporation; (2) any director elected by the shareholders;
(3) any officer elected by the directors. The principals of a limited liability
company are all of its members and managers. The principals of a general
partnership are all of its general partners. The principals of a limited
partnership are the general partner and all limited partners. Where a
person consists of a complex of statutory entities such as subsidiaries, the
principals of the ultimate parent and all subsidiary, subordinate or affiliated
entities are principals within the meaning of this article.
RECOGNIZED AMUSEMENT PARK — A commercially operated permanent
business open to the public at least 31 consecutive days annually, whose
acreage is designed and themed for the primary purpose of providing
participatory amusement incorporating rides or water slides licensed in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 5:3-31 et seq., and food and merchandise
concessions in permanent structures, it being the intention of the Township
Council that a site coming within the foregoing definition shall be deemed
a recognized amusement park solely for the purpose of this article and the
§ 35-10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 35-10
10:241
Amusement Games Licensing Law, and the foregoing definition shall not be
deemed to control the interpretation of any other chapter of the Code of the
Township of Old Bridge.
REDEMPTION AMUSEMENT GAME — A game certified as permissible by
the Commissioner, pursuant to the Amusement Games Licensing Law, which
is played for amusement or entertainment, which is a game in which the
person or player actively participates, in which the outcome is not in the
control of the operator or owner of the game and which is so conducted that
when and where all of the players are present there occurs, in continuous
sequence, the sale of a right to participate, the event which determines
whether a player wins or loses and the award of a merchandise prize or
nontransferable tokens or tickets which may be accumulated and which are
immediately redeemable for a merchandise prize; provided, however, that
the following are not redemption amusement games and are not eligible for
license under this article:
§ 35-11. License required to operate redemption amusement
games.
It shall be unlawful for any person to own or operate within Old Bridge
Township any redemption amusement game without first having obtained a
proper license therefor from the Township Council of the Township of Old
Bridge. Said license shall be issued only pursuant to this article and the
provisions of the Amusement Games Licensing Law.64
§ 35-12. Application for license.
A. Bingo games;
B. Draw raffles;
Games excluded from the scope of this article pursuant to § 35-18
hereof.
C.
A. Each applicant for such a license shall file with the Township Clerk a
written application therefor in duplicate and shall pay the fees provided
in this article. The application shall be in the form prescribed by the
Commissioner and shall comply with all application requirements as
specifically set forth in the Amusement Games Licensing Law, and this
article.
B. The Township Clerk may require, as a condition of application, that any
applicant (or for applicants other than natural persons, the principals
thereof) to be fingerprinted under the supervision of the Old Bridge
Department of Police and that the record thereof be submitted with and
as a part of such application.65
64.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 5:8-78 et seq.
65.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 35-10 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 35-12
10:242
§ 35-13. Issuance of license; term; certificate; display.
C. Any fees for fingerprinting or any other investigation shall be paid by
the applicant, even though not otherwise stated in this article.
A. Issuance. Upon the applicant's compliance with all applicable
requirements of this article, the Township Council shall by resolution
authorize the issuance of a license. Said resolution shall specifically
recite the finding of the Township Council that the premises to be
licensed is located in a recognized amusement park. Promptly following
the date of the resolution, the Township Clerk shall issue the license
certificate or certificates authorized thereby and shall forward to the
Commissioner a certified copy of the resolution, a copy of the
application, a counterpart original of the license certificate and the
license fees payable to the Commissioner as hereinafter provided.
B. License term. Each license issued pursuant to this article shall be for a
term of the calendar year which next follows the date of such
resolution, or if the applicant shall so request, for a term which
commences on the date of the resolution and which expires on
December 31 next following such date; provided, however, that the
license so issued shall be inoperative unless and until the licensee
named therein shall also, within 90 days from the issuance thereof and
prior to the conduct or operation of redemption amusement games
thereunder, procure and receive from the Commissioner a state license
authorizing the licensee holding the Old Bridge Township license to
operate and conduct certain redemption amusement games according
to the terms of such Old Bridge Township license; and any license
issued hereunder shall also be inoperative during any period of
suspension or revocation of such state license.
C. License certificate.
(1) The license certificate shall be in the form prescribed by the
Commissioner and shall set out on the face thereof:
(a) The name of the licensee.
(b) The address of the licensed premises and such further
description or limitation upon the licensed premises as may be
provided in the application or the said resolution.
(c) The certification category of the kinds of games licensed and,
in the case of arcade games, the number thereof.
(d) The amount of fee paid.
(e) A statement of the dates between which and the hours between
which such games may be conducted.
(2) Each license certificate shall be issued in triplicate, the original to
be delivered to the applicant, with one copy to the Commissioner,
§ 35-12 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 35-13
10:243
§ 35-14. Hearing prior to refusal of license; amendments.
§ 35-15. Control and supervision.
as aforesaid, and the remaining copy to be retained by the
Township Clerk.
D. Display. Each license certificate and all other information required
under the Amusement Games Licensing Law66 to be posted upon
licensed premises shall be conspicuously displayed at the place or
places where the redemption amusement games are to be conducted, at
all times during the conduct thereof.
A. No application for the issuance of a license shall be refused by the
Township Council until after a hearing is held on due notice to the
applicant, at which hearing the applicant shall be entitled to present
evidence upon the qualifications of the applicant and the merits of the
application.
B. Any license issued under this article may be amended, upon application
made to the Township Council, if the subject matter of the proposed
amendment could lawfully and properly have been included in the
original license and upon payment of such additional license fee, if any,
as would have been payable, if the amendment had been so included.
A. Concurrently with the Commissioner and the Commissioner's agents
and designees, the Township shall have and exercise control and
supervision over all amusement games held, operated or conducted
under such license with all the powers authorized or granted to it under
the Amusement Games Licensing Law and all amendments and
supplements thereto.
B. The Department of Community Development may inspect or cause to be
inspected any place or building in which redemption amusement games
are made available for public use and all records that the licensee is
required to prepare and maintain under the Amusement Games
Licensing Law.
C. Redemption amusement games licensed hereunder shall be available
only in plain view of any person or persons who may enter upon any
place where such redemption amusement games are made available for
play or use by the public; and in no licensed premises shall they be
made available selectively to certain persons designated by the licensee
or other person; nor shall they be in any way concealed except when out
of service for maintenance or repair.
D. Redemption amusement games shall not be operated or otherwise
made available to the public for use on any day later than 11:00 p.m.
nor earlier than 8:00 a.m.
66.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 5:8-78 et seq.
§ 35-13 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 35-15
10:244
E. Neither alcoholic beverages nor tobacco products shall be sold or
consumed on any premises licensed hereunder.
F. Prizes awarded as the result of play or use of redemption amusement
games shall be only merchandise of no greater value than as applicable
the single game and aggregate limitations from time to time provided
under the Amusement Games Licensing Law. Alcoholic beverages,
tobacco products, weapons, obscene or indecent pictures, writings or
recordings or money shall not be awarded as prizes, and no licensee
shall directly, indirectly or by any subterfuge, purchase any
merchandise prize, once it has been duly awarded, nor shall licensee
exchange the prize for money or money's worth.
G. Every licensee shall comply with such conditions and limitations as the
Commissioner may include in any certification.
H. The following provisions of the Amusement Games Licensing Law67 are
by this reference hereby incorporated as provisions of this article, as
fully as if they were herein at length set out, it being the intention of the
Township Council that any violation of such sections by a licensee shall
be a violation not only of the Amusement Games Licensing Law but also
of this article and that any duties of a licensee as set out in such
sections are duties of a licensee under both the Amusement Games
Licensing Law and this article:
(1) N.J.A.C. 13:3-1.12, Qualification of applicant; conviction of crime.
(2) N.J.A.C. 13:3-3.4, Maximum fee for participation in game.
(3) N.J.A.C. 13:3-3.5, Types of prizes permitted; value of prize.
(4) N.J.A.C. 13:3-3.6, Determination of value of prizes.
(5) N.J.A.C. 13:3-3.7, Redemption of prize or cash.
(6) N.J.A.C. 13:3-3.9, Employee's qualification, questionnaires, list.
(7) N.J.A.C. 13:3-3.10, Fingerprinting employees.
(8) N.J.A.C. 13:3-3.11, Interest held in business by person other than
licensee.
(9) N.J.A.C. 13:3-3.12, Law enforcement officers holding business
interests.
(10)N.J.A.C. 13:3-3.13, Hindering inspection or investigation.
(11)N.J.A.C. 13:3-3.15, Gambling on licensed premises.
(12)N.J.A.C. 13:3-3.16, Licensee responsible for acts of employees.
(13)N.J.A.C. 13:3-3.17, Required signs.
67.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 5:8-78 et seq.
§ 35-15 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 35-15
10:245
§ 35-16. Violations and penalties; forfeiture of license for certain
acts.
Any licensee or principal thereof who or which shall make any false
statement in any application for such license, or shall fail to keep such
books and records as required to be kept under the Amusement Games
Licensing Law, or shall falsify such books or records, or shall violate any
of the provisions of this article or the Amusement Games Licensing Law
or of any of the terms of such license, shall be a disorderly person; and if
convicted as such, shall in addition to any other penalties which may be
lawfully imposed, forfeit any license issued to it under this article.
§ 35-17. Separate licenses required; fees.
(14)N.J.A.C. 13:3-4.1, Books of account, entries, inspection.
(15)N.J.A.C. 13:3-4.2, Invoices of cost of prizes retained.
(16)N.J.A.C. 13:3-4.3, Report of conduct of game by licensee.
(17)N.J.A.C. 5:8-103.
(18)N.J.A.C. 5:8-108.
A. There shall be issued to an applicant who shall qualify a separate
license for each place at which the licensee is authorized to hold,
operate and conduct such redemption amusement games. The annual
license fee for each place shall be $250.
B. A separate license shall be issued for each specific kind of redemption
amusement game authorized to be held, operated and conducted on the
licensed premises by the licensee. The license fee payable to the
Township for each specific kind of game certified by the Commissioner
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 13:3-7.9, as permissible, shall be as follows:
(1) Games permitted under Category and Certification No. 1: throw
games wherein a single player upon payment of fee is furnished a
number of balls, hoops, darts or other objects, or uses his own coins
to be hand thrown or propelled at, into, or upon targets, with prizes
awarded according to results achieved; provided that only one of
the above games may be licensed under one license; and there is no
restriction on the number of units that may comprise the game:
$250.
(2) Games certified as permissible under Category and Certification
No. 2: arcade games wherein a single player upon payment of fee is
permitted to play a machine or device to obtain a prize or attain to
score upon which a prize is awarded according to results achieved:
$250 plus $10 per machine for each machine in excess of 50
machines.
§ 35-15 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 35-17
10:246
§ 35-18. Scope; prohibited games; exemptions.
Redemption amusement games certified by the Commissioner as
permissible under Certification 3 (non-draw raffle games), Certification 5
(a certain game of chance particularly described in such certification and
named therein, "Stop and Go Game"), Certification 6 (guessing games) and
Certification 9 (a certain game of chance particularly described in such
certification and named therein, Pan Game, Crazy Ball and Crazy Block), are
(3) Games certified as permissible under Category and Certification
No. 4: competitive games wherein several players upon payment of
fee are permitted to compete against each other for a prize to be
awarded to the player who first achieves the required result,
provided that only one of the above games shall be licensed under
one license; and there is no restriction on the number of units that
may comprise the game: $250.
(4) Games certified as permissible under Category and Certification
No. 7: tests of strength wherein a single player upon payment of a
fee is entitled to win a prize in the event that within a permitted
number of tries he rings a bell or gong a required number of times
by striking with a maul one end of a horizontal level arm on the
other end of which propels a weight upward along a vertical wire at
the top of which the bell or gong is located; provided, however, only
one unit may be licensed under one license: $250.
(5) Games certified as permissible under Category and Certification
No. 8: miscellaneous games wherein a single player upon payment
of a fee is entitled to use a physical skill to obtain a predetermined
goal for which a prize is awarded: $250.
C. The required Township fee, which shall be an annual fee without
proration, shall accompany the license application. In the event that the
license is denied or the application therefor is withdrawn, the Township
shall retain 25% of the application fee as an investigation fee, and the
balance shall be returned to the applicant.
D. On application, the applicant shall deposit, with the Township Clerk, the
applicant's certified check or money order, in an amount equal to the
license fees otherwise payable to the Township, and drawn to the order
of the New Jersey Amusement Games Control Commissioner. If the
Township Council shall pursuant to § 35-13 of this article authorize the
issuance of a license to the applicant, then together with the other
items to be forwarded under Subsection D hereof, the Township Clerk
shall forward the certified check or (as the case may be) money order, to
the Commissioner. However, if the Township Council shall refuse or
decline to authorize the issuance of the license applied for, or if the
application shall be withdrawn, then at the time when the Township
Clerk returns a portion of the required Township fee as hereinabove
provided, the Township Clerk shall also return to the applicant the
certified check or money order.
§ 35-17 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 35-18
10:247
prohibited hereby and shall not be operated within Old Bridge Township,
and no license shall be issued authorizing the same. Nothing in this article
shall be deemed to require a license for the award of prizes as the result of
successful play at any game which, pursuant to common understanding, is a
sport such as baseball, soccer, tennis or golf; or for the distribution without
charge of rights to participate in amusements, as promotional inducement
to persons to visit a premises licensed hereby; or for the award of the
same prize value in respect of the play of any game or device, before or
following each use of such device or play of such game and without regard
to any particular score or outcome resulting therefrom. Games and game
devices, the use or play of which does not result in any person receiving any
merchandise, prize, additional right to play or participate without charge
or other thing of value, are beyond the scope of this article. Nothing
provided herein shall be construed to state or imply that such games or
devices must be licensed under this article; or that the Township does not
retain the inherent prerogative to provide by ordinance for the licensing,
regulation and supervision of the use of such games and devices. Also
beyond the scope of this article is any carnival, fair or other activity held on
an annual or other periodic or scheduled basis by a not-for-profit group or
organization wherein amusement devices, structures or amusement rides
are installed or used on a temporary basis.
§ 35-18 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 35-18
10:248
Chapter 39
ANIMALS
§ 35-18 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 35-18
10:249

ARTICLE I
Keeping of Animals
[Adopted as Sec. 4-12 of the 1973 Revised General Ordinances]
§ 39-1. Compliance required.
No person shall keep any animals in the Township except in accordance
with the provisions of this article.
§ 39-2. Exceptions.
This article shall not apply to the keeping of dogs which are licensed
and regulated under the provisions of Article II of this chapter, with the
exception of limitation of number as provided in § 39-4 below.
§ 39-3. Health requirements; condition of premises; inspections.
A. The premises on which animals are maintained and kept shall meet and
conform to the following health standards:
(1) Location is such as to preclude odors and sounds from interfering
with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property on neighboring
premises.
(2) Buildings, food storage bins, appliances, equipment, feeding areas
and other facilities on premises are constructed and maintained in
such fashion as to permit proper cleansing.
(3) Water supply is adequate for proper sanitation.
(4) Water or other liquid to which mosquitoes may have access is
properly treated to prevent their breeding.68
(5) Disposition is made of animal wastes, garbage, refuse or vegetable
matter deposited upon the premises in such manner as to prevent
insect breeding or rodent harborage or pollution of the air or any
body of water or the creation of any other unhealthy or unsanitary
condition.
(6) Rodents or insects hazardous to public health do not exist or
reproduce therein or thereon.
(7) Adequate measures are taken to prevent animals from escaping.
(8) Adequate equipment is available to maintain the premises in a
sanitary condition at all times.
B. The Health Officer of the Township is authorized to inspect any
premises where animals under this section are kept for the purpose of
enforcing the provisions herein.
68.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 284, Mosquito Breeding Control.
§ 39-1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 39-4
10:251
§ 39-4. Limitations on number of animals.
§ 39-5. Pigeons. [Added 9-8-1987 by Ord. No. 28-87]
A. Dogs and cats. No person shall keep more than three dogs and three
cats six months of age or over on any lot that is less than two acres.
B. Horses. No person shall keep any horses except on lots greater than
two acres. The number shall be limited to such that can reasonably be
maintained and kept in compliance with the health standards of § 39-3.
C. Pigs. No person shall raise, herd, breed or otherwise keep in any
manner pigs, unless such are limited to a maximum of two animals per
the first five acres of land. For each acre after the first five, one
additional pig may be kept. In no case shall any pigs be kept on lands of
less than five acres, and in no case shall any pig, pigsty, run or any
shelter for such animals be located closer than 250 feet to any road or
highway abutting on such lands or from any boundary thereof.
D. Cows and other animals. No person shall keep any cows or other
animals, excluding common household pets, except on lots greater than
five acres. The number shall be limited to such that can reasonably be
maintained and kept in compliance with the health standards of § 39-3.
A. No person shall keep, maintain or harbor any pigeons within the
Township of Old Bridge, except upon conditions set forth in this section,
which conditions are in addition to any restrictions which may be
contained in the Zoning Ordinance of the Township, the Sanitary Code
and the Building Code.
B. Restrictions.
(1) Pigeons shall be kept in a suitable house or coop, not more than
800 cubic feet in size. Pigeon houses or coops may have an
attached, enclosed runway, but such structures shall be
constructed so as to keep pigeons properly confined and prevent
their flying about as provided in Subsection B(3). Not more than
100 pigeons shall be kept at any one time.
(2) No pigeon house, coop or runway shall be constructed except on
lots greater than two acres, and they shall be within the rear yard
of the premises and shall be at least 25 feet from the property line.
This subsection shall not apply to residents who are members of the
International Federation of Homing Pigeons, Inc., or the American
Racing Pigeon Union as of the effective date of this section.
(3) Pigeons shall not be permitted to fly about and shall be kept within
a house, coop or runway at all times, except that carrier or homing
pigeons, when a proper permit has been obtained from the
Department of Health and Welfare, may be permitted to be
exercised and flown outside the enclosure before 10:00 a.m. and
after 5:00 p.m. Homing or carrier pigeons under six months of age
§ 39-4 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 39-5
10:252
may be permitted to be outside their enclosure during their
training period. Pigeons returning from training flights may do
so at any time, provided that they immediately enter their lot.
The flying of carrier or homing pigeons may be prohibited in any
specific case where it is satisfactorily established that they soil
clothes or other property not belonging to their keeper. Such proof
shall be established in an action in the Municipal Court on
complaint of a person affected by the violation of this provision.
[Amended 1-9-2006 by Ord. No. 38-2005]
(4) Pigeon houses, coops or runways shall be maintained in a proper
sanitary condition so as to avoid offensive odors, and no pigeons
shall be kept which create loud and excessive noises and sounds.
Odors emanating from pigeon houses, coops or runways which are
perceptible from adjoining properties, and any noises emitting
from pigeons which are audible from adjoining properties, shall be
prima facie evidence of a violation of this section.
C. No person shall attempt to attract pigeons by throwing or scattering
food for pigeons on public or private property.
D. Any person found to be in violation of the provisions of this section shall
be subject to the penalty provisions of Chapter 1, Article II, Penalty, of
the Code of the Township of Old Bridge.
§ 39-5 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 39-5
10:253

ARTICLE II
Licensing and Regulation of Dogs and Cats69
[Adopted as Ch. VII of the 1973 Revised General Ordinances]
§ 39-6. License required; dogs defined.
§ 39-7. Annual license fees for dogs; late fee. [Amended 7-20-1981
by Ord. No. 19-81; 10-21-1985 by Ord. No. 48-85; 12-22-1994 by
Ord. No. 89-94; 7-24-2002 by Ord. No. 39-02]
§ 39-8. Private kennels; fees. [Amended 1-9-2006 by Ord. No.
38-2005]
Dogs kept in kennels need not be individually licensed, provided that the
kennel is licensed and the dogs kept therein are not permitted to run
at large. "Kennel" shall mean a place where dogs are confined within
the boundaries of the premises of the occupant, but no place shall be
construed to be a kennel unless it is marked with a kennel name posted in a
conspicuous place. The fee for a kennel in which not more than 10 dogs are
kept shall be $10. The fee for a kennel in which more than 10 dogs are kept
shall be $25. Kennel licenses shall be issued by the Township Clerk for the
same periods of time as dog licenses. All dogs over six months of age shall
be counted in computing the number of dogs kept in a kennel.
§ 39-9. Accounting for license fees.
License fees or other moneys collected or received under the provisions of
this article, except registration tag fees, shall be forwarded to the Treasurer
A. The word "dog" as used in this article shall apply to and include canines
of both sexes.
B. All dogs over six months of age and not confined to a licensed kennel
kept within the limits of the Township shall be licensed as hereinafter
provided.
A. Any person who shall own, keep or harbor a dog of licensing age shall,
in the month of January, apply for and procure from the Township Clerk
a license and official registration tag for each dog so owned, kept or
harbored. The license fee for each dog shall be $8.80, plus $1 per
annum registration fee, plus $0.20 for the New Jersey Pilot Clinic Fund
and an additional $3 for those dogs not spayed or neutered for the New
Jersey Pet Population Control Fund. [Amended 1-9-2006 by Ord. No.
38-2005; 3-26-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-06]
B. Any person who has kept or harbored a dog within the Township of Old
Bridge during the months of January and February and who shall apply
for a license on or after March 1 of such year shall pay a late fee of $5 in
addition to the cost of the annual license fee.
69.Editor's Note: The relevant statutory provisions are found in N.J.S.A. 4:19-15 et seq.
§ 39-6 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 39-9
10:255
of the Township within 30 days after collection or receipt and shall be
placed in a special account separate from any other accounts of the
Township and used for only the purposes recited in N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.11. If
not expended for such purposes, such moneys shall be retained and held
and ultimately disposed of in the manner in that section provided.
§ 39-10. Certificate and metallic tag; fee for replacement tags.
§ 39-11. Nuisances by dogs; removal of feces. [Added 9-6-1988 by
Ord. No. 36-8871]
No owner or person having custody of any dog or any other animal shall
permit said dog or any other animal to defecate on any school ground,
public street, alley, sidewalk, tree bark, park or any other public grounds
or any private property within the Township, other than the premises of the
owner or person having custody of said dog or other animal, unless said
defecation is removed immediately.
§ 39-12. Barking; dogs at large.72
No person owning, keeping or harboring a dog shall permit it to habitually
bark or cry so as to annoy any neighbor or other resident. No person
owning, keeping or harboring a dog shall permit it to be upon any of the
A. The Township Clerk shall secure at Township expense metallic tags, or
tags of other suitable material, and certificates for delivery to licensees.
When a license is issued for an individual dog, the licensee shall be
provided with such tag and a certificate. Such tag shall have stamped
thereon a number and the year of issue. The certificate shall bear a
number corresponding to the number on the tag and in addition thereto
shall show the age, color, breed, sex, license tag number, name of dog
and name and address of owner. When a license is issued for a kennel,
the licensee shall be provided with a certificate only, which certificate
shall show the name and address of the owner, location and name of the
kennel, year for which the license is issued, number of dogs permitted
and the fee paid for same. The Clerk shall keep a copy of all licenses
issued. The certificate shall constitute the license.
B. Such tag shall be worn by the dog at all times and fastened to the collar.
No tag shall be used upon any other dog except the one for which it is
issued, nor shall anyone maliciously remove or mutilate the tag. If
satisfactory proof is presented that the tag has been lost or stolen, the
Clerk shall issue another tag, which shall be noted upon the original
certificate and record, upon the payment of an additional fee of $0.50
and return of the original certificate for that licensing year.70
70.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
71.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
72.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 300, Noise.
§ 39-9 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 39-12
10:256
public streets or upon any private property in the Township, except the
private property of the person owning, keeping or harboring such dog,
or except upon premises where permission has been given by the owner
thereof to the person owning, keeping or harboring any such dog to keep
it on the private property of the person so giving permission, unless such
dog is accompanied by a person over the age of 12 years and is securely
confined and controlled by an adequate leash not more than six feet long;
provided, nevertheless, that the provisions for leashing and attendance
shall not apply in farming and hunting areas of the Township.
§ 39-13. Damage by dogs.
No person owning, keeping or harboring a dog shall permit it to do any
injury or to do any damage to any lawn, shrubbery, flowers, grounds or
property. Any person who keeps or harbors a dog on premises occupied by
him or her, or permits a dog to remain, shall be deemed the owner thereof
and liable for the observance of violation of any of the provisions of this
article.
§ 39-14. Vicious and potentially dangerous dogs.73
Vicious and potentially dangerous dogs are regulated pursuant to N.J.S.A.
4:19-17 et seq. The annual license fee for a potentially dangerous or vicious
dog shall be $700.
§ 39-15. Impounding dogs.
A. The Chief of Police or any person appointed for the purpose by the
Administrator shall take into custody and impound or cause to be taken
into custody and impounded any dog running at large on any public
street or on any private premises when the official or his agent has
reason to believe any such dog is a stray dog. Thereafter, provided that
at least 72 hours have elapsed from the time of such impounding, such
stray dog shall be destroyed or disposed of. The designated official or
his agent shall take or cause to be taken into custody and impounded
and disposed of in the manner hereinbefore set forth any dog without a
current registration tag on his collar, if such dog is off the premises of
his owner or off the premises of any person keeping or harboring such
dog. He shall take or cause to be taken into custody and impounded and
disposed of any unattended female dog in season if such dog is off the
premises of its owner or off the premises of any person keeping or
harboring such dog.74
B. Where dogs have been taken into custody and impounded under the
provisions of this section, a reasonable fee, as set from time to time by
resolution of the Council, shall be paid to those persons retrieving or
73.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
74.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 39-12 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 39-15
10:257
§ 39-16. Animal Control Officer.75
§ 39-17. Seeing Eye, service and hearing ear dogs.76
Dogs used as guides for blind persons and commonly known as "Seeing Eye
dogs," dogs used to assist handicapped persons and commonly known as
"service dogs" and dogs used to assist deaf persons and commonly known as
"hearing ear" dogs shall be registered and licensed in the same manner as
other dogs, and shall be subject to all the rules and regulations controlling
dogs in the Township, except that the owner or keeper shall not be required
to pay any fee therefor.
§ 39-18. Commercial kennels.
adopting the impounded dogs to defray the expense of taking dogs into
custody and to provide for their board and keep.
C. No dog taken into custody shall be released to the owner or for
adoption without proof of a current license having been obtained as
required by § 39-7.
A. The Township Administrator shall hire a person for a term not to extend
beyond December 31 in the year in which such person was hired, who
shall act as Animal Control Officer and whose duty it shall be to take
into custody at any time all dogs found by him at large within the
Township limits in violation of any of the provisions of this article. He
shall receive such compensation as the Council shall fix by resolution.
B. The Animal Control Officer shall impound the dog and, upon taking any
dog into custody, thereafter destroy or dispose of it.
C. In addition to apprehending dogs in violation of this article, the Animal
Control Officer shall have the full authority and duty to apprehend any
animal or creature, as defined under Title 4, Chapter 22 of the statutes,
found at large, which is creating a public nuisance, disturbance or
hazard for the protection of the public.
D. No person shall molest, obstruct or interfere with any person appointed
or designated by the Township Administrator to enforce the provisions
of this article when such person is engaged in the performance of his
duties.
A. Definition. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
COMMERCIAL KENNEL — Any establishment wherein or whereon the
business of boarding or selling dogs or breeding dogs is carried on,
except a pet shop.
75.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
76.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 39-15 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 39-18
10:258
B. License required. No person shall operate or maintain a commercial
kennel within the Township unless such person first receives a
commercial kennel license from the Township Clerk.
C. License Application and Review by Administrator. Application for a
license for a new commercial kennel shall be made in writing to the
Township Administrator. Such application shall contain a full and
detailed written description of the premises where the establishment is
located or proposed to be located, and shall state the purpose for which
such kennel is to be maintained or operated. The Administrator may
require the applicant to submit drawings, sketches or plans describing
the premises. The Administrator shall review and examine the
application to determine whether the operation and maintenance of
such kennel will comply with the state and local health legislation,
regulations, and standards regarding location, construction, operation
and sanitation of and at such establishments. The Administrator shall
require the applicant to make such changes as may be necessary to
effect compliance. If the Administrator determines that the operation
and maintenance of such kennel will comply with the state and local
health legislation, regulations and standards, he shall then advise the
Township Clerk, and upon receipt of the appropriate fee, the Clerk shall
issue the license.77
D. License term and fees. All licenses issued for a commercial kennel shall
expire on June 30 of each year. All applications for annual renewals of
commercial kennel licenses shall be made in the month of June. The
annual license fee for a kennel and for any renewal thereof shall be $10
for 10 dogs or less and $25 for more than 10 dogs.78
E. Approval required for sales, moves, etc. No commercial kennel shall be
transferred, sold or conveyed to another person nor shall any such
kennel be moved to another location, or its operation substantially
changed, without application first being made to the Administrator for
his approval. If the Administrator determines that compliance with
state and local health legislation, regulations and standards will be
maintained, he shall approve such transfer, sale, conveyance, move or
change.79
F. General regulations. The operation and maintenance of all commercial
kennels shall be conducted in accordance with the rules and
regulations promulgated by the State Department of Health and Senior
Services pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.14. Moreover, the following
conditions shall apply:
77.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
78.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
79.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 39-18 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 39-18
10:259
(1) All premises upon which commercial kennels are operated shall be
maintained free of any accumulation of filth or source of foulness,
including but not limited to the infestation of rodents, flies, fleas,
parasites or other insects which may be hazardous to the health or
comfort of any of the residents of the Township.
(2) All commercial kennels shall have in constant attendance a person
to maintain the premises. However, in the event the kennel
accommodates less than 10 animals, there shall be daily
inspections by the owner or persons maintaining the kennel.
(3) There shall be a regular inspection of the premises at least once
every three months by a Township health official. The records
concerning the operation of the kennel shall be available for the
inspection of the health official. The records shall show the type of
dogs, the ages of dogs, whether they are registered with the
American Kennel Club, and whether the dogs are for sale or for
breeding purposes. The health official may require that the records
kept provide additional information which he deems necessary.
(4) Waste matters, excrement and other unsightly or dangerous
articles shall be cleaned away each day. They shall not be burned
on the premises nor shall they be buried thereon. At least once a
week the kennels shall be washed down with a recognized
disinfectant.
(5) All commercial kennels shall consist of one or a number of shelters
to house the dogs. Adjoining each shelter shall be a fenced-in area
known as a "run" upon which the dogs can exercise. The runs shall
be generally rectangular in shape and fenced on three sides. The
fourth side shall lead into the shelter. An exercise area exclusive of
the shelter and run area may be provided.
(6) All dogs shall be confined to their shelter and run area except when
they are using the exercise area. They shall not be permitted to
wander elsewhere on the owner's property or onto the property of
neighbors or adjoining landowners.
(7) No shelter and run area or exercise area shall be established less
than 10 feet from any property line.
(8) If a shelter contains dogs classified as small or toy breed in
accordance with American Kennel Club specifications, the size of
the adjoining run shall be no less than three feet by eight feet, and
there shall be no more than seven doghouses therein. The fence
enclosing the run shall be four feet high and shall be of a chain-link
type or of heavy galvanized welded mesh.
(9) If a shelter contains dogs classified as medium or large in
accordance with American Kennel Club specifications, the size of
the adjoining run shall be no less than four feet by 10 feet, and
there shall be no more than three dogs housed therein. The fence
§ 39-18 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 39-18
10:260
§ 39-19. Fines. [Added 10-19-1981 by Ord. No. 27-81; amended
10-15-1990 by Ord. No. 22-9081]
Except as provided in N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.19, for a first offense of any section
of this article, a fine of $25, for a second offense, a fine not in excess of
$35 and for third and subsequent offenses, fines not to exceed $50 shall be
assessed.
enclosing the run shall be six feet high and shall be of chain-link
type or of heavy galvanized welded mesh.
(10) Mongrels shall be classified as either small, toy, medium or large
according to their shoulder height.
(11) Fencing for exercise area shall be of such height and strength as to
provide for the largest dog accommodated, in accordance with the
specifications set forth above.
(12) At any one time the use of the exercise area shall be limited to the
occupants of one run so that there shall not be overcrowding in the
exercise area.
(13) All fences required by this section shall closely follow the contour
of the ground so that it will not be possible for dogs to crawl under
a fence.
(14) The surface of the runs shall be composed of cement or macadam
of sufficient thickness so it shall not crack. Surrounding the run,
there shall be a one-foot-wide border of crushed stone at least six
inches deep, provided that the soil underneath is permeable. If the
soil is not permeable, the twelve-inch border shall consist of a sixinch
depth of sand beneath six inches of crushed stone. As an
alternative to a hard surface run as described above, if the ground
underneath is permeable, the run may consist of a layer of crushed
stone one inch deep.
G. Suspension of license. In the event that this section or any provision
hereof is violated, the license of the owner or operator of the
commercial kennel shall be suspended subject to the licensee's
requesting a hearing on the question of whether there shall be a
revocation of the license. In the event that no formal request for the
hearing is received by the Administrator within two weeks after notice
of suspension, the license may then be revoked.80
80.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
81.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 39-18 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 39-20
10:261
§ 39-20. Maintenance of animal shelter by Township. [Added
6-19-1989 by Ord. No. 20-89]
The Township of Old Bridge shall maintain an animal shelter for the purpose
of housing and caring for dogs, cats and other domestic animals that have
been taken into custody by virtue of running loose, being abandoned or
surrendered for adoption or euthanasia.
§ 39-21. Operational control of animal shelter. [Added 6-19-1989 by
Ord. No. 20-89]
Operation and control of the animal shelter shall be vested in the
Department of Health and Welfare of the Township of Old Bridge.
§ 39-22. Availability of facilities. [Added 6-19-1989 by Ord. No.
20-89]
Utilization of the shelter and its facilities shall be made available to
residents of the Township of Old Bridge, and any stray animals which are
caught or taken into custody within the confines of the Township of Old
Bridge shall be housed and cared for in the shelter.
§ 39-23. Fees for animal shelter. [Added 6-19-1989 by Ord. No.
20-89; amended 3-27-2000 by Ord. No. 05-00]
Upon receiving any animal in custody brought to the shelter by an owner or
person (except an Animal Control Officer, police officer or other employee
or enforcing agent of the Township of Old Bridge), the following schedule of
fees shall apply to the use of the shelter:
A. Redemption of unsupervised animals. [Amended 10-25-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-30]
(1) For the first redemption of any animal housed in the shelter: $25
plus $10 per day boarding fee.
(2) For the second redemption of any animal housed in the shelter: $50
plus $10 per day boarding fee.
(3) For the third redemption of any animal housed in the shelter: $100
plus $10 per day boarding fee.
(4) For redemption of any animal picked up pursuant to an emergency
call: $50 plus administration fee, $10 per day boarding fee, and
applicable redemption fee.
B. Daily boarding charge, per animal per day: $10. [Amended
10-25-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-30]
C. For the picking up of any animal at a private place for either the owner
or custodian of an animal: $25, plus all surrender fees, during normal
working hours; $50, plus surrender fees, during nonworking hours.
§ 39-20 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 39-23
10:262
D. For receiving unwanted animals brought to the shelter:
(1) Kitten less than nine weeks old: $10.
(2) Cats 10 weeks to six months: $30.
(3) Cats more than six months: $40.
(4) Small and medium dogs: $70. [Amended 10-25-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-30]
(5) Large dog: $90. [Amended 10-25-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-30]
(6) Extra large dog: $100. [Amended 10-25-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-30]
(7) Huge dog (100 or more pounds): $120. [Amended 10-25-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-30]
(8) Out of town - space available: $100.
(9) Keep for adoption - space available: $35 per week.
E. Special services.
(1) Holding quarantined animals to be returned to owner: [Amended
10-25-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-30; 12-13-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-35]
(a) Kitten less than nine weeks old: $20 plus $10 per day boarding
fee.
(b) Cats 10 weeks to six months: $50 plus $10 per day boarding
fee.
(c) Cats more than six months: $60 plus $10 per day boarding fee.
(d) Small and medium dogs: $75 plus $10 per day boarding fee.
(e) Large dogs: $80 plus $10 per day boarding fee.
(f) Extra large dogs: $90 plus $10 per day boarding fee.
(g) Huge dogs (100 or more pounds): $95 plus $10 per day
boarding fee.
(2) Holding quarantined animals for subsequent adoption or
euthanasia: [Amended 10-25-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-30]
(a) Kitten less than nine weeks old: $20 plus appropriate
surrender fees.
(b) Cats 10 weeks to six months: $50 plus appropriate surrender
fees.
§ 39-23 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 39-23
10:263
(c) Cats more than six months: $60 plus appropriate surrender
fees.
(d) Small and medium dogs: $75 plus appropriate surrender fees.
(e) Large dogs: $80 plus appropriate surrender fees.
(f) Extra large dogs: $90 plus appropriate surrender fees.
(g) Huge dogs (100 or more pounds): $95 plus appropriate
surrender fees.
(3) Euthanasia and disposal: $50 per animal; tranquilizer, if needed:
$30. [Amended 10-25-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-30]
(4) Transportation of animal head to Trenton for rabies examination:
$25.
F. Adoption of animals.
(1) Mixed-breed dogs. [Amended 10-25-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-30]
(a) Six weeks to four months old: $50 plus medical expenses.
(b) Five months to one year old: $40 plus medical expenses.
(c) Over one year old: $30 plus medical expenses.
(2) Purebred dogs. [Amended 10-25-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-30]
(a) Six weeks to four months old: $100 plus medical expenses paid
for animal.
(b) Five months to one year old: $90 plus medical expenses paid
for animal.
(c) Over one year old: $80 plus medical expenses paid for animal.
(3) Mixed-breed cats.
(a) Six weeks to four months old: $25 plus medical expenses paid
for animal.
(b) Five months to one year old: $15 plus medical expenses paid
for animal.
(c) Over one year old: $5 plus medical expenses paid for animal.
(4) Purebred cats. [Amended 10-25-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-30]
(a) Six weeks to four months old: $75 plus medical expenses paid
for animal.
(b) Five months to one year old: $50 plus medical expenses paid
for animal.
§ 39-23 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 39-23
10:264
§ 39-24. Interpretation of animal shelter fees. [Added 6-19-1989 by
Ord. No. 20-89; amended 3-27-2000 by Ord. No. 05-00]
The schedule of fees above shall be defined to mean that a daily boarding
charge of $8 is for a twenty-four-hour period covering 12:00 midnight to
11:59 p.m. Any portion of a day where the animal is in custody for less than
one day will be chargeable as a full day. The sum of all applicable fees and
expenses for an animal must be paid prior to the release of the animal
§ 39-25. Cats. [Added 2-4-1991 by Ord. No. 4-91]
(c) Over one year old: $25 plus medical expenses paid for animal.
G. Medical fees. [Added 10-25-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-30]
(1) K-9: $25.
(2) Ferc: $20.
(3) Blood test: $30.
(4) Wormed: $20.
(5) Frontline: $20.
(6) Rabies: $30.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY — Any person or agency designated
or certified by the State of New Jersey to enforce the provisions of this
section.
ANIMAL — For the purpose of this section, "animal" shall mean dog or
cat.
CAT OF LICENSING AGE — Any cat which has attained the age of
seven months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
CAT — Any member of the domestic feline species; male, female or
altered.
CATTERY — Any room or group of rooms, cage or exhibition pen, not
part of a kennel, wherein cats for sale are kept or displayed.
LICENSING AUTHORITY — The agency or department of the Township
of Old Bridge or any designated representative thereof charged with
administering the issuance and/or revocation of permits and licenses
under the provisions of this section.
NEUTERED — Rendered permanently incapable of reproduction as
certified by a licensed veterinarian.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a cat, shall include
every person having a right of property (or custody) in such cat and
§ 39-23 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 39-25
10:265
every person who has such cat in his or her keeping or who harbors or
maintains a cat or knowingly permits a cat to remain on or about any
premises occupied by that person.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, organization or
institution commonly recognized by law as a unit.
B. Rabies vaccination of cats.
(1) Vaccination and license requirement. No person shall own, keep,
harbor or maintain any cat over seven months of age within the
Township of Old Bridge unless such cat is vaccinated and licensed.
The provisions of this section do not apply to cats held in a cattery
or those held by a state or federally licensed research facility or a
veterinary establishment where cats are received or kept for
diagnostic, medical, surgical or other treatments or licensed
animal shelters, pounds, kennels or pet shops.
(2) Vaccination. All cats shall be vaccinated against rabies by a
licensed veterinarian in accordance with the latest "Compendium
of Animal Rabies Vaccines and Recommendations for
Immunization" published by the National Association of State
Public Health Veterinarians, except as provided for in Subsection
B(4).
(3) Vaccination certificate. A certificate of vaccination shall be issued
to the owner of each animal vaccinated on a form recommended by
the state.
(4) Exemptions. Any cat may be exempted from the requirement of
such vaccination for a specified period of time by the Department of
Health and Welfare, upon presentation of a veterinarian's
certificate stating that because of an infirmity or other physical
condition or regimen of therapy, the inoculation of such cat shall be
deemed inadvisable. [Amended 1-9-2006 by Ord. No. 38-2005]
C. Licensing requirements.
(1) Cats must have license number displayed. Any person who shall
own, keep or harbor a cat of licensing age shall annually apply for
and procure from the Clerk of the municipality, or other official
designated by the governing body thereof to license cats in the
municipality in which he or she resides, a license and official
registration sleeve for each cat so owned, kept or harbored and
shall place upon such cat a collar or other device with the license
number securely fastened for displayed thereto. Acceptable
methods of displaying the license number shall include, but are not
limited to, breakaway or elastic collars. License tags or sleeves are
not transferable.
(2) Time for applying for license. The owner of any newly acquired cat
of licensing age or of any cat which attains licensing age shall make
§ 39-25 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 39-25
10:266
application for a licensing tag or sleeve for such cat within 10 days
after such acquisition or age attainment. This requirement will not
apply to a nonresident keeping a cat within the Township of Old
Bridge for no longer than 90 days.
(3) Cats brought into jurisdiction. Any person who shall bring or cause
to be brought into the Township of Old Bridge any cat licensed in
another state for the current year and bearing a registration tag or
sleeve and who shall keep the same or permit the same to be kept
within the Township of Old Bridge for a period of more than 90 days
shall immediately apply for a license and registration tag or sleeve
for each such cat.
(4) Application; contents; preservation of information. The application
shall state the breed, sex, age, color and markings of the cat for
which license and registration are sought and whether it is a longor
short-haired variety; also the name, street and post office
address of the owner and the person who shall keep or harbor such
cat. The information on said application and the registration
number issued for the cat shall be preserved for a period of three
years by the Clerk or other local official designated to license cats
in the municipality.
(5) License forms and tags. License forms and official tags or sleeves
shall be furnished by the municipality and shall be numbered
serially and shall bear the year of the license and the name of the
municipality.
(6) Evidence of inoculation with rabies vaccine or certification of
exemption. Requirement for license: No municipal clerk or other
official designated by the governing body of any municipality to
license cats therein shall grant any such license and official
registration tag or sleeve for any cat unless the owner thereof
provides evidence that the cat to be licensed and registered has
been inoculated with the rabies vaccine of a type approved by and
administered in accordance with the recommendations of the
United States Department of Agriculture and the United States
Department of Human Services, or has been certified exempt as
provided by Subsection B(4) above. The rabies inoculation shall be
administered by a duly licensed veterinarian or by such other
veterinarian permitted by law to do the same.
(7) License fee schedule. A license shall be issued after payment of a
fee of $13 for each unneutered cat, and $10 for each neutered cat.
[Amended 12-22-1994 by Ord. No. 89-94; 8-14-1995 by Ord.
No. 44-95; 7-24-2002 by Ord. No. 39-02; 1-9-2006 by Ord. No.
38-2005]
(a) Any person who has kept or harbored a cat within the
Township of Old Bridge during the months of January through
April and who shall apply for a license on or after June 1 of
§ 39-25 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 39-25
10:267
such year shall pay a late fee of $5 in addition to the cost of the
annual license fee.
(8) Fees; renewals; expiration date of license.
(a) Licenses from another municipality shall be accepted. The
person applying for the license and registration tag and/or
sleeve shall pay the fee fixed or authorized. The fee for the
renewal of the license and registration tag or sleeve shall be
the same as for the original, and said license, registration tag
or sleeve and renewal thereof shall expire on April 30 in the
following year. [Amended 8-14-1995 by Ord. No. 44-95]
(b) Only one license and registration tag or sleeve shall be
required in the licensing year for any cat in the Township of
Old Bridge. Any valid New Jersey license tag or sleeve issued
by a New Jersey municipality shall be accepted by this
municipality as evidence of compliance.
(9) Loss of license. If a license tag or sleeve has been misplaced or lost,
the Township Clerk may issue a duplicate license and/or
registration sleeve for that particular cat at a fee of $0.50.
(10) Proof of licensing. Proof of licensing shall be produced by any
person owning, keeping, maintaining or harboring a cat upon the
request of any health official, police officer, animal control officer
or other authorized person.
(11) Interfering with persons performing duties under this section. No
person shall hinder, molest or interfere with anyone authorized or
empowered to perform any duty under this section.
(12) Disposition of fees collected. License fees and other moneys
collected or received under the provisions of this section shall be
forwarded to the Treasurer of the municipality and shall be placed
in a special account separate from any of the other accounts of the
municipality and shall be used for the following purposes only:
collecting, keeping and disposing of cats liable to seizure, for local
prevention and control of rabies, providing antirabies treatment
under the direction of the Department of Health and Welfare for
any person known or suspected to have been exposed to rabies and
for administering the provisions of this section. Any unexpended
balance remaining in such special account shall be retained until
the end of the third fiscal year following and may be used for any of
the purposes set forth in this section. At the end of said third fiscal
year following and at the end of each fiscal year thereafter, there
shall be transferred from such special account to the general funds
of the municipality any amount then in such account which is in
excess of the total amount paid into the special account during the
last two fiscal years next preceding. [Amended 1-9-2006 by Ord.
No. 38-2005]
§ 39-25 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 39-25.1
10:268
§ 39-25.1. Feral cat program. [Added 3-27-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-09]
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ANIMAL CONTROL PROVIDER — Any agency contracted or selected
by the Township and/or the TNR Committee to coordinate and monitor
the TNR program.[Amended 9-24-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-27]
CAREGIVER — Any person who provides food, water or shelter to or
otherwise cares for a cat.
CODE OFFICIAL — Any person or agency employed by or otherwise
contracted by the Township who is authorized to investigate violations
of laws and regulations concerning cats, and to issue citations in
accordance with relevant New Jersey statutory authority and this Code.
DOMESTICATED CAT — A cat that is socialized to humans and is
appropriate as a companion for humans.
EAR TIPPING — A straight-line cutting of the tip of the left ear of a cat
by a licensed veterinarian while the cat is anesthetized.
FEEDING — To give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any
edible material.
FERAL CAT — A cat which is completely or substantially unsocialized to
humans. The usual and consistent temperament of a feral cat is extreme
fear and resistance to contact with humans. Feral cats are either born
in the wild, the offspring of tame or feral cats and not socialized; or
formerly tame cats that have been abandoned and have reverted to an
untamed state.
FERAL CAT COLONY — An individual feral cat or a group of cats
which congregate together outside as a unit. Any non-feral cats that
congregate with a multiple-cat colony shall be deemed part of it.
NUISANCE — Disturbing the peace by habitually or continually
howling, crying or screaming, or the unreasonable destruction,
desecration or soiling of property against the wishes of the owner of the
property.
OWNER — Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association,
trust, estate, or any other legal entity.
STRAY CAT — A cat which is regularly off the property of the owner,
is not under the physical control and restraint of the owner and is not
regularly provided with food by the owner.
SUITABLE SHELTER — A shelter that provides protection from rain,
sun, and other elements that is adequate to protect the health of the
cat.
TAME CAT — A cat which is socialized to humans and is appropriate as
a companion for humans.
§ 39-25.1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 39-25.1
10:269
TNR — Trap, neuter and return.
TNR COMMITTEE — Any person or entity appointed by the Chief
of Police who or which will perform the duties and responsibilities
as established in this section. In establishing the TNR Committee,
the Chief of Police, or his/her designee, shall select the members,
determine the number of members that will comprise the TNR
Committee, the tenure of each member and the frequency at which the
TNR Committee shall meet. The TNR Committee shall be established
within 60 days of March 27, 2019, the date of adoption of this section.
TNR PROGRAM — A program pursuant to which feral and stray cats
are trapped, neutered or spayed, vaccinated against rabies, ear tipped
and returned to the location where they congregate.
B. Feral cat colonies.
(1) Feral cat colonies shall be permitted and caregivers shall be
entitled to maintain them in accordance with the terms and
conditions of this section. [Amended 9-24-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-27]
(2) No feral cat colony shall be permitted to be located within 1,000
feet of the property line of any public or private school located in
the Township of Old Bridge.
(3) The Township of Old Bridge shall have no liability with regard to
the operation and maintenance of any cat colony permitted by this
section and all caregivers shall agree to defend and indemnify the
Township of Old Bridge in regards to their maintenance of a cat
colony.
(4) Any cat colony that existed prior to the adoption of the ordinance
establishing this section and for which the Township also received a
nuisance complaint prior to the adoption of the ordinance, shall
first require written approval of all property owners located within
five hundred (500) feet of the colony prior to it being permitted to
be maintained by a caregiver in accordance with the terms and
conditions of this section.
C. Animal control provider responsibilities. It shall be the duty of the
animal control provider to:
(1) Provide training for the cat colony caregivers;
(2) Help to resolve any complaints over the conduct of a cat colony
caregiver or of cats within a colony; and
(3) Be responsible for any cost as provided in any Township agreement
with reference to the TNR program.
D. TNR Committee responsibilities. It shall be the duty of the TNR
Committee to:
§ 39-25.1 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 39-25.1
10:270
(1) Help resolve any complaints over the conduct of a colony caregiver
or of cats within a colony;
(2) Maintain records provided by colony caregivers on the registration,
size and location of the colonies, as well as the vaccination and
spay/neuter records of cats in the caregiver's colonies;
(3) Report semiannually in writing to the Code Official on the status of
the colony, including data on the number and gender of all cats in
the colony, the number of cats who died or otherwise ceased being
a part of the colony during the prior six-month period, the number
of kittens born to colony cats and their disposition, the number of
cats and kittens spayed and neutered and the number of cats and
kittens placed in permanent homes as companion cats.
(4) Provide the semi-annual report forms to caregivers and provide
assistance upon request by the caregiver in the preparation of the
forms.
(5) To contract and hire the Animal Control Provider. [Amended
9-24-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-27]
E. Feral cat caregiver responsibilities.
(1) It shall be the duty of feral cat caregivers to:
(a) Register the feral cat colony with the TNR Committee;
(b) Take steps to vaccinate the colony population for rabies and
update the required vaccination protocols whenever possible;
take steps to get all cats in the colony population spayed/
neutered by a licensed veterinarian;
(c) Maintain digital photos of each cat in the colony and copies of
documents evidencing that the cats have been vaccinated,
spayed/neutered and ear tipped; providing food, water and, if
feasible, suitable shelter for colony cats;
(d) Observe the colony cats and keep a record of any illnesses or
unusual behavior noticed in any colony cats;
(e) Obtain the written approval of the owner of any property to
which the caregiver requires access to provide colony care;
(f) Take steps, in the event that kittens are born to a colony cat, to
remove the kittens from the colony after they have been
weaned, and place the kittens in homes, foster homes, or with
animal shelters, rescue organizations or veterinary offices for
the purpose of subsequent permanent placement;
(g) Report semiannually in writing to the TNR Committee on the
status of the colony, the total number of cats in the colony,
including data on the number and gender of all cats in the
§ 39-25.1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 39-25.1
10:271
colony, the number of cats who died or otherwise ceased being
a part of the colony during the prior six-month period, the
number of kittens born to colony cats and their disposition,
the number of cats and kittens spayed and neutered and the
number of cats and kittens placed in permanent homes as
companion cats;
(h) Obtain proper medical attention for any colony cat that
appears to require it;
(i) Undergo training for themselves and their responsible
substitutes in the proper management of a colony as developed
and verified by the animal control provider;
(j) Set up consistent and monitored feeding schedules. Feeding
shall be limited to daylight hours. All remaining food must be
removed daily;
(k) "Ear tip" all cats with a single cut preferably on the left ear;
(2) All costs and expenses associated with maintaining a feral cat
colony shall be borne solely by the feral cat caregiver and the
Township of Old Bridge shall not provide any financial resources or
funds to caregivers who maintain a cat colony.
F. Exemptions from restrictive ordinances. The following sections of the
Township Code shall not apply to feral cat colonies managed by the TNR
Program or to any person or organization that is providing care for a
feral cat colony and is taking steps to trap and sterilize the animals:
§ 39-25, Cats.
G. Cat colony caregiver registration-ownership exemption. Any person
undertaking the duties and responsibilities of a cat colony caregiver
shall first be registered with the TNR Committee at no cost. A
registered caregiver shall not be considered an owner in or be subject
to regulations governing ownership or control of an animal, except as
specified in this subsection.
H. Ordinance enforcement. The Township shall retain the following rights:
(1) The right to seize or remove from a colony, cats that have not been
vaccinated against rabies and which are demonstrating signs of the
disease.
(2) The right to seize or remove from a colony a cat that is creating a
nuisance after the caregiver and sponsor have been given 60 days
to resolve the complaint or remove and relocate the cat and have
failed to do so.
(3) The right to seize or remove a colony of cats when the caregiver
regularly fails to comply with the requirements of this section and
the TNR Committee has not been able to obtain a replacement or
substitute caregiver within 60 days of the Township's notice to the
§ 39-25.1 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 39-25.1
10:272
TNR Committee of the caregiver's failure to comply with this
subsection.
(4) The right to replace or remove a caregiver who fails to comply with
the responsibilities and requirements of this section after
reasonable notice is provided to the caregiver of noncompliance.
I. Nuisance complaints. The requirements of this subsection
notwithstanding, Code Officials and the Township Police Department or
other appropriate Township official may investigate any nuisance
complaint. If a Code official, Police Department or Township official
determines that an ear-tipped feral colony cat is causing a nuisance as
defined in this section, the Code Official, Police Department or
Township Official shall contact the TNR Committee and allow the TNR
Committee 60 days to resolve the complaint or remove the cat before
further action is taken. The caregiver or TNR Committee must begin
nuisance abatement procedures within 48 hours after being notified of
a nuisance and must take all reasonable and necessary steps to resolve
the nuisance in as short a time period as possible, not to exceed 60
days. If the TNR Committee fails to resolve the nuisance or remove the
cat within the 60 days, the Code Official may remove the cat. If a Code
Official, Police Department or Township official reasonably determines
that a cat is injured or poses a significant threat to public health, the
Code Official, Police Department or Township official may reduce the
time that the TNR Committee has to resolve the complaint, as
necessary to protect the cat and public health, before taking further
action. In the case of an emergency, the Code Official, Police
Department or Township Official may remove the cat, but within 24
hours must provide the TNR Committee with notice of the cat's
whereabouts and allow the TNR Committee an opportunity to retrieve
the cat for treatment, return, or relocation.
J. Enforcement and fines.
(1) This section shall be enforced by the Code Official, Police
Department and any other Department or Township official that
may hereinafter be designated by the Township Administrator.
(2) If it is determined by the Code Official, Police Department or
Township official that the an owner has abandoned a domesticated
cat, then the owner shall be subject to a maximum penalty of $100
per violation; each and every day in which a violation of this section
exists shall constitute a separate violation.
K. Study and review. This section shall be reviewed after a period of one
year from the date of adoption of this section to permit the Township to
study the effectiveness of the TNR Program and to review the
continuance of this subsection.
§ 39-25.1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 39-25.1
10:273

ARTICLE III
Dangerous Dogs
[Adopted 8-22-2005 by Ord. No. 22-2005]
§ 39-26. Purpose.
This article establishes municipal regulations governing dangerous dogs.
§ 39-27. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — Certified Municipal Animal Control Officer
as defined in N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.1.
BODILY INJURY — Physical pain, illness or any impairment of physical
condition.[Added 10-23-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-23]
BODILY INJURY, SERIOUS — Bodily injury which creates a substantial risk
of death or which causes serious, permanent disfigurement or protracted
loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.[Added
10-23-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-23]
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Health.
DOMESTIC ANIMAL — Any cat, dog or livestock other than poultry.
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG — Any dog or dog hybrid declared
potentially dangerous by a municipal court pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-23.
VICIOUS DOG — Any dog or dog hybrid declared vicious by a municipal
court pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-22.
§ 39-28. Seizure and impoundment of dog by Animal Control
Officer; grounds.
A. The Animal Control Officers shall seize and impound a dog when the
officer has reasonable cause to believe that the dog:
(1) Attacked a person and caused death or serious bodily injury as
defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1(b) to that person;
(2) Caused bodily injury as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1(a) to a person
during an unprovoked attack and poses a serious threat of harm to
persons or domestic animals;
(3) Engaged in dog-fighting activities as described in N.J.S.A. 4:22-24
and N.J.S.A. 4:22-26; or
(4) Has been trained, tormented, badgered, baited or encouraged to
engage in unprovoked attacks upon persons or domestic animals.
B. The dog shall be impounded until the final disposition as to whether the
dog is vicious or potentially dangerous. The dog shall be impounded in
§ 39-26 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 39-28
10:275
§ 39-29. Notice of seizure and impoundment; determination of
identity of owners; notice of hearing; return of statement by owner;
destruction of dog.
§ 39-30. Agreement between Township of Old Bridge and dog
owner; settlement and disposition; liability of municipality; legal
expenses.
Notwithstanding any provision in N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 et seq., to the contrary,
the municipality and the owner of the dog may settle and dispose of the
matter at any time in such manner and according to such terms and
conditions as may be mutually agreed upon. Notwithstanding any provision
of N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 et seq., to the contrary, no municipality or any of its
employees shall have any liability by virtue of having entered into any
settlement agreement pursuant to this section, or for any action or inaction
related to the entry into such agreement, for any injuries or damages
caused thereafter by the dog. The municipality may, as a condition of
the settlement agreement, also require that the owner of the dog hold
the municipality harmless for any legal expenses or fees the municipality
may incur in defending against any cause of action brought against the
municipality, notwithstanding the prohibition against such causes of action
set forth in this section.
the Old Bridge Shelter located in the Township of Old Bridge.
[Amended 10-23-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-23]
A. The Animal Control Officer shall notify the municipal court and the
Municipal Health Officer immediately that he has seized and
impounded a dog pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-19, or that he has reasonable
cause to believe that a dog has killed another domestic animal and that
a hearing is required. The Animal Control Officer shall, through a
reasonable effort, attempt to determine the identity of the owner of any
dog seized and impounded pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-19. If its owner
cannot be identified within seven days, that dog may be humanely
destroyed.
B. The Animal Control Officer shall, within three working days of the
determination of the identity of the owner of a dog seized and
impounded pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-19, notify by certified mail, return
receipt requested, the owner concerning the seizure and impoundment,
and that, if the owner wishes, a hearing will be held to determine
whether the impounded dog is vicious or potentially dangerous. This
notice shall also require that the owner return within seven days, by
certified mail or hand delivery, a signed statement indicating whether
he wishes the hearing to be conducted, or if not, to relinquish
ownership of the dog, in which case the dog may be humanely
destroyed. If the owner cannot be notified by certified mail, return
receipt requested or refuses to sign for the certified letter, or does not
reply to the certified letter with a signed statement within seven days of
receipt, the dog may be humanely destroyed.
§ 39-28 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 39-31
10:276
§ 39-31. Finding to declare dog vicious; grounds.
§ 39-32. Finding to declare dog potentially dangerous.
A. The municipal court shall declare the dog vicious if it finds by clear and
convincing evidence that the dog:
(1) Killed a person or caused serious bodily injury as defined in N.J.S.A.
2C:11-1(b) to a person; or
(2) Has engaged in dog-fighting activities as described in N.J.S.A.
4:22-24 and N.J.S.A. 4:22-26.
B. A dog shall not be declared vicious for inflicting death or serious bodily
injury as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1(b) upon a person if the dog was
provoked. The municipality shall bear the burden of proof to
demonstrate that the dog was not provoked.
C. If the municipal court declares a dog to be vicious, and no appeal is
made of this ruling pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-25, the dog shall be
destroyed in a humane and expeditious manner, except that no dog may
be destroyed during the pendency of an appeal.
A. The municipal court shall declare a dog to be potentially dangerous if it
finds by clear and convincing evidence that the dog:
(1) Caused bodily injury as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:11(a) to a person
during an unprovoked attack and poses a serious threat of bodily
injury or death to a person.
(2) Severely injured or killed another domestic animal and: [Amended
10-23-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-23]
(a) Poses a threat of serious bodily in jury or death to a person; or
(b) Poses a threat of death to another domestic animal.
(3) Has been trained, tormented, badgered, baited or encouraged to
engage in unprovoked attacks upon persons or domestic animals.
B. A dog shall not be declared potentially dangerous for:
(1) Causing bodily injury as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1(a) to a person if
the dog was provoked; or
(2) Severely injuring or killing a domestic animal if the domestic
animal was the aggressor. For the purposes of Subsection B(1) of
this subsection, the municipality shall bear the burden of proof to
demonstrate that the dog was not provoked. [Amended
10-23-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-23]
§ 39-31 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 39-33
10:277
§ 39-33. Order and schedule for compliance for potentially
dangerous dog; conditions.
If the municipal court declares the dog to be potentially dangerous, it shall
issue an order and a schedule for compliance which, in part:
A. Shall require the owner to comply with the following conditions:
(1) To apply, at his own expense, to the Municipal Clerk or other official
designated to license dogs pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.2 for a
special municipal potentially dangerous dog license, municipal
registration number and red identification tag issued pursuant to
this article. The owner shall at his own expense have the
registration number tattooed upon the dog in a prominent location.
A potentially dangerous dog shall be impounded until the owner
obtains a municipal potentially dangerous dog license, municipal
registration number and red identification tag.
(2) To display in a conspicuous manner a sign on his premises warning
that a potentially dangerous dog is on the premises. The sign shall
be visible and legible from 50 feet of the enclosure required
pursuant to Subsection A(3) of this section.
(3) To immediately erect and maintain an enclosure for the potentially
dangerous dog on the property where the potentially dangerous
dog will be kept and maintained which has sound sides, top and
bottom to prevent the potentially dangerous dog from escaping by
climbing, jumping or digging and within a fence of at least six feet
in height separated by at least three feet from the confined area.
The owner of a potentially dangerous dog shall securely lock the
enclosure to prevent the entry of the general public and to preclude
any release or escape of a potentially dangerous dog by an
unknowing child or other person. All potentially dangerous dogs
shall be confined in the enclosure or, if taken out of the enclosure,
securely muzzled and restrained with a tether approved by the
Animal Control Officer having a minimum tensile strength
sufficiently in excess of that required to restrict the potentially
dangerous dog's movements to a radius of no more than three feet
from the owner and under the direct supervision of the owner.
B. May require the owner to maintain liability insurance in an amount
determined by the municipal court to cover any damage or injury
caused by the potentially dangerous dog. The liability insurance, which
may be separate from any other homeowner policy, shall contain a
provision requiring the municipality in which the owner resides to be
named as an additional insured for the sole purpose of being notified by
the insurance company of any cancellation, termination or expiration of
the liability insurance policy.
§ 39-33 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 39-34
10:278
§ 39-34. Procedures for appeal.
The owner of the dog, or the Animal Control Officer in the municipality
in which the dog was impounded, may appeal any final decision, order or
judgment, including any conditions attached thereto, of a municipal court
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 et seq., by filing an appeal with the Superior
Court, Law Division, in accordance with the Rules Governing the Courts
of the State of New Jersey pertaining to appeals from courts of limited
jurisdiction. The Superior Court shall hear the appeal by conducting a
hearing de novo in the manner established by those rules for appeals from
courts of limited jurisdiction.
§ 39-35. Liability of owner for costs of impoundment and
destruction.
§ 39-36. Right to convene hearing for subsequent action of dog.
If the municipal court finds that the dog is not vicious or potentially
dangerous, the municipal court shall retain the right to convene a hearing
to determine whether the dog is vicious or potentially dangerous for any
subsequent actions of the dog.
§ 39-37. Duties of owner of potentially dangerous dog.
The owner of a potentially dangerous dog shall:
A. If a dog is declared vicious or potentially dangerous and all appeals
pertaining thereto have been exhausted, the owner of the dog shall be
liable to the municipality in which the dog is impounded for the costs
and expenses of impounding and destroying the dog. The municipality
may establish by ordinance a schedule of these costs and expenses. The
owner shall incur the expense of impounding the dog in a facility other
than the municipal depository, regardless of whether the dog is
ultimately found to be vicious or potentially dangerous.
B. If the dog has bitten or exposed a person within 10 days previous to the
time of euthanasia, its head shall be transported to the New Jersey
State Department of Health laboratory for rabies testing.
A. Comply with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 et seq., in accordance
with a schedule established by the municipal court, but in no case more
than 60 days subsequent to the date of determination.
B. Notify the licensing authority, local police department or force and the
Animal Control Officer if a potentially dangerous dog is at large or has
attacked a human being or killed a domestic animal.
C. Notify the licensing authority, local police department or force and the
Animal Control Officer within 24 hours of the death, sale or donation of
a potentially dangerous dog.
§ 39-34 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 39-37
10:279
§ 39-38. Violations by owner: penalties, enforcement; seizure and
impoundment of dog; destruction by order of the court.
The owner of a potentially dangerous dog who is found by clear and
convincing evidence to have violated this article or any rule or regulation
adopted pursuant thereto or to have failed to comply with a court's order
shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 per day of the violation,
and each day's continuance of the violation shall constitute a separate and
distinct violation. The municipal court shall have jurisdiction to enforce this
section. The Animal Control Officer is authorized to seize and impound any
potentially dangerous dog whose owner fails to comply with the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 et seq., or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant
thereto, or a court's order. The municipal court may order that the dog so
seized and impounded be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner.
§ 39-39. Potentially dangerous dog registration number, red
identification tag and license issuance, telephone number to report
violations.
Each municipality shall:
D. Prior to selling or donating the dog, inform the prospective owner that
the dog has been declared potentially dangerous.
E. Upon the sale or donation of the dog to a person residing in a different
municipality, notify the department and the licensing authority, police
department or force and animal control officer of that municipality of
the transfer of ownership and name, address and telephone number of
the new owner.
F. In addition to any license fee required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.3,
pay a potentially dangerous license fee to the municipality as provided
by N.J.S.A. 4:19-31.
A. Issue a potentially dangerous dog registration number and red
identification tag along with a municipal potentially dangerous dog
license upon a demonstration of sufficient evidence by the owner to the
Animal Control Officer that he has complied with the court's orders. The
last three digits of each potentially dangerous dog registration number
issued by a municipality will be the three-number code assigned to that
municipality in the regulations promulgated pursuant to N.J.S.A.
4:19-33. The Animal Control Officer shall verify in writing compliance to
the Township Clerk or other official designated to license dogs in the
municipality.
B. Publicize a telephone number for reporting violations of this article.
This telephone number shall be forwarded to the Department and any
changes in this number shall be reported immediately to the
Department.
§ 39-37 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 39-40
10:280
§ 39-40. Fee for potentially dangerous dog license.
Each person who shall own, possess, keep or harbor any potentially
dangerous dog or dogs shall obtain an annual license for each dog and shall
have the same registered and numbered with the Township Clerk, and for
such license shall pay the sum of $700, as a license fee for each and every
potentially dangerous dog. Said license fee shall be in lieu of the dog license
fee required pursuant to the Code of the Township of Old Bridge.
§ 39-41. Inspection to determine continuing compliance.
The Animal Control Officer shall inspect the enclosure and the owner's
property at least monthly to determine continuing compliance with this
article.
§ 39-42. Deposit and use of fines and fees.
All fines and fees collected or received by the Township pursuant to this
article shall be deposited in a special account and used by the Township to
administer and enforce the provisions of this article.
§ 39-43. Inapplicability to dogs used for law enforcement activities.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to dogs used for law
enforcement activities.
§ 39-40 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 39-43
10:281
Chapter 42
ANTI-NEPOTISM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 5. Ethics — See Ch. 145.
§ 42-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CONTRACT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY — Personal involvement in or
direct supervisory responsibility for the formulation or execution of a
contract with the Township in any capacity, including without limitation the
preparation of specifications, evaluation of bids or proposals, negotiation of
contract terms, or supervision of performance.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT AGENCY — Any agency, board, governing body
including the chief executive officer, bureau, division, office, commission
or other instrumentality within the municipality and any independent local
authority, including any entity created by more than one municipality, which
performs functions other than a purely advisory nature, but shall not
include a school board.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE — A local government
officer or a local government employee.
RELATIVE OF AN INDIVIDUAL — The individual's spouse, domestic partner
as defined in Section 3 of P.L. 2003, c.46 (N.J.S.A. 26:8A-3), or partner in
a civil union couple as defined in Section 2 of P.L. 2006, c.103 (N.J.S.A.
37:1-29), or the individual's or spouse's or partner's parent, child, brother,
sister, aunt, uncle, niece, nephew, grandparent, grandchild, son-in-law,
daughter-in-law, first cousin, stepparent, stepchild, stepbrother, stepsister,
half-brother or half-sister, whether the relative is related to the individual or
the individual's spouse or partner by blood, marriage or adoption.
§ 42-2. Employment prohibitions.
A. The following are prohibited:
(1) Having a relative employed or sponsoring the employment of a
relative in the governmental agency in which the officer or
employee serves;
(2) Having employed or sponsoring the employment of anyone other
than a relative in exchange for:
(a) The employment or sponsorship for employment in a public
position of a relative by another public officer or employee; or
§ 39-43 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 42-2
10:282
(b) The provision of assistance to a relative in obtaining
employment or contracts with a person performing a public
contract;
(3) Exercising contract management authority over any public
contract with a person who is, or employs or has a contract with, a
relative of the officer or employee; or
(4) Using or permitting the use of the officer or employee's exercise of
contract management authority over a public contract, when not
barred outright under Subsection A(2) to;
(a) Assist a relative in obtaining employment or contracts with a
person performing that public contract; or
(b) Assist anyone other than a relative in obtaining employment or
contracts with a person performing the public contract in
exchange for:
[1] The employment or sponsorship for employment of a
relative by another such public officer or employee; or
[2] The provision of assistance by another such public officer
or employee in obtaining employment or contracts with
any public contractor.
(5) Notwithstanding the provisions of any other law to the contrary,
there shall not be employed, or nominated, proposed or
recommended for employment, in any Township agency in which a
member of the Council, Township officer or employee, or special
Township officer or employee serves or over which the member,
officer or employee exercises authority, supervision, or control:
(a) Any relative of the member, officer or employee; or
(b) Any person other than a relative of the member, officer or
employee if the employment, or the nomination, proposal or
recommendation for employment, of that person is in exchange
for or in consideration of:
[1] The employment, or the nomination, proposal or
recommendation for employment, in the same or any other
Old Bridge Township agency, of any relative of the
member, officer or employee by any other such member,
officer or employee, by a local government officer or
employee; or
[2] The provision of assistance to a relative of the member,
officer or employee in securing employment or contracts
with a person engaged in the performance of a contract for
the provision of goods or services to the same or any other
Old Bridge Township agency, or to an Old Bridge Township
§ 42-2 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 42-2
10:283
§ 42-3. Exceptions.
The prohibited employment or professional or business service practices set
forth in § 42-2 herein shall not apply in the following circumstances:
government authority or to any Old Bridge Township
Commission.
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of any other law to the contrary:
(1) If a person engaged in the performance of a public contract for the
provision of goods or services to any Township agency, authority or
commission is, or employs or has a contract with, a relative of a
member of the Council, Township officer or employee, or special
Township officer or employee, the member, officer or employee
shall not exercise contract management authority over that public
contract.
(2) If a member of the Council, Township officer or employee, or
special Township officer or employee exercises contract
management authority over a public contract for the provision of
goods or services to a Township agency, authority, commission, the
member, officer or employee shall not use or permit the use of that
authority to:
(a) Assist a relative of the member, officer or employee in securing
employment or contracts with a person engaged in the
performance of that contract.
C. The employment of or contracting with a relative of a council member,
township officer or employee, or special officer or employee of the
Township of Old Bridge, by such a person within six months prior to the
commencement of, during the term of, or within six months after the
completion or termination of, a public contract that the person is to
perform, is performing, or shall have performed shall be evidence that
any contract management authority exercised by the member, officer,
or employee was exercised in violation of Subsection B of this section or
that the relative's employment or contract with the person was
obtained in violation of Subsection B(2) or B(2)(a) of this section, as
appropriate.
A. Nothing contained herein shall restrict or prohibit the continued
employment of individuals to a position or positions within the
Township where a relative of an employee is elected to the governing
body after the date of the employee's start of employment with the
Township of Old Bridge.
B. Nothing contained herein shall affect the employment of any present
Township employees and/or any existing contractual obligations with
employees by the Township.
§ 42-2 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 42-3
10:284
Chapter 52
BEACH AND RECREATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 30.
Animals — See Ch. 39.
Camping — See Ch. 93.
Recreation fees — See Ch. 160, Art. I.
Festivals; mass gatherings — See Ch. 169.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 342.
C. Nothing contained herein shall restrict or prohibit the hiring of a
seasonal part-time employee who is a relative of a department head,
elected officials or other employee of the Township.
D. This section shall not apply to the relative of any member of any local
government agency, board, commission and committee where that
member is employed as a volunteer.
§ 42-3 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 42-3
10:285

ARTICLE I
Use Regulations
[Adopted as Sec. 4-14 of the 1973 Revised General Ordinances]
§ 52-1. Purpose.
The provisions of this article are deemed necessary to promote the general
public safety and welfare of all persons using the beach, public areas and
recreation areas of the Township.
§ 52-2. Applicable areas.
The regulations hereafter set forth shall apply to the beach, bay and lake
areas and all recreation areas of the Township, which areas are hereby
defined and declared to be:
§ 52-3. Unlawful conduct.
A. All of those areas of land along the oceanfront, bayfront and lakefront
owned or rented by the Township.
B. All of those areas of land along the oceanfront, bayfront and lakefront
wherein the Township has control of the use by easement, deed or
deeds; in addition, all of those areas of land along the oceanfront,
bayfront, lakefront and beach areas which shall be open to the public
for public purposes as a result of ownership or control by the Township
as owner in fee, easement, deed or deeds, agreement with owner,
dedication, riparian rights or otherwise.
C. All other areas set apart by written consent of owners filed with the
Township.
D. Public street ends on the bayfront.
E. Public parks, playgrounds and any other places of public recreation and
recreational facilities.
A. The following conduct by any person in an applicable area under this
article is prohibited:
(1) To throw, bat or catch a baseball, football, basketball or softball or
fly kites or engage in the playing of any games endangering the
health and safety of others in areas posted by sign as reserved for
sunbathing and swimming only, or so designated by the lifeguards,
or to swim or bathe in any area not posted for swimming or
bathing.
(2) To swim or bathe beyond a safe depth in the swimming areas, as
from time to time indicated, determined or regulated by the
lifeguards, or to swim or bathe in any area not posted for swimming
or bathing.
§ 52-1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 52-3
10:287
(3) To use a surfboard, canoe, boat or raft of any kind or description,
except at locations designated by the lifeguards.
(4) To throw, place or deposit or leave any bottles, glass, crockery,
sharp or pointed article or thing, paper, refuse or debris of any
kind.
(5) To disobey any order, direction, whistle or other signal used by the
lifeguards or the police.
(6) To consume alcoholic beverages on the public beaches or in any
recreational area.
(7) To climb upon, stand on or tamper with or handle the lifeguards'
boats or other equipment used by lifeguards.
(8) To revel, disport or behave in a noisy and boisterous manner,
emitting loud cries and other noises, so as to inconvenience others
or otherwise disrupt and disturb the public peace and dignity
within the areas defined.
(9) To park vehicles, loiter, assemble, band or crowd together so as to
interfere or be likely to interfere with the ingress and egress of
others at the street ends approaching the beaches or other
recreation areas.
(10) To act in a loud, indecent, obscene or offensive manner.
(11) To sleep on the public beaches or in any recreation area during any
time between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
(12) To change clothes, dress, undress or otherwise disrobe, except
outer wraps.
(13) To drive or move any vehicle on the beach or other recreation area.
(14) To use any type of vehicle or truck or trailer as a place for the
purpose of changing from street attire into bathing suit or vice
versa or to engage at any time of day or night in the practice
commonly known as "sleeping in cars" within the areas defined or
on any of the public streets of the Township.
(15) To engage in the activity of fishing during the months of June, July,
August and September of each year in areas posted by sign to
prohibit this activity or as designated by the lifeguards.
(16) To be at any beach or bay area during the hours of 11:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m. or loiter in any park area between one hour after sunset
and sunrise. This prohibition shall not apply to surf fisherman who
shall be permitted to occupy a beach or bay area for purposes of
fishing activities so long as the surf fisherman has first secured a
valid and current written permit from the Director of the
§ 52-3 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 52-3
10:288
§ 52-4. Beach parties.
Anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding, beach parties may be
permitted upon application for and receipt of written permission therefor
from the Township Manager or anyone he may so designate.
§ 52-5. Beach parking fees. [Added 2-20-1979 by Ord. No. D-260]
Department of Parks and Recreation. [Amended 7-21-1994 by
Ord. No. 42-94]
(17)No dog or other domestic pet is permitted to run unleashed in any
park or recreation area. Animal defecation shall be removed
immediately by any pet owner whenever a dog or other domestic
pet eliminates upon any Township land or public right-of-way.
[Added 7-21-1994 by Ord. No. 42-94]
B. The Township Council may, from time to time, promulgate, by
resolution, additional rules and regulations governing applicable areas
under this article, which rules shall be properly posted in such areas.
A. Laurence Harbor Beach parking areas.
(1) All buses are prohibited from parking at the Laurence Harbor
parking areas.
(2) Automobiles shall pay the following rates:
(a) Old Bridge residents:
[1] Season parking pass: $5.
[2] One dollar per car with four people (daily fee).
[3] Twenty-five cents per person in excess of four people (daily
fee).
[4] Two dollars for season parking up to May 30.
(b) Nonresidents:
[1] Season parking pass: $10.
[2] Two dollars per car with four people (daily fee).
[3] Fifty cents per person in excess of four people (daily fee).
[4] Four dollars for season parking up to May 30.
§ 52-3 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 52-5
10:289

ARTICLE II
Rules and Regulations Governing County Parks
[Adopted 4-24-2000 by Ord. No. 20-00]
§ 52-6. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to formally adopt the revised Rules and
Regulations Governing the Use of County Parks adopted by the Middlesex
County Board of Chosen Freeholders on August 19,1999, so that such rules
may be enforced by the Township of Old Bridge on all county lands within
the Township.
§ 52-7. Adoption of county rules and regulations.
The Township Council of the Township of Old Bridge hereby formally adopts
the Rules and Regulations governing the Use of County Parks as adopted
by the Middlesex County Board of Chosen Freeholders by Resolution No.
99-1441 dated August 19, 1999, with respect to any and all county lands
within the Township of Old Bridge. Ten copies of the Rules and Regulations
Governing the Use of County Parks shall be filed with the Township Clerk
and the Township of Old Bridge Police Department in accordance with the
filing requirements of N.J.S.A. 40:69A-181.
§ 52-6 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 52-7
10:291

ARTICLE III
Skate Park
[Adopted 9-11-2000 by Ord. No. 39-00]
§ 52-8. Skate Park rules and regulations.
The following rules and regulations shall apply to the Skate Park located in
Veteran's Park:
§ 52-9. Hours of operation.
The Skate Park is open only during regular hours of park operation (dawn
until dusk unless lighted).
§ 52-10. Reports of accidents and infractions.
Any accident or infraction of these rules and regulations must be
immediately reported to the Park Supervisor and the Old Bridge Police
Department.
A. Open to skateboards, in-line skates and BMX bicycles only.
B. Helmets, elbow pads and knee pads are required to be worn at all
times.
C. Nonskaters, nonboarders and nonbikers are not allowed on the Skate
Park surface or ramps.
D. No personal ramps, rails, boxes or any other jump apparatus are
allowed.
E. No food or drink allowed except for water in plastic bottles.
F. No horseplay or aggressive behavior will be tolerated.
G. No motorized skateboards, bicycles, scooters or cycles are allowed.
§ 52-8 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 52-10
10:293

ARTICLE IV
Schedule of Fines for Violations of Rules and Regulations
Governing County Parks
[Adopted 6-25-2001 by Ord. No. 33-01]
§ 52-11. Purpose.
This article formally adopts the Schedule of Fines adopted by the Middlesex
County Board of Chosen Freeholders on February 15, 2001, for violations of
the Rules and Regulations Governing the Use of County Parks.
§ 52-12. Adoption of County Schedule of Fines.
The Township Council of the Township of Old Bridge hereby formally adopts
the Schedule of Fines for Violations of the Rules and Regulations Governing
the Use of County Parks as adopted by the Middlesex County Board of
Chosen Freeholders on February 15, 2001. The Schedule of Fines shall be
kept on file with the Township Clerk.
§ 52-11 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 52-12
10:295
Chapter 67
BOWS AND ARROWS
§ 67-1. Unlawful conduct.
It shall be unlawful to:
Chapter 72
BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 198.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 366.
Stormwater — See Ch. 432.
A. Use a bow and arrow from a motor vehicle.
B. Cast an arrow from or across any road, street or highway.
C. Possess a nocked arrow within 600 feet of an occupied dwelling.
D. Possess a nocked arrow within 600 feet of a school playground unless
authorized by school officials and used under proper supervision.
§ 52-12 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 67-1
10:296
ARTICLE I
Maintenance of Retention, Detention and Recharge Basins
[Adopted 5-8-2006 by Ord. No. 15-2006]
§ 72-1. Purpose.
This article establishes municipal regulations governing the maintenance
and upkeep of retention, detention and recharge basins in the Township of
Old Bridge.
§ 72-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DETENTION BASIN — A man-made or natural water collection facility
designed to collect surface water and subsurface water in order to impede
its flow and to release the same gradually into natural or man-made outlets
at a controlled rate consistent with sound downstream stormwater
management practices.
OWNER — Any owner of record, including any person, group of persons,
firm, association, homeowner's association or corporation owning property
containing a retention, detention, or recharge basin located within the
Township of Old Bridge.
RECHARGE BASIN — A basin used to recharge surface and subsurface
water.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY — Any person, group of persons, firm, association,
homeowner's association or corporation that receives a benefit from a
retention, detention or recharge basin located within the Township of Old
Bridge.
RETENTION BASIN — A pond, pool or basin used for the permanent
storage of water.
§ 72-3. Unlawful to allow growth above certain height.
§ 72-4. Charge for mowing by the Township of Old Bridge.
When the Township of Old Bridge is required for health and safety reasons
under this article to mow or remove debris from a detention, retention or
A. It shall be unlawful for any owner or responsible party to permit any
debris, grass or weeds or other vegetation whatsoever to grow higher
than 10 inches from the ground in, on or around any retention,
detention or recharge basin on property owned or benefited by such
person, group of persons, firm, association, homeowner's association or
corporation within the Township of Old Bridge.
B. This section does not apply to mature trees or detention or recharge
basins which are designed to grow into natural wetlands.
§ 72-1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 72-4
10:297
recharge basin on private property, or when the Township of Old Bridge
is requested by the owner or responsible party to mow or remove debris
from a detention or retention basin on private property in the Township, the
following cost shall be assessed as a lien on the property:
§ 72-5. Notice of violation.
In case such owner or responsible party shall fail to keep such basin cut
to the height above-mentioned and free of debris, the Township Engineer
or his designee shall serve a notice on such owner or responsible party
ordering the same be done within 10 days from the date of such notice.
§ 72-6. Action to correct violation; recovery of costs.
§ 72-7. Inspection to determine continuing compliance.
The Township Engineer or his designee shall periodically inspect the basins
within the Township of Old Bridge to determine continuing compliance with
this article.
§ 72-8. Maintenance of retention, detention or recharge basins;
violations declared nuisance; penalty.
Any owner or responsible party violating any of the provisions of this article
shall be guilty of maintaining a nuisance and, upon conviction thereof
before any court of competent jurisdiction, shall be fined no less than $100
nor more than $500 and costs. Each day that such nuisance is maintained
shall constitute a separate offense.
A. Mowing and/or weeding: $100 per hour with a $100 minimum.
B. Removal of trash and debris as needed: $100 per hour with a $100
minimum.
C. Administrative charge: $50 per occurrence.
A. Should the owner or responsible party receiving any such notice refuse
or neglect to cut the grass, weeds or remove the debris from the
retention or detention basin within the time provided above, the
Township Engineer or his designee may provide for the cutting or
debris removal from the basin by and under his direction. In such case,
the Township Engineer certifies the cost thereof to be charged against
the lands, which shall become a lien upon such lands, added to and
becoming part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon such
lands and shall bear interest at the same rate as other taxes and shall
be collected and enforced in the same manner as taxes.
B. If the basin is located on property not owned by an owner of record as
defined herein, then said costs shall be charged on a pro rata basis
against all responsible parties who benefit from the basin and its use
and shall become a lien on the property or properties of the owner(s) so
benefited in the manner noted above.
§ 72-4 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 72-8
10:298
Chapter 86
BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarms and alarm systems — See Ch. 26.
§ 72-8 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 72-8
10:299

ARTICLE I
Security Measures
[Adopted 1-21-1986 by Ord. No. 2-86 (Sec. 4-27 of the 1973 Revised
General Ordinances)]
§ 86-1. Purpose; scope of article.
§ 86-2. Closing hours; personnel and security requirements.
No business or commercial establishment to which the public is invited shall
be open between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. (2300 to 0500 hours)
unless:
§ 86-3. Violations and penalties.82
Any person who shall violate a provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished as set forth in Chapter 1, Article II, Penalty. A separate
A. The purpose of this article is the regulation of the opening and closing
hours of all business and commercial establishments to which the
public is invited in the interest of the protection of employees, patrons
and law enforcement officers. It has been determined that unprotected
and understaffed business and commercial enterprises are prey to the
criminal element in our society during the late night and early morning
hours and that certain security devices must be provided in order to
protect the general public who use these establishments.
B. The provisions and requirements of this article shall not apply to, nor
include, any business or commercial establishment issued a license or
permit for on-the-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages or
permitted to carry on a business or commercial activity under the laws
of the United States, the State of New Jersey or other municipal
ordinances not inconsistent with the provisions of this article.
A. There are two employees on continuous duty in that part of the business
or commercial establishment to which the public is invited; and, in
addition thereto
B. The business or commercial establishment shall employ a security
officer; or the premises has in operation a security device approved by
the Chief of Police of the Township of Old Bridge which may consist of a
silent and/or audible burglar alarm connected to a central security
monitoring system designed to activate police response, a closed circuit
television connected to a central security monitoring system designed
to activate police response, or such other device which can be activated
instantaneously to notify law enforcement officers that a crime or
disorderly person's activity is in progress.
82.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 86-1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 86-3
10:301
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
§ 86-3 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 86-3
10:302
ARTICLE II
Lighting in Parking Areas
[Adopted 1-24-2000 by Ord. No. 01-00]
§ 86-4. Businesses open 24 hours a day.
Any business which invites the public to its premises 24 hours a day and
maintains a lighted parking area shall be required to operate all lighting
approved for use in such parking area from dusk till dawn for general safety.
§ 86-5. Types of businesses.
Businesses which invite the public to their premises 24 hours a day shall
include, though not be limited to, the following types of businesses:
supermarkets and convenience stores open 24 hours a day, video rental
stores with a night return box and banks with ATM machines.
§ 86-6. Violations and penalties.83
Any person who violates or causes to be violated the provisions of this
article shall be subject to a penalty as set forth in Chapter 1, Article II,
Penalty. Each day a violation occurs shall constitute an additional separate
and distinct offense.
83.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 86-4 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 86-6
10:303
Chapter 90
BUS SHELTERS
§ 90-1. Posting adhesive materials to bus shelters prohibited.
No person shall affix any adhesive label, sticker or like material to any bus
shelter within the Township of Old Bridge.
§ 90-2. Violations and penalties.84
Any person affixing adhesive labels, stickers or like materials to any bus
shelters within the Township of Old Bridge shall, upon conviction in the
Municipal Court of the Township of Old Bridge, be subject to the penalty set
forth in Chapter 1, Article II, Penalty.
§ 90-3. Legislative statement; cleanup.
Recognizing that the extent of any penalty is a matter within the sound
discretion of the Municipal Court, the Township Council nevertheless
expresses its collective view that any person violating this chapter should
be given a sentence which includes an obligation of community service
involving cleanup of Township bus shelters.
Chapter 93
CAMPING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Beach and recreation areas — See Ch. 52. Peace and good order — See Ch. 342.
§ 93-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CAMPSITE — Any place where any bedding, sleeping bag or other sleeping
matter is placed, established or maintained, whether or not such place
incorporates the use of any tent, lean-to shack or other structure or any
vehicle or part thereof.
§ 93-2. Camping on streets and sidewalks.
It is unlawful for a person to camp upon any Township sidewalk, street,
alley, lane, park, public right-of-way or any other place to which the general
public has access, or under any bridgeway or viaduct, unless otherwise
84.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 86-6 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 93-2
10:304
specifically authorized by this Code or by declaration of the Mayor in an
emergency circumstance. This shall be deemed not to prohibit camping in
any designated campsite in any state park.
§ 93-3. Warning.
No person shall be convicted of violating this chapter unless such person
shall continue to camp for more than five minutes after receiving a warning
to leave. Such warning shall be given by a police officer or by any Township
employee or officer.
§ 93-4. Violations and penalties.85
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall
be subject to the penalties set forth in Chapter 1, Article II, Penalty, and a
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which
a violation occurs.
Chapter 95
CARNIVALS AND CIRCUSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusement devices — See Ch. 35.
Festivals; mass gatherings — See Ch. 169.
Games of chance — See Ch. 210.
§ 95-1. License required.
No person or persons shall conduct a business of circuses and carnivals
within the Township of Old Bridge without having first obtained a license
from the Clerk so to do.
§ 95-2. Contents of application.
An application for a license under this chapter shall contain the following
information:
A. The date or dates and the hours during which the licensed activity will
be conducted.
B. A list of all the games, attractions, contests or performances that will be
included in the activity to be conducted, a general description of each,
and, if not operated by the applicant or his employees, the name and
address of the concessionaire or other person operating them.
85.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 93-2 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 95-2
10:305
§ 95-3. Investigation by Chief of Police.
The application shall be referred by the Clerk to the Chief of Police, who
shall make such investigation of the applicant and of the premises where the
activity is to be conducted as he shall deem to be necessary in the interest
of public health and safety.
§ 95-4. Issuance of license.
The Chief of Police shall report his findings to the Township Council for
consideration. If the Township Council shall thereupon approve the
application, the Clerk is hereby authorized to issue any such license upon
the payment by the applicant of the proper fee therefor as hereinafter
provided.
§ 95-5. Duration and effect of license; transferability; revocation.
Every license shall remain in force and be valid only for the time therein
expressed, and shall apply only to the person or persons to whom granted
and shall not be transferable. A license shall be subject to revocation by the
Chief of Police for violation of its terms or for the conduct of the licensed
activity in a manner inimical to public health and safety.
§ 95-6. Exhibition of license.
Any person to whom such license is granted as herein provided is hereby
required to exhibit such license whenever called upon so to do.
§ 95-7. License fees.
The license fees under this chapter shall be as follows:
§ 95-8. Violations and penalties.
Each and every person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties set forth in Chapter 1,
Article II, Penalty.
C. A description of the off-street parking and sanitary facilities available at
the location at which the activity is to be conducted.
D. Appropriate evidence that the applicant has made adequate provision
for the payment of workers' compensation to any of his employees who
shall be injured, as required by N.J.S.A. 34:15-71.
A. Circuses: $75 per day.
B. Carnivals: $75 per day.
§ 95-2 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 95-8
10:306
Chapter 99
CHARITABLE CLOTHING BINS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 265. Property maintenance — See Ch. 366.
§ 99-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter only:
SOLICITATION or SOLICIT — The request, directly or indirectly, for money,
credit, property, financial assistance, or other thing of any kind or value.
"Solicitation" shall include, but not be limited to, the use or employment of
canisters, carts, receptacles or similar devices for the collection of money
or other thing of value. A solicitation shall take place whether or not the
person making the solicitation receives any contribution.
§ 99-2. Permit required.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary, no person
shall place, use, or employ a donation clothing bin within the Township of
Old Bridge for solicitation purposes without obtaining a permit from the
Recycling Coordinator. Permits are renewable on an annual basis during the
month of January.
§ 99-3. Permit fee.
The annual nonrefundable permit fee is $25 per bin and will be used to
offset the costs involved in enforcing this chapter. All permits shall run from
the date issued to the last day of January, next. No application fee shall be
prorated. Permits are renewable on an annual basis during the month of
January.
§ 99-4. Application requirements.
The application for obtaining a permit shall include:
A. A site plan drawn to scale showing the location where the bin would be
situated, as precisely as possible, including the distance to the nearest
structure(s). The site plan shall also demonstrate that the bin will not
eliminate any parking spaces or restrict or create a hazard for vehicles
or pedestrians.
B. The name, address, phone number and e-mail address of the registered
person who owns the bin and of any other entity which may share profit
from any clothing or other donations collected via the bin.
§ 95-8 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 99-4
10:307
§ 99-5. Renewal application requirements.
In addition to the above application requirements, renewal applications
must include:
C. The manner in which the person anticipates any clothing or other
donations collected via the bin would be used, sold, or dispersed, and
the method by which the proceeds of collected donations would be
allocated or spent.
D. The name and telephone number of the bona fide office of any person or
entity which may share or profit from any clothing or other donations
collected via the bin, at which such person can be reached during
normal business hours. For the purposes of this subsection, an
answering machine or service unrelated to the person does not
constitute a bona fide office.
E. Name, address, emergency phone number, e-mail address and written
consent from the property owner to place the bin on his property and
written acknowledgment of his responsibility for any littering violations
on his property pursuant to Chapter 265, Littering, and/or Chapter 366,
Property Maintenance, of the Code of the Township of Old Bridge,
relative to unlawful dumping of items outside any charity clothing bin(s)
located on his property. The consent of the property owner must include
a grant of access to the Township for the enforcement of the
requirements contained in this chapter.
F. The schedule of pickups removing articles from the bins shall be not
less than once per week, and the name and telephone number of the
person to be notified if the bin is overflowing prior to the scheduled
date of pickup.
G. Permit applicant must provide a list of all fuel or other flammable
liquids or gases that are stored on the site where the bin is proposed to
be located.
H. Permit applicants must provide a copy of their documentation which
demonstrates they are a registered charitable organization of the State
of New Jersey registered with the Division of Consumer Affairs. No forprofit
clothing bins shall be permitted to be located on public or private
property within the Township of Old Bridge.
I. Any other information required under N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.61 as amended
from time to time.
A. A statement on the manner in which the person has used, sold, or
dispersed any clothing or other donation collected via the bin, the
method by which the proceeds of collected donations have been
allocated or spent, and any changes the person anticipates it may make
in the process during the period covered by the renewal;
§ 99-4 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 99-5
10:308
§ 99-6. Placement of bins.
§ 99-7. Display of permit.
The following information shall be clearly and conspicuously displayed on
the exterior of the donation clothing bin:
B. The name and telephone number of the bona fide office of any entity
which shared or profitted from any clothing or other donations
collected via the bin, and of any entities which may do so during the
period covered by the renewal; and
C. If the location of the bin is to be moved, the new location where the bin
is to be situated, described as precisely as possible, and written consent
from the property owner of the new location.
A. Old Bridge Township shall not grant an application for a permit to
place, use, or employ a donation clothing bin if it determines that the
placement of the bin could constitute a safety hazard. Such hazards
shall include, but not be limited to, the placement of a donation clothing
bin within 100 yards of any place which stores large amounts of, or
sells, fuel or other flammable liquids or gases, or the placement of a bin
where it interferes with vehicular or pedestrian circulation. The person
placing, using or employing a donation clothing bin shall maintain the
bin and the area surrounding the bin such that there shall be no
accumulation of clothing, other donations or other items outside the
bin.
B. No permit shall be granted if the Zoning Officer determines that the
placement of the bin is either in the front yard setback or could
constitute a safety hazard.
A. The permit number and its date of expiration;
B. The name and address of the registered person who owns the bin and of
any other entity which may share or profit from any clothing or other
donations collected via the bin;
C. The telephone number of the owner's bona fide office, and if applicable,
the telephone number of the bona fide office of any other entity which
may share or profit from any clothing or other donations collected via
the bin. For the purposes of this subsection, an answering machine or
service unrelated to the person does not constitute a bona fide office;
D. In cases when any entity other than the person who owns the bin may
share or profit from any clothing or other donations collected via the
bin, a notice written in a clear and easily understandable manner,
indicating that the clothing or other donations collected via the bin,
their proceeds, or both, may be shared, or given entirely to, an entity
other than the person who owns the bin, and identifying all such
entities which may share or profit from such donations; and
§ 99-5 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 99-7
10:309
§ 99-8. Receipt and investigation of complaints.
§ 99-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall
be subject to the penalties set forth in Chapter 1, Article II, Penalty.
§ 99-10. Additional penalties, remedies.
In addition to any other penalties or remedies authorized by the laws of
this state, any person who violates any provision of this chapter or the
provisions of P.L. 2007, c. 209 (N.J.S.A. 48-2.60, et seq.) which results in
seizure of the donation clothing bin shall be:
E. A statement, consistent with the information provided to the Township
in the most recent permit or renewal application, indicating the manner
in which the owner anticipates any clothing or other donations
collected via the bin would be used, sold, or dispersed, and the method
by which the proceeds of collected donations would be allocated or
spent.
A. The Zoning Officer shall receive and investigate, within 30 days, any
complaints from the public or Township employees about the bin.
Whenever it appears to the Zoning Officer that a person has engaged in
or is engaging in any act or practice in violation of this chapter, the
person who placed the bin and/or the property owner shall be issued a
warning, stating that if the violation is not rectified or a hearing with
the Recycling Coordinator is not requested within 45 days, the bin will
be seized or removed at the expense of the person who placed the bin,
and any clothing or other donations collected via the bin will be sold at
public auction or otherwise disposed of. In addition to any other means
used to notify the person who placed the bin, such warning shall be
affixed to the exterior of the bin itself.
B. In the event that the person who placed the bin does not rectify the
violation or request a hearing within 45 days of the posting of the
warning, the Township of Old Bridge may seize the bin, remove it, or
have it removed, at the expense of the person who placed the bin, and
sell at public auction or otherwise dispose of any clothing or other
donations collected via the bin. Any proceeds from the sale of the
donations collected via the bin shall be paid to the Chief Financial
Officer of the Township.
A. Subject to a penalty of up to $20,000 for each violation. The Township
may bring this action to the Township of Old Bridge Municipal Court or
the Superior Court of New Jersey as a summary proceeding under the
Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999, P.L. 1999, c. 274 (N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10
et seq.), and any penalty monies collected shall be paid to the Chief
Financial Officer of the Township; and
§ 99-7 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 99-10
10:310
Chapter 103
CONSERVATION EASEMENTS, NOTIFICATION OF
§ 103-1. Condition for issuance of certificate of occupancy or
continued use.
As an additional condition for the issuance of a certificate of occupancy
(required under Old Bridge Township Code § 26-2) or a certificate of
continued use (required under Old Bridge Township Code § 26-3), the Code
Enforcement Office of the Department of Community Development shall
determine whether the lot (improved or unimproved) to be sold or
transferred is burdened by a conservation easement or is adjacent to
property owned by a homeowners' association which contains a
conservation easement.
§ 103-2. Notification to purchaser of lot burdened by conservation
easement.
In the event the lot or parcel of land to be sold or transferred is burdened
by a conservation easement, a notice in the form attached to this chapter as
CEN-A86 shall be personally delivered by the seller(s) or their agent to the
purchaser(s).
§ 103-3. Notification to purchaser of lot adjacent to land owned by
homeowners' association burdened by conservation easement.
In the event the lot or parcel of land to be sold or transferred is adjacent
to lands owned by a homeowners' association which are burdened by a
conservation easement, the seller(s) or their agent shall personally deliver
to the purchaser(s) a notice in the form attached to this chapter as CEN-B.87
B. Deemed ineligible to place, use, or employ a donation clothing bin for
solicitation purposes pursuant to this chapter and P.L. 2007, c. 209
(N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.61). A person or organization disqualified from
placing, using, or employing a donation clothing bin by violating the
provisions of P.L. 2007, c. 209 (N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.60 et seq.) may apply to
the Township Council to have that person's eligibility restored. The
Township Council may restore the eligibility of a person who:
(1) Acts within the public interest; and
(2) Demonstrates that he made a good faith effort to comply with the
provisions of this chapter and P.L. 2007, c. 209 (N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.60
et seq.), and all other applicable laws and regulations, or had no
fraudulent intentions.
86.Editor's Note: CEN-A is on file in the Township offices.
87.Editor's Note: CEN-B is on file in the Township offices.
§ 99-10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 103-4
10:311
§ 103-4. Acknowledgement of receipt of notice.
Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy under Old Bridge
Township Code § 26-2 or prior to the issuance of a certificate of continued
use under Old Bridge Township Code § 26-3, the seller shall deliver an
acknowledgement of receipt of the notice required by this chapter which
is signed by the purchaser(s) and which is certified by the seller(s) or
their agent to be the true and verified signature of the purchaser(s). In the
event the purchaser(s) refuses to execute the acknowledgement required
hereunder, the seller(s) and any other persons having relevant knowledge
shall certify under oath that the notice of CEN-A or CEN-B, as the case may
be, was personally delivered to the purchaser(s) but that the purchaser(s)
has refused to acknowledge same.
§ 103-5. Applicability to all sales of property.
This chapter shall apply to all sales of property (including resales) and shall
not be limited to the first sale of lots in a residential subdivision to an
individual home buyer.
§ 103-6. Violations and penalties.88
Any person found guilty by the Municipal Court of the Township of Old
Bridge for failure to abide by the forms of this chapter shall be subject to
the penalty set forth in Chapter 1, Article II, Penalty.
Chapter 108
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fences — See Ch. 164.
Fire fighting — See Ch. 176.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 185.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 198.
Heating devices — See Ch. 226.
Housing — See Ch. 235.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 366.
§ 108-1. Enforcing agency established.
A. Establishment and composition. There is hereby established in the
Township of Old Bridge a State Uniform Construction Code enforcing
agency, to be known as the "Division of Code Enforcement in the
Department of Community Development," consisting of a Construction
Official, Building Subcode Official, Plumbing Subcode Official, Fire
Protection Subcode Official, Electrical Subcode Official and such other
88.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 103-4 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 108-1
10:312
§ 108-2. Consolidated office location.
The public shall have the right to do business with the enforcing agency at
one office location except for emergencies and unforeseen or unavoidable
circumstances.
§ 108-3. (Reserved)89
§ 108-4. Fees. [Amended 3-16-1992 by Ord. No. 9-92; 5-18-1992 by
Ord. No. 16-92; 10-28-1993 by Ord. No. 52-93; 1-25-1999 by Ord.
No. 2-99; 8-28-2000 by Ord. No. 37-00; 9-8-2003 by Ord. No. 43-03;
6-28-2004 by Ord. No. 17-04; 8-22-2005 by Ord. No. 25-2005;
1-9-2006 by Ord. No. 38-2005; 6-25-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-14;
6-30-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-19; 12-15-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-35;
2-27-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-05]
The fee for a construction permit shall be the sum of the subcode fees below
and shall be paid before the permit is issued:
subcode officials for such additional subcodes as the Commissioner
of the Department of Community Affairs, State of New Jersey, shall
hereafter adopt as part of the State Uniform Construction Code. The
Construction Official shall be the chief administrator of the enforcing
agency. [Amended 1-9-2006 by Ord. No. 38-2005]
B. Qualifications; dual office; on-site inspection agencies. Each official
position created in Subsection A hereof shall be filled by a person
qualified for such position pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq. and
N.J.A.C. 5:23, provided that, in lieu of any particular subcode official, an
on-site inspection agency may be retained by contract pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:23. More than one such official position may be held by the
same person, provided that such person is qualified pursuant to N.J.S.A.
52:27D-119 et seq. and N.J.A.C. 5:23 to hold each such position.
A. Building subcode fees.
(1) For new construction and additions, the fees shall be calculated (by
cubic feet) for the building or structure based on the following use
groups:
(a) Use Groups R-1, R-2, R-3, R-5: $0.06.
(b) Use Groups A-1, A-2, A-3, A-4, A-5, I-1, I-2, I-3: $0.07.
(c) Use Groups B, E, F-1, F-2, M, S-1, S-2, U: $0.07.
(d) There will be a minimum fee of $350 for new construction
permits and for additions.
89.Editor’s Note: Former § 108-3, Construction Board of Appeals, as amended, was repealed
12-5-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-28.
§ 108-1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 108-4
10:313
(2) For renovations, alterations and repairs, the fees shall be based on
the estimated cost of construction and shall be based on $30 per
$1,000 ($250 minimum for residential; $350 minimum for
commercial). Fees shall be rounded to the nearest dollar amounts.
(3) For a combination of renovations and additions, the sum of the fees
shall be computed separately as renovations and alterations.
(4) Establishment of fees for installations of:
(a) Installation of in-ground swimming pools and/or spas: $250.
(b) Installation of aboveground pools: $150.
(c) Installation of a fence for a swimming pool: $50.
(d) Installation of woodburning stove or prefabricated fireplace:
$200.
(e) Installation of a masonry fireplace: $250.
(f) Installation of windows: $150.
(g) Installation of temporary structures: $100.
(h) Installation of a wooden deck (Use Group R):
[1] Under 12 square feet: $250.
[2] Over 12 square feet: $350.
(i) Satellite (dish-type) antennas over 24 inches: $100.
(j) Roof replacement (Use Groups R-3, R-4 and R-5): $100.
[1] With plywood replacement: $150.
[2] In multiple-family buildings, price is per upper-floor unit.
(k) Commercial roof replacement: based on renovation and repair
schedule; $30 per $1,000 cost of construction, but not less than
$250.
(l) Installation/replacement of exterior siding (Use Groups R-3
and R-4): $100.
(m) Demolition.
[1] Structure: R-3, R-4, R-5: $250.
[2] Commercial building demolition: $500.
(n) Installation of a sign:
[1] Wall signs: $2/square foot surface area.
[2] Freestanding sign: $250.
§ 108-4 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 108-4
10:314
[3] Minimum fee for sign: $100.
(o) Installation of elevator: $30 per $1,000 of cost of construction.
(p) Asbestos removal permit: $100.
(q) Lead abatement: $100.
(r) Sheds under 200 square feet: $100.
(s) Three-season rooms:
[1] On deck: $30 per $1,000.
(t) Generator, residential: $150.
(u) Solar installation, residential: $250.
(5) The training fee shall be collected at the rate in effect at the time of
permit issuance as per N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.19(b).
(6) Prototype processing shall receive a plan review credit of 20%.
(7) Minimum building subcode fee shall be $100.
(8) Certificate fees shall be as follows:
(a) Certificate of occupancy (CO): $250.
(b) Certificate of continued occupancy (CCO): $250.
(c) Certificate of clearance (lead): $100.
(d) Annual permit fee shall be as specified in N.J.A.C.
5:23-4.20(c)5.
(e) Variation application: $500 (building codes).
(f) Temporary certificate of occupancy: $200.
(9) A nonrefundable deposit of $200 shall be submitted with all permit
applications for new construction, additions or major renovations
as per N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.18(a)1.
(10) Permit update fees: $50 per hour (or portion thereof) per subcode.
B. Plumbing subcode fees.
(1) Installations of the following:
(a) Water closet: $25.
(b) Urinal/bidet: $25.
(c) Bathtub: $25.
(d) Lavatory: $25.
§ 108-4 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 108-4
10:315
(e) Shower: $25.
(f) Floor drain: $25.
(g) Sink: $25.
(h) Dishwasher: $25.
(i) Drink fountain: $25.
(j) Washing machine: $25.
(k) Hose bib: $25.
(l) Gas piping: $35/unit.
(m) Fuel oil piping: $75.
(n) Steam boiler: $150.
(o) Hot-water boiler: $150.
(p) Water heater: $75.
(q) Sewer pumps.
[1] Residential single fixture: $75.
[2] Residential multifixture: $150.
[3] Commercial: $300.
(r) Interceptor.
[1] Interior: $100.
[2] Exterior: $300.
(s) Comm. backflow: $100.
(t) Water cooled.
[1] Refrig. unit: $150.
[2] Residential A/C: $50.
[3] Commercial A/C: $100.
(u) Sewer connection: $125.
(v) Water service: $125.
(w) Active solar system: $50.
(x) Vents/stacks: $30 vent/stack.
(y) Lawn sprinkler system: $75.
§ 108-4 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 108-4
10:316
(z) Water filter/cond. system: $75.
(aa) Sump pump: $50.
(bb) Roof drains: $75/drain.
(cc) Condensate drain: $35/unit.
(dd) Medical gas system: $150 each.
(ee) Pressure booster: $75.
(ff) Pool heater: $150.
(gg) Commercial RTU: $100.
(hh) Pool piping: $100.
(ii) Commercial HVAC hydronic piping: $75/zone.
(jj) Residential HVAC hydronic piping: $75.
(kk) Commercial roof drain leaders: $75 each.
(ll) New furnace install: $50.
(mm) Residential backflow: $50.
(2) The minimum fee for plumbing subcode shall be $75.
(3) Demolition of a structure to include capping of sewer and water
services is $100.
(4) Annual permits: fee charged as per current N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.20(c)5,
State of New Jersey Uniform Construction Code.
(5) Installation of liquid propane gas tanks (LPG): $150/each.
(6) Annual recertification of commercial backflow preventers as per
N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.23(l): $75/unit.
C. Electrical subcode fees.
(1) Receptacles and fixtures:
(a) First 25: $75.
(b) Each additional 25 up to 150: $40.
(c) Each additional 25 over 150: $75.
(2) Motors and electrical devices:
(a) Over 1 HP to 10 HP: $75.
(b) Up to 50 HP: $90.
(c) Up to 100 HP: $190.
§ 108-4 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 108-4
10:317
(d) Larger than above: $450.
(3) Transformers and generators:
(a) Over 1 KW to 10 KW: $60.
(b) Up to 45 KW: $95.
(c) Up to 121.5 KW: $175.
(d) Larger than above: $450.
(4) Service panels, entrances and subpanels:
(a) Up to 100 amps: $100.
(b) Up to 200 amps: $125.
(c) Up to 400 amps: $250.
(d) Larger than above: $450.
(5) (Reserved)
(6) The following shall establish flat fees:
(a) Annual commercial pool inspection: $200.
(b) Residential aboveground pool permit: $85.
(c) Residential in-ground pool permit: $165.
(d) Air conditioner over 1 HP: $60.
(e) Electrical signs: $100.
(7) Annual permits: fee charged as per current N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.20(c)5,
State of New Jersey Uniform Construction Code.
(8) The minimum fee for electrical subcode shall be $75.
(9) Photovoltaic systems.
(a) 1 to 50 kw: $100.
(b) 51 to 100 kw: $250.
(c) 101 kw and above: $650.
D. Fire-protection subcode fees.
(1) Wet and/or dry sprinkler heads.
(a) Fee.
§ 108-4 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 108-4
10:318
Number of Heads Fee
1 to 20 $150
21 to 100 $300
101 to 200 $400
201 to 400 $600
401 to 1,000 $900
Over 1,000 $1,000
(2) Smoke and heat detectors.
Number of Detectors Fee
1 to 5 $75
6 to 10 $100
11 to 15 $150
16 to 20 $170
21 to 25 $190
26 to 30 $210
Over 30 $250
(a) Manual pull stations (each): $50.
(b) Audible devices (each): $50.
(c) Control panel: $150.
(d) Tamper and supervisory switches (each): $50.
(e) Fire alarm device changes (each): $50.
(3) Pre-engineered systems:
(a) Carbon dioxide (CO2): $150.
(b) Foam suppression: $200.
(c) Wet chemical: $150.
(d) Clean agent: $150.
(4) Standpipes: $300/riser.
(5) Kitchen hood exhaust systems: $150.
(6) Incinerators and crematoriums: $450.
(7) Gas- or oil-fired appliance: $75.
(8) Smoke control systems: $400.
(9) Underground fire mains: $200.
§ 108-4 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 108-4
10:319
§ 108-5. Preparation of fee schedules. [Amended 9-6-1988 by Ord.
No. 35-88]
The Construction Official shall, with the advice of the subcode officials,
prepare and submit to the Township Council, biannually, a report
recommending a fee schedule based on the operating expenses of the
agency and any other expenses of the municipality fairly attributable to the
enforcement of the State Uniform Construction Code Act.90
§ 108-6. Surcharge fee; remittance; reports to state. [Amended
9-6-1988 by Ord. No. 35-88; 10-16-1989 by Ord. No. 39-89;
12-5-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-27]
In order to provide for the training, certification and technical support
systems required by the Uniform Construction Code Act and the
regulations, the enforcing agency shall collect, in addition to the fees
specified above, a surcharge fee of $0.00371 per cubic foot of volume of new
construction and $1.90 per $1,000 of actual cost of construction for permits
to perform alterations, renovations, repairs and reconstruction, but not less
than $1. Such surcharge fee shall be remitted to the Division of Codes and
(10) Fire pump (review and field accept.): $400.
(11) Flammable or combustible liquid tank installations:
(a) Up to 275 gallons: $125/tank.
(b) 276 to 1,000 gallons: $150/tank.
(c) 1,001 gallons to 2,000 gallons: $300/tank.
(d) Over 2,000 gallons: $400/tank.
(12) Removal or abandonment of AST or UST:
(a) Up to 275 gallons: $125/tank.
(b) 276 to 1,000 gallons: $150/tank.
(c) Over 1,000 gallons: $350/tank.
(13) Minimum fee for fire subcode: $100.
E. Mechanical fees.
(1) Chimney liners: $75.
(2) Gas fireplaces: $75.
F. Elevator subcode fees.
(1) Elevator registration and fees shall be as per N.J.A.C. 5:23,
Subchapter 12.
90.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
§ 108-4 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 108-6
10:320
Standards, Department of Community Affairs, on a quarterly basis for the
fiscal quarters ending September 30, December 31, March 31 and June 30
and not later than one month succeeding the end of the quarter for which it
is due. The enforcing agency shall report annually, at the end of each fiscal
year, to the Division of Codes and Standards, and not later than January 31,
the total amount of the surcharge fees collected in the fiscal year.
§ 108-7. Fire limits.
The following fire limits are established pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23 to be
established by July 1, 1977.91
§ 108-8. (Reserved)92
§ 108-9. Waiver of permit fees for construction of residential
handicapped accessibility improvements. [Added 3-9-1998 by Ord.
No. 17-98]
A. Purpose.
(1) The State of New Jersey Uniform Construction Code, N.J.S.A.
52:27D-126e permits the governing body of any municipality to
provide by ordinance that no person shall be charged a
construction permit surcharge fee or enforcing agency fee for any
construction, reconstruction, alteration or improvement designed
and undertaken solely to promote accessibility by disabled persons
to an existing public or private structure or any of the facilities
contained therein.
(2) The Township Council of the Township of Old Bridge believes that
the promotion of such accessibility improvements in residential
buildings is for the public good.
B. Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions
shall apply:
DISABLED PERSON — A person who has the total and permanent
inability to engage in any substantial gainful activity by reason of
any medically determinable physical or mental impairment, including
blindness, and shall include, but not be limited to, any resident of the
Township who is disabled pursuant to the Federal Social Security Act
(42 U.S.C. § 416), or the Federal Railroad Retirement Act of 1974 (45
U.S.C. § 231 et seq.), or is rated as having a 60% disability, or higher,
pursuant to any federal law administered by the United States Veterans'
Act. For the purposes of this definition, "blindness" means central visual
acuity of 20/200, or less, in the better eye with the use of a correcting
91.Editor's Note: The fire limits are on file in the Township Clerk's office.
92.Editor's Note: Former § 108-8, Inspections; penalty for reinspections, added 10-16-1989 by
Ord. No. 39-89, as amended, was repealed 2-27-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-06. Original Sec.
11-1.8b, which contained an inspection fee for weekends and holidays, amended
5-21-1990 by Ord. No. 12-90, which previously followed this subsection, was deleted
1-9-2006 by Ord. No. 38-2005.
§ 108-6 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 108-9
10:321
Chapter 110
CONTRACTS, PUBLIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 5.
lens. An eye which is accompanied by a limitation in the fields of vision
such that the widest diameter of the visual field subtends an angle no
greater than 20 degrees shall be considered as having a central visual
acuity of 20/200 or less.
C. Waiver of fees. A disabled person, or a parent or sibling of a disabled
person, shall not be required to pay any municipal fee, or charge, in
order to secure a construction permit for any construction,
reconstruction, alteration, or improvement which promotes
accessibility to his or her own living unit.
D. Exclusions. This section specifically excludes accessibility
improvements made to buildings or structures devoted to commercial
use.
§ 108-9 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 108-9
10:322
ARTICLE I
Prohibition on Awarding to Certain Contributors
[Adopted 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 2-2006]
§ 110-1. Prohibitions.
A. Any other provision of law to the contrary notwithstanding, the
Township, its purchasing agent or those of its independent authorities,
as the case may be, shall not enter into an agreement or otherwise
contract to procure, without a fair and open process, any service which
the Township would be permitted to procure on a "no bid" basis
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:11-5(1)(a)(i) and 40A:11-5(1)(m) (the "statute")
from any professional business entity if that entity has solicited on
behalf of, or made any contribution of money, or pledged a contribution,
including in-kind contributions, to a campaign committee of any Old
Bridge Township municipal candidate or municipal office holder
seeking reelection, who would have, or has, ultimate responsibility for
the award of the contract, or to any Old Bridge Township or Middlesex
County party committee, or to any political action committee (PAC) that
is organized for the primary purpose of promoting or supporting any
Old Bridge Township municipal candidate or municipal office holder
seeking reelection, in excess of the thresholds specified in Subsection
C, within 12 consecutive months immediately preceding the date of the
award of the contract.
B. No professional business entity which enters into negotiations for, or
agrees to, any contract or agreement not the subject of public bidding
or a fair and open process with the Township or its independent
authorities for the rendition of services described in Subsection A shall
knowingly solicit on behalf of, or make any contribution of money, or
pledge of a contribution, including in-kind contributions, in excess of
the thresholds specified in Subsection C below to any Old Bridge
Township municipal candidate or municipal office holder seeking
reelection, who would have, or has, ultimate responsibility for the
award of the contract, or to any Old Bridge Township or Middlesex
County party committee, or to any PAC that is organized for the primary
purpose of promoting or supporting any Old Bridge Township municipal
candidate or municipal office holder seeking reelection, between the
time of first communications between the professional business entity
and the Township regarding a specific professional services agreement
and the later of the termination of negotiations or the completion of the
contract or agreement.
C. Contribution limits.
(1) Subject to the limitation in Subsection C(2), of this subsection, any
individual meeting the definition of "professional business entity"
under this article may make a contribution up to the amount that is
reportable by the recipient under P.L. 1973, c.83 (N.J.S.A. 19:44A-1
et seq.), currently in excess of $300, to each candidate for Mayor or
§ 110-1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 110-1
10:323
§ 110-2. Contributions made prior to the effective date.
No contribution of money or any other thing of value, including in-kind
contributions, made by a professional business entity to any municipal
candidate for Mayor or Council, or Township municipal office holder seeking
reelection, or county party committee or PAC referenced in this article shall
be deemed a violation of this section, nor shall an agreement for property,
goods, or services of any kind whatsoever be disqualified thereby, if that
contribution was made by the professional business entity prior to the
effective date of this article.
§ 110-3. Contribution statement by professional business entity.
Council, Old Bridge Township or Middlesex County party
committees, or to a PAC referenced in this article, for each election,
without violating Subsection A or B of this section; however.
(2) Any entity meeting the definition of "professional business entity"
under this section, including such principals, partners and officers
of the entity, may not contribute in the aggregate in excess of a
total of $2,500 for each election to all Township municipal
candidates and municipal office holders seeking reelection who
have, or if elected would have, ultimate responsibility for the award
of the no bid contract, and to all Old Bridge Township or Middlesex
County political parties and PACs referenced in this article without
violating Subsection A or B of this section.
D. For purposes of this article, a professional business entity is any entity
seeking or performing without competitive bidding a public contract for
services permissible under the statute and which includes an
individual, including the individual's spouse, if any, and any child living
at home; a person; firm; corporation; professional corporation;
partnership; organization; or association. The definition of a
"professional business entity" includes all principals who own 10% or
more of the equity in the corporation or business trust, partners, and
officers employed by the entity as well as any subsidiaries directly
controlled by the business entity.
E. For purposes of this section, the office that is considered to have
ultimate responsibility for the award of the contract shall be:
(1) The Township of Old Bridge Council, if the contract requires
approval or authorization from the Council.
(2) The Mayor of the Township of Old Bridge, if the contract requires
approval of the Mayor, or if a public officer who is responsible for
the award of contract is appointed by the Mayor.
A. Prior to awarding any contract or agreement without public bid, any
service which the Township would be permitted to procure on a "no bid"
basis pursuant to the statute to any professional business entity, the
§ 110-1 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 110-3
10:324
§ 110-4. Return of excess contributions.
A professional business entity or Township municipal candidate or
municipal office holder seeking re-election, or municipal or county party
committee or PAC referenced in this ordinance may cure a violation of
Section 1 of this order, if, within 60 days after the general election, the
Professional Business Entity notifies the Township Council in writing and
seeks and receives reimbursement of a contribution from the entity to whom
the contribution was made.
§ 110-5. Violations and penalties.
Township or any of its purchasing agents or agencies, as the case may
be, shall receive a sworn statement from the professional business
entity made under penalty of perjury that it has not made a contribution
in violation of § 110-1 of this article.
B. The professional business entity shall have a continuing duty to report
any violations of this article that may occur during the negotiation or
duration of a contract. The certification required under this subsection
shall be made prior to entry into the contract or agreement with the
Township and shall be in addition to any other certifications that may be
required by any other provision of law.
A. All Old Bridge Township agreements with professional business entities
shall provide that it shall be a material breach of the terms of the
government contract for a professional business entity to violate, or to
aide or abet a violation, of § 110-1B or C or to knowingly conceal or
misrepresent contributions given or received, or to make or solicit
contributions through intermediaries for the purpose of concealing or
misrepresenting the source of the contribution.
B. Any professional business entity who knowingly fails to reveal a
contribution made in violation of this article, or who knowingly makes
or solicits contributions through intermediaries for the purpose of
concealing or misrepresenting the source of the contribution, shall be
disqualified from eligibility for future Old Bridge Township contracts for
a period of 48 months from the date on which the violation is finally
determined.
§ 110-3 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 110-5
10:325
Chapter 114
CURFEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 342.
§ 110-5 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 110-5
10:326
ARTICLE I
Halloween Curfew for Minors
[Adopted 3-28-2005 by Ord. No. 07-05 (Sec. 4-19 of the 1973
Revised General Ordinances)]
§ 114-1. Curfew hours.
No person under the age of 18 years shall be on any public street, sidewalk
or other public area during the following dates and hours:
A. October 29 at 10:00 p.m. to October 30 at 6:00 a.m.;
B. October 30 at 10:00 p.m. to October 31 at 6:00 a.m.; and
C. October 31 at 10:00 p.m. to November 1 at 6:00 a.m.
§ 114-1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 114-1
10:327
Chapter 119
DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION OF OFFICERS AND
EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Ethics — See Ch. 145. Personnel policies — See Ch. 351.
§ 119-1. Intent and purpose.
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to provide for the defense of
actions against the indemnification of public employees and officials as
permitted by N.J.S.A. 59:10-1 et seq.
§ 119-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EMPLOYEE or OFFICIAL — Includes an officer, employee, servant or
official, whether or not compensated or part-time, who is authorized to
perform any act or service; provided, however, that the term does not
include an independent contractor.
PUBLIC EMPLOYEE or PUBLIC OFFICIAL — Any employee or official or
former employee or former official of the Township of Old Bridge.
§ 119-3. Defense of actions and indemnifications; rate for private
counsel.
§ 119-4. Exceptions.
The provisions of § 119-3 shall not be applicable when a court of competent
jurisdiction determines that:
A. The Township of Old Bridge shall provide for indemnification and the
defense of any action brought against a public employee or official on
account of any act or omission in the scope of his employment, and this
obligation shall extend to any cross-actions, counterclaims or crosscomplaints
against such employee.
B. Private counsel engaged to represent officers or employees shall be
paid the rate of $135 per hour unless a different hourly rate is provided
by contract between the Township of Old Bridge and the attorney.
A. The act or omission was not within the scope of employment; or
B. The act or failure to act was because of actual fraud, willful misconduct
or actual malice; or
§ 114-1 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 119-4
10:328
§ 119-5. Withholding defense; defending under reservation.
§ 119-6. Methods of providing defense.
The Township of Old Bridge may provide any defense required of it under
this chapter through an attorney from its own staff or by employing other
counsel.
§ 119-7. Control over litigation.
Whenever the Township of Old Bridge provides any defense required of it
under this chapter, the Township of Old Bridge through counsel may assume
exclusive control over the representation of the public employee or official,
and such employee or official shall cooperate fully with the defense.
§ 119-8. Indemnification.
C. The defense of the action and indemnification are provided for by an
insurance policy or policies, whether obtained by the Township or by
any other person; or
D. The public employee or official failed to deliver any original or a copy of
the same to the Township Clerk of the Township of Old Bridge within 10
calendar days after the time he or she is served; or
E. The public employee or official has failed to cooperate fully with the
defense.
A. If the defense and indemnification are not provided for by an insurance
policy or policies, and if it appears to the Township Council that a
particular claim, lawsuit, action or proceeding may not be properly the
subject for municipal indemnification because of factual disputes which
can only be resolved as the case develops (during investigation,
discovery motion or trial), the Township Council may elect to either:
(1) Withhold a defense until such time as the matter is established to
be a proper one for indemnification. In such case the employee,
officer, or official shall engage his or her own counsel to defend the
claim, lawsuit, action or proceeding subject to reimbursement or
reasonably necessary fees and costs. Reimbursement shall be made
only in the case of a later determination that the claim was the
proper subject of indemnification; or
(2) The Township of Old Bridge may elect to provide a defense in such
case but subject to a reservation of rights with respect to any
obligation to indemnify the employer, officer or official.
B. In the event the Township of Old Bridge extends a defense to an officer
or employee under a reservation of rights, the Township Council may
require the officer or employee to sign an agreement to repay defense
costs expended by the Township of Old Bridge if an exception under
§ 119-4 is determined by a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 119-4 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 119-8
10:329
§ 119-9. Punitive damages.
Chapter 124
DRUG AND DRUNK-DRIVING-FREE ZONES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 30.
A. In any case where the Township of Old Bridge is required to provide a
defense under this chapter, the Township of Old Bridge shall pay or
shall reimburse the public employee or official for:
(1) Any bona fide settlement agreements entered into by the employee
or official;
(2) Any judgments entered against the employee or official; and
(3) If the Township of Old Bridge has failed to provide such required
defenses, all costs of defending the action, including reasonable
attorney fees and expenses, together with costs of any appeal.
B. In addition, in any case where the Township of Old Bridge would be
required to provide a defense under this chapter except for the fact that
such defense is provided for any insurance, the Township of Old Bridge
shall provide indemnification as aforesaid, but only to the extent not
covered by insurance.
A. The Township of Old Bridge shall also indemnify any employee or
official in any case where a defense has been provided with respect to
awards of punitive or exemplary damages except in the following cases:
(1) The act or omission was not within the scope of employment for the
Township of Old Bridge; or
(2) The employee or official engaged in actual fraud; or
(3) The employee or official engaged in willful misconduct or actual
malice.
B. In these cases where no defense has been provided or a defense has
been provided under a reservation of rights, the Township of Old Bridge
shall not indemnify any person for liability or an award of damages
whether compensatory, punitive or exemplary unless the governing
body has first declared and determined that the employee or official is
properly entitled to indemnification.
§ 119-8 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 119-9
10:330
ARTICLE I
Drunk-Driving-Free School Zones
[Adopted 4-24-2000 by Ord. No. 18-00]
§ 124-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to amend the Code of the Township of Old
Bridge in order to establish drunk-driving-free school zones as the laws of
the State of New Jersey provide for increased penalties for offenses such
as driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs when such offenses are
committed in a school zone.
§ 124-2. Designation of school crossings.
In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of P.L. 1999, c. 185, the
following is a list of school crossings which have been so designated by the
Township of Old Bridge:
Biondi Avenue and Genoa Section
Boulevard East and Central Avenue
Carpenter School and Cindy Street
Carpenter School and Utica
Cindy Street and Owens Road
Englishtown Road and Midway
Grace Drive and William
Grissom School and Cindy
Harding and Harding
Laurence Parkway and Ravine Section
Laurence Parkway and School #9
Madison Park and Wellsley Road
Matawan Road and Ely Avenue
Mc Divitt School and Manny Martin Way
Miller School and Matawan Road
Ocean Boulevard and Furman Boulevard, Magic Cottage Hoffman
Pharmacy Post Office
Ocean Boulevard and Lake Avenue
Ocean Boulevard and Raritan
Ocean Boulevard and Sunset
Old Matawan Road and Bus Driveway
Schirra School and Awn Street
Shepherd and Bushnell
Southwood and Farmbrook
§ 124-1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 124-2
10:331
Southwood and Sycamore
St. Ambrose School and Driveway, Throckmorton
St. Ambrose School and Thomas Street
St. Bernadette's and Temple Road
St. Thomas and Marlboro
Voorhees and Midway Road, Liberty
Westminister and Downing
Westminister and Gorniak
Westminister and Parkwood
§ 124-3. Adoption of map. [Amended 6-28-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-20; 7-9-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-17]
The Drug Free/Drunk Driving Free School Zones Map dated May 2018 and
prepared by Nicole Shapiro, Township Engineer, is hereby approved and
adopted as an official finding and record of the location and areas within
the municipality of property which is used for school purposes and which is
owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school on school land
and of the areas on or within 1,000 feet to such school property.
§ 124-4. Map and list to constitute official findings.
The Drunk-Driving-Free School Zones Map approved and adopted pursuant
to this article shall continue to constitute an official finding and record
as to the location and boundaries of areas on or within 1,000 feet of
property owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or
school board which is used for school purposes until such time, if any,
that this article shall be amended to reflect any additions or deletions with
respect to the location and boundaries of school property and drunk-drivingfree
school zones. The list of school crossings designated above by the
Township Council shall continue to constitute an official finding and record
of the location of school crossing zones within the Township of Old Bridge
until such time, if any, that this article shall be amended to reflect any
additions or deletions with respect to school crossing zones in Old Bridge
Township.
§ 124-5. Changes in locations or boundaries.
The School Board, or the chief administrative officer in the case of any
private or parochial school, is hereby directed and shall have the continuing
obligation to promptly notify the office of the Township Engineer and the
Township Attorney of any changes or contemplated changes in the location
and boundaries of any property owned by or leased to any elementary or
secondary school or school board and which is used for school purposes or
of any additions or deletions to school crossings.
§ 124-2 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 124-6
10:332
§ 124-6. Original map and list to be on file; copies.
The Township Clerk is hereby directed to receive and to keep on file the
original of the map approved and adopted pursuant to this article and the
list of school crossings and to provide at a reasonable cost a true copy
thereof to any person, agency or court, which may from time to time request
such a copy, along with a certification that such copy is a true copy of the
map approved and adopted herein and kept on file. It is hereby further
directed that a true copy of such map and list and of this article shall be
provided without cost to the Middlesex County Clerk and to the office of the
Middlesex County Prosecutor.
§ 124-7. Map and list as evidence.
The following additional matters are hereby determined, declared, recited,
and stated:
A. It is understood that the map and list approved and adopted pursuant to
this article were prepared and are intended to be used as evidence in
prosecutions arising under the criminal and traffic laws of this state and
that, pursuant to state law, such map and list shall constitute prima
facie evidence of the following:
(1) The location of elementary and secondary schools within the
municipality.
(2) The boundaries of the real property which is owned by or leased to
such schools or a school board.
(3) That such school property is and continues to be used for school
purposes.
(4) The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within 1,000
feet of such school property.
(5) The location of all school crossings in the Township of Old Bridge.
§ 124-6 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 124-7
10:333

ARTICLE II
Drug-Free Public Areas
[Adopted 10-10-2000 by Ord. No. 44-00]
§ 124-8. Purpose.
This article amends the Code of the Township of Old Bridge in order to
establish drug-free zones as the laws of the State of New Jersey provide
for increased penalties for drug offenses when such offenses are committed
within 500 feet of a public housing facility, a public park, or a public
building.
§ 124-9. Adoption of map. [Amended 6-28-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-20; 7-9-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-17]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.1, a Drug-Free Zone Map, dated May 2018 and
prepared by Nicole Shapiro, Township Engineer, is hereby approved and
adopted as an official finding and record of the location and boundaries of
the areas on or within 500 feet of a public housing facility, a public park or
public building within the boundaries of the Township of Old Bridge.
§ 124-10. Map to constitute official findings.
The Drug-Free Zone Map approved and adopted pursuant to this article
shall continue to constitute an official finding and record as to the location
and boundaries of the area or areas on or within 500 feet of a public housing
facility, a public park or public building within the Township of Old Bridge
until such time, if any, that this article shall be amended to reflect any
additions or deletions with respect to the location and boundaries of the
area or areas on or within 500 feet of a public housing facility, a public park
or public building within the Township of Old Bridge.
§ 124-11. Original map to be on file; copies.
The Township Clerk is hereby directed to receive and to keep on file the
original of the map approved and adopted pursuant to this article and to
provide at a reasonable cost a true copy thereof to any person, agency
or court which may from time to time request such a copy, along with a
certification that such copy is a true copy of the map approved and adopted
herein and kept on file. It is hereby further directed that a true copy of such
map shall be provided without cost to the Middlesex County Clerk and to
the office of the Middlesex County Prosecutor.
§ 124-12. Map and list as evidence.
It is understood that the map and list approved and adopted pursuant to
this article were prepared and are intended to be used as evidence in
prosecutions arising under the criminal laws of this state and that, pursuant
to state law, such map and list shall constitute prima facie evidence of the
location and boundaries of the area or areas on or within 500 feet of a
§ 124-8 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 124-12
10:335
public park, public building or public housing facility pursuant to N.J.S.A.
2C:35-7.1.
§ 124-12 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 124-12
10:336
ARTICLE III
Drug-Free School Zones
[Adopted 6-28-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-20]
§ 124-13. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to amend the Code of the Township of Old
Bridge in order to establish drug-free school zones as the laws of the State
of New Jersey provide for increased penalties for drug offenses when such
offenses are committed within 1,000 feet of property which is used for
school purposes and which is owned by or leased to any elementary school
or secondary school or school board.
§ 124-14. Adoption of map. [Amended 7-9-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-17]
The Drug Free/Drunk Driving Free School Zones Map dated May 2018 and
prepared by Nicole Shapiro, Township Engineer, is hereby approved and
adopted as an official finding and record of the location and areas within
the municipality of property which is used for school purposes and which is
owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school on school land
and of the areas on or within 1,000 feet of such school property.
§ 124-15. Map to constitute official findings.
The Drug Free/Drunk Driving Free School Zones Map approved and
adopted pursuant to this article shall continue to constitute an official
finding and record as to the location and boundaries of areas on or within
1,000 feet of property owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary
school or school board which is used for school purposes until such time, if
any, that this article shall be amended to reflect any additions or deletions
with respect to the location and boundaries of school property and drugfree/
drunk-driving-free school zones.
§ 124-16. Changes in locations or boundaries.
The school board, or the chief administrative officer in the case of any
private or parochial school, is hereby directed and shall have the continuing
obligation to promptly notify the office of the Township Engineer and the
Township Attorney of any changes or contemplated changes in the location
and boundaries of any property owned by or leased to any elementary or
secondary school or school board and which is used for school purposes.
§ 124-17. Original map to be on file.
The Township Clerk is hereby directed to receive and to keep on file the
original of the map approved and adopted pursuant to this article and to
provide at a reasonable cost a true copy thereof to any person, agency
or court, which may from time to time request such a copy, along with
a certification that such copy is a true copy of the map approved and
§ 124-13 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 124-17
10:337
adopted herein and kept on file. It is hereby further directed that a true
copy of such map and list and of this article shall be provided without cost
to the Middlesex County Clerk and to the office of the Middlesex County
Prosecutor.
§ 124-18. Map as evidence.
It is understood that the map approved and adopted pursuant to this article
was prepared and is intended to be used as evidence in prosecutions arising
under the criminal and traffic laws of this state and that, pursuant to state
law, such map shall constitute prima facie evidence of the following:
A. The location of elementary and secondary schools within the
municipality.
B. The boundaries of the real property which is owned by or leased to such
schools or a school board.
C. That such school property is and continues to be used for school
purposes.
D. The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within 1,000 feet
of such school property.
§ 124-17 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 124-18
10:338
Chapter 133
DRY-CLEANING ESTABLISHMENTS, COIN-OPERATED
§ 133-1. Establishment of code.
A code regulating the use, operation and maintenance of coin-operated
dry-cleaning establishments, authorizing inspection of and operations
connected therewith, and fixing penalties for violations is hereby
established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 to 26:3-69.6. A copy of the code
is annexed to and made part of this chapter without the inclusion of the text
herein.
§ 133-2. Title of code.
The code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "Coin-Operated Dry-Cleaning Establishment Code
of New Jersey (1962)."
§ 133-3. Public record.93
Three copies of the Coin-Operated Dry-Cleaning Establishment Code of
New Jersey (1962) have been placed on file in the offices of the Secretary of
the Department of Health and Welfare and the Township Clerk for the use
and examination of the public.
Chapter 145
ETHICS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Defense and indemnification of officers and
employees — See Ch. 119.
Personnel policies — See Ch. 351.
§ 145-1. Declaration of policy; findings.
"No man can serve two masters nor should he attempt to do so." Public
office and employment are public trusts. The vitality and stability of
representative democracy depend upon the public's confidence in the
integrity of its elected and appointed representatives. Whenever the public
perceives a conflict between the private interests and the public duties of a
government officer or employee, that confidence is imperiled. Governments
have the duty both to provide their citizens with standards by which they
may determine whether public duties are being faithfully performed and
to apprise their officers and employees of the behavior which is expected
93.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 124-18 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 145-1
10:339
of them while conducting their public duties. The governing body of the
Township of Old Bridge declares that all citizens should be treated with
courtesy, impartiality, fairness and equality. Public officials should avoid
actual and potential conflicts between their private self-interest and the
public interest.
§ 145-2. Purpose and authority.
§ 145-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGENCY — Any agency, board, governing body, including the chief
executive officer, office, commission or other instrumentality within the
Township of Old Bridge, and any independent local authority created by
or appointed under the authority of the Township of Old Bridge, which
performs functions other than of a purely advisory nature.
BUSINESS ORGANIZATION — Any corporation, partnership, firm,
enterprise, franchise, association, trust, sole proprietorship, union or other
legal entity.
EMPLOYEE — Any person, whether compensated or not, whether parttime
or full-time, employed by or serving on an agency who is not a local
government officer.
INTEREST — The ownership or control of more than 10% of the profits,
assets or stock of a business organization but shall not include the control
of assets in a nonunion profit entity or labor union.
MEMBER OF IMMEDIATE FAMILY — The spouse or dependent child of an
officer or employee residing in the same household.
A. It is the purpose of this chapter to provide a method of assuring that
standards of ethical conduct and financial disclosure requirements for
officers and employees of the Township of Old Bridge shall be clear,
consistent, uniform in their application, enforceable, and to provide
those officers or employees with advice and information concerning
possible conflicts of interests which might arise in the conduct of their
public duties.
B. It is the further purpose of this chapter to implement the provisions of
the Local Government Ethics Law, P.L. 1991, c. 29, N.J.S.A. 40A:9-22.1
et seq.
C. This chapter is enacted under the authority of the Local Government
Ethics Law, P.L. 1991, c. 29, N.J.S.A. 40A:9-22.1 et seq. and under the
further authority granted to the Township of Old Bridge under the
provisions of Titles 40 and 40A of the New Jersey Statutes.
§ 145-1 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 145-3
10:340
OFFICER —
Any person, whether compensated or not, whether part-time or fulltime,
who is one of the following:
(1) Mayor.
(2) Member of the Township Council.
(3) Business Administrator.
(4) Department head.
(5) Chief of Police.
(6) Deputy Chief of Police.94
(7) Tax Assessor.
(8) Chief Financial Officer.
(9) Township Clerk.95
(10)Consultant engineers and planners.96
(11)Assistant Township Attorney.
(12)Township Prosecutor.
(13)Planning Board member.
(14)Planning Board Attorney.
(15)Zoning Board of Adjustment member.
(16)Zoning Board of Adjustment Attorney.
(17)Rent Board member.
(18)Rent Board Attorney.
(19)Construction Code Officer.
(20)Plumbing Inspector.
(21)Municipal Utilities Authority member.
(22)Municipal Utilities Authority Engineer.
(23)Municipal Utilities Authority Attorney.
A.
94.Editor's Note: The positions of Captain and Lieutenant, which previously followed this
subsection, were repealed 5-13-1996 by Ord. No. 22-96.
95.Editor's Note: The position of Township Auditor, which previously followed this subsection,
was repealed 5-13-1996 by Ord. No. 22-96.
96.Editor's Note: The position of Municipal Judge, which previously followed this subsection,
was repealed 6-23-1997 by Ord. No. 25-97.
§ 145-3 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 145-3
10:341
OFFICER or EMPLOYEE — An officer or employee of the Township of Old
Bridge or of an agency under the authority of or appointed by the Township
of Old Bridge.
§ 145-4. Promulgation of Municipal Code of Ethics; statement of
ethical principles.
While it is recognized that the Old Bridge Township Ethical Standards
Board created by this chapter is vested with authority to promulgate the
Municipal Code of Ethics for all local government officers and employees,
the Township Council intends to state ethical principles which it believes
should be incorporated in the Code of Ethics by adopting resolution(s) from
time to time expressing the view of the Council.
§ 145-5. Financial disclosure statements.
(24)Municipal Utilities Authority Executive Director.
(25)Library Board member.
(26)Director of Township Library.
(27)Ethical Standards Board.
(28)Housing Authority.
(29)Cable TV Committee.
(30)Channel 29 Personnel.
(31)Tax Collector. [Added 10-27-1997 by Ord. No. 36-97]
Any other person who is a managerial executive or confidential
employee, as defined in § 3 of the "New Jersey Employer-Employee
Relations Act," N.J.S.A. 34:13A-3, of the Township of Old Bridge or of an
agency created under the authority of or appointed by the Township of
Old Bridge.
B.
"Local government officer" shall not mean any employee of a school
district or member of the school board.
C.
A. Officers of the Township shall annually file a financial disclosure
statement. All financial disclosure statements shall include the
following information which shall specify, where applicable, the name
and address of each source and the officer's job title:
(1) Each source of income, earned or unearned, exceeding $2,000
received by the officer or a member of his or her immediate family
during the preceding calendar year. Individual client fees,
customer receipts or commissions on transactions received
through a business organization need not be separately reported as
sources of income. If a publicly traded security is the source of
income, the security need not be reported unless the local
§ 145-3 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 145-5
10:342
§ 145-6. Township Ethical Standards Board established; hearings.
government officer or member of his or her immediate family has
an interest in the business organization;
(2) Each source of fees and honorariums having an aggregate amount
exceeding $250 from any single source for personal appearances,
speeches or writings received by the local government officer or a
member of his or her immediate family during the preceding
calendar year;
(3) Each source of gifts, reimbursements or prepaid expenses having
an aggregate value exceeding $400 from any single source,
excluding relatives, received by the local government officer or a
member of his or her immediate family during the preceding
calendar year;
(4) The name and address of all business organizations in which the
local government officer or a member of his or her immediate
family had an interest during the preceding calendar year; and
(5) The address and brief description of all real property in the state in
which the local government officer or a member of his or her
immediate family held an interest during the preceding calendar
year.
B. The Township of Old Bridge Ethical Standards Board shall prescribe a
financial disclosure statement form for filing purposes. If a financial
disclosure statement form has been promulgated by the New Jersey
Local Finance Board, in accordance with the New Jersey Local
Government Ethics Law,97 then that form shall be used. The Township
Clerk shall make the forms available to the officers and employees
required to file a financial disclosure statement.
C. The original statement shall be filed with the Township Clerk on or
before April 30th of each year. A copy of the statement shall be filed
with the Township of Old Bridge Ethical Standards Board.
D. All financial disclosure statements filed shall be public records.
A. There is hereby established the Township of Old Bridge Ethical
Standards Board consisting of six members who are residents of the
Township, at least two of whom shall be public members. The members
of the Board shall be appointed by the Township Council. The members
shall be chosen by virtue of their known and consistent reputation for
integrity and their knowledge of local government affairs. No more than
three members of the Board shall be of the same political party.
[Amended 9-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-17]
97.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:9-22.1 et seq.
§ 145-5 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 145-6
10:343
§ 145-7. Facilities and staff.
B. The members of the Township of Old Bridge Ethical Standards Board
shall annually elect a Chairperson from among the membership.
C. The members shall serve for a term of five years; except that of the
members initially appointed, two of the public members shall be
appointed to serve for terms of five years, one member shall be
appointed to serve for a term of four years, and the remaining members
shall be appointed to serve for terms of three years. Each member shall
serve until his or her successor has been appointed and qualified. Any
vacancy occurring in the membership of the Board shall be filled in the
same manner as the original appointment for the unexpired term.
[Amended 9-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-17]
D. Members of the Board shall serve without compensation but shall be
reimbursed for necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their
duties under this chapter.
E. All hearings required pursuant to this chapter shall be conducted in
conformity with the rules and procedures, insofar as they may be
applicable, provided for hearings by a state agency in contested cases
under the Administrative Procedure Act, N.J.S.A. 52:14B-1 et seq.
F. In the event a hearing is to be held, the officer or employee charged
with a violation of this chapter shall be accorded due process of law,
including but not limited to the following:
(1) Right to counsel.
(2) Right to prehearing discovery.
(3) Right to take sworn oral and written testimony from any person.
(4) Reasonable notice of hearing.
(5) Right to subpoena persons and documents.
(6) Right to make stenographic record of the hearing.
(7) Right of examination and cross-examination.
A. The Mayor shall provide the Township of Old Bridge Ethical Standards
Board with the facilities needed for the conduct of its business and the
preservation of its records and shall supply equipment and supplies as
may be necessary and as may be provided for in the annual municipal
budget.
B. All necessary expenses incurred by the Township of Old Bridge Ethical
Standards Board and its members shall be paid, upon certification of
the Chairperson of the Board, by the Township Director of Finance
within the limits of funds appropriated in the annual budget or by
emergency appropriations for those purposes.
§ 145-6 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 145-7
10:344
§ 145-8. Adoption of Code of Ethics.
C. The Township of Old Bridge Ethical Standards Board may request and
receive assistance from Township officers and employees, including the
Township Clerk and the Township Attorney, and may appoint
employees, including independent counsel, and clerical staff as are
necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter within the limits of
funds appropriated by the Township Council for those purposes in the
annual budget.
A. Within 90 days after the appointment of the Township of Old Bridge
Ethical Standards Board, the Board shall promulgate by resolution a
Code of Ethics for all officers and employees serving the Township.
Officers and employees serving a Township independent authority shall
be deemed to be serving the Township for purposes of this chapter.
Until such time as the Township of Old Bridge Ethical Standards Board
shall have adopted a Code of Ethics, the provisions set forth in § 145-4
shall serve as the Code of Ethics.
B. The Code of Ethics promulgated by the Board shall be either identical to
the provisions set forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:9-22.5 or more restrictive, but
shall not be less restrictive.
C. Within 15 days following the promulgation thereof, the Code of Ethics,
and a notice of the date of the public hearing to be held on the Code of
Ethics, shall be published in the newspaper designated for the
publication of official notices for the Township and shall be distributed
to the Township Clerk and to the Mayor for circulation among the
officers and employees serving the Township.
D. The Township of Old Bridge Ethical Standards Board shall hold a public
hearing on the Code of Ethics not less than 30 days following its
promulgation at which any officer or employee of the Township and any
other person wishing to be heard shall be permitted to testify.
E. As a result of the hearing, the Board may amend or supplement the
Code of Ethics as it deems necessary.
F. If the Code of Ethics is not identical to the provisions set forth in
N.J.S.A. 40A:9-22.5, the Old Bridge Township Ethical Standards Board
shall, as required by law, submit the Code of Ethics to the New Jersey
Local Finance Board for approval.
G. If the Board fails to act within 60 days of the submission, the Code of
Ethics shall be deemed approved.
H. A Code of Ethics requiring approval by the New Jersey Local Finance
Board shall take effect 60 days after approval by the Commission.
I. A Code of Ethics identical to the provisions set forth in N.J.S.A.
40A:9-22.5 shall take effect 10 days after the public hearing.
§ 145-7 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 145-8
10:345
§ 145-9. Powers of Ethical Standards Board.
The Ethical Standards Board shall have the following powers:
§ 145-10. Advisory opinions.
J. The Board shall forward a copy of the Code of Ethics to the Township
Clerk and shall make copies available to officers and employees serving
the Township.
A. To initiate, receive, hear and review complaints and hold hearings with
regard to possible violations of the Municipal Code of Ethics or financial
disclosure requirements by local government officers or employees
serving the Township;
B. To issue subpoenas for the production of documents and the attendance
of witnesses with respect to its investigation of any complaint or to the
holding of a hearing;
C. To forward to the County Prosecutor or the Attorney General or other
governmental body any information concerning violations of the Code
of Ethics or financial disclosure requirements by officers or employees
serving the Township which may warrant the institution of other legal
proceedings by the Attorney General;
D. To render advisory opinions to local officers or employees serving the
Township as to whether a given set of facts and circumstances would
constitute a violation of any provision of the Code of Ethics or financial
disclosure requirements;
E. To enforce the provisions of the Code of Ethics and financial disclosure
requirements with regard to officers or employees serving the
Township and to impose penalties for the violation thereof as authorized
by this chapter; and
F. To adopt rules and regulations and do other things as are necessary to
implement the purposes of this chapter.
A. An officer or employee of the Township of Old Bridge may request and
obtain from the Old Bridge Township Ethical Standards Board an
advisory opinion as to whether any proposed activity or conduct would
in its opinion constitute a violation of the Code of Ethics or any financial
disclosure requirements.
B. Advisory opinions shall not be made public, except when the Board by
the vote of two-thirds of all of its members directs that the opinion be
made public.
C. Public advisory opinions shall not disclose the name of the officer or
employee unless the Board in directing that the opinion be made public
so determines.
§ 145-8 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 145-11
10:346
§ 145-11. Complaints.
§ 145-12. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
A. The Old Bridge Township Ethical Standards Board, upon receipt of a
signed written complaint by any person alleging that the conduct of any
officer or employee of the Township of Old Bridge serving the Township
is in conflict with the Code of Ethics or financial disclosure
requirements, shall acknowledge receipt of the complaint within 30
days of receipt and initiate an investigation concerning the facts and
circumstances set forth in the complaint.
B. The Board shall make a determination as to whether the complaint is
within its jurisdiction or frivolous or without any reasonable factual
basis.
C. If the Board shall conclude that the complaint is outside its jurisdiction,
frivolous or without factual basis, it shall reduce that conclusion to
writing and shall transmit a copy thereof to the complainant and to the
officer or employee of the Township of Old Bridge against whom the
complaint was filed.
D. If the Board shall conclude that the complaint is within its jurisdiction
and has at least a minimal factual basis, the Board shall notify the
officer or employee of the Township of Old Bridge against whom the
complaint was filed of the nature of the complaint and the facts and
circumstances set forth therein.
E. The officer or employee shall have the opportunity to present the Board
with any statement or information concerning the complaint which he
or she wishes.
F. If the Board determines that a reasonable doubt exists as to whether
the officer or employee of the Township of Old Bridge is in conflict with
the Municipal Code of Ethics or any financial disclosure requirements,
the Board shall conduct hearing concerning the possible violation and
any other facts and circumstances which may have come to the
attention of the Board with respect to the conduct of the officer or
employee.
G. The Board shall render a decision as to whether the conduct of the
officer or employee is in conflict with the Code of Ethics or any financial
disclosure requirements. This decision shall be made by no less than
two-thirds of all members of the Board.
H. If the Board determines that the officer or employee is in conflict with
the Code of Ethics or any financial disclosure requirements, it may
impose any penalties which it believes appropriate within the limits of
this chapter.
A. An appointed officer or employee of the Township of Old Bridge found
guilty by Old Bridge Township Ethical Standards Board of the violation
§ 145-11 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 145-12
10:347
§ 145-13. Records of Ethical Standards Board.
All statements, complaints, requests, or other written material filed
pursuant to this chapter, and any rulings, opinions, judgments, transcripts
or other official papers prepared pursuant to this chapter, shall be
preserved for a period of five years from the date of filing or preparation, as
the case may be.
Chapter 151
FARM, RIGHT TO
GENERAL REFERENCES
Mosquito breeding control — See Ch. 284.
Noise — See Ch. 300.
Nuisances — See Ch. 305.
Pesticide control — See Ch. 355.
of any provision of this chapter or of any Code of Ethics in effect
pursuant to this chapter shall be fined not less than $100 nor more
than $500, which penalty may be collected in a summary proceeding
pursuant to the Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999, N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10
et seq. The Old Bridge Township Ethical Standards Board shall report
its findings to the office or agency having the power of removal or
discipline of the appointed officer or employee and may recommend
that further disciplinary action be taken.98
B. An elected officer or employee of the Township of Old Bridge found
guilty by the Old Bridge Township Ethical Standards Board of the
violation of any provision of this chapter or of any Code of Ethics in
effect pursuant to this chapter shall be fined not less than $100 nor
more than $500, which penalty may be collected in a summary
proceeding pursuant to the Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999, N.J.S.A.
2A:58-10 et seq.99
C. The finding by the Old Bridge Township Ethical Standards Board that
an appointed officer or employee of the Township of Old Bridge is guilty
of the violation of the provision of this chapter, or of any Code of Ethics
in effect pursuant to this chapter, shall be sufficient cause for his or her
removal, suspension, demotion or other disciplinary action by the
officer or agency having the power of removal or discipline.
98.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
99.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 145-12 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 151-1
10:348
§ 151-1. Right to farm recognized.
The right to farm all land is hereby recognized to exist as a natural right,
subject to all relevant federal or state statutes or rules and regulations,
including but not limited to the New Jersey Health Code, applicable
regulations of the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and
the United States Environmental Protection Agency, all as amended. The
right to farm shall be exercised with appropriate consideration given to the
Old Bridge Township Zoning Ordinance.
§ 151-2. Permitted practices.
The right to farm should be read to include the use of large irrigation pumps
and equipment, aerial and ground seeding and spraying, large tractors,
and numerous farm laborers; the application of chemical fertilizers and
products for either the control and elimination of insects, pests, weeds,
fungus and other substances injurious to the farming process or for the
purpose of producing from the land agricultural products, such as
vegetable, grains, hay, fruits, fibers, potatoes, wood, trees, plants, shrubs,
flowers and seeds. This right to farm shall also include the right to use land
for grazing by animals, subject to the restrictions contained elsewhere in
this chapter for raising livestock. The right to farm shall not include any
agricultural practice which poses a direct threat to public health and safety.
§ 151-3. Agricultural activities.100
The foregoing uses and activities are included in the right to farm, when
reasonable and necessary for the particular farming: livestock or fowl
production, and when conducted in accordance with generally accepted
agricultural practice, as the same may be determined and promulgated,
from time to time, by the Rutgers University School of Agriculture.
§ 151-4. Findings.
It is expressly found that whatever temporary inconveniences may be
caused to others by such uses and activities so conducted, they are more
than offset by the benefits from farming to the neighborhood and
community and to society in general, by the preservation of open space,
the beauty of the countryside and clean air, and by the preservation and
continuance of farming operations as a source of agricultural products for
this and future generations in Old Bridge Township and the State of New
Jersey.
§ 151-5. Notification.
A developer and/or landowner who plans to build or sell a dwelling in
an agricultural area must personally, or through their agent, inform
prospective buyers of the existence of the right to farm ordinance and the
100. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 151-1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 151-5
10:349
protection it grants to agricultural operations. This notification must be
included in the deed of conveyance and recorded in the Clerk's office.
Chapter 160
FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees for public records — See Ch. 380.
§ 151-5 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 151-5
10:350
ARTICLE I
Recreation Fees
[Adopted 3-6-1978 by Ord. No. D-224 (Sec. 5-10 of the 1973 Revised
General Ordinances); amended in its entirety 6-5-1978 by Ord. No.
D-236]
§ 160-1. Ice rink fees. [Amended 10-16-1978 by Ord. No. D-251;
10-20-1980 by Ord. No. D-326; 1-7-1985 by Ord. No. 1-85;
9-18-1989 by Ord. No. 32-89; 10-14-1993 by Ord. No. 46-93;
8-11-1997 by Ord. No. 29-97; 11-8-1999 by Ord. No. 32-99;
8-22-2005 by Ord. No. 24-2005]
A. Old Bridge Arena is wholly owned by the Township of Old Bridge and, as
such, the Township is empowered to set fees for its admission and use.
B. Pursuant to the recommendation of Old Bridge Township's Director of
Recreation, fees for the 1999-2000 skating season are revised
according to the following schedule. The Mayor, Township Clerk,
Director of Recreation and Director of Law are hereby authorized to
take any action and to sign any and all documents necessary to carry
out this article. [Amended 5-10-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-15;
10-25-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-30]
Type Fee
Adult resident $7
Adult nonresident $10
Student resident/senior citizen resident (62 and
over)
$6
Student nonresident/senior citizen nonresident (62
and over)
$8
Child resident (12 or under) $5
Child nonresident (12 or under) $6
Resident I.D. Card Fee
Type Fee
Adults No charge
Student/child No charge
Ice Skate Rental
Type Fee
Adults and children $6
§ 160-1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 160-1
10:351
§ 160-2. Hockey league; instruction hockey. [Added 6-25-2001 by
Ord. No. 34-01]
Ice Rental
Type Prime Time Off Prime
General ice hockey and figure
skating
$300 per hour $250 per hour
Old Bridge ice hockey and figure
skating
$220 per hour $200 per hour
Figure Skating Instructional Lessons
Program Resident fee
Nonresident
fee
8-week session $40 $50
12-week session $60 $75
A. Purpose. This section establishes the resident and nonresident fees for
the instructional hockey and hockey league programs at the Old Bridge
Arena.
B. Fees. Pursuant to the recommendation of Old Bridge Township's
Director of Recreation, fees for the instructional hockey and hockey
league programs are set as follows: [Amended 6-9-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-16; 5-10-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-15; 5-16-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-08; 3-12-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-09; 4-11-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-08]
(1) Hockey league.
Program Resident Fee Nonresident Fee
Mite-C $1,500 $1,625
Mite-B $1,625 $1,725
Squirt $2,475 $2,600
Peewee $2,600 $2,725
Bantam $2,725 $2,850
Midget Minor $1,625 $1,750
Midget Major $1,625 $1,750
(2) Instructional hockey.
Session Resident Fee Nonresident Fee
First session $350 $400
Second session $350 $400
§ 160-1 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 160-2
10:352
§ 160-3. Recreation building fees. [Amended 1-7-1985 by Ord. No.
1-85]
• Mites reduced from full ice to cross-ice.
• Midgets short season ending December 1, 2016.
• The above fees wil be reduced by $500 for goalies for Squirt
through Midget levels.
A. The department head of the Recreation Department or his designee has
the discretion to approve or disapprove any application for use of any
recreation facility and has the discretion to waive any or all utility and
custodial fees for charitable or nonprofit organizations only.
B. Fee charges. [Amended 2-19-1985 by Ord. No. 12-85; 10-14-1993
by Ord. No. 46-93; 5-8-1995 by Ord. No. 29-95]
(1) Class A. Department-sponsored or Township-sponsored activities:
no fee or deposit.
(2) Class B. Youth programs sponsored by school or organized
Township youth organization:
(a) Room rental charge: $20.
(b) Per-hour supervisor charge: $5.
(c) Setup rate: $20.
(d) Breakdown/cleanup fee: $20.
(e) Special note: One adult chaperon will be required for each 15
participants. Special police may be required, depending on the
affair, at the discretion of the Director of Parks and Recreation.
(3) Civic Center.
(a) Class C. Adult dances/banquets, craft shows, etc. (affairs). One
flat rate for rental setup and breakdown.
[1] Rental charge (including setup, breakdown, utilities,
kitchen): $240.
[2] Supervisor fee: $8 per hour.
[3] Refundable security deposit: $50.
(b) Class E. Meetings.
[1] Large (assembly room): $120.
[2] Small (all others): $60.
[3] Supervisor: $8.
§ 160-2 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 160-3
10:353
§ 160-4. (Reserved)101
§ 160-5. Roller skate fees. [Added 2-20-1979 by Ord. No. D-258]
The fees relating to roller skates shall be the same as those set forth above
for ice rink fees, § 160-1.
§ 160-6. Athletic field rental. [Added 10-14-1993 by Ord. No. 46-93]
§ 160-7. Picnics. [Added 10-14-1993 by Ord. No. 46-93]
[4] Security deposit (refundable): $50.
(4) Satellite buildings.
(a) Class C. Affairs, such as showers, parties, craft shows, etc. One
flat rate for rental setup and breakdown.
[1] Rental charge (includes setup, cleanup): $120.
[2] Supervisor: $8 per hour.
[3] Security deposit (refundable): $50.
(b) Class E. Meetings.
[1] Main room: $60.
[2] Supervisor: $8 per hour.
[3] Security deposit (refundable): $50.
A. Class A.
(1) Little league/youth softball: $0.
(2) Activities/Old Bridge Board of Education/bona fide charity games:
$0.
B. Class B. Township-sanctioned leagues and organizations.
(1) Per game (day): $10.
(2) Per game (lighted): $25.
C. Class C. Private/commercial teams and leagues.
(1) Per game (day): $10. [Amended 12-12-2005 by Ord. No.
40-2005]
(2) Per game (lighted): $50.
A. Residents: $50.
101. Editor's Note: Former § 160-4, Tennis court fees, as amended, was repealed 3-26-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-07.
§ 160-3 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 160-7
10:354
B. Nonresidents: $100.
C. Security fee (refundable): $25.
§ 160-7 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 160-7
10:355

ARTICLE II
Tax Collector Fees
[Adopted 12-11-1995 by Ord. No. 66-95]
§ 160-8. Fees collected by Tax Collector.
The following fees are hereby established and shall be collected by the Tax
Collector of the Township of Old Bridge as indicated:
A. Upon the authorization of any party who redeems a tax sale certificate
or, for any other reasons, secures the cancellation of an outstanding tax
sale certificate, the Tax Collector of the Township of Old Bridge shall
record such cancellation at the County Clerk's Office and shall collect
from the redeeming party a fee of $30. [Amended 9-24-2018 by Ord.
No. 2018-25]
B. Should any person or entity require the issuance of a certificate of
redemption (from Tax Collector) or affidavit of discharge (from third
party lien holders), the following fees shall be collected by the Tax
Collector:
(1) Certificate of redemption: $15.
(2) Affidavit of discharge: $20.
C. In any case in which the Tax Collector mails an original unrecorded
cancelled certificate to the redeeming party, such mailing shall be done
by certified mail and a fee equal to the US postal authorities' charges
for such mail, plus a handling charge of $2.50, shall be collected by the
Tax Collector.
D. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 54:5-54, the Tax Collector shall provide to
any party entitled to redeem a certificate pursuant to this section
(N.J.S.A. 54:5-54) two calculations of the amount required for
redemption within a calendar year at no cost. For each subsequent
calculation requested from the Tax Collector there shall be a fee of $50.
A request for a redemption calculation shall be made in writing to the
Tax Collector. [Added 2-28-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-03]
E. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 54:5-97.1, the Tax Collector may charge a
lien holder of a tax lien $50 for the calculation of the amount due to
redeem the tax lien as required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-97.1. Any
request for a redemption calculation shall specify the date to be used
for the calculation, which shall be the date of the notice. Neither the Tax
Collector nor the municipality shall be liable for an incorrect
calculation. The fee paid to the municipality shall not become part of
the lien and shall not be passed on to any party entitled to redeem
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-54. [Added 2-28-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-03]
§ 160-8 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 160-8
10:357

ARTICLE III
Various Goods and Services
[Adopted 8-26-1996 by Ord. No. 32-96]
§ 160-9. Purpose.
This article establishes fees for goods and/or services rendered to
individuals or organizations by the Township.
§ 160-10. Reimbursable legal work.
§ 160-11. Police reports.
A. Preparation of deed: $120.
B. Review of bonds: $45.
C. Other legal work charged to third parties: $100 per hour.
A. Copies of police documents. [Amended 9-23-2002 by Ord. No.
45-02]
(1) Police reports, including but not limited to accident reports,
criminal case reports and DWI case reports, shall be $0.05 per
letter-size page or smaller and $0.07 per legal-size page or larger.
[Amended 5-10-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-15; 10-25-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-30]
(2) For all police reports which are requested other than in person, an
additional fee of $5 for the first three pages and $1 for each page
thereafter shall be charged.
B. Photographs.
(1) Crime scene or accident scene.
(a) Complete sets: $5 per picture.
(b) Eight by 10 enlargement: $15 per enlargement.
(c) Eight by 12 enlargement: $20 per enlargement.
(2) ID photographs for permits, licenses, etc.
(a) Group of four: $5 per group.
(3) Digital photographs: $25 per disc. [Added 9-24-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-21]
C. Audiotape cassette: $0.30 per copy. [Amended 10-25-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-30]
D. Videotape cassette: $0.30 per copy. [Amended 10-25-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-30]
§ 160-9 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 160-11
10:359
§ 160-12. Maps.
§ 160-13. Rent Stabilization Ordinance.
The fee for the Rent Stabilization Ordinance (Chapter 388, Article I) is
$15.75 (plus $1 by mail).
§ 160-14. Land Development Ordinance. [Amended 6-12-2006 by
Ord. No. 27-2006]
The fee for the Land Development Ordinance is $45 per copy (plus $5 for
mailing).
§ 160-15. Lists.
§ 160-16. Returned check fee.
The fee for a returned check is $20.
§ 160-17. Tax office.
E. Fingerprinting.
(1) Township residents: $5.
(2) Nonresidents: $20.
F. Purchase of police documents online. A processing fee between $3.50
and $5.50 per transaction shall be charged for the purchase of police
documents through the Internet. The actual fee charged by the
Township shall be determined by and subject to administrative fees,
online processing costs and credit card fees charged by the credit card
company. [Added 3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-04]
A. Street, ward or zoning maps: $5 each ($1 additional by mail).
B. Assessors map: $0.75 per sheet.
A. Certified property owners list: $0.25 per name or $10, whichever is
greater. [Amended 2-13-2001 by Ord. No. 05-01]
B. Bond release lists: $25.
C. Mailing list labels printed: $250.
(1) Mailing list labels on diskette: $150.
A. Duplicate tax bill for nonproperty owner: $5.
B. Substitute/replacement tax bill by other than property owner: $5 per
quarter.
C. Certified tax search: $10 per property per year.
§ 160-11 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 160-17
10:360
§ 160-18. Recycling containers. [Amended 1-9-2006 by Ord. No.
38-2005; 5-10-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-15; 3-7-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-06]
The following fees are charged for recycling containers:
§ 160-19. Recreation fees.102
§ 160-20. Other license and permit fees.
§ 160-20.1. Licensing and administration of reward-type programs.
[Added 5-6-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-09]
D. Continuation of tax search: $2 per property per year.
E. Letter of tax status: $1 per property.
F. Research of tax years prior to last three years: $3 per property per year
or part thereof.
G. Redeemed lien cancellation fee: $30 per certificate. [Amended
9-22-2003 by Ord. No. 49-03; 9-24-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-26]
H. Certificate of redemption for municipal liens: $15 per lien.
I. Affidavit of discharge for outside liens: $20 per lien.
A. Fourteen-gallon container with lid: $12.25.
B. Twenty-gallon round container: $8.90.
C. All future amendments to this section changing the fees to be charged
for recycling containers may be accomplished by resolution adopted by
the Township Council and without the requirement of adoption of an
ordinance formally amending this section.
A. Program and participation fees as established by Council resolution
B. Building rental fees as established by Council resolution
A. License and permits fees are established elsewhere in the Code.
B. Ordinances establishing fees for items mentioned in this article are
hereby repealed.
A. Any vendor who offers reward programs which includes the payment of
taxes for Old Bridge Township taxpayers who shop at participating Old
Bridge Township-based businesses shall before implementing such a
program obtain a license as provided for in this section.
102. Editor's Note: See also Art. I, Recreation Fees, of this chapter.
§ 160-17 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 160-20.1
10:361
B. The program shall be administered solely by the vendor who shall
undertake to register interested taxpayers and Old Bridge Townshipbased
businesses.
C. The vendor shall pay to the Township a license fee in the amount of
$500 yearly together with an application in the form provided by the
Township, which shall include all information as may be reasonably
required in order for the Township Administrator and Chief Financial
Officer to determine the truth or validity of the statements contained in
the application. All applications and vendors shall be subject to review
and approval by resolution of Township Council prior to the issuance of
a license pursuant to this section.
D. Conditions. The Township shall establish the necessary reporting
requirement for any payment of taxes made to the Township by the
vendor. The Township shall not be responsible for any impact of
program participation on mortgage escrow calculations. The Township
shall not be responsible for any changes in property ownership.
§ 160-20.1 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 160-20.1
10:362
ARTICLE IV
Parking Fees
[Adopted 3-25-2002 by Ord. No. 08-02; amended in its entirety
1-9-2006 by Ord. No. 38-2005]
§ 160-21. Purpose.
This article establishes a parking fee of $1 for the Old Bridge Township
commuter parking lot located near the intersection of Inverness Drive and
Route 9, and at the Old Bridge Park 'N Ride Lot located at Route 9 and
Westminster Road.
§ 160-22. Daily parking fee.
The Township of Old Bridge hereby establishes a daily parking fee of $1
per parking space at the Inverness Drive Commuter Parking Lot and at the
Old Bridge Park 'N Ride Lot located at Route 9 and Westminster Road. The
collection of parking fees shall not be instituted until the Mayor certifies
the resurfacing of the commuter parking lot projected to occur in 2002 is
complete.
§ 160-21 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 160-22
10:363

ARTICLE V
Vital Statistics
[Adopted 3-25-2002 by Ord. No. 10-02 (Sec. 19-14 of the 1973
Revised General Ordinances); amended in its entirety 9-27-2004 by
Ord. No. 34-04]
§ 160-23. Certified copies of vital statistics. [Amended 5-14-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-09]
A. Burial permit: cost as state mandated.
B. Certified copies of vital statistics, including but not limited to birth,
marriage, domestic partnership, civil union: $10. [Amended 6-9-2008
by Ord. No. 2008-15]
C. Filing of correction to a vital record (for each REG-34 state form filed):
$10. [Amended 6-9-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-15]
D. Certified copy of correction to vital record: $10.
E. Record an adoption: $2. [Added 5-10-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-15]
F. Record a legal name change: $2. [Added 5-10-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-15]
§ 160-23 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 160-23
10:365

ARTICLE VI
Internet Payment of Property Taxes
[Adopted 6-10-2002 by Ord. No. 25-02; amended in its entirety
8-11-2003 by Ord. No. 40-03]
§ 160-24. Purpose.
This article establishes fees to be charged by the Township when accepting
payment through the Internet with and without the use of a credit card.
§ 160-25. Transaction charge; credit card processing fee.
A. A fee of $1 per transaction shall be charged for Internet payments not
involving a credit card transaction.
B. A credit card processing fee of between 0% and 4% per transaction
shall be charged by the Township for any payment made to the
Township through the Internet by use of a credit card. The actual fee
charged shall be subject to the cost of processing charged by the credit
card company and administrative charges.
§ 160-24 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 160-25
10:367

ARTICLE VII
Special Law Enforcement Officer I Academy
[Adopted 7-8-2002 by Ord. No. 28-02]
§ 160-26. Purpose.
This article establishes a fee amount for enrollment in the Old Bridge
Township Police Department Special Law Enforcement Officer I Academy.
§ 160-27. Enrollment fee.
A fee of $100 shall be charged for enrollment in the Old Bridge Township
Police Department Special Law Enforcement I Academy.
§ 160-26 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 160-27
10:369

ARTICLE VIII
Day-Care Program
[Adopted 4-28-2003 by Ord. No. 21-03; amended in its entirety
12-14-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-22]
§ 160-28. Purpose.
This article establishes the fees for the Before and After School Day-Care
Program and the Summer Recess Program pursuant to the recommendation
of the coordinator of said day-care programs.
§ 160-29. Registration fee.
A registration fee shall be charged equal to one month's payment based
on the program chosen. If written notice is provided at least 30 days prior
thereto, the registration fee will be returned within 30 days. If the child
remains in the full program, the registration fee will be accepted as the June
payment.
§ 160-30. Fees for Before and After School Day-Care Program.
The fees for the Before and After School Day-Care Program shall be as
follows:
A. Elementary After School (Program "A"), per child, per month:
[Amended 9-12-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-11; 8-11-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-15; 8-21-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-14; 7-9-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-20]
2018 2019 2020
(1) Five days per week: $230 $250 $270
(2) Four days per week: $210 $230 $250
(3) One to three days per
week:
$200 $220 $240
B. Before School (Program "B"), per child, per month: [Amended
9-12-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-11; 8-11-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-15;
8-21-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-14; 7-9-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-20]
2018 2019 2020
(1) Five days per week: $180 $200 $220
(2) Four days per week: $170 $190 $210
(3) One to three days per
week:
$160 $180 $200
C. Combination Before and After School (Program "C"), per child, per
month: [Amended 9-12-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-11; 8-11-2014 by
§ 160-28 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 160-30
10:371
§ 160-31. Fees for Full-Day Summer Camp. [Amended 7-9-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-20]
The tuition fees for the Full-Day Summer Camp shall be as follows:
Ord. No. 2014-15; 8-21-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-14; 7-9-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-20]
2018 2019 2020
(1) Five days per week: $290 $310 $330
(2) Four days per week: $260 $280 $300
(3) One to three days per
week:
$240 $260 $280
D. Middle School After School (Program "D"), per child, per month:
[Amended 9-12-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-11; 8-11-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-15; 8-21-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-14; 7-9-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-20]
2018 2019 2020
(1) Five days per week: $250 $270 $290
(2) Four days per week: $225 $245 $265
(3) One to three days per
week:
$205 $225 $245
E. An administration fee of $5 shall be charged each month per child.
F. For parents who pick up after our program has ended at 6:00 p.m.: a fee
of $5 per five minutes or part of five minutes.
A. Eight-week program, per child:
2019
(1) Elementary: $1,500
(2) Middle School: $1,650
(3) High School $1,850
B. Four-week program, per child:
2019
(1) Elementary: $1,000
(2) Middle School: $1,110
C. Camp Robin, six-week program.
D. Shirt fee. A shirt fee of $5 shall be collected for each shirt at the time of
registration.
§ 160-30 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 160-31
10:372
§ 160-32. Late tuition payments.
A late tuition payment fee of $25 shall be charged if payment is received
after the tuition deadline.
E. Administration fee. An administration fee of $20 shall be charged for
the nine-week summer camp, and an administration fee of $15 shall be
charged for the five-week summer camp.
F. Late pickup fee. A fee of $5 per five minutes or part of five minutes shall
be charged for parents who pick up after our program has ended at
6:00 p.m.
§ 160-31 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 160-32
10:373

ARTICLE IX
Miscellaneous Fees
[Added 6-12-2006 by Ord. No. 27-2006]
§ 160-33. Miscellaneous fees. [Amended 5-10-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-15; 10-25-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-30]
A. Copies.
(1) Per letter-size page or smaller: $0.05.
(2) Per legal-size page or larger: $0.07.
B. DVD: $0.30 per copy.
C. Alcoholic beverage license application and supporting documentation:
$1.75.
D. Notary fee: $2.50, and as may be amended by N.J.S.A. 22A:4-14.
§ 160-33 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 160-33
10:375

ARTICLE X
Individual Subsurface Sewage Disposal Systems
[Adopted 6-9-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-15]
§ 160-34. Application fee; license fee for cleaning or emptying of
sewage receptacles.
A. The fee for review of each application to construct or alter an individual
subsurface sewage disposal system is $200, which includes witnessing
soil logs and percolation tests, review of engineer plans and inspection
during construction. The fee shall be payable upon the filing of an
application.
B. For the issuance or renewal of a license to a person engaged in the
business of cleaning or emptying receptacles for the reception and
storage of human excrement or other putrescible matter: $100 per year
for each vehicle or conveyance.
§ 160-34 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 160-34
10:377
Chapter 164
FENCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 108. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 435.
§ 164-1. Fences in residential zones; permit; fee. [Amended
10-27-1994 by Ord. No. 67-94]
All fences erected in any residential zone in the Township, with the
exception of farm uses, shall be subject to the following requirements:
§ 164-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CORNER LOT — A parcel of land abutting two or more streets.
INTERIOR LOT — A parcel of land with a street on one side only.
OPEN FENCE — A fence which is greater than 50% open to the direct line
of vision.
SOLID FENCE — A fence which is less than 50% open to the direct line of
vision.
§ 164-3. Height restrictions.
A. A fence permit shall be issued by the Department of Community
Development for all fences, except living fences, erected in the
Township. If, however, a fence is in excess of six feet, a construction
permit is required. [Amended 1-9-2006 by Ord. No. 38-2005]
B. Existing fences which are being replaced or altered require a fence
permit and must meet all other requirements of this chapter. The fee for
a fence permit shall be $30. [Amended 12-8-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-22]
A. A solid six-foot-high fence may be installed on an interior lot in the rear
and side yards and shall not extend beyond the front building line of the
house. (Exception: When a house which exists on an adjacent lot is less
than 7 1/2 feet from the common property line, a six-foot fence will not
be permitted in the side yard.)
B. A solid six-foot-high fence may be installed on a corner lot in the side
and rear yard, to within five feet of the property; however, this fence
shall not be permitted to obstruct the sight triangle at the corner.
§ 160-34 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 164-3
10:378
§ 164-4. Materials.
The following materials are prohibited for use as fencing materials on any
residential lot:
§ 164-5. Finished side.
All fences shall be constructed with the face or finished side facing adjacent
properties.
§ 164-6. Living fences.
Living fences shall be maintained in a neatly trimmed condition and shall
not extend into adjacent properties. Living fences along roads and at road
intersections must also be maintained in accordance with Chapter 435,
Article II, Obstructions Along Roads and At Intersections.
§ 164-7. Drainage.
Fences shall be constructed in a manner so as not to restrict the flow
of natural drainage nor cause surface water to be blocked or dammed to
create ponding.
§ 164-8. Appeals.
All appeals concerning the regulations of this chapter applicable to
residential properties shall be directed to the Township Council, which may
grant variances in cases of hardship. The Township Council will act on this
appeal only after the applicant presents proof that the adjacent property
owners affected by the appeal have been notified of the appeal.
C. A maximum four-foot-high open fence may be installed in the front yard
area forward of the front building line of the house.
D. The height of all fences shall be measured from grade.
A. Barbed wire.
B. Sharp pointed materials of any type to form the top of the fence.
C. Canvas.
D. Cloth.
E. Electrically charged fences.
F. Temporary fences, such as but not limited to snow fences, expandable
fences and collapsible fences upon a lot with a dwelling or structure on
it; however, temporary fences shall be permitted to protect any
hazardous condition or excavation.
§ 164-3 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 164-9
10:379
§ 164-9. Swimming pools.
Fences around swimming pools shall meet the requirements as established
in the Swimming Pool Safety Devices section of the New Jersey State
Uniform Construction Code.
§ 164-10. Nonresidential fences.
Chapter 169
FESTIVALS; MASS GATHERINGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusement devices — See Ch. 35.
Carnivals and circuses — See Ch. 95.
Flea markets — See Ch. 193.
Games of chance — See Ch. 210.
Noise — See Ch. 300.
Racetracks — See Ch. 373.
§ 169-1. License required; fee; definitions; restrictions.
A. Fences proposed at any new construction project shall be included as
part of the site plan proposal presented for consideration before the
appropriate approving board.
B. Barbed wire and electrically charged fences shall be permitted in
conjunction with farm uses. Where barbed wire or electrically charged
fences are located within 100 feet of any residential property,
permanent signs identifying the type of fence shall be posted every 100
feet. A "farm" is defined as any parcel of land, three acres or larger in
size, which is used in the raising of agricultural products, livestock,
poultry or dairy products as a source of income.
C. Fences at nonresidential properties shall be 75% open and not exceed
10 feet in height.
A. No person shall permit, maintain, promote, conduct, advertise, act as
entrepreneur, undertake, organize, manage, sell or give tickets to an
actual or reasonably anticipated outdoor assembly of 1,000 or more
people, whether on public or private property, unless a license to hold
the assembly has first been issued by the Township Clerk of the
Township of Old Bridge, application for which must be made at least 30
days in advance of the assembly. A license to hold an assembly issued to
one person shall permit any person to engage in any lawful activity in
connection with the holding of the licensed assembly.
B. Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
§ 164-9 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 169-1
10:380
§ 169-2. Conditions for issuance of license.
Before the issuance of a license, the applicant shall first:
ASSEMBLY — A company of persons gathered together at any location
at any single time for any purpose.
PERSON — Any individual, natural human being, partnership,
corporation, firm, company, association, society or group.
C. A separate license shall be required for each day and each location in
which 1,000 or more people assemble or can reasonably be anticipated
to assemble. The fee for each license shall be $250.103
D. The license shall permit the assembly of only the maximum number of
people stated in the license. The licensee shall not sell tickets to nor
permit to assemble at the licensed location more than the maximum
permissible number of people.
E. The licensee shall not permit the sound of the assembly to carry
unreasonably beyond the closed boundaries of the location of the
assembly.
F. No such assembly shall be conducted between the hours of 2:00 a.m.
and 6:00 a.m.
G. Any applicant which is a recognized community service and charitable
group or has a principal function activity related thereto may apply to
the Township Council for a variance from the terms of this chapter,
provided that the Council is satisfied that the variance would be in the
public interest.
H. This chapter shall not apply to government-sponsored affairs held on
regularly established fair grounds nor to assemblies required to be
licensed by other ordinances and regulations of the Township of Old
Bridge.
I. This chapter shall not apply to the conduct of any festivals or mass
assemblies which are conducted by any operator of a race track which
is licensed under Chapter 373, Racetracks, of this Code, which has as
its primary purpose the showing or selling of vehicles, components,
parts or accessories related to motor vehicles, motorcycles, scooters or
other similar motorized conveyance. [Added 2-13-1996 by Ord. No.
4-96]
A. Determine the maximum number of people which will be assembled or
admitted to the location of the assembly, provided that the maximum
number shall not exceed the number which can reasonably assemble at
the location of the assembly, in consideration of the nature of the
assembly.
103. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 169-1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 169-2
10:381
B. Provide proof that he will furnish, at his own expense, before the
assembly commences:
(1) A fence completely enclosing the location of sufficient height and
strength to prevent people in excess of the maximum permissible
number from gaining access to the assembly grounds, which fence
shall have at least four gates, at least on four opposite points of the
compass.
(2) Potable water meeting all federal and state requirements for purity,
sufficient to provide drinking water for the maximum number of
people to be assembled, at the rate of at least one gallon per person
per day.
(3) Enclosed toilets for males and females, meeting all state and local
specifications, conveniently located throughout the grounds as
follows:
(a) For events with an anticipated duration of eight hours or less
or where the anticipated attendance of each person in the
event area will be for eight hours or less: one toilet designated
for males and one toilet designated for females for every 350
people in attendance.
(b) For events with an anticipated duration greater than eight
hours or where the attendees will be in the event area for a
period greater than eight hours: two toilets designated for
males and two toilets designated for females for every 350
people in attendance.
(4) A sanitary method of disposing of solid waste, in compliance with
state and local laws and regulations, sufficient to dispose of the
solid waste production of the maximum number of people to be
assembled, at the rate of at least 2.5 pounds of solid waste per
person per day, together with a plan for holding and a plan for
collecting all such waste at least once a day in the assembly, and
sufficient trash cans with tight-fitting lids and personnel to perform
the task.
(5) Physicians and nurses licensed to practice in New Jersey as follows:
(a) Gatherings where the attendees will arrive and depart on the
same calendar day (not to mean any twenty-four-hour period):
Attendance
Number of
Physician(s)
Number of
Nurse(s)
2,001 — 3,000 1 2
3,001 — 5,000 2 4
5,001 — 50,000 3 6
50,001 —
100,000
5 10
§ 169-2 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 169-2
10:382
Attendance
Number of
Physician(s)
Number of
Nurse(s)
Over 100,000 5 10
(b) Gatherings where the attendees will depart one or more
calendar days after the calendar day of arrival:
Attendance
Number of
Physician(s)
Number of
Nurse(s)
1,000 — 2,000 1 2
2,001 — 3,000 2 4
3,001 — 5,000 3 6
5,001 — 30,000 5 8
30,001 — 50,000 5 10
Over 50,000 5/10 10
(6) If the assembly is to continue during hours of darkness,
illumination sufficient to light the entire area of the assembly at the
rate of at least five footcandles, but not to shine unreasonably
beyond the barriers of the enclosed areas of the assembly.
(7) A parking area inside of the assembly grounds sufficient to provide
parking space for the maximum number of people to be assembled
at the rate of at least one parking space for every four persons.
(8) Telephones connected to outside lines sufficient to provide service
for the maximum number of people to be assembled at the rate of at
least one separate line and receiver for each 10,000 persons.
(9) Security guards, either regularly employed duly sworn off-duty
New Jersey peace officers or private guards licensed in New Jersey,
sufficient to provide adequate security for the maximum number of
persons assembled, at the rate of at least one security guard for
every 750 people.
(10) Fire protection, including alarms, extinguishing devices and fire
lanes and escapes, sufficient to meet all state and local standards
for the location of the assembly, as set forth in the statutes of the
State of New Jersey and ordinances of this municipality, and
sufficient emergency personnel to efficiently operate the required
equipment.
(11) All reasonably necessary precautions to ensure that the sound of
the assembly will not carry unreasonably beyond the enclosed
boundaries of the location of the assembly.
(12) A bond, filed with the Clerk of Old Bridge Township, either in cash
or underwritten by a surety company licensed to do business in
New Jersey, in the amount of $10,000,000, which shall indemnify
§ 169-2 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 169-2
10:383
§ 169-3. Application for license.
and hold harmless this municipality or any of its agents, officers,
servants, and employees from any liability or causes of action
which might arise by reason of the granting of this license and from
any damage incurred by trespass, vandalism or otherwise and from
any costs incurred in cleaning up waste material produced or left
by the assembly. [Amended 5-10-1999 by Ord. No. 19-99]
A. Application for a license to hold an actual or anticipated outdoor
assembly of 1,000 or more persons shall be in writing to the governing
body of this municipality at least 30 days in advance of such assembly.
The application shall contain a statement made upon oath or
affirmation that the statements contained therein are true and correct
to the best knowledge of the applicant and shall be signed and sworn to
or affirmed by the individual making application in the case of an
individual or a natural human being, by an officer in the case of a
corporation, by all partners in the case of a partnership or by all officers
of an unincorporated association, society or group or, if there are no
officers, by all members of such association, society or group.
B. The application shall contain and disclose:
(1) The name, age, residence and mailing address of all persons
required to sign the application by Subsection A and, in the case of
a corporation, a certified copy of the certificate of incorporation,
together with the name, age, residence and mailing address of each
person holding 10% or more of the stock in said corporation.
(2) The name, age, residence and mailing address of all persons
contributing $500 or more to the production of said assembly.
(3) The address and legal description of all property upon which the
assembly is to be held, together with the name, residence and
mailing address of the record owner or owners of all such property.
(4) Proof of ownership of all property upon which the assembly is to be
held or a statement made upon oath or affirmation by the record
owner or owners of all such property that the applicant has
permission to use such property for an outdoor assembly of 1,000
or more persons.
(5) The nature or purpose of the assembly.
(6) The total number of days and/or hours during which the assembly
is to last.
(7) The maximum number of persons the applicant shall permit to
assemble at any time is not to exceed the maximum number which
can reasonably assemble at the location of the assembly, in
consideration of the nature of the assembly.
§ 169-2 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 169-3
10:384
(8) The maximum number of tickets to be sold, if any.
(9) The plans of the applicant to limit the maximum number of people
permitted to assemble.
(10) The plans for fencing the location of the assembly and the gates
contained in such fence.
(11) The plans for supplying potable water, including the source,
amount available and location of outlets.
(12) The plans for providing toilet and lavatory facilities, including the
source, number and location, type and means of disposing of
deposits of waste.
(13) The plans for holding, collecting and disposing of solid waste
material.
(14) Plans to provide medical facilities, including the location and
construction of the structure, the names and addresses and also
availability of all physicians and nurses and provisions for
emergency ambulance service.
(15) The plans, if any, to illuminate the location of the assembly,
including the source, amount of power and the location of land.
(16) The plans for the parking of vehicles, including the size and
location of lots, points of highway entry and interior roads,
including routes between highway access and parking lots.
Approved state permits must be furnished.
(17) The plans for telephone service, including the source, number and
location of telephones.
(18) The plans for security, including the number of guards, the
deployment, their names, addresses and credentials and hours of
availability.
(19) The plans for fire protection, including the number, type and
location of all protective devices, including the alarms and
extinguishers, number of emergency fire personnel to operate the
equipment.
(20) The plans for sound control and sound amplification, if any,
including the number, location and power of the amplifiers and
speakers.
(21) The plans for food concessions and concessionaires who will be
allowed to operate on the grounds, including the names and
addresses of all concessionaires and their license or permit
numbers.
C. The application shall include the bond required in § 169-2B(12) and the
license fee.
§ 169-3 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 169-4
10:385
§ 169-4. Public hearing.
A public hearing shall be held on each application before each license shall
be issued. No license shall be issued unless the governing body is satisfied
that the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Township will not
be adversely affected.
§ 169-5. Processing and issuance of license.
The application for a license shall be processed within 21 days of receipt
and shall be issued if all conditions are complied with.
§ 169-6. Revocation of license.
The license may be revoked by the governing body of this municipality at
any time if any of the conditions necessary for the issuance of or contained
in the license are not complied with or if any condition previously met
ceases to be complied with.
§ 169-7. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
§ 169-8. Commercial flea markets; license fee.105
Applicants or the person or persons having control over or ownership of
any commercial flea market shall pay $1 per table per day license fee to
the Township Clerk for a license to operate said market. Said fee shall be
payable monthly by said person and shall be due and payable on the last day
of each month for all said tables for all said months. Said license shall be
valid for a period not to exceed 12 months and shall be renewable, provided
that all of said fees have been paid.
A. The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by injunction in any
court of competent jurisdiction.
B. The holding of any outdoor assembly in violation of any provision or
condition contained in this chapter shall be viewed as a public nuisance
and may be abated as such.
C. Any person who violates any section or who violates any condition upon
which he is granted a license may be fined or imprisoned in accordance
with the general penalty provisions in Chapter 1, Article II, Penalty.104
104. Editor's Note: Original Sec. 5-11.8, Municipal assessment, which previously followed this
section, was repealed 8-16-1999 by Ord. No. 26-99.
105. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 193, Flea Markets
§ 169-4 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 169-8
10:386
Chapter 176
FIRE FIGHTING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 185. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 435.
§ 176-1. Adoption of fire control measures and regulations.
There is hereby adopted by the Township of Old Bridge the fire control
measures and regulations as herein set forth for the purposes of controlling
conditions which could impede or interfere with fire suppression forces.
§ 176-2. Authority at fires and other emergencies.
The Fire Chief or duly authorized representative, as defined in Chapter 14
of Title 40A of the New Jersey Revised Statutes and the rules of the fire
district or districts of the Township of Old Bridge, as may be in charge at
the scene of a fire or other emergency involving the protection of life and/
or property, is empowered to direct such operations as may be necessary
to extinguish or control any suspected or reported fires, gas leaks or other
hazardous conditions or situations or of taking any other action necessary
in the reasonable performance of his duty. The Fire Chief or duly authorized
representative may prohibit any person, vehicle or object from approaching
the scene and may remove or cause to be removed from the scene any
person, vehicle or object which may impede or interfere with the operations
of the Fire Department. The Fire Chief or duly authorized representative
may remove or cause to be removed any person, vehicle or object from
hazardous areas. All persons ordered to leave a hazardous area shall do so
immediately and shall not reenter the area until authorized to do so by the
Fire Chief or duly authorized representative.
§ 176-3. Interference with Fire Department operations.
It shall be unlawful to interfere with, attempt to interfere with, conspire to
interfere with, obstruct or restrict the mobility of or block the path of travel
of any Fire Department emergency vehicle in any way or to interfere with,
attempt to interfere with, conspire to interfere with, obstruct or hamper any
Fire Department operation.
§ 176-4. Compliance with orders.
A person shall not willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of the Fire Chief or duly authorized representative or to interfere
with the compliance attempts of another individual.
§ 169-8 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 176-5
10:387
§ 176-5. Vehicles crossing fire hose.
A vehicle shall not be driven or propelled over any unprotected fire hose of
the Fire Department when laid down on any street, alleyway, private drive
or any other vehicular roadway without the consent of the Fire Chief or duly
authorized representative in command of said operation.
§ 176-6. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE — Restricted to those which are
defined and authorized under the laws of the State of New Jersey.
§ 176-7. Operation of vehicles on approach of authorized
emergency vehicles.
Upon the approach of any authorized emergency vehicle giving audible and
visual signal, the operator of every other vehicle shall immediately drive
the same to a position as near as possible and parallel to the right-hand
edge or curb of the street or roadway, clear of any intersection, and shall
stop and remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle or
vehicles shall have passed, unless otherwise directed by the Fire Chief or
duly authorized representative or a police officer.
§ 176-8. Vehicles following fire apparatus.
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle, other than one on official
business, to follow closer than 300 feet to any fire apparatus traveling
in response to a fire alarm or to drive any vehicle within the block or
immediate area where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm.
§ 176-9. Unlawful boarding or tampering with Fire Department
emergency equipment.
A person shall not, without proper authorization from the Fire Chief or duly
authorized representative in charge of said Fire Department emergency
equipment, cling to, attach himself to, climb upon or into, board or swing
upon any Fire Department emergency vehicle, whether the same is in
motion or at rest, or sound the siren, horn, bell or other sound-producing
device thereon or manipulate or tamper with any levers, valves, switches,
starting devices, brakes, pumps or any equipment or protective clothing on
or a part of any Fire Department emergency vehicle.
§ 176-10. Damage and injury to Fire Department equipment and
personnel.
It shall be unlawful for any person to damage or deface or attempt or
conspire to damage or deface any Fire Department emergency vehicle
§ 176-5 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 176-10
10:388
at any time or to injure or attempt to injure or conspire to injure Fire
Department personnel while performing departmental duties.
§ 176-11. Emergency vehicle operation.
§ 176-12. Blocking fire hydrants and connections; removal of
obstructions; costs.
§ 176-13. Tampering with fire hydrants; violations and penalties.
A. The driver of any emergency vehicle, as defined in § 176-6 of this
chapter, shall not sound the siren thereon or have the front red lights on
or disobey any existing traffic regulation, except when said vehicle is
responding to an emergency call or when responding to but not upon
returning from a fire. Tactical strategies, such as but not restricted to
move-ups, do not constitute an emergency call. The driver of any
emergency vehicle may:
(1) Park or stand irrespective of the provisions of existing traffic
regulations.
(2) Proceed past a red or stop signal or other sign, but only after
slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation.
(3) Exceed the prima facie speed limit so long as the action does not
endanger life or property.
(4) Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning
in specified directions.
B. The exemptions herein granted to an emergency vehicle shall apply
only when the driver of any such vehicle, while in motion, sounds
audible signal by bell, siren or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably
necessary and when the vehicle is equipped with at least one lighted
lamp displaying a red light visible under normal atmospheric conditions
from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such vehicle.
A. It shall be unlawful to obscure from view, damage, deface, obstruct or
restrict access to any fire hydrant or any Fire Department connection
for the pressurization of fire-suppression systems, including fire
hydrants, and Fire Department connections that are located on public
or private streets and access lanes or on private property.
B. If, upon the expiration of the time mentioned in a notice of violation,
obstructions or encroachments are not removed, the Fire Official shall
proceed to remove the same. Cost incurred in the performance of
necessary work shall be paid from the municipal treasury on certificate
of the Fire Official and with the approval of the chief administrative
official; and the legal authority of the municipality shall institute
appropriate action for the recovery of such costs.
§ 176-10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 176-13
10:389
§ 176-14. Recommendations regarding location of fire hydrants and
water mains.
The Fire Official shall recommend to the chief administrative official of
the municipality the location or relocation of new or existing fire hydrants
and the placement or replacement of inadequate water mains located upon
public property and deemed necessary to provide an adequate fire flow and
distribution pattern. A fire hydrant shall not be placed into or removed from
service until approved by the Fire Official.
§ 176-15. Yard systems.
All new and existing shipyards, oil-storage plants, lumberyards, amusement
or exhibition parks and educational or institutional complexes and similar
occupancies and uses involving high fire or life hazards and which are
located more than 150 feet from a public street or which require quantities
of water beyond the capabilities of the public water distribution system
shall be provided with properly placed fire hydrants. Such fire hydrants
shall be capable of supplying fire flows as required by the Fire Official
and shall be connected to a water system in accordance with accepted
engineering practices. The Fire Official shall designate and approve the
number and location of fire hydrants. The Fire Official may require the
installation of sufficient fire hose and equipment housed in accordance with
the approved rules and may require the establishment of a trained fire
brigade when the hazard involved requires such measures. Private hydrants
shall not be placed into or removed from service until approved by the Fire
Official.
§ 176-16. Maintenance of fire-suppression equipment.
A person shall not obstruct, remove, tamper with or otherwise disturb
any fire hydrant or fire appliance required to be installed or maintained
under the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code, except for the purpose
of extinguishing fire, training or testing purposes, recharging or making
necessary repairs or when permitted by the Fire Official. Whenever a fire
A. No person shall tamper with, turn on, adjust, damage or attempt to
tamper with, open, turn on or adjust any fire hydrant which is the
property of the Old Bridge Municipal Utilities Authority or is connected
to the Township's water system. Nothing in this subsection shall apply
to any person authorized by the Old Bridge Municipal Utilities
Authority or Township Fire Company to use or have proper contact with
a fire hydrant.
B. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this section
shall be subject to the penalty contained in Chapter 1, Article II,
Penalty, for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day on which a violation occurs or continues.106
106. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 176-13 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 176-16
10:390
appliance is removed as herein permitted, it shall be replaced or reinstalled
as soon as the purpose for which it was removed has been accomplished.
Defective and nonapproved fire appliances or equipment shall be replaced
or repaired as directed by the Fire Official.
§ 176-17. Sale of defective fire extinguishers.
A person shall not sell, trade, loan or give away any form, type or kind
of fire extinguisher which is not approved by the Fire Official or which
is not in proper working order or the contents of which do not meet the
requirements of the Fire Official. The requirements of this section shall not
apply to the sale, trade or exchange of obsolete or damaged equipment
for junk when said units are permanently disfigured or marked with a
permanent sign identifying the unit as junk.
§ 176-18. Street obstructions.
A person or persons shall not erect, construct, place or maintain any bumps,
fences, gates, chains, bars, pipes, wood or metal horses or any other type
of obstruction in or on any street within the boundaries of the municipality.
The word "street," as used in this section, shall mean any roadway
accessible to the public for vehicular traffic, including but not limited to
private streets or access lanes, as well as all public streets and highways
within the boundaries of the municipality.
§ 176-19. False alarms.
No person shall raise, create or continue a false alarm of fire.
Chapter 180
FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS
§ 180-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit the payment to a claimant by
any insurance company of any claim in excess of $2,500 for fire damage
on all real property improvements located within the Township pursuant
to any type fire insurance policy issued or renewed after the adoption
of this chapter and the filing of this chapter with the New Jersey State
Commissioner of Insurance until such time as all taxes and assessments
and all other municipal liens or charges due and payable, appearing on the
official certificate of search shall have been paid as hereinafter provided
and pursuant to N.J.S.A. 17:36-8 et seq.
§ 180-2. Statutory authority.
The prohibition of the payment by any insurance company by the Township
pursuant to § 180-1 is in accordance with N.J.S.A. 17:36-8 et seq.
§ 176-16 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 180-3
10:391
§ 180-3. Agreement with real property owner.
The Mayor and Council may enter into an agreement with the real property
owner of any fire-damaged property to pay in full all delinquent taxes,
assessments or other municipal liens by installment pursuant to N.J.S.A.
54:5-19 or for the redemption of the tax sale lien by installment payments
pursuant to Article 7 of Chapter 5 of Title 54 of the Revised Statutes,
provided the Mayor and Council are satisfied that the claim for fire damages
is to be used to restore or improve the fire-damaged property. The Mayor
and Council by resolution may then authorize the insurance company
involved to make full payment on the claim to the insured property owner.
The resolution shall verify the agreement made with the property owner.
§ 180-4. Payment made to Township; withholding upon appeal.
Unless a certified copy of the resolution is received by the insurance
company in accordance with § 180-3 of this chapter, the insurance company
authorized to write fire insurance policies in the Township shall be required
and authorized, prior to the payment of any claims for fire damage in excess
of $2,500, to pay to the Township of Old Bridge the amount of the liens or
the related charges as may be certified to the said insurance company. In
the event an appeal is taken on the amount of any lien or charge other than
an appeal on the assessed valuation of real property pursuant to N.J.S.A.
54:3-21, the insurance company shall withhold 75% of the full amount of
the lien or charge being contested pending termination of all proceedings,
at which time such moneys and all interest accruing thereon, at a rate paid
on interest bearing account in a banking institution or savings and loan
association in the state, shall be distributed in accordance with the final
order or judgment of the court.
§ 180-5. Payment of claims requiring certificate.
No insurance company authorized to issue the fire insurance policies in the
Township shall pay any claims in excess of $2,500 on any real property
in the Township unless or until the insured person submits an official
certificate of search for municipal liens pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-12
certifying that all taxes, assessments or other municipal liens or charges
levied and assessed and due and payable against the property have been
paid or a certified copy of a resolution is submitted pursuant to § 180-3 of
this chapter.
§ 180-6. Copy filed with Insurance Commissioner.
A certified true copy of this chapter shall be filed with the New Jersey
State Commissioner of Insurance within five days after adoption, and no
changes or amendments of this chapter shall take effect until filed with
the Commissioner. The compliance within N.J.S.A. 17:36-9 shall be by the
Commissioner.
§ 180-3 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 180-7
10:392
§ 180-7. Official certificate of search; corrections.
The official certificate of search by the Township may be altered by the
appropriate Township bonded officials responsible for preparing such
certificates in order to correct any errors or omissions or to add any
municipal liens or related charges due and payable subsequent to the
preparation of the official certificate.
§ 180-8. Township claim shall be paramount; exception.
A claim by the Township made in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter shall be paramount to any other claims on the proceeds of the fire
insurance policy, except the claim of a holder of a mortgage on the fire
insurance property where the fire insurance policy at the time of the loss
listed the mortgagee as a named insured, in which event, the claim of the
mortgagee to the proceeds shall be paramount to the municipal lien under
this act only to the extent of the amount due and payable to the mortgage
under the mortgage contract.
§ 180-9. Insurance policies subject to statutory provisions.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 17:36-13, every fire insurance policy issued on property
situated in the Township shall be subject to the provisions of this act in
addition to standard provisions for fire insurance policies as set forth in
N.J.S.A. 17:36-5.20.
§ 180-10. Exceptions.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed:
A. To obligate an insurance company for any amount in excess of the value
of the fire insurance policy on the property or the amount of the liability
of the insurance company thereunder.
B. Except as provided in the case of appeals under § 180-4 of this chapter,
to obligate the insurance company for any lien not appearing on the
official certificate or any certified changes, submitted by the
appropriate Township officials.
C. To affect the authority of a municipality to enforce a municipal lien
under any other law of this state.
§ 180-7 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 180-10
10:393
Chapter 185
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarms and alarm systems — See Ch. 26.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 108.
Fire fighting — See Ch. 176.
Fire insurance claims — See Ch. 180.
Hazardous materials — See Ch. 221.
Heating devices — See Ch. 226.
Property maintenance— See Ch. 366.
Smoking in public buildings — See Ch. 422.
§ 185-1. Establishment of limits of districts in which storage of
flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks is to be
prohibited.107 [Amended 1-3-1989 by Ord. No. 70-88]
§ 185-2. Establishment of limits in which bulk storage of liquefied
petroleum gases is to be restricted. [Amended 1-3-1989 by Ord. No.
70-88]
The limits referred to in Section F-3000 of the Fire Prevention Code, in
which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted, are hereby
established as the entire Township, except for the M3 Heavy Industrial
Zone, as established by the Zoning Ordinance of the Township.
§ 185-3. Establishment of motor vehicle routes for vehicles
transporting explosives and blasting agents. [Amended 1-3-1989 by
Ord. No. 70-88]
The routes referred to in Section 12-7 of the Fire Prevention Code for
vehicles transporting explosives and blasting agents are hereby established
A. The limits referred to in Section F-2800 of the Fire Prevention Code, in
which storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks is
prohibited, are hereby established as the entire Township of Old Bridge,
except for the M3 Heavy Industrial Zone, as established by the Zoning
Ordinance of the Township of Old Bridge.
B. The limits referred to in Section F-2800 of the Fire Prevention Code in
which new bulk plants for flammable or combustible liquids are
prohibited are hereby established as the entire Township of Old Bridge,
except for the M3 Heavy Industrial Zones, established by the Zoning
Ordinance of the Township of Old Bridge.
107. Editor's Note: Former Section 12-1, Codes Adopted; Section 12-2, Establishment and
Duties of Fire Marshal; Inspectors; Section 12-3, Definitions; and Section 12-4,
Establishment of Limits of Districts in Which Storage of Explosives and Blasting Agents Is
To Be Prohibited, which previously preceded this section, were repealed 1-3-1989 Ord. No.
70-88.
§ 180-10 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 185-3
10:394
as only such roads as are designated arterial streets in the Master Plan of
the Township.
§ 185-4. Establishment of routes for vehicles transporting
hazardous chemicals or other dangerous articles. [Amended
1-3-1989 by Ord. No. 70-88]
The routes referred to in Section 12-8 for vehicles transporting hazardous
chemicals and other dangerous articles are hereby established as only such
roads as are designated arterial streets in the Land Subdivision Ordinance
of the Township.108
§ 185-5. Plans and specifications of buildings. [Added 6-18-1984 by
Ord. No. 15-84109]
The application for a building permit, in addition to Township Uniform
Construction Code requirements, shall be accompanied by one copy of
specifications and of plans which may be unsealed, drawn to scale, with
sufficient clarity and detail dimensions to show the nature and character of
the building, which copy shall be forwarded thereafter to the appropriate
district fire department by the Department of Community Development.
§ 185-6. Local Uniform Fire Code provisions. [Added 6-3-1985 by
Ord. No. 26-85; amended 7-15-1985 by Ord. No. 31-85]
A. Pursuant to Section 11 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act,110 the Uniform
Fire Code shall be enforced locally within the established limits of Fire
District Nos. 1, 2, 3 and 4 in the Township of Old Bridge.
B. The local enforcing agency within the limits of Fire District No. 1 shall
be the Board of Fire Commissioners of Fire District No. 2. [Amended
5-22-2000 by Ord. No. 23-00]
C. The local enforcing agency within the limits of Fire District No. 2 shall
be the Board of Fire Commissioners of Fire District No. 2.
D. The local enforcing agency within the limits of Fire District No. 3 shall
be the Board of Fire Commissioners of Fire District No. 3.
E. The local enforcing agency within the limits of Fire District No. 3 shall
be the Board of Fire Commissioners of Fire District No. 5. [Amended
5-22-1995 by Ord. No. 34-95; 5-22-2000 by Ord. No. 23-00;
2-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-01; 7-9-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-18]
108. Editor's Note: Former Section 12-9, Establishment of Fire Lanes on Private Property
Devoted to Public Use; Section 12-10, Amendments Made to Fire Prevention Code, as
amended 1-7-1985 by Ord. No. 6-85; Section 12-11, Modifications; Section 12-12, New
Materials, Processes or Occupancies Which May Require Permits; and Section 12-13,
Gasoline Storage, Transport and Sale, which previously followed this section, were
repealed 1-3-1989 by Ord. No. 70-88.
109. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
110. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-202.
§ 185-3 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 185-6
10:395
F. The Board of Fire Commissioners so designated shall enforce the
Uniform Fire Safety Act111 and the codes and regulations adopted
thereunder in all buildings, structures and premises within the
established boundaries of said Fire District, except owner-occupied
one- and two-family dwellings, used exclusively for dwelling purposes,
and shall faithfully comply with the requirements of the Uniform Fire
Safety Code and the Uniform Fire Code.
G. The local enforcing agency established hereunder shall periodically
inspect all life-hazard uses as defined in the Uniform Fire Safety Act
and Uniform Fire Code no less than the minimum schedule for
inspections provided therein.
H. The Board of Fire Commissioners so designated shall appoint a Fire
Official or establish a Bureau of Fire Prevention or other agency or
office to perform the functions and duties established under the
Uniform Fire Safety Act and may establish rules and regulations for the
administration of said officer, bureau, agency or office. For all purposes,
said officer, bureau, agency or office shall be the agent of the Board of
Fire Commissioners.
I. The Board of Fire Commissioners so designated shall charge and collect
such inspection and permit fees as are established by this chapter. Such
fees and revenues shall be appropriated for the cost and expense of
enforcing the Uniform Fire Code within the respective fire districts.
[Amended 9-3-1985 by Ord. No. 43-85]
J. The Board of Fire Commissioners shall employ at least one paid
inspector who shall enforce and administer under the supervision of the
Board of Fire Commissioners the Uniform Fire Safety Act and the
Uniform Fire Code and any state or local rules and regulations. The Fire
Inspector must be certified by the Commissioner of Consumer Affairs
and shall be the Fire Official and/or Administrator of the Bureau of Fire
Prevention or such other agency or office established by the Board of
Fire Commissioners.
K. The Fire Official and any subofficials or inspectors shall serve for a term
of two years and may be removed from office during the term of
appointment only for good cause shown and only after having been
offered a hearing upon any charges before the Board of Fire
Commissioners.
L. The subofficials and inspectors appointed by the Board of Fire
Commissioners, upon recommendation of the Fire Official, shall be
under the supervision and control of the Fire Official.
M. The subofficials, inspectors and other employees of the Fire Official or
Bureau of Fire Prevention shall be subject to discipline, suspension or
dismissal by the Fire Official for cause, including but not limited to
inefficiency or misconduct. Any disciplinary action, suspension or
111. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq.
§ 185-6 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 185-6
10:396
dismissal shall be subject to the right of the affected employee to appeal
the same to the Board of Fire Commissioners.
N. As provided in the Uniform Fire Safety Act, any person or entity
aggrieved by any order of the local enforcement agency shall have the
right to appeal to the Construction Board of Appeals of the Township of
Old Bridge.
O. In addition to the inspection and fees required pursuant to the Act and
the regulations of the Department of Community Affairs, the following
additional inspections and fees for those uses not defined as life-hazard
uses shall be required: [Amended 9-3-1985 by Ord. No. 43-85;
1-3-1989 by Ord. No. 70-88; 1-3-1989 by Ord. No. 72-88;
10-16-1989 by Ord. No. 38-89; 5-22-2000 by Ord. No. 23-00]
(1) The following buildings, uses, premises contained in this section,
other than those that are incidental or auxiliary to the agricultural
use of farm property, are subject to registration and periodic
inspection requirements as hereby established. (Where two or
more of the same use or different uses exist at the same building or
premises, each one shall be considered as separate and distinct for
the purpose of this chapter and shall be registered pursuant
thereto.)
(2) Type (L) uses.
(a) Business use as defined in the latest edition of the BOCA Basic
National Building Code, 500 square feet or less total gross
floor area and not defined as a life-hazard use.
(b) Mercantile use as defined in the latest edition of the BOCA
Basic National Building Code, 500 square feet or less total
gross floor area and not defined as a life-hazard use.
(Exception: Any Type L uses with suppression/detection
systems shall be classified under Type M).
(3) Type (M) uses.
(a) Business uses as defined in the latest edition of the BOCA Basic
National Building Code, 501 square feet or more but less than
1,500 square feet total gross floor area and not defined as a
life-hazard use.
(b) Mercantile uses as defined in the latest edition of the BOCA
Basic National Building Code, 501 square feet or more but less
than 1,500 square feet total gross floor area and not defined as
a life-hazard use.
(c) Storage buildings as defined in the latest edition of the BOCA
Basic National Building Code, 501 square feet or more but less
than 1,500 square feet total gross floor area and not defined as
a life-hazard use.
§ 185-6 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 185-6
10:397
(d) Any Type L use with suppression/detection systems.
(4) Type (N) uses.
(a) Business uses as defined in the latest edition of the BOCA Basic
National Building Code, 1,501 square feet or more, but less
than 3,000 square feet total gross floor area and not defined as
a life-hazard use.
(b) Mercantile uses as defined in the latest edition of the BOCA
Basic National Building Code, 1,501 square feet or more, but
less than 3,000 square feet total gross floor area and not
defined as a life-hazard use.
(c) Storage buildings as defined in the latest edition of the BOCA
Basic National Building Code, 1,501 square feet or more, but
less than 3,000 square feet total gross floor area and not
defined as a life-hazard use.
(5) Type (O) uses.
(a) Business uses as defined in the latest edition of the BOCA Basic
National Building Code, 3,001 square feet or more, but less
than 4,500 square feet total gross floor area and not defined as
a life-hazard use.
(b) Mercantile uses as defined in the latest edition of the BOCA
Basic National Building Code, 3,001 square feet or more, but
less than 4,500 square feet total gross floor area and not
defined as a life-hazard use.
(c) Storage buildings as defined in the latest edition of the BOCA
Basic National Building Code, 3,001 square feet or more, but
less than 4,500 square feet total gross floor area and not
defined as a life-hazard use.
(d) Eating and drinking establishments with less than 50
occupants in which no alcoholic beverages are consumed.
(6) Type (P) uses.
(a) Business uses as defined in the latest edition of the BOCA Basic
National Building Code, 4,501 square feet or more, but less
than 7,500 square feet total gross floor area and not defined as
a life-hazard use.
(b) Mercantile uses as defined in the latest edition of the BOCA
Basic National Building Code, 4,501 square feet or more, but
less than 7,500 square feet total gross floor area and not
defined as a life-hazard use.
(c) Storage buildings as defined in the latest edition of the BOCA
Basic National Building Code, 4,501 square feet or more, but
§ 185-6 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 185-6
10:398
less than 7,500 square feet total gross floor area and not
defined as a life-hazard use.
(d) Hotels and motels with 100 rooms or less and not defined as
life-hazard uses.
(e) Buildings where less than 100 persons assemble for the
purpose of amusement, entertainment, recreation centers and
health spas.
(7) Type (Q) uses.
(a) Business uses as defined in the latest edition of the BOCA Basic
National Building Code, 7,501 square feet or more but less
than 12,000 square feet total gross floor area and not defined
as a life-hazard use.
(b) Mercantile uses as defined in the latest edition of the BOCA
Basic National Building Code, 7,501 square feet or more but
less than 12,000 square feet total gross floor area and not
defined as a life-hazard use.
(c) Storage buildings as defined in the latest edition of the BOCA
Basic National Building Code, 7,501 square feet or more but
less than 12,000 square feet total gross floor area and not
defined as a life-hazard use.
(d) Factory and industrial uses as defined in the latest edition of
the BOCA Basic National Building Code, 7,501 square feet or
more but less than 12,000 square feet total gross floor area
and not defined as a life-hazard use.
(8) Type (R) uses.
(a) Business uses as defined in the latest edition of the BOCA Basic
National Building Code, 12,001 square feet or more but less
than 15,000 square feet total gross floor area and not defined
as a life-hazard use.
(9) Type (S) uses.
(a) Business uses as defined in the latest edition of the BOCA Basic
National Building Code, 15,001 square feet or more but less
than 20,000 square feet total gross floor area and not defined
as a life-hazard use.
(10) Type (T) uses.
(a) Business uses as defined in the latest edition of the BOCA Basic
National Building Code, 20,001 square feet or more but less
than 25,000 square feet total gross floor area and not defined
as a life-hazard use.
(11) Type (U) uses.
§ 185-6 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 185-6
10:399
(a) Business uses as defined in the latest edition of the BOCA Basic
National Building Code, 25,001 square feet or more but less
than 30,000 square feet total gross floor area and not defined
as a life-hazard use.
(12) Type (V) uses.
(a) Business uses as defined in the latest edition of the BOCA Basic
National Building Code, 30,001 square feet or more but less
than 35,000 square feet total gross floor area and not defined
as a life-hazard use.
(13) Type (W) uses.
(a) Business uses as defined in the latest edition of the BOCA Basic
National Building Code, 35,001 square feet or more but less
than 40,000 square feet total gross floor area and not defined
as a life-hazard use.
(14) Type (X) uses.
(a) Business uses as defined in the latest edition of the BOCA Basic
National Building Code, 40,001 square feet or more but less
than 45,000 square feet total gross floor area and not defined
as a life-hazard use.
(15) Type (KK) uses.
(a) Business uses as defined in the latest edition of the BOCA Basic
National Building Code, 45,001 square feet or more but less
than 50,000 square feet total gross floor area and not defined
as a life-hazard use.
(16) Type (JJ) uses.
(a) Business uses as defined in the latest edition of the BOCA Basic
National Building Code, 50,001 square feet or more but less
than 55,000 square feet total gross floor area and not defined
as a life-hazard use.
(17) Type (II) uses.
(a) Business uses as defined in the latest edition of the BOCA Basic
National Building Code, 55,001 square feet or more but less
than 60,000 square feet total gross floor area and not defined
as a life-hazard use.
(18) Type (HH) uses.
(a) Business uses as defined in the latest edition of the BOCA Basic
National Building Code, 60,001 square feet or more but less
than 65,000 square feet total gross floor area and not defined
as a life-hazard use.
§ 185-6 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 185-6
10:400
(19) Type (GG) uses.
(a) Business uses as defined in the latest edition of the BOCA Basic
National Building Code, 65,001 square feet or more but less
than 70,000 square feet total gross floor area and not defined
as a life-hazard use.
(20) Type (FF) uses.
(a) Business uses as defined in the latest edition of the BOCA Basic
National Building Code, 70,001 square feet or more but less
than 75,000 square feet total gross floor area and not defined
as a life-hazard use.
(21) Type (EE) uses.
(a) Business uses as defined in the latest edition of the BOCA Basic
National Building Code, 75,001 square feet or more but less
than 80,000 square feet total gross floor area and not defined
as a life-hazard use.
(22) Type (DD) uses.
(a) Business uses as defined in the latest edition of the BOCA Basic
National Building Code, 80,001 square feet or more but less
than 85,000 square feet total gross floor area and not defined
as a life-hazard use.
(23) Type (CC) uses.
(a) Business uses as defined in the latest edition of the BOCA Basic
National Building Code, 85,001 square feet or more but less
than 90,000 square feet total gross floor area and not defined
as a life-hazard use.
(24) Type (BB) uses.
(a) Business uses as defined in the latest edition of the BOCA Basic
National Building Code, 90,001 square feet or more but less
than 95,000 square feet total gross floor area and not defined
as a life-hazard use.
(25) Type (AA) uses.
(a) Business uses as defined in the latest edition of the BOCA Basic
National Building Code, 95,001 square feet or more but less
than 100,00 square feet total gross floor area and not defined
as a life-hazard use.
(26) Required inspections.
(a) All additional uses as listed in the aforementioned schedule
shall be inspected for compliance with the provisions of this
chapter periodically but not less than specified herein:
§ 185-6 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 185-6
10:401
[1] Type L uses: once every 12 months.
[2] Type M uses: once every 12 months.
[3] Type N uses: once every 12 months.
[4] Type O uses: once every 12 months.
[5] Type P uses: once every 12 months.
[6] Type Q uses: once every 12 months.
[7] Type R uses: once every 12 months.
[8] Type S uses: once every 12 months.
[9] Type T uses: once every 12 months.
[10] Type U uses: once every 12 months.
[11] Type V uses: once every 12 months.
[12] Type W uses: once every 12 months.
[13] Type X uses: once every 12 months.
[14] Type KK uses: once every 12 months.
[15] Type JJ uses: once every 12 months.
[16] Type II uses: once every 12 months.
[17] Type HH uses: once every 12 months.
[18] Type GG uses: once every 12 months.
[19] Type FF uses: once every 12 months.
[20] Type EE uses: once every 12 months.
[21] Type DD uses: once every 12 months.
[22] Type CC uses: once every 12 months.
[23] Type BB uses: once every 12 months.
[24] Type AA uses: once every 12 months.
(b) Registration fees for all additional uses shall be as follows:
[Amended 10-22-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-26; 8-10-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-13]
Class Square Feet Fee Per Year
Type L uses 500 $56.95
Type M uses 501 - 1,500 $91.13
Type N uses 1,501 - 3,000 $136.69
§ 185-6 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 185-6
10:402
Class Square Feet Fee Per Year
Type O uses 3,001 - 4,500 $170.86
Type P uses 4,501 - 7,500 $227.81
Type Q uses 7,501 - 12,000 $284.76
Type R uses 12,001 - 15,000 $353.11
Type S uses 15,001 - 20,000 $410.06
Type T uses 20,001 - 25,000 $512.58
Type U uses 25,001 - 30,000 $626.49
Type V uses 30,001 - 35,000 $797.35
Type W uses 35,001 - 40,000 $911.25
Type X uses 40,001 - 45,000 $1,139.06
Type KK uses 45,001 - 50,000 $1,181.25
Type JJ uses 50,001 - 55,000 $1,223.44
Type II uses 55,001 - 60,000 $1,350
Type HH uses 60,001 - 65,000 $1,093.75
Type GG uses 65,001 - 70,000 $1,603.75
Type FF uses 70,001 - 75,000 $1,729.69
Type EE uses 75,001 - 80,000 $1,856.25
Type DD uses 80,001 - 85,000 $1,982.81
Type CC uses 85,001 - 90,000 $2,109.38
Type BB uses 90,001 - 95,000 $2,235.94
Type AA uses 95,001 - 100,000 $2,362.50
After 100,000 square feet, add in the above category for
additional square footage. Inspections not described above
shall require a fee of $35 per inspection.
(c) Where more than one additional use exists under one
ownership at a given location, the highest use shall be
registered at full fee and subsequent use at 1/2 scheduled fee.
(d) Multiple dwelling inspections. The local enforcing agency shall
engage in multiple dwelling inspections pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:70-2.1. The fee for each inspection shall be the fee per unit as
set forth below. [Added 3-10-2003 by Ord. No. 07-03]
(e) Smoke detector inspections. Local enforcing agency shall
engage in smoke detector inspections with R-3 uses pursuant
to N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.3 and the fee for the inspections shall be set
forth below. [Added 3-10-2003 by Ord. No. 07-03]
(f) Fees for inspections. The fee schedule for the inspections in
Subsection O(26)(d) and (e) is as follows: [Added 3-10-2003
§ 185-6 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 185-6
10:403
by Ord. No. 07-03; amended 3-9-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-04]
[1] Inspections conducted on 10 business days' notice or
more: $50.
[2] Inspections conducted on less than 10 but more than four
business days' notice: $75.
[3] Inspections conducted less than four business days' notice:
$125.
(g) Reinspections. All reinspections of multidwelling inspections
and smoke detector/carbon monoxide detector inspections
shall carry a fee of $35 for each return inspection. [Added
3-9-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04]
(27) Permits. Permit fees shall be charged as indicated in the New
Jersey Administrative Code N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.9(c) with modifications
as per Subsection P of this section.
(28) The latest adopted New Jersey version of the BOCA Basis Fire
Prevention Code and all amendments and supplements thereto to
the extent the provisions of same exceed the Uniform Fire Code are
hereby adopted by the Township of Old Bridge for the purpose of
establishing rules and regulations to improve the safety of the
public by promoting the control of fire hazards; regulating the
installation, use and maintenance of equipment and the use and
occupancy of structures, premises and open areas; providing for
the abatement of fire hazards; and establishing and implementing
standards to achieve the said objectives. In the event of any conflict
between the provisions of this chapter and those set forth in said
code, the provisions hereof shall govern. The said standards, rules
and regulations set forth in the said code shall be and the same are
hereby incorporated in this chapter by reference, three copies of
which have been and are now on file in the Office of the Township
Clerk of the Township of Old Bridge.
(29) Penalties.
(a) All penalties as indicated in the New Jersey Administrative
Code, Title 5, Chapters 70 and 70-2 (Uniform Fire Code) shall
be adopted for the purpose of enforcing this chapter except
those penalties imposed as hereinafter provided for violations
of this chapter not included within the Uniform Fire Code or
authorized by the Uniform Fire Safety Act.
(b) Except as otherwise provided by law, any violation of the
provisions of this chapter, including the latest adopted New
Jersey version of the BOCA Basic Fire Prevention Code, and
amendments and supplements thereto, shall be punished as
provided in Chapter 1, Article II, Penalty. Each and every day
§ 185-6 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 185-6
10:404
that a violation of the provisions of this chapter shall continue
after notification thereof by the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall
be deemed and considered a separate and specific violation
of this chapter. Such penalties as hereinabove provided shall
not be exclusive, and, in addition thereto, any violation may
be abated by a civil action instituted in a court of competent
jurisdiction. [Amended 1-9-2006 by Ord. No. 38-2005]
P. The permit fees established by the Uniform Fire Code shall govern all
activities subject to this chapter, except for the following, which shall
amend the Uniform Fire Code: [Amended 10-16-1989 by Ord. No.
38-89; 5-22-2000 by Ord. No. 23-00; 10-22-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-26; 8-10-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-13]
Type Fee
1 $52.80
2 $118.13
3 $253.13
4 $337.50
5 $843.75
Q. No amendment to this chapter shall conflict with the Uniform Fire
Safety Act112 or the Uniform Fire Code.
R. Fire watch and Fire Department firesafety standby. [Added
10-22-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-25]
(1) Whenever the appropriate Fire Marshal shall determine that onsite
fire inspector(s) or fire-fighting personnel shall be required for
fire watch as a result of fire protection system failure or
deficiencies, or firesafety at any occupancy or event to insure the
safety of the public or emergency responders, the owner or
occupant responsible shall obtain a permit for the use or event
from the applicable fire district.
(2) The following provisions shall apply:
(a) The Fire Marshal shall determine the number of inspectors
and/or fire-fighting personnel required.
(b) The Fire Marshal shall determine the hours that the fire
inspector(s) and/or fire-fighting personnel will be on duty.
(c) The permit fee shall cover the expenses incurred by the local
enforcing agency.
(d) The fee for the permit shall include:
112. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq.
§ 185-6 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 185-6
10:405
§ 185-7. Local Fire Prevention Code provisions. [Added 1-3-1989 by
Ord. No. 71-88; amended 5-22-2000 by Ord. No. 23-00]
Annexed hereto as Schedule A and incorporated herewith are the local
provisions of the Fire Prevention Code of the Township of Old Bridge, which
are expressly incorporated in and made a part of the Fire Prevention Code,
as set forth in Chapter 185 of the Code of the Township of Old Bridge and
shall supersede any other provisions inconsistent herewith.
Schedule A, Local Provisions
ARTICLE 70
F-7000.0 General
F-7000.1 Scope: This section shall apply to all buildings, structures or
premises located within Old Bridge Township.
F-7001.0 Permits
F-7001.1 (Reserved)
F-7001.2 Type 1 permits: The following permits shall be classified as
Type 1 permits.
[1] Compensation for fire inspector(s) at present rate of pay
per hour Monday through Friday as specifically assigned
and time and one-half per hour thereafter as well as
holidays, Saturdays, and Sundays. [Amended 3-10-2008
by Ord. No. 2008-05]
[2] The rate for use of vehicles shall be $25 per hour.
[3] Reimbursement rates for other related services,
equipment, or expenses shall be provided to the owner by
the Fire Marshal prior to the scheduled use or event.
(e) The Fire Marshal or designee(s) shall have right of access to
the premises and area surrounding it without interference
from the property owner.
(f) Failure to secure a permit shall be punishable by a penalty as
per the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code N.J.A.C. 5:70-12.
[Amended 3-10-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-05]
(g) Permit shall be required for each separate event or date of the
activity requiring such a permit.
(h) Any occupancy or event requiring fire apparatus and firefighting
personnel on site to insure the safety of the public and/
or other occupants, and/or to insure the safety of any building
and/or exposures, shall reimburse the appropriate fire district.
Fees shall be $150 per required fire apparatus unit per
occurrence and $20 per hour per firefighter manning
apparatus.
§ 185-6 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 185-7
10:406
Schedule A, Local Provisions
ARTICLE 70
F-7000.0 General
F-7001.2.1 Asphalt (tar) kettle: No person, firm or corporation shall
make use or fire any asphalt (tar) kettle without first securing a permit
from the Fire Official.
F-7001.2.2 (Reserved)
F-7001.2.3 (Reserved)
F-7001.2.4 Liquefied petroleum gas or liquefied natural gas: A permit
shall be obtained from the Fire Official for the storage or use of liquefied
petroleum gas or liquefied natural gas utilizing storage containers with an
aggregate water capacity exceeding 10 gallons and less than 4,000 gallons.
F-7001.2.5 Flammable or combustible liquids and hazardous
materials: A permit shall be obtained from the Fire Official to test, install,
remove, repair or alter in any way a stationary tank for the storage of
flammable or combustible liquids or hazardous materials, or to modify or
replace any line or dispensing device connected thereto if not required to
obtain a permit for such activity under the Uniform Construction Code,
N.J.A.C. 5:23.
F-7001.2.6 Flammable or combustible liquids: To store five or more
gallons but less than 120 gallons of flammable or combustible liquids above
ground.
F-7001.2.7 Hazardous materials: To store, handle or process hazardous
materials or chemicals which, because of their toxicity, flammability,
liability to explosion or decomposition, render fire fighting abnormally
dangerous or difficult. Also, to store, handle or process materials which
are chemically unstable and which may spontaneously form explosive
compounds, or undergo spontaneous reactions of explosive violence or
with sufficient evolution of heat to be a fire hazard. Hazardous chemicals
or materials shall include but not be limited to such materials as flammable
solids, corrosive liquids, radioactive chemicals, toxic materials, poisonous
gasses, pesticides, rodenticides and fertilizers.
Exception: Materials or processes covered by a life-hazard use or
permit under N.J.A.C. 5:70.
F-7001.2.8 Tank abandonment: A permit shall be obtained from the Fire
Official to remove, abandon, place temporarily out of service or otherwise
dispose of any flammable or combustible liquid or hazardous material tank.
F-7001.2.9 Other: Permits required by the Fire Official for hazardous
operations or activities other than those specifically listed.
F-7001.3 Type 2 permits: The following permits shall be classified as
Type 2 permits:
F-7001.3.1 Processing equipment: A permit shall be obtained from the
Fire Official to install, modify or alter process equipment not required to
have a permit under the Uniform Construction Code, N.J.A.C. 5:23.
§ 185-7 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 185-7
10:407
Schedule A, Local Provisions
ARTICLE 70
F-7000.0 General
F-7001.3.2 Flammable or combustible liquids: To store 120 or more
gallons but less than 660 gallons of flammable or combustible liquids above
ground, or to store any amount of flammable or combustible liquids in
underground tanks, storage above ground of more than 660 gallons shall
be covered by a Type 4 permits as authorized under the Uniform Fire Code,
N.J.A.C. 5:70.
Exception: Fuel oil tanks for heating of one- and two-family dwellings
up to 660 gallons in capacity.
Schedule A, Local Provisions
ARTICLE 70
F-7000.0 General
F-7002.0 Fire Safety/Emergency Actions Plans
F-7002.1 General: In addition to those required under N.J.A.C. 5:70,
safety evacuation and emergency action plans shall be prepared as set
forth in this section where required by Section F-7002.1 through
F-7002.2.1.5.
F-7002.1.1 Occupant loads of 50 or more: All buildings with an
occupant load greater than 50.
F-7002.1.2 Use Group H: All use Group H buildings.
F-7002.1.3 Use Group F: All use Group F buildings.
F-7002.1.4 Use Group S: All use Group S buildings.
F-7002.1.5 Use Group E: All use Group E buildings.
F-7002.2 Approval and distribution: The fire safety evacuation and
emergency action plans shall be approved by the Fire Official and shall be
distributed by the owner to all tenants and employees.
F-7002.3 Evacuation plan: The evacuation plan shall be conspicuously
posted on every floor and in each tenant space for the occupant's use.
F-7002.4 Maintenance: The fire safety evacuation and emergency action
plans shall be maintained to reflect changes in the use and physical
arrangement of the building.
F-7002.5 Training: If an emergency action plan assigns employees with
specific responsibilities in areas such as evacuation coordination, fire
fighting or material leak and spill handling, the employer shall provide
a minimum of annual training sessions to prepare the employee for such
activities.
§ 185-7 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 185-7
10:408
Schedule A, Local Provisions
ARTICLE 70
F-7000.0 General
F-7002.6 Emergency action teams: Emergency action teams and fire
brigades assigned the responsibility of fire fighting beyond the incipient
stage with hand extinguishers or assigned the responsibility of containing
and controlling hazardous material or flammable or combustible liquid
leaks and spills shall be approved by the Fire Official.
In submitting an application for such approval, information shall be
included listing the team members, their qualifications and selection
criteria utilized for membership.
F-7002.6.1 Equipment and training: Members of emergency action
teams and fire brigades as specified in F-7002.6 shall be equipped, trained
and maintained in conformance with USOSHA regulations as a minimum.
Equipment utilized shall be compatible with that of the local fire district.
Schedule A, Local Provisions
ARTICLE 70
F-7000.0 General
F-7003 Fire Alarms/Reporting/Fire Reporting
F-7003.1 Fire alarms: The Fire Official shall investigate, or cause to
be investigated, the activation of any fire alarm, fire detector, or fire
protection system occurring within the jurisdiction to determine the cause
for such activation and to determine if the device and/or equipment have
been properly restored to full service.
F-7003.2 Failure to report: It shall be a violation of this code for any
person or persons, having knowledge of same, to fail to report to the
Fire Department and/or Fire Official a fire or the activation of any fire
protection system or device; or to fail to report the spill or leakage of
any flammable or combustible liquid or gas or of any hazardous material
immediately upon gaining such knowledge.
Schedule A, Local Provisions
ARTICLE 70
F-7000.0 General
F-7004.0 Water Supplies
F-7004.1 General: Public and private fire hydrants, connections and
appliances shall be installed and maintained in accordance with this
section.
F-7004.2 Fire hydrant local standard: Section F-7004.2.1 through
F-7004.2.4 shall be considered minimum standards for the installation and
placement of public or private fire hydrants.
§ 185-7 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 185-7
10:409
Schedule A, Local Provisions
ARTICLE 70
F-7000.0 General
F-7004.2.1. Public hydrants: Hydrants in single-family residential zones
shall be spaced with a hydrant installed one every 500 feet along the
roadway(s) measured along the roadway edge.
Hydrants in business, commercial and industrial zones shall be spaced
with a hydrant at each intersection and/or one every 300 feet along the
roadway(s) as a minimum requirement.
F-7004.2.2 Private hydrants: Hydrants installed on private property
shall be located and spaced according to the occupancy and site design
requirements based on fire fighting needs with F-7004.2.1 utilized as a
minimum requirement.
F-7004.2.3 Additional requirements: All new and existing hydrants,
both public and private, shall have two 2.5 inch outlets and one 4.5 inch
outlet with National Standard threads; be located within 24 inches of
a curb, roadway, fire lane or parking area. All new hydrants, public or
private, shall be provided with an individual control valve; be supplied
by a water main a minimum of eight inches in diameter which shall be
maintained up to the individual hydrant valve and in no case shall be more
than 10 feet from the hydrant; and shall be installed in accordance with the
standards of the American Water Works Association and NFPA 24.
F-7004.2.4 Approval: The Fire Official shall approve the placement and
water supply piping of all fire hydrants prior to installation.
F-7004.2.5 Fire Department connections: All new and existing
connections shall be located so that immediate access can be made by the
Fire Department and be visible on a street front or in a location approved
by the authority having jurisdiction. Obstructions such as fences, bushes,
trees, walls or any other similar object shall not be permitted for new or
existing installations. A reflective metal sign with raised letters at least
one inch (25 mm) in height shall be mounted on the Fire Department
connection serving sprinklers or standpipe. Such signs shall read
"Automatic Sprinklers and/or Standpipe."
In areas where the Fire Department connection is not visible or where a
sign cannot be mounted to the connection, i.e., a freestanding, curb side
connection, a metal sign, as described above, shall be mounted on post and
located within close proximity to the connection.
F-7004.2.6 Markings: All fire protection system components shall be red
in color.
Control valves for fire system water supplies and risers shall be provided
with a sign identifying the area it controls, i.e., riser 1, riser 2, hydrant
loop, etc.
The lettering of such sign shall be of a conspicuous color and shall be at
least four inches in height. Where control valves are located in separate
rooms, the sign(s) shall be provided on the entrance door.
§ 185-7 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 185-7
10:410
Schedule A, Local Provisions
ARTICLE 70
F-7000.0 General
F-7004.2.7 Fire flows: In determining required fire flows, the Fire Official
shall utilize the NFPA Fire Protection Handbook (current edition).
F-7004.2.8 Hydrants out-of-service: Hydrants out-of-service shall be
conspicuously marked.
Schedule A, Local Provisions
ARTICLE 70
F-7000.0 General
F-7005.0 General Precautions
F-7005.1 Equipment rooms: No storage of any kind shall be permitted
within any mechanical equipment, electrical, furnace or boiler room.
F-7005.2 Barbecue grills: Barbecue grills shall not be located or used
within or upon any building, or within 10 feet laterally of any building wall
or overhang.
Exception: One- and two-family dwellings.
F-7005.3 Interior storage: Interior storage in Use Groups A, F, H, S
and M shall not be located above aisleways, corridors or exits, unless
upon a mezzanine constructed and approved pursuant to the Uniform
Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23).
F-7005.3.1 Floor plans: Operators of new and existing storage or
warehouse facilities shall submit a to-scale floor plan of the storage
arrangement, including aisles, corridors, exits and elevators, to the Fire
Official.
Any changes in arrangement that affects egress or height of storage shall
be approved by the Fire Official.
F-7005.3.2 Plans: Non residential occupancies shall be required to
provide the Fire Official with to-scale plans of the site and interior floor
plans with detail as required by the Fire Official, such as exterior drives,
fire lanes, exterior fire protection equipment, doorways, corridors, aisles,
use of rooms, high hazard materials, utility controls and fire protection
equipment. Submittals shall include 10 feet to the inch to 40 feet to the
inch scale drawings, sized to 8 1/2 inch by 11 inch sheets. Plans shall be
submitted within 180 days of receiving a notice from the Fire Official and
shall not be required to be sealed.
F-7005.3.3 Material information: All occupancies shall be required to
provide the Fire Official with full information concerning materials stored
or utilized, including amounts, storage arrangement, flow charts and/or
Material Safety Data Sheets. Information shall be submitted within 30 days
of receiving a notice from the Fire Official.
§ 185-7 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 185-7
10:411
Schedule A, Local Provisions
ARTICLE 70
F-7000.0 General
F-7005.3.4 Access: All buildings or structures protected by fire
suppression systems or fire alarms and all other areas required by the Fire
Official shall be provided with a key box or locking device approved by the
Fire Official. The key box shall contain keys to provide access to all areas of
the building or structure and shall be installed in a location(s) approved by
the Fire Official, such key box shall only be utilized in response to a report
of a fire or fire protection system activation or other emergency call from
the Police Communications Center.
Exceptions:
a. Buildings or structures occupied 24 hours a day, seven days a week by
personnel possessing keys to all areas.
b. Residential occupancies; provided, however, that residential
complexes containing locked common areas and/or master key
capabilities shall be provided with a key box.
F-7005.3.5 Key box: The key box shall be provided with a monitored
tamper switch and shall be located in a lighted location, seven feet above
grade.
F-7005.3.6 Installation: Key boxes shall be installed within 90 days of
receiving a notice from the Fire Official.
F-7005.3.7 Open burning: The burning of rubbish or combustible waste
matter shall be prohibited except in approved incinerators pursuant to the
Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23).
Exceptions:
1. Agricultural burnings that are being conducted in compliance with
a valid permit issued by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.
2. Small campfires for the purpose of cooking food that have received the
prior approval of the Fire Official.
F-7005.3.8 Extinguishment: The Fire Official shall order the
extinguishment of all prohibited burnings. In the event the Fire Official
must call the Fire Department for extinguishment of the fire, the violator
may be subject to the entire cost of the Fire Department response as
certified by the Chief Executive of the Fire Department. The Fire Official
shall collect these costs pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.13.
F-7005.3.9 Identification: All rear doors of commercial occupancies shall
be marked with the name of the occupant. Such lettering shall not exceed
two inches (50 mm) in height. Rear doors also providing access to fire
protection shall identify these doors with a sign stating "FIRE
PROTECTION EQUIPMENT" and be permanently fastened to the door.
§ 185-7 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 185-7
10:412
Schedule A, Local Provisions
ARTICLE 70
F-7000.0 General
F-7006.0 Fire Lanes
F-7006.1 Requirements and designation: The Fire Official may require
and designate public or private fire lanes as deemed necessary for the
efficient and effective use of fire apparatus, access for fire fighting, or the
egress of occupants.
For purposes of this section, the previous term, "FIRE ZONE" shall have
the same meaning as "FIRE LANE." The previous identification of "FIRE
ZONE" shall be changed to "FIRE LANE" as specified below under
F-7006.2 markings.
F-7006.2 Markings: The owner shall, within 30 days of being given a
notice to do so by the Fire Official, mark the lane as follows:
a. Signs constructed of metal and with raised red letters a minimum
of two inches in size on a white background with the wording "NO
PARKING FIRE LANE" shall be posted. Spacing of the signs shall be
even, with a minimum of one sign for every 100 feet of fire lane or part
thereof, or as ordered by the Fire Official. Any variation to this section
shall be approved in writing by the Fire Official prior to installation.
b. The area of the fire lane on improved areas shall be delineated along
its entire circumference with yellow lines four inches in width. Within the
yellow lines shall be marked "NO PARKING FIRE LANE" in yellow letters
18 inches in height. The number of times this wording is to be repeated
shall be at the discretion of the Fire Official. The inside of the fire lane
shall be further marked with diagonal striping yellow in color and four
inches in width spaced at intervals of five feet. If the designated fire lane
abuts a curb, the curbing shall be yellow in color where it abuts the fire
lane.
F-7006.3 Notification: The marking of fire lanes shall be the
responsibility of, and at the expense of, the property owner and shall be
completed within 30 days of receipt of notification.
F-7006.4 Unpaved areas: Unpaved fire lanes installed on public or
private property shall comply with the "Fire Lane Typical Details"
installation methods blueprint available from the Fire Protection Subcode
Official and be approved by the Fire Official.
Selection of a method to be used as per the typical details shall be subject
to the approval of the Fire Official. Signs and markings shall be provided
as required by the Fire Official.
F-7006.5 Restricted access: Gates, chains or other methods utilized to
prevent unauthorized access to fire lanes shall be approved by the Fire
Official prior to installation.
§ 185-7 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 185-7
10:413
Schedule A, Local Provisions
ARTICLE 70
F-7000.0 General
F-7006.6 Installation, maintenance: Fire lanes shall be installed and
maintained by the owner of the premises in conformance with the
provisions of this chapter. Fire lanes in existence prior to the enactment
of this chapter shall be required to conform to the provisions herein at the
discretion of the Fire Official.
F-7006.7 Obstructions: See the Fire Prevention Code, N.J.A.C.
5:70-3.1(a)3, F-311.2.
F-7006.8 Multiple use: In designated areas where the fire lane and
loading zone are common in usage, it shall be at the discretion and
approval of the Fire Official. When approved, priority and enforcement
procedures for these areas shall be governed as though the area was a fire
lane with the exception being the loading or unloading of material to an
occupancy.
The designated area shall be marked in the following ways:
a. The area (lane) shall have the roadway marked and signs installed in
accordance with the other provisions of Section F-7006.0 Fire Lanes.
b. Securely mounted beneath the fire lane sign shall be a sign indicating
loading zone as specified by the authority having jurisdiction.
F-7006.9 Access control devices for gated communities or
buildings:When access control devices, including bars, grates, electric
or magnetic locks or similar devices, which would inhibit rapid Fire
Department emergency access to the building are installed, such devices
shall be approved by the Fire Official. All access control devices shall be
provided with an approved means for deactivation or unlocking by the
Fire Department. Access control devices shall also comply for exiting. Any
variation of this section shall be approved in writing by the Fire Official
prior to installation. [Added 6-30-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-21]
Schedule A, Local Provisions
ARTICLE 70
F-7000.0 General
F-7007.0 Construction Activities
F-7007.1 General: All construction requiring a construction permit under
N.J.A.C. 5:23, the Uniform Construction Code, shall comply with the
requirements of the Fire Prevention Code and this section as shall be
applicable. The term "construction activities" as used in this section shall
refer to those construction activities which require a permit under the
Uniform Construction Code.
§ 185-7 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 185-7
10:414
Schedule A, Local Provisions
ARTICLE 70
F-7000.0 General
F-7007.2 Refuse containers: All active construction sites and locations
shall be provided with noncombustible refuse container(s) in such numbers
as shall be necessary to contain all combustible refuse generated by the
construction activities.
All combustible refuse, rubbish and debris shall be cleaned up and
deposited in the container(s) on a daily basis. Refuse container(s) shall be
located a minimum of 20 feet away from any building, structure, lot line or
combustible material storage location.
F-7007.3 Extinguishers: While construction activities are in progress,
fire extinguishers shall be provided by the builder in accordance with
the following subsections, and shall be maintained in a location approved
by the Fire Official. Personnel normally on the construction site shall be
instructed in the use of the fire extinguishers provided.
F-7007.3.1 Industrial, commercial: At construction sites for new
industrial or commercial structures, at least four portable fire
extinguishers having a rating of at least 10-A, 60-BC shall be provided.
F-7007.3.2 Multiunit residential: At construction sites for new
residential structures where more than three buildings or buildings
containing four or more dwelling units are under construction, at least four
portable fire extinguishers having a rating of at least 10-A, 60-BC shall
be provided, and in addition, one extinguisher with similar rating shall be
provided for each site supervisor.
F-7007.3.3 All other locations: In locations other than those specified in
F-7007.3.2 and F-7007.3.3, at least one portable fire extinguisher having a
rating of at least 4-A, 30-BC shall be within a travel distance of 75 feet or
less to any point of the structure under construction.
F-7007.4 Liquids and gases: Flammable or combustible liquids and
gases shall be stored, handled or used in accordance with the applicable
provisions of the Fire Prevention Code and the standards of the National
Fire Protection Association.
F-7007.5 Occupied buildings: When construction activities take place
in occupied buildings, special fire safety precautions shall be taken as
required by the Fire Official in accordance with the Fire Prevention Code.
F-7007.5.1 Fire prevention equipment: When fire suppression,
detection or alarm systems or devices are affected by construction
activities, their down time shall be kept to a minimum. When possible,
isolation of system components shall occur to insure operation in
unaffected areas.
§ 185-7 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 185-7
10:415
Schedule A, Local Provisions
ARTICLE 70
F-7000.0 General
Whenever fire protection systems or devices are removed from service, a
fire watch shall be posted if deemed necessary by the Fire Official. When
the area affected is of a high hazard use, normal operations and occupancy
of the area may be required to be suspended by the Fire Official until
protection is restored.
F-7007.6 Access: Temporary all-weather surface access roads, gravel or
equivalent, capable of supporting a thirty-ton emergency vehicle, shall be
provided at all times for Fire Department vehicular access to all structures
under construction and storage of combustible construction materials.
Access to such locations shall be within 125 unobstructed feet at all times.
Every dead-end roadway more than 300 feet in length shall be provided at
the closed end with a temporary turnaround acceptable to the Fire Official.
F-7007.7 Water supply: The fire protection water supply system,
including fire hydrants shown on the approved site plan, shall be installed
and in service prior to placing combustible building materials on the
project site or utilizing them in the construction of building structures. If
phased construction is approved, coordinated phased installation of the fire
protection water system shall be permitted as approved by the Fire Official
with the following subsection as a minimum requirement:
F-7007.7.1 One- and two-family dwellings: In one- and two-family
dwelling developments, fire hydrant(s) shall be within 250 feet of
combustible construction material and accessible by roadways as required
by Section F-7007.6.
F-7007.7.2 Multifamily dwellings: In multifamily apartment,
condominium and townhouse development(s), fire hydrants shall be within
250 feet of combustible construction material and accessible by roadways
as required by F-7007.6.
F-7007.7.3 Industrial, commercial sites: Industrial and commercial
developments shall be provided with fire hydrant(s) as required by the
Fire Official on a case-by-case basis, taking into consideration the planned
construction activities and site design, with the minimum requirement
being the installation of any required public water main(s) and/or fire
hydrant(s) prior to the introduction of combustible materials to the site.
-7007.8 Open communications in buildings: Emergency services
wireless communication frequencies must be able to operate within all new
or existing buildings. A signal booster must be installed and maintained as
required by the Fire Official. Any variation of this section shall be approved
in writing by the Fire Official prior to installation. [Added 6-30-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008-21]
§ 185-7 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 185-7
10:416
Schedule A, Local Provisions
ARTICLE 70
F-7000.0 General
F-7008.0 Storage of Flammable or Combustible Liquids or
Hazardous Materials
F-7008.1 Abandonment of tanks: Any flammable or combustible liquid
or hazardous material tank no longer in use shall comply with F-7008.1.1
to F-7008.1.4.
F-7008.1.1 Tanks "temporarily out of service" shall have the fill line, gauge
opening, and pump connection secured against tampering. Vent lines shall
remain open and be maintained.
F-7008.1.2 Any tank not used for a period of 90 days shall be properly
safeguarded or removed in a manner approved by the Fire Official.
F-7008.1.3 Any tank which has not been used for a period of one year shall
be removed from the property in a manner approved by the Fire Official,
and the site restored in an acceptable manner after approval of the Health
Officer.
F-7008.1.4 Tanks which are to be returned to service shall be tested in a
manner approved by the Fire Official.
F-7008.2 Tank marking: Aboveground tanks or containers for flammable,
combustible or hazardous material, or structures housing same, shall be
provided with decals and lettering identifying their contents. Such marking
shall include the product name, U.N. classification number and NFPA 704
designation or an industry equivalent approved by the Fire Official.
F-7008.3 Secondary containment: All new and existing aboveground
tanks or containers for flammable or combustible liquids or hazardous
materials or structures containing same shall be provided with secondary
containment constructed of an impermeable material and sized to hold
150% of the largest tank within the containment area.
Exception: Existing single-family residential fuel oil tank installations
containing less than 660 gallons. Containers containing five gallons or
less when located at a retail establishment or consumer location of use.
F-7008.4 Temporary tank/container installations: Temporary
aboveground tank/container installations for flammable or combustible
liquids or hazardous materials shall comply with NFPA 30.
F-7008.4.1 Temporary: Tank installations shall be considered temporary
when the following apply:
1. The tank(s) is being utilized on an active construction site.
2. The tank(s) is being utilized for a period not exceeding six months.
3. The tank(s) is being utilized as an emergency fuel source while a
permanent installation is undergoing repair or replacement.
§ 185-7 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 185-7
10:417
Schedule A, Local Provisions
ARTICLE 70
F-7000.0 General
F-7008.5 Testing: Buried or partially buried tanks for the storage of
flammable or combustible liquids or hazardous materials shall be subject to
periodic integrity testing in accordance with the schedule set forth below.
Exception: Residential fuel oil tanks 1,000 gallons or less in capacity.
A permit shall be obtained from the Fire Official prior to conducting tests
and a certificate of test completion shall be filed with the Fire Official
and Health Officer.
1. For tanks age one year to 14 years: once every five years.
2. For all tanks 15 years and older: once every two years until
replacement.
F-7008.5.1 Waiver: This testing frequency may be waived by the Fire
Official, after consulting the Health Officer, provided that the storage tank
has been designed and constructed with double wall, membrane envelope
or vault methods of containment and has an adequate leak detection
system.
F-7008.5.2 Determining age: Determining the testing schedule
applicable to each storage tank location, the owner or operator shall
provide specific proof of age, such as code enforcement permits or
purchase/installation invoices. In the absence of specific proof of age, the
tank shall be considered to be more than 15 years old for the purpose of
this section.
Schedule A, Local Provisions
ARTICLE 70
F-7000.0 General
F-7009.0 Reinspections
F-7009.1 Penalty charges: In instances where the Fire Inspector has to
return to the same occupancy multiple times to gain compliance in abating
violations, a penalty levy of double the inspection fee shall be charged after
the first reinspection.
Schedule A, Local Provisions
ARTICLE 70
F-7000.0 General
F-7010.0 Refuse Container(s)
F-7010.1 Refuse container(s): All shopping centers and/or locations
where container(s) will be used shall be provided with noncombustible
refuse container(s) in such numbers as shall be necessary to contain all
combustible refuse generated by site activities.
§ 185-7 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 185-7
10:418
Schedule A, Local Provisions
ARTICLE 70
All combustible refuse, rubbish and debris shall be cleaned up and
deposited in the container(s) on a daily basis. Refuse container(s) shall
be located a minimum of 20 feet away from any building or structure. At
the discretion of the Fire Official, signage and/or location markings will be
posted as directed.
Chapter 189
FIREWORKS
§ 189-1. Sale, possession and use.
§ 189-2. Violations and penalties.113
Unless otherwise provided by law, statute or ordinance, any person charged
with violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, pay a fine not less than $100 nor more than the maximum penalty
set forth in Chapter 1, Article II, Penalty.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to offer for sale, expose for sale, sell,
possess or use, or explode any blank cartridge, toy pistol, toy cannon,
toy cane or toy gun in which explosives are used; the type of balloon
which requires fire underneath to propel the same; firecrackers;
torpedoes; skyrockets, Roman candles, bombs, sparklers or other
fireworks of like construction, or any fireworks containing any explosive
or inflammable compound or any tablets or other device commonly
used and sold as fireworks containing nitrates, chlorates, oxalates,
sulphides of lead, barium, antimony, arsenic, mercury, nitroglycerine,
phosphorus or any compound containing any of the same or other
explosives, or any substance or combination of substances, or article
prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect by
combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation, other than aviation
and railroad signal light flares, except that it shall be lawful for any
person to offer for sale, expose for sale, sell, possess or use, or explode
any toy pistol, toy cane, toy gun, or other device in which paper or
plastic caps containing 0.25 grain or less of explosive compound per
cap are used, provided they are so constructed that the hand cannot
come in contact with the cap when in place for use, and toy pistol paper
or plastic caps which contain less than 0.20 grain of explosive mixture
per cap.
B. This chapter shall not apply to any sale, offer of sale, possession or use
of fireworks which is expressly permitted under state statute.
113. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 185-7 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 189-2
10:419
Chapter 193
FLEA MARKETS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Festivals, mass gatherings and commercial
flea markets — See Ch. 169.
Secondhand jewelry — See Ch. 242.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 347.
Holiday sales; Christmas tree sales — See Ch.
394.
Vendors — See Ch. 502.
§ 193-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
FLEA MARKET — A sale of items of tangible personal property wherein on
one location there are multiple vendors who have paid a fee for the privilege
of occupying the space allotted to each such vendor for the purpose of
displaying and selling items of tangible personal property.
§ 193-2. License required; application; fee; conditions.
No person, firm or corporation may, without a license, conduct a flea market
other than a bona fide charitable, eleemosynary, educational or cultural
organization not for profit and being able to establish that it is such type of
nonprofit organization; subject, however, to the following requirements:
A. Each organization authorized to conduct a flea market in accordance
with this chapter shall obtain a permit from the Township Clerk at least
14 days prior to the date of the commencement of such flea market sale.
B. Such permit shall set forth the following:
(1) The name and address of the organization conducting the sale.
(2) The street address of the location at which said flea market sale is
to be conducted.
(3) The date or dates of the sale.
(4) There shall be a permit fee of $1 for each sale conducted.
C. Such flea market sales shall be limited to two consecutive calendar
days, excluding Sunday, and shall be conducted only between the hours
of 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. There will be a maximum of two rain dates
allowed.
D. The permit for the conducting of such sale must be prominently
displayed upon the premises upon which the sale is conducted
throughout the entire period of sale.
§ 189-2 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 193-3
10:420
§ 193-3. Filing of list of participants; annual fee.
Any person, firm or corporation not a bona fide charitable, eleemosynary,
educational or cultural organization as set forth above may obtain a license
to operate a flea market from the Township Clerk upon filing a list of each
person, group of persons, firms or organizations which will participate in
said flea market, the home address of each said person or firm, the location
of the flea market, its dates and hours of operation and the number of
booths. The annual fee for each flea market shall be $5 per stall or booth.
§ 193-4. Cleaning of premises; removal of merchandise.
Immediately upon the conclusion of any sale or series of sales authorized
by this chapter, the permittee shall be obliged within 24 hours after the
conclusion of said sale to clean the outside of said premises and remove all
unsold merchandise therefrom and restore same to the condition in which
it existed prior to said sale.
§ 193-5. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to affect the following:
§ 193-6. Violations and penalties.114
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to the penalty set forth in Chapter 1, Article
II, Penalty.
Chapter 196
FLOOD CONTROL COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 198.
Mosquito Breeding Control — See Ch. 284.
Stormwater quality — See Ch. 432.
A. Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
B. Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officials.
C. The selling or advertising for sale of any item or items of personal
property which are specifically described in the advertisement.
114. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 193-3 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 196-1
10:421
§ 196-1. Agreement to participate in joint flood control commission.
The Township of Old Bridge agrees to participate in the creation of and
operation of the South Central Middlesex County Flood Control Commission
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:14-16 et seq., as follows:
A. The municipalities invited to participate in said Commission are:
Borough of Helmetta, Borough of Jamesburg, Borough of Spotswood,
Borough of South River, Township of Monroe, Township of Old Bridge
and Township of East Brunswick.
B. The South Central Middlesex County Flood Control Commission shall
be established in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:14-16 et seq.
C. The South Central Middlesex County Flood Control Commission shall:
(1) Collect, study and analyze data on flooding, past floods and the
causes of floods in the area;
(2) Make such data and studies available to the participating members,
to the Division of Water Policy and Supply, the Army Corps of
Engineers, local and county planning boards and officials
concerned with subdivisions and development of properties within
the floodway and drainage areas;
(3) Keep itself informed as to the availability of state and federal funds
and grants and the procedures for applying therefor, and shall
make such information available to participating members;
(4) Coordinate the activities of the participating members relating to
flooding, flood prevention, brook cleaning and the like;
(5) Encourage the acquisition of lands within the floodway and lowlying
areas by appropriate county park commissions, counties or
participating municipalities;
(6) Publicize methods of flood control and flood prevention;
(7) Encourage its participating members and others to adopt
appropriate ordinances and regulations relating to flood control;
(8) Encourage its participating members to support other programs
designed or intended to alleviate flooding;
(9) Perform such other acts and fulfill such other functions as may be
permitted by law and as determined by the members, subject to the
limitations in this chapter and subject to the limitations as set forth
in N.J.S.A. 40:14-16 et seq.
D. Appropriations.
(1) The general, administrative and other expenses of the Commission,
affecting the Commission as a whole, shall be apportioned among
the members in a manner to be determined by the members not
§ 196-1 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 196-1
10:422
§ 196-2. Representatives.
later than 120 days after the appointment of all representatives by
the participating municipalities.
(2) Whenever a specific project is to be undertaken involving less than
the interests of all of the participating members, or of special
benefit to less than all of the participating members, the
apportionment of the costs thereof shall be agreed upon by the
participating members specially benefited thereby in advance of
authorization of such project.
(3) The apportionments may be changed by agreement among the
participating municipalities and counties; provided, however, that
there shall be no increase in the percentage to be contributed by
any participant without the consent of the governing body of such
participating member.
E. Budget. The tentative annual budget for the Commission shall be
adopted by the Commission no later than 120 days after the
appointment of all representatives by the participating municipalities.
F. Operating procedures. The operating procedures of the Commission
shall be adopted at a regular or special meeting of the Commission, but
not later than 120 days after the appointment of all representatives by
the participating municipalities.
G. Withdrawal. Each member municipality and county reserves the right
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:14-17d to withdraw from the Commission;
provided, however, that at least 90 days' notice of such intention is
given to the Commission; and provided, further, that such withdrawal
after the adoption of the Commission budget for a given year shall not
abrogate the responsibility of the municipality or county to meet its
obligations under the budget for such year.
A. The Board of Chosen Freeholders and each municipal council shall
appoint two representatives to the Commission, either or both of said
representatives may be a member of the board or council or hold other
elective or appointive office in the respective governmental units.
B. In additional to such representatives, the Township Council may
appoint two alternate representatives to the Commission who shall
serve for the terms of one year each or until the appointment and
qualification of their successors. Such alternates shall have the right to
attend all meetings of the Commission and take part in all discussions.
The alternates shall be designated as first alternate and second
alternate and in such order may represent the Township of Old Bridge
and vote in the event of the absence or disability of one or both of the
regular representatives.
C. Each regular representative shall serve for a term of five years or until
his successor has been appointed and has qualified except that any
§ 196-1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 196-2
10:423
§ 196-3. Distribution of copies.
The Clerk of this Township Council shall forward certified copies of this
chapter to all of the participants set forth in § 196-1A; the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection; and the senators and
assemblypersons representing Middlesex County.
§ 196-4. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect upon the final adoption of ordinances by all of
the participants set forth in § 196-1A hereof.
Chapter 198
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 108.
Flood Control Commission — See Ch. 196.
Land development — See Ch. 250.
Stormwater quality — See Ch. 432.
Water systems; water supply — See Ch. 515.
appointed representative who holds another elected or appointed
public office shall serve as such representative for the term of his
elected or appointed office and only so long as he shall hold such
elected or appointed public office, notwithstanding his term of
appointment as such representative. Appointments to vacancies caused
by the death, resignation or other inability to serve of a representative
shall be filled for the balance of the term only. No alternate
representative shall automatically succeed to a regular representative
position upon a vacancy occurring in a regular position.
§ 196-2 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 196-4
10:424
ARTICLE I
Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose and Objectives
§ 198-1.1. Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1, et
seq., delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote public health, safety, and general welfare
of its citizenry. Therefore, the Township Council of the Township of Old
Bridge, Middlesex County, New Jersey does ordain as follows.
§ 198-1.2. Findings of fact.
§ 198-1.3. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
A. The flood hazard areas of the Township of Old Bridge are subject to
periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety, and general welfare.
B. The flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and
velocities, and, when inadequately anchored, causes damage in other
areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise
protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
A. Protect human life and health;
B. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding
and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas
mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, bridges located in
areas of special flood hazard;
F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
G. Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
§ 198-1.1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 198-1.3
10:425
§ 198-1.4. Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
H. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
A. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
B. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
C. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
floodwaters;
D. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage; and
E. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
§ 198-1.3 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 198-1.4
10:426
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 198-2.1. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
ADVISORY BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (ABFE) — The elevation shown on a
community's Advisory Flood Hazard Area Map that indicates the advisory
stillwater elevation plus wave effect (ABFE = SWEL + wave effect) resulting
from a flood that has a one-percent or greater chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
ADVISORY FLOOD HAZARD AREA (AFHA) — The land in the floodplain
within a community subject to flooding from the one-percent annual chance
event depicted on the Advisory Flood Hazard Area Map.
ADVISORY FLOOD HAZARD AREA MAP — The official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Administration has delineated the areas
of advisory flood hazards applicable to the community.
APPEAL — A request for a review of the Township Flood Plain Manager's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH, or VO Zone on a
community's Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM) with a one-percent
annual or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet
where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding
is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within
a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any
given year. It is shown on the FIRM as Zone V, VE, V1-30, A, AO, A1-A30,
AE, A99, or AH.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The flood elevation shown on a
published Flood Insurance Study (FIS) including the Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM). For Zones AE, AH, AO, and A1-30 the elevation represents
the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent or
greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. For zones
VE and V1-30 the elevation represents the stillwater elevation (SWEL) plus
wave effect (BFE = SWEL + wave effect) resulting from a flood that has a
one-percent or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given
year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
§ 198-2.1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 198-2.1
10:427
BEST AVAILABLE FLOOD HAZARD DATA — The most recent available flood
risk guidance FEMA has provided. The Best Available Flood Hazard Data
may be depicted on but not limited to Advisory Flood Hazard Area Maps,
Work Maps or Preliminary FIS and FIRM.
BEST AVAILABLE FLOOD HAZARD DATA ELEVATION — The most recent
available flood elevation FEMA has provided. The Best Available Flood
Hazard Data Elevation may be depicted on an Advisory Flood Hazard Area
Map; Work Map; or Preliminary FIS and FIRM.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support of
the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse
under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREA — An area of special flood hazard
extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along
an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity wave action from
storms or seismic sources.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or
storage of equipment or materials located within the area of special flood
hazard.
DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM) — The official map on
which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building (i) built, in the case of
a building in an Area of Special Flood Hazard, to have the top of the
elevated floor or, in the case of a building in a Coastal High-Hazard Area,
to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the
elevated floor, elevated above the base flood elevation by means of piling,
columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water,
and (ii) adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity
of the building during a flood up to the magnitude of the base flood.
In an Area of Special Flood Hazard, "elevated building" also includes a
building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with
openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters. In
Areas of Coastal High Hazard, "elevated buildings" also includes a building
otherwise meeting the definition of "elevated building" even though the
lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls.
EROSION — The process of the gradual wearing away of land masses.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
§ 198-2.1 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 198-2.1
10:428
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report in which the
Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as the
Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion
control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term
describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which
provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and
reduction.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than 0.2
foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
B.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
§ 198-2.1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 198-2.1
10:429
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, useable solely for
the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than
a basement is not considered a building's lowest floor provided that such
enclosure is not built so to render the structure in violation of other
applicable non-elevation design requirements of 44 CFR 60.3.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle."
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION
— A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain regulation adopted
by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by the municipality.
PRELIMINARY FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The draft version
of the FIRM released for public comment before finalization and adoption.
PRIMARY FRONTAL DUNE — A continuous or nearly continuous mound
or ridge of sand with relatively steep seaward and landward slopes
immediately landward and adjacent to the beach and subject to erosion and
overtopping from high tides and waves from coastal storms. The inland limit
of the primary frontal dune occurs at the point where there is a distinct
change from the relatively steep slope to a relatively mild slope.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
A. Built on a single chassis;
§ 198-2.1 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 198-2.1
10:430
SAND DUNES — Naturally occurring or man-made accumulations of sand
in ridges or mounds landward of the beach.
START OF CONSTRUCTION —
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or a
gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its condition before damage
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start
of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the longest
horizontal projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck; and
C.
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal
use.
D.
For other than new construction or substantial improvements under
the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L. No. 97-348) includes substantial
improvements and means the date the building permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within
180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site such
as the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation,
or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
A.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading and filling nor does it include the installation of
streets and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement,
footings or piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor
does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings,
such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part
of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start
of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.
B.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
A.
§ 198-2.1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 198-2.1
10:431
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter that
permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this
chapter.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter. A new or substantially improved structure or
other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or
other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR § 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10),
(e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
have been identified by the local code enforcement officer and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
Any alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration will
not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure.
B.
§ 198-2.1 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 198-2.1
10:432
ARTICLE III
General Provisions
§ 198-3.1. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of the Township of Old Bridge, Middlesex County, New Jersey.
§ 198-3.2. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
§ 198-3.3. Violations and penalties.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, relocated to, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined
not more than $2,500 or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both, for
A. The areas of special flood hazard for the Township of Old Bridge,
Community No. 340265, are identified and defined on the following
documents prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
(1) A scientific and engineering report "Flood Insurance Study,
Middlesex County, New Jersey (All Jurisdictions)" dated July 6,
2010.
(2) Flood Insurance Rate Map for Middlesex County, New Jersey (All
Jurisdictions) as shown on Index and panel(s) 34023CIND0A;
34023C0144F; 34023C0154F; 34023C0158F; 34023C0159F;
34023C0161F; 34023C0162F; 34023C0163F; 34023C0164F;
34023C0166F; 34023C0167F; 34023C0168F; 34023C0169F;
34023C0178F; 34023C0186F; 34023C0188F; 34023C0257F;
34023C0276F; 34023C0277F; 34023C0278F; 34023C0279F;
34023C0281F, whose effective date is July 6, 2010.
(3) Best Available Flood Hazard Data, index and panels 34023CIND0B;
34023C0144G; 34023C0158G; 34023C0159G; 34023C0161G;
34023C0162G; 34023C0163G; 34023C0166G; 34023C0167G;
34023C0178G, dated January 31, 2014. These documents shall take
precedence over effective panels and FIS in construction and
development regulations only. Where the effective mapping or base
flood elevation conflict or overlap with the best available flood
hazard data, whichever imposes the more stringent requirement
shall prevail.
B. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study, maps and advisory documents
are on file at One Old Bridge Plaza, Old Bridge, New Jersey.
§ 198-3.1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 198-3.3
10:433
each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in
the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Township of Old Bridge
from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy
any violation.
§ 198-3.4. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
and other ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 198-3.5. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
§ 198-3.6. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
A. Considered as minimum requirements;
B. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
A. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural
causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special
flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from
flooding or flood damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Township of Old
Bridge, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance
Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 198-3.3 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 198-3.6
10:434
ARTICLE IV
Administration
§ 198-4.1. Establishment of development permit.
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development
begins, including placement of manufactured homes, within any area of
special flood hazard established in § 198-3.2. Application for a development
permit shall be made on forms furnished by the Township Flood Plain
Manager and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to
scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in
question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage
facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following
information is required:
§ 198-4.2. Designation of local administrator.
The Township Flood Plain Manager is hereby appointed to administer and
implement this chapter by granting or denying development permit
applications in accordance with its provisions.
§ 198-4.3. Duties and responsibilities of administrator.
Duties of the Township Flood Plain Manager shall include, but not be limited
to:
A. Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all structures;
B. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been
floodproofed;
C. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the
floodproofing criteria in § 198-5.2B; and
D. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
A. Permit review.
(1) Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
(2) Review all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
(3) Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway. If located in the floodway,
assure that the encroachment provisions of § 198-5.3A are met.
§ 198-4.1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 198-4.3
10:435
(4) Review all development permits in the coastal high hazard area of
the area of special flood hazard to determine if the proposed
development alters sand dunes so as to increase potential flood
damage.
(5) Review plans for walls to be used to enclose space below the base
flood level in accordance with § 198-5.4B(4).
B. Use of other base flood and floodway data. When base flood elevation
and floodway data has not been provided in accordance with § 198-3.2,
Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard, the Township Flood
Plain Manager shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base
flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or
other source, in order to administer § 198-5.2A, Specific standards,
residential construction, and § 198-5.2B, Specific standards,
nonresidential construction.
C. Information to be obtained and maintained.
(1) Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure
contains a basement.
(2) For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(a) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level); and
(b) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in
§ 198-4.1C.
(3) In coastal high hazard areas, certification shall be obtained from a
registered professional engineer or architect that the provisions of
§ 198-5.4B(1) and (2)(a) and (b) are met.
(4) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
D. Alteration of watercourses.
(1) Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Dam Safety and Flood Control Section
and the Land Use Regulation Program prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.
(2) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so the flood carrying capacity
is not diminished.
E. Interpretation of FIRM boundaries. Make interpretations where
needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special
§ 198-4.3 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 198-4.3
10:436
§ 198-4.4. Variance procedure.
flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict
between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person
contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in § 198-4.4.
A. Appeal Board.
(1) The Township Zoning Board of Adjustment as established by
Township Council shall hear and decide appeals and requests for
variances from the requirements of this chapter.
(2) The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals
when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the Township Flood Plain Manager in the
enforcement or administration of this chapter.
(3) Those aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment,
or any taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of
New Jersey, as provided in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
(4) In passing upon such applications, the Zoning Board of Adjustment
shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors,
standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan and floodplain management program of that area;
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
§ 198-4.3 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 198-4.4
10:437
(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
(k) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
(5) Upon consideration of the factors of § 198-4.4A(4) and the purposes
of this chapter, the Zoning Board of Adjustment may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to
further the purposes of this chapter.
(6) The Township Flood Plain Manager shall maintain the records of all
appeal actions, including technical information, and report any
variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
B. Conditions for variances.
(1) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or
less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the
items in § 198-4.4A(4)(a) through (k) have been fully considered. As
the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical
justification required for issuing the variance increases.
(2) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.
(3) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
(4) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
(5) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on
§ 198-4.4 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 198-4.4
10:438
or victimization of the public as identified in § 198-4.4A(4), or
conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(6) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
§ 198-4.4 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 198-4.4
10:439

ARTICLE V
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
§ 198-5.1. General standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards, compliance with the applicable
requirements of the Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23) and the
following standards, whichever is more restrictive, is required:
A. Anchoring.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
structure.
(2) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use
of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is
in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for
resisting wind forces.
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
C. Utilities.
(1) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(2) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharge from the systems into floodwaters;
(3) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding;
and
(4) For all new construction and substantial improvements the
electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
D. Subdivision proposals.
§ 198-5.1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 198-5.1
10:441
§ 198-5.2. Specific standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data have
been provided as set forth in § 198-3.2, Basis for establishing areas of
special flood hazard, or in § 198-4.3B, Use of other base flood data, the
following standards are required:
(1) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
(2) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize
flood damage;
(3) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage; and
(4) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed new development which contain at
least 50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).
E. Enclosure openings. All new construction and substantial
improvements having fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that
are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in
an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall
be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria: A minimum of two openings having a total net area of
not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall
be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped
with screens, louvers, or other covering or devices provided that they
permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
A. Residential construction.
(1) New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure located in an A or AE zone shall have the lowest floor,
including basement together with the attendant utilities and
sanitary facilities, elevated at or above the base flood elevation
(published FIS/FIRM) or the best available flood hazard data
elevation, whichever is more restrictive, plus two feet;
(2) Require within any AO zone on the municipality's FIRM that all new
construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
above the highest adjacent grade two feet above the depth number
specified in feet (at least three feet if no depth number is specified)
§ 198-5.1 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 198-5.2
10:442
or at or above the best available flood hazard data elevation plus
two feet, whichever is more restrictive, and require adequate
drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters
around and away from proposed structures.
B. Nonresidential construction. In an Area of Special Flood Hazard, all
new construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure located in an A or AE zone
shall have the lowest floor, including basement together with the
attendant utilities and sanitary facilities:
(1) Either:
(a) Be elevated to or above the base flood elevation (published
FIS/FIRM) or the best available flood hazard data elevation
whichever is more restrictive, plus two feet; and
(b) Require within any AO zone on the municipality's DFIRM that
all new construction and substantial improvement of any
commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall
have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the
highest adjacent grade two feet above the depth number
specified in feet (at least three feet if no depth number is
specified) or at or above the best available flood hazard data
elevation plus two feet, whichever is more restrictive, and
require adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes
to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures;
(2) Or:
(a) Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level plus two
feet, or the best available flood hazard data elevation plus two
feet (whichever is more restrictive), the structure is watertight
with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
(b) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
(c) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the design and methods of construction are in accordance
with accepted standards of practice for meeting the applicable
provisions of this subsection. Such certification shall be
provided to the official as set forth in § 198-4.3C(2)(b).
C. Manufactured homes.
(1) Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with
§ 198-5.1A(2).
(2) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within an area of special flood hazard shall be elevated on a
permanent foundation such that the top of the lowest floor is at or
§ 198-5.2 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 198-5.2
10:443
§ 198-5.3. Floodways.
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in § 198-3.2 are
areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely
hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris,
potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
§ 198-5.4. Coastal high hazard area.
Coastal high hazard areas (V or VE Zones) are located within the areas
of special flood hazard established in § 198-3.2. These areas have special
flood hazards associated with high velocity waters from tidal surges and
hurricane wave wash; therefore, the following provisions shall apply:
above the base flood elevation (published FIS/FIRM) or the best
available flood hazard data elevation, plus two feet (whichever is
more restrictive).
A. Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development unless a technical evaluation
demonstrates that encroachment shall not result in any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
B. If § 198-5.3A is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements must comply with Article V, Provisions for Flood Hazard
Reduction.
C. In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation data
has been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with
all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than 2/10 of a foot at any
point.
A. Location of structures.
(1) All buildings or structures shall be located landward of the reach of
the mean high tide.
(2) The placement of manufactured homes shall be prohibited, except
in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision.
B. Construction methods.
(1) Elevation. All new construction and substantial improvements shall
be elevated on piling or columns so that:
(a) The bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the
lowest floor (excluding the piling or columns) is elevated two
foot above the base flood elevation (published FIS/FIRM), the
best available flood hazard data elevation or as required by the
Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23), whichever is more
restrictive; and
§ 198-5.2 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 198-5.4
10:444
(b) With all space below the lowest floor's supporting member
open so as not to impede the flow of water, except for
breakaway walls as provided for in § 198-5.4B(4).
(2) Structural support.
(a) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
securely anchored on piling or columns.
(b) The pile or column foundation and structure attached thereto
shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral
movement due to the effects of wind and water loading values
each of which shall have a one-percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year (one-hundred-year
mean recurrence interval).
(c) There shall be no fill used for structural support.
(3) Certification. A registered professional engineer or architect shall
develop or review the structural design specifications and plans for
the construction and shall certify that the design and methods of
construction to be used are in accordance with accepted standards
of practice for compliance with the provisions of § 198-5.4B(1) and
(2)(a) and (b).
(4) Space below the lowest floor.
(a) Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a
structure started after the enactment of this chapter shall not
enclose the space below the lowest floor unless breakaway
walls, open wood lattice-work or insect screening are used as
provided for in this section.
(b) Breakaway walls, open wood lattice-work or insect screening
shall be allowed below the base flood elevation provided that
they are intended to collapse under wind and water loads
without causing collapse, displacement or other structural
damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting
foundation system. Breakaway walls shall be designed for a
safe loading resistance of not less than 10 and no more than 20
pounds per square foot. Use of breakaway walls which exceed
a design safe loading of 20 pounds per square foot (either by
design or when so required by local or state codes) may be
permitted only if a registered professional engineer or
architect certifies that the designs proposed meet the following
conditions.
[1] Breakaway wall collapse shall result from a water load less
than that which would occur during the base flood; and
[2] The elevated portion of the building and supporting
foundation system shall not be subject to collapse,
§ 198-5.4 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 198-5.4
10:445
displacement or other structural damage due to the effects
of wind and water load acting simultaneously on all
building components (structural and nonstructural). Water
loading values used shall be those associated with the base
flood. Wind loading values used shall be those required by
applicable state or local building standards.
(c) If breakaway walls are utilized, such enclosed space shall be
used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage
and not for human habitation.
(d) Prior to construction, plans for any breakaway wall must be
submitted to the Construction Code Official or Building Sub-
Code Official for approval.
C. Sand dunes. Prohibit man-made alteration of sand dunes within Zones
VE and V on the community's DFIRM which would increase potential
flood damage.
§ 198-5.4 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 198-5.4
10:446
Chapter 203
FOOD AND BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Live entertainment at premises licensed to
serve alcohol — See Ch. 14, Art. I.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 30.
Mobile lunch wagons — See Ch. 273.
§ 198-5.4 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 198-5.4
10:447

ARTICLE I
Vehicles Used for Food Transportation or Sale
[Adopted as Sec. 19-8 of the 1973 Revised General Ordinances]
§ 203-1. Rules and regulations.
The following rules and regulations shall govern the use of vehicles for the
transportation or sale of food products:
§ 203-2. Inspection of vehicles.
Before any vehicle is used for the transportation or sale of food or in
connection with any activity for which a license is required from the
Township, it shall be inspected by the Health Officer or his agents or
employees to ascertain whether it complies with the provisions of this
article and all other applicable health regulations. The vehicle shall be
A. Whenever any food is transported in a vehicle which is wholly or partly
open, it shall be completely screened or covered at all times. The
screening or covering shall consist of material which will effectively
prevent flies or other insects from alighting around or upon any food.
B. All seafood, meat, poultry and dairy products shall be transported only
in refrigerated vehicles and shall remain under refrigeration until the
time of sale or delivery. The refrigerated portion of the vehicle shall be
maintained at a temperature low enough to completely safeguard the
products contained in it to the fullest extent possible.
C. No licensee shall at any time permit any debris, waste material, rotting
or unfit produce or merchandise of any kind to remain in or upon his
vehicle, unless the same is contained in a leakproof metal container
having a properly fitted metal cover on the container.
D. No licensee shall permit any waste materials or parts of produce or any
other merchandise to remain on any street, roadway, curb or walk and
shall at all times remove any debris that may have fallen from his
vehicle so that the same is immediately placed in metal containers, as
provided in Subsection C.
E. All sales of merchandise shall, at the time of sale, be placed in bags or
other suitable containers.
F. No manufactured foodstuffs, beverages or ice cream and other frozen
products as defined in Chapter 10 of Title 24 of the New Jersey Revised
Statutes shall be sold on any public street or other public place except
in individual wrappers or containers packed and sealed at the place of
manufacture.
G. All prepared or manufactured foodstuffs shall come from an approved
source; however, any products in containers packed and sealed by a
reputable manufacturer shall be considered as coming from an
approved source.
§ 203-1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 203-2
10:449
reinspected at reasonable intervals and if used in connection with a licensed
activity shall in any event be reinspected at the time the license is renewed.
No vehicle shall be used for any of the purposes specified herein unless
approved by the Health Officer. A written certificate of approval shall be
kept in the vehicle at all times and shall be shown to any person who may
request to see it.
§ 203-3. Sale of products made in vehicle.
When any food products are processed or manufactured in any vehicle
upon a public street or place, the vehicle shall conform to the following
requirements:
A. The part of the vehicle where the products are made or sold shall be
completely enclosed with some easily cleaned impervious material.
B. The service opening may be screened but all other screening shall be
kept to a minimum.
C. The service opening shall be self-closing.
D. A sink and waste tank and at least 30 gallons of hot water under
pressure shall be available inside the vehicle. The water shall be drawn
from the Township water supply or some other approved source.
§ 203-2 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 203-3
10:450
ARTICLE II
Retail Food Establishments
[Adopted as Sec. 19-10 of the 1973 Revised General Ordinances]
§ 203-4. Applicability of state standards. [Added 1-9-2006 by Ord.
No. 38-2005; amended 5-14-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-09]
The provisions of N.J.A.C. 8:24-1 et seq. pertaining to retail food
establishments and food beverage vending machines shall be enforced in
the Township of Old Bridge.115
§ 203-5. License required. [Amended 1-9-2006 by Ord. No. 38-2005;
5-14-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-09]
§ 203-6. Fees. [Amended 1-7-1985 by Ord. No. 2-85; 3-25-2002 by
Ord. No. 10-02; 9-23-2002 by Ord. No. 46-02; 9-27-2004 by Ord. No.
34-04; 1-9-2006 by Ord. No. 38-2005; 5-14-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-09]
The following shall be the schedule of fees for each retail food
establishment:
A. No person shall operate a retail food-handling establishment unless a
license or approval of an existing license to operate shall have been
issued by the Department of Health. Such license or approval of an
existing license shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the
establishment.
B. A person conducting an itinerant retail food-handling establishment
shall secure a license issued by the Department of Health. Such license
or approval of existing license shall be posted in a conspicuous place in
the establishment.
A. All persons required to be licensed shall pay an annual license fee as
follows:
(1) Restaurants:
Seating Capacity Fee
1 to 49 $150
50 to 99 $250
100 or greater $350
(2) Retail food stores other than restaurants:
115. Editor's Note: Oridinal Sec. 19-10.1, Establishment of code; Sec. 19-10-2, Title; and Sec.
19-10.3, Public record, which previously preceded this section, were deleted 1-9-2006 by
Ord. No. 38-2005.
§ 203-4 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 203-6
10:451
§ 203-7. Renewal; revocation; transfer.
Total Square Footage of
Establishment Fee
0 to 2,500 $100
2,500 to 5,000 $150
5,001 to 7,500 $200
7,501 to 9,999 $250
10,000 or greater $350
(3) Mobile vendors:
(a) Units with food preparation: $125.
(b) All food items prepackaged: $100.
(c) Ice cream or ices: $100.
(4) Late fee. All persons who fail to register by January 30 of the
license year renewal date will be subject to a late fee of $50.
B. Reinspection. There shall be a fee of $50 for each reinspection which is
required as a result of an inspection rating other than satisfactory.
C. Incidental sales. Businesses whose sales of food items are limited solely
to the sale of prepackaged food, such as dry goods and other
nonperishable items, which is displayed in an area not exceeding 20
square feet shall be exempt from the payment of the fee; if over 20
square feet, refer to square footage fee schedule.
D. Special event food vendor. There shall be a fee of $50 for a special event
food vendor license. This fee may be waived by the Township Council
for Township-sponsored events upon application to the Township
Council for a waiver.
A. A license issued or approved under the provisions of this article shall
expire annually on December 31 of each year, and the application for
renewal shall be submitted together with the required fee prior to
January 1 of each year.
B. A license or approval of license may be suspended or revoked for a
violation by the holder of any provision of this article or code after an
opportunity for a hearing by the Department of Health and Welfare or
its authorized representative. [Amended 1-9-2006 by Ord. No.
38-2005]
C. A license or approval of a license issued by another Board of Health is
not transferable.
§ 203-6 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 203-8
10:452
§ 203-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-9-2006 by Ord. No.
38-2005]
Any person who violates any provision of or order promulgated under
this article of this Code established herein shall, upon conviction thereof,
be liable to a penalty of not less than $50 nor more than $1,000 for
each violation. Each day a particular violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 203-8 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 203-8
10:453
Chapter 210
GAMES OF CHANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusement devices — See Ch. 35.
Carnivals and circuses — See Ch. 95.
Festivals; mass gatherings — See Ch. 169.
§ 210-1. Eligible organizations; conduct on Sundays.
Any municipal licenses obtained by bona fide organizations or associations
of veterans of any war in which the United States has been engaged,
churches or religious congregations or religious organizations, charitable,
educational, civic and service clubs, officially recognized volunteer firemen,
officially recognized volunteer first aid or rescue squads, pursuant to the
provisions of the aforesaid statute which authorizes the holding, conducting
or operating of certain games of chance, shall be valid on the first day of
the week, commonly known and designated as Sunday, and it shall be lawful
for the holders of such licenses to conduct, hold or operate such games of
chance as may be permitted under the aforesaid statute on the first day of
the week, commonly known and designated as Sunday.
§ 210-2. Applicable statutes.
All applications for licenses under this chapter shall be made to the
Township Clerk and shall conform to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 5:8-50 to
5:8-77.
§ 210-3. Raffle and bingo licensing; fees. [Added 11-20-2006 by Ord.
No. 51-2006; amended 10-25-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-30]
The Municipal Clerk is hereby delegated the authority to act as the issuing
authority to approve the granting of raffle and bingo licenses. Licensing fees
shall be as established by N.J.A.C. 13:47-4.9 and as may be amended from
time to time.
Chapter 215
GRAFFITI
§ 215-1. Purpose.
A. Whereas, the Township of Old Bridge, New Jersey, hereby finds and
declares that graffiti is detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of
the community; and
§ 203-8 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 215-1
10:454
§ 215-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DEFACE — To cover, mark, write on, paint, color or otherwise mar, disfigure
or draw whatsoever on any private or public property of any nature, without
the express consent of the owner.
GRAFFITI — Any form of inscription, word, figure, marking or design that
is marked, etched, scratched, drawn down or painted on any building,
structure, fixture or other improvement, whether permanent or temporary,
including, by way of example only and without limitation, fencing
surrounding construction sites, whether public or private, without the
consent of the owner of the property, or the owner's authorized agent, which
is visible from the private right-of-way.
INDELIBLE MARKER — Any felt tip marker, China marker or similar device
that is not water soluble and which has a flat or angled writing surface 1/2
inch or greater.
KNOWINGLY — Includes knowledge or information which a parent should
reasonably be expected to have pertaining to the marking of graffiti. It is
intended to include and require neglectful or careless parents to maintain
a reasonable community standard of parental respectability through an
objective test. There shall be no defense of a parent who is indifferent to the
activities or conducts of a minor in their custody, when they have knowledge
of individual's actions that are not in compliance with this chapter.
MINOR or JUVENILE — Used interchangeably and shall mean any person
under the age of 17, any person less than 17 years of age or any person who
has not celebrated his or her 17th birthday.
OWNER — The owner of record of the property as set forth in the records
of the Tax Assessor for the Township of Old Bridge.
B. Whereas, there is a perception in the community that the laws
protecting public and private property can be disregarded with
impunity; and
C. Whereas, this perception fosters a sense of disrespect of the law that
results in an increase of crime, is detrimental to the property values of
the community, degrades the community and leads to urban blight and
is inconsistent with the Township of Old Bridge's property maintenance
goals and aesthetic standards.
D. Graffiti results in visual pollution and is hereby deemed a public
nuisance.
E. It is the purpose of this chapter to provide a mechanism in which
individuals may be prosecuted for defacing public and private property.
§ 215-1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 215-2
10:455
PARENT — Any person to whom legal custody of a juvenile has been given
by court order or is acting in the place of the parent or is responsible for
the care and welfare of the juvenile and shall include:
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the public has access, including
but not limited to a public street, road, thoroughfare, sidewalk, bridge,
alley, plaza, park, recreation or shopping area, public transportation facility,
vehicle used for public transportation, parking lot or any other parking,
public building, structure or any municipal parking signs, etc., or area.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Old Bridge, New Jersey.
§ 215-3. Prohibited acts.
The following acts are prohibited:
§ 215-4. Parental responsibility.
It shall be unlawful for a parent as defined in § 215-2 of this chapter having
legal custody over a minor to knowingly permit or by inefficient or lack of
control to allow such minor in their control to place graffiti on any private
or public property as defined in § 215-2 of this chapter.
§ 215-5. Enforcement.
A. Natural or adoptive parents.
B. Legal guardians.
C. A person who stands in loco parentis.
D. A person to whom legal custody has been given by court order.
A. No person shall willfully or maliciously damage, deface or vandalize any
public or private property by painting, writing, drawing or otherwise
inscribing in any fashion graffiti thereon without the express
permission or consent of the owner. However, this prohibition shall not
apply to easily removable (which are water soluble) chalk markings on
public sidewalks or streets, written or drawn in connection with
traditional children's games, or in any lawful business or public purpose
or activity.
B. It shall be unlawful to aid anyone in defacing public or private property.
C. No person shall possess a spray container or indelible marker in any
public place or on any public facility or private property with the intent
to use the same to deface said public building, property or private
property, absent express permission to the contrary.
A. Any minor under the age of 17 years found by a police officer to be in
violation of this chapter shall be brought to the nearest police station,
where the minor shall be released to his or her parent or guardian. The
§ 215-2 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 215-5
10:456
§ 215-6. Violations and penalties.
parent, as defined in § 215-2, shall be immediately notified and required
to report to police headquarters to procure the juvenile.
B. When a parent immediately called has come to take charge of the
juvenile and the appropriate information has been recorded, the
juvenile shall be released to the custody of such parent. If a parent
cannot be located or fails to take charge of the juvenile, then the
juvenile shall be released to the juvenile authorities except to the extent
that, in accordance with police regulations promulgated by the Chief of
Police, approved in advance for juvenile authorities, the juvenile may
temporarily be entrusted to an adult, relative, neighbor or other person
who will, on behalf of the parent, assume responsibility for caring for
the juvenile pending availability of the parent or guardian.
C. If the minor has been convicted of violating this chapter on a prior
occasion within one year of the date of the present violation, there shall
be a presumption that, whenever a minor has been convicted for a
violation of this chapter, the parent or guardian having care of the
minor knew or should have known of the minor's violation of this
section.
A. Adults who are not parents of offenders as defined in § 215-2 of this
chapter. Any adult who violates any of the provisions of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by the penalty set forth in
Chapter 1, Article II, Penalty. [Amended 1-9-2006 by Ord. No.
38-2005]
B. Juveniles and/or parent violators as defined in § 215-4 of this chapter.
(1) After the receipt of a summons pursuant to § 215-5C of a first
violation by a juvenile, when a second graffiti violation is adjudged
against the same minor, the parents of the minor shall be subject to
prosecution under this section. Violators of this chapter shall be
subject to the penalty set forth in Chapter 1, Article II, Penalty.
Additionally, any parent having the care or custody of a minor found
to be in violation of this section, if it is adjudged that both the
juvenile and the juvenile's parents violated this chapter, they shall
be required to perform community service together. [Amended
1-9-2006 by Ord. No. 38-2005]
(2) If a minor has been found to violate this chapter twice within a sixmonth
period, the minor shall receive a summons and complaint
from the police officer who apprehended the minor for the violation
of this chapter.
(3) If a juvenile is found to be in violation of this chapter on three
occasions within six months, then the juvenile as well as the parent
having the care and custody of the minor shall receive a summons
and complaint for the violation of this chapter.
§ 215-5 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 215-6
10:457
§ 215-7. Removal of graffiti.
(4) Any juvenile who violates any of the provisions of this chapter as
contained in § 215-3 more than four times shall be reported by the
Chief of Police to the juvenile authorities as a juvenile in need of
supervision, and the Chief of Police, Township Attorney or their
designee may proceed to file such charges with the Superior Court
of New Jersey Family Part as he or she may deem appropriate.
(5) In addition to any other penalty imposed by the court, any person
convicted of a violation of this chapter may, at the discretion of the
Judge of the Municipal Court, be required to pay to the owner of
the damaged property monetary restitution in the amount of the
pecuniary damage caused by the act of graffiti or, as part of such
person's community service, to remove the graffiti from the
property.
A. Requirement to remove graffiti. The occupant, lessee, agent and/or
landlord of any commercial premises which has any form of graffiti on
any building or structure shall be required to either restore the defaced
surface by removing the graffiti or repaint that defaced surface within
15 calendar days after notice to the occupant, lessee, agent and/or
landlord by the Chief of Police, his designee, or Code Enforcement
Officer to remove same. Any person who shall violate any provision of
this section shall be subject to a penalty of $20 per day; after 30 days,
the penalty shall increase to $100 per day. Such penalty shall be
imposed for each day after the initial 15 calendar days that such
violation thereafter continues. The penalties may be imposed against
the owner or lessee, agent and/or landlord wherein such violation
occurs, or both. [Amended 5-19-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-14]
B. Remedy. If said graffiti is not corrected within 30 business days after
written notice is issued, then the Township of Old Bridge shall have the
right to issue a summons and to enter the premises to remove the
graffiti and/or repaint the premises, and the cost of the removal of the
graffiti and/or repainting shall be at the sole cost and expense of the
occupant, lessee, agent and/or landlord of said building or structure.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.12f, or any successor
statute, the actual cost of the removal of the graffiti and/or repainting,
plus the cost of inspection of said graffiti and/or repainting and other
costs incidental to such removal, shall be certified by the Business
Administrator to the Township Council and therefor shall be entered as
a lien upon the real property upon which the graffiti was found to be
placed and shall be added to and become a part of the taxes to be
assessed against and levied on the real property, and the same shall be
collected and reinforced in the same manner as taxes.
§ 215-6 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 215-7
10:458
Chapter 221
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Air pollution — See Ch. 21. Stormwater quality — See Ch. 432.
§ 221-1. Policy.
The designated best use of all groundwaters in the Township of Old Bridge
is for public and private water supply. Surface waters are needed for
recreational use and water supply. Therefore, it is hereby declared to be
the policy of the Township of Old Bridge to maintain its water resources
as near to their natural condition of purity as reasonably possible for the
safeguarding of the public health and, to that end, to require the use of all
available practical methods of preventing and controlling water pollution
from toxic and hazardous materials.
§ 221-2. Purpose.
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to safeguard the water resources
of the Township of Old Bridge from toxic or hazardous materials pollution
by controlling or abating pollution from such sources in existence when
this chapter is enacted and also by preventing further pollution from new
sources under a program which is consistent with the above-stated
declaration of policy.
§ 221-3. Definitions.
Whenever used in this chapter, unless otherwise expressly stated or unless
the context or subject matter requires a different meaning, the following
terms shall have the respective meanings set forth or indicated:
ABOVEGROUND — When referring to tanks, means 100% exposed above
the final ground elevation.
BULK STORAGE — The loose or bagged storage of dry or semidry materials.
DISCHARGE — To release by any means or to relinquish control in a manner
that could result in a release to the surface waters, groundwaters, surface
of the ground or below ground. "Discharge" includes but is not necessarily
limited to the following, either singly or in any combination:
A. Leaks from the failure of a storage facility.
B. Spills during transport or transfer of toxic or hazardous materials.
Disposal or storage of soils, dredge spoils, sand or debris containing
toxic or hazardous materials.
C.
§ 215-7 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 221-3
10:459
DOUBLE-WALLED — Constructed with more than one containment layer,
with space between the layers sufficient to allow monitoring of any leakage
into or out of the space.
HEALTH OFFICER — The official responsible for Health Code Enforcement
for the Township of Old Bridge.
IMPERVIOUS — A layer of natural and/or man-made material of sufficient
thickness, density and composition as to prevent the discharge into the
underlying groundwater or adjacent surface waters of any toxic or
hazardous substances for a period of at least as long as the maximum
anticipated time during which the toxic or hazardous substances will be in
contact with the material and sufficient to allow complete recovery of the
spilled product with minimum disturbance of the containment material.
NEW JERSEY STATE DISCHARGE STANDARDS — Standards of quality
and purity and special standards and groundwater quality standards and
effluent standards and/or limitations as established by the State of New
Jersey pursuant to the New Jersey Water Pollution Control Act (P.L. 1977, c.
74)116 and related codes, rules and regulations.
POLLUTION — The presence in the environment of conditions and/or
contaminants in quantities or of such characteristics, which are or may
be injurious to human, plant or animal life or to property, or which
unreasonably interfere with the use of resources and the comfortable
enjoyment of life and property throughout such areas of the Township that
shall be affected thereby.
Disposal to storm drains, cooling water, roof drains, sanitary systems
or any other drainage system or leaching system of toxic or hazardous
materials.
D.
Burial, land-spreading or dumping anywhere of toxic or hazardous
materials, including but not limited to landfill and scavenger facilities,
notwithstanding that the material so buried, spread or dumped was
containerized at the time of said burial, spreading or dumping.
E.
F. Passing of toxic or hazardous waste materials to any person.
Abandonment of containers, tanks, pipes, vehicles or premises
containing toxic or hazardous materials or residues. For the purpose of
this subsection, "abandonment" shall mean:
(1) Unattended; or
The relinquishment or termination of possession, ownership or
control without full disclosure to the new owner thereof of
containers, tanks, pipes, vehicles or premises containing toxic or
hazardous materials or residues, whether by vacating or by
disposition thereof, and shall not depend on a mere lapse of time.
(2)
G.
116. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 58:10A-1 et seq.
§ 221-3 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 221-3
10:460
PRODUCT-TIGHT — Impervious to the material which is or could be
contained therein so as to prevent the detectable seepage of the product
through the container. To be product-tight, the container shall be made of
a material that is not subject to physical or chemical deterioration by the
product being contained.
PROPERLY REGISTERED INDUSTRIAL WASTE SCAVENGER — A person
in the business of collecting industrial wastes who carries a current, valid
industrial waste collector registration issued by the State of New Jersey.
SINGLE-WALLED — Constructed with walls made of one continuous
thickness of material. Laminated, coated or clad materials shall be
considered as "single-walled."
STORAGE FACILITY — Tanks, pipes, vaults, buildings, yards, pavements
or fixed containers used or designed to be used, either singly or in any
combination thereof, for the storage and/or transmission of toxic or
hazardous materials or for the storage of portable containers containing
toxic or hazardous materials.
SUBSTANTIAL MODIFICATION — The construction of any additions to an
existing storage facility as defined under the definition of "storage facility,"
or restoration, refurbishment or renovation which:
TOXIC OR HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — Any substance, solution or mixture
which, because of its quality, quantity, concentration, physical, chemical
or infectious characteristics or any combination of the foregoing, presents
or may present an actual or potential hazard to human health or to the
drinking water supply, soil or atmosphere or otherwise damage the
environment. "Toxic and hazardous materials" shall include but not
necessarily be limited to:
TOXIC OR HAZARDOUS WASTES —
A. Increases or decreases the in-place storage capacity of the facility;
B. Alters the physical configuration; or
Impairs or affects the physical integrity of the facility or its monitoring
systems.
C.
Each and every substance, material or waste found listed in either
or both Part 116 and Part 261 of Title 40 of the Code of Federal
Regulations; or New Jersey codes, rules and regulations.
A.
B. Acids and alkalies below the pH range of three and above 11.
C. Petroleum products, including fuels and waste oils.
Any solid or semisolid material which if left to stand or if exposed to
water will leach out or, wholly or partially, dissolve forming a "toxic or
hazardous material" as defined in Subsections A through C above.
D.
Toxic or hazardous materials, as defined in the definition of "toxic or
hazardous material" above, generated by or as the result of operations
A.
§ 221-3 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 221-3
10:461
UNDERGROUND — When referring to tanks, when any portion is below the
final ground elevation.
§ 221-4. Powers of Health Officer.
in or the existence of any manufacturing or other industrial or
commercial establishment, which toxic or hazardous materials are not
actually used in a final product for sale, and shall include those toxic
or hazardous materials retained as by-products of the operations within
such manufacturing or other industrial or commercial establishment
for the purpose of recouping salvage value; or toxic or hazardous
materials generated and/or used within any residential premises, for
which special disposal is intended, and which waste is not considered
domestic wastewater acceptable for disposal to the waste water
treatment facility serving the residential premises.
B. All "toxic and hazardous wastes" are toxic and hazardous materials.
A. The Health Officer may make, or cause to be, in the Township of Old
Bridge, an investigation which, in his opinion, is desirable for enforcing
this chapter in controlling or reducing the potential for contamination
of the waters of the Township of Old Bridge from toxic or hazardous
materials.
B. The Health Officer may order the owner or any other person in
possession or control of any land, structure or equipment, or the agent
of such owner or other person, to take whatever action is necessary, in
the opinion of the Health Officer, to bring said land, structure or
equipment into compliance with the provisions of this chapter and any
standards or regulations promulgated thereunder. Such action may
include but is not necessarily limited to the following, either singly or in
any combination thereof:
(1) Ordering tank testing or the testing of the physical integrity of
pipes or any other part of a storage facility or ordering the physical
testing of the integrity of an entire storage facility.
(2) Ordering the removal of the contents of a tank, portable container,
storage facility or any part thereof.
(3) Ordering the removal or abandonment or reconstruction of any
installation, tank, storage facility or any part thereof installed in
contravention of any of the requirements of this chapter or any
standards or regulations promulgated thereunder.
(4) Ordering that physical improvements be performed on any tank,
storage facility or part thereof before permitting it to be returned
to service, including such improvements as tank-lining removal and
replacement and bottom and structural repairs.
(5) Ordering the drafting of and/or implementation of emergency
contingency plans if there is evidence that such plans may be
§ 221-3 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 221-4
10:462
§ 221-5. Prohibited discharges; transport and disposal; copy of
registration required.
§ 221-6. Construction and modification permits.
§ 221-7. Permits to operate.
necessary to protect the public from toxic or hazardous materials
stored at any particular facility.
(6) Ordering the posting of a performance bond in a sufficient amount
to guarantee that toxic or hazardous materials will not be
abandoned or stored in a matter violative of this chapter prior to
construction, expansion or operation of a storage facility within the
Township of Old Bridge to protect the public from the effects of
operating such a facility. The amount of this bond shall be reviewed
from time to time and increased or reduced in accordance with
current usage of the facility.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to discharge toxic or
hazardous materials in the Township of Old Bridge unless such
discharge is specifically in accordance with a New Jersey Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) permit or other permit issued
by or acceptable to the Health Officer for that purpose.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to pick up, transport or
dispose of toxic or hazardous waste materials in the Township of Old
Bridge without having a valid and appropriate New Jersey State
industrial waste collector registration and valid waste disposal
manifest.
C. It shall be unlawful for any industrial waste collector with a registration
issued by the New Jersey State Department of Environmental
Protection to fail to maintain a copy thereof on each vehicle operated by
said collector at all times.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to construct, install or
substantially modify a storage facility, or part thereof, without a valid
permit therefor issued by or acceptable to the Health Officer.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person or entity in possession of or acting
pursuant to a permit issued under this section to act, allow or cause any
act in contravention of any provision of the permit.
C. Any permit issued pursuant to this section shall be effective for the
specified duration of time indicated thereon, not to exceed one year
from the effective date thereof.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to use, cause to be used,
maintain or fill or cause to be filled with toxic or hazardous materials
any storage facility or part thereof without having registered all the
tanks at the facility on forms provided by the Health Officer and without
§ 221-4 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 221-7
10:463
§ 221-8. Exemptions.
having obtained a valid permit to operate such storage facility or part
thereof issued by or acceptable to the Health Officer.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person or entity in possession of or acting
pursuant to a permit issued pursuant to this section to act, permit or
cause any act in contravention of any provision of the permit.
C. No permit to operate a storage facility as required pursuant to this
section shall be issued by the Health Officer or shall be satisfactory to
the Health Officer unless and until the prospective permittee:
(1) Has provided a listing to the Health Officer of all of the toxic or
hazardous materials to be stored at the storage facility; and
(2) Has demonstrated that said storage facility complies with all of the
provisions of this chapter and all regulations and standards
promulgated pursuant to it applicable to said storage facility, based
upon submission of such written proof as is required by the Health
Officer.
D. Any permit issued pursuant to this section shall be effective only for the
specified duration of time indicated thereon, not to exceed five years
from the effective date thereof.
A. All storage facilities which meet all of the following criteria shall be
exempt from all provisions of this chapter except those contained in
§ 221-3, Definitions; § 221-4, Powers of Health Officer; § 221-5,
Prohibited discharges; transport and disposal; copy of registration
required; § 221-8, Exemptions; § 221-10A, New storage facilities;
§ 221-10E, General provisions and requirements; § 221-10G, Overfill
protection; § 221-11A(4), on overfill detection; § 221-11D(1) and (2),
Leaks; repairs; § 221-13B(1) and (4), Transfer operations; and § 221-20,
Waivers:
(1) The materials so stored are not toxic or hazardous waste
substances;
(2) The volume of the storage facility is less than 1,100 gallons;
(3) The facility is intended solely for the storage of kerosene, Number
2 fuel oil, Number 4 fuel oil, Number 6 fuel oil, diesel oil or
lubricating oil;
(4) The intended use of the product stored is solely for on-site heating
or intermittent stationary power production, such as stand-by
electricity generation or irrigation pump power; and
(5) The materials stored are not intended for resale.
B. All storage facilities no longer receiving the benefit of any exemption
but which were previously exempted from any or all provisions of this
§ 221-7 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 221-8
10:464
§ 221-9. Transfer of permits prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to transfer a permit issued pursuant
to §§ 221-6 and 221-7 of this chapter from one location to another, from
one storage facility to another or from one person to another. Any permit
transferred in violation of this section shall be deemed null and void and
without any effect whatsoever as of the date of said unlawful transfer.
However, upon making proper application, a new owner of a facility which
was previously operating under a valid permit may continue operation
under the terms of the old permit until such time as the new permit is issued
or denied.
§ 221-10. Underground storage facilities.
chapter shall be required to appropriately conform to all of the
provisions of this chapter and all regulations and standards
promulgated pursuant thereto by one year after loss of the exemption.
C. Tanks for the storage of Number 6 fuel oil or other petroleum products
of equivalent viscosity are exempt from the internal inspection and
tank-lining requirements. Further, storage facilities for these products
are exempted from the impervious-dike and enclosure-around-the-tank
requirements if, upon the determination of the Health Officer with
consultation with the Municipal Engineer, the location of the facility is
so situated that a spill could not run off into storm drains or surface
waters or contaminate aquifers used for groundwater recharge or
watershed areas part of a public water supply.
A. New storage facilities.
(1) All new storage facilities shall be limited for use to those chemicals
with a specific gravity of less than one and which are only slightly
soluble in water, such as oils and gasoline. For those floatable
materials, acceptable designs for tank construction include
cathodically protected steel; glass-fiber-reinforced plastic; steelclad-
with-glass-fiber-reinforced plastic; double-walled steel or
plastic; or other equivalent design approved by the Health Officer,
Construction Official and Township Engineer.
(2) Approval of design by the Health Officer, Construction Official and
Township Engineer is required before installation, and the
determination of equivalency or adequacy lies with the Health
Officer, Construction Official and Township Engineer.
(3) Design, construction, fabrication and installation of new
underground storage facilities shall be in accordance with
regulations and standards as they may be adopted by the Health
Officer, Construction Official and Township Engineer under this
chapter from time to time.
§ 221-8 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 221-10
10:465
(4) A new storage facility for all facilities not previously covered by this
section is one for which construction actually begins on or after the
date of effectiveness of this chapter, subject, however, to the
exemptions contained in § 221-8A.
(5) It shall be unlawful for any person to sell for use in the Township of
Old Bridge, install, use, put into service or maintain the existence
of any new underground storage facility or part thereof after the
date of effectiveness of this chapter if said new storage facility or
part thereof fails to conform to all of the provisions of Subsection
A(1), (2) and (3) above and all regulations and standards
promulgated thereunder; subject, however, to the exemptions
contained in § 221-8A.
B. Existing storage facilities.
(1) Any existing underground storage facility is one that exists, in
whole or in part, below the surface of the ground or for which
construction actually begins prior to the date of effectiveness of
this chapter.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to substantially modify or cause
the substantial modification of any existing underground storage
facility or part thereof without complying with the provisions of
Subsection A above and all regulations and standards promulgated
thereunder.
(3) It shall be unlawful to use or maintain the existence of any existing
underground storage facility beyond January 1, 1997, which is
intended for use with toxic or hazardous materials with a specific
gravity of less than one and which are only slightly soluble in water,
such as oils and gasoline, without modifying said storage facility so
as to comply with all of the provisions of Subsection A above and all
regulations and standards promulgated thereunder.
(4) It shall be unlawful to use or maintain the existence of any existing
underground storage facility beyond January 1, 1989, which is
intended for use with any toxic or hazardous materials other than
those with a specific gravity of less than one and which are only
slightly soluble in water, such as oils and gasoline, without
modifying said storage facility so as to comply with all of the
provisions of Subsection A above and all regulations and standards
promulgated thereunder.
C. Abandonment.
(1) Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms
shall have the meanings indicated:
ABANDONED STORAGE FACILITY OR PART THEREOF — One
which has remained out of service for two years or more or which
has been declared by the owner to be abandoned.
§ 221-10 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 221-10
10:466
DISCOVERY — Either actual discovery or knowledge of the
existence of the abandoned storage facility or part thereof or
possession of sufficient knowledge of the facts and circumstances
involved so that the existence of the abandoned storage facility or
part thereof should have been discovered or known of.
OUT OF SERVICE — Substantially empty, meaning 5% or less filled;
or not in use, meaning no regular filling or drawing; or not being
maintained, meaning lacking adherence to the requirements of this
chapter; or uncontrolled, meaning not attended or secured; or any
combination thereof.
(2) Unlawful acts.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to use or maintain the
existence of an abandoned underground storage facility or part
thereof.
(b) It shall be unlawful for anyone to sell or transfer to another an
improperly abandoned underground storage facility or land
containing an improperly abandoned underground storage
facility if there exists any reasonable evidence of the existence
of such a facility, unless the purchasing party has been made
fully aware of the presence of such facility or evidence.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person to repair, alter or prepare
for use any abandoned storage facility without first obtaining a
permit to construct from the Department of Community
Development with review by the Health Officer.117
(d) It shall be unlawful for the owner or other person in possession
of any real property, building or place or vehicle used for the
storage or handling of toxic materials to abandon a storage
facility. All such storage facilities shall be decommissioned in
accordance with a plan approved by Department of Community
Development and Health Officer. Abandoned facilities shall be
decommissioned and secured within a reasonable period of
time as determined by the Health Officer. All hazardous
materials shall be stored or disposed of in environmentally safe
manner in accordance with Department of Environmental
Protection and Environmental Protection Agency
regulations.118
D. Testing and inspection.
(1) All existing underground storage facilities or parts thereof which
do not meet the construction standards in Subsection A above must
be tested and inspected in accordance with the schedule set forth
117. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
118. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 221-10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 221-10
10:467
below. It shall be unlawful for any existing underground storage
facility owner, operator or lessee to fail to test his tanks and file an
acceptable certificate of test completion with the Health Officer in
accordance with the following schedule:
Testing Schedule (X) for Existing Underground Tanks
Age of System by 1983
Year 1-4 5-9 10-14 15-19
20 or
More
1 Year of effectiveness of this chapter
2 X
3 X
4 X X
5 X
6 X X X
7 X
8 X X
9 X
10 X X X X
11
12 X X X
13 X
14 X X X
15 X X
16 Full compliance for all facilities
(2) If for any reason specified testing cannot be satisfactorily
performed, the tank must be removed from service or brought up to
the standards of Subsection A by the first scheduled test date.
(3) The final test of the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA),
Recommended Practice No. 329 or other test of equivalent or
superior accuracy as approved by the Health Officer must be used
to comply with the testing and inspection requirements of
Subsection D(1).
(4) Testing shall be done by qualified personnel, and the results of the
testing shall be filed within 30 days after completion of the storage
facility. No certificate of test completion shall be acceptable to the
Health Officer to indicate satisfactory compliance with the testing
requirements of this subsection if the qualifications of the tester
have not been accepted by the Health Officer prior to the test. No
certificate of test completion shall be acceptable to the Health
Officer if the test and inspection were not performed in accordance
§ 221-10 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 221-10
10:468
with Subsection D(3) of this section and in accordance with any
regulations and standards which may be promulgated pursuant
thereto.
(5) The certificate of test completion shall be filed on a form provided
by the Health Officer, and a copy of such form, completed, shall be
kept by the storage facility owner, operator or lessee and by the
tester for a period of not less than five years from the date of its
issuance.
(6) Certificates of test completion shall contain a legally authorized
form notice to the effect that false statements made knowingly
therein are punishable pursuant to § 221-25 of this chapter.
(7) A certificate of test completion not properly completed and/or not
subscribed by the tester shall not be acceptable to the Health
Officer.
E. General provisions and requirements.
(1) It shall be unlawful to cause or permit a leaking underground
storage facility or part thereof to remain in service or to continue to
retain its toxic or hazardous contents after the owner, operator or
lessee of said storage facility or part thereof knows or should have
known of the existence of the leak therein.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to repair or to permit the repair,
in place, of any underground storage facility or part thereof which
has leaked or has otherwise failed, for the purpose of reusing said
storage facility, unless:
(a) Such repair will result in the storage facility or part thereof
complying with the requirements of Subsection A above and all
regulations and standards promulgated thereunder;
(b) Such repair occurs pursuant to plans therefor previously
submitted to and approved by the Health Officer; and
(c) Repaired tanks shall be tested in accordance with cited
procedures prior to returning to service.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any person to use, maintain or put into
service any underground storage facility or part thereof without
first complying with the testing and inspection requirements of
Subsection D above and regulations and standards promulgated
thereunder.
F. Monitoring and leak detection.
(1) All underground storage facilities or parts thereof must be
equipped with means of calculating product delivery and
consumption. Accurate records must be kept of all deliveries and
consumption, and the figures reconciled weekly in an approved
§ 221-10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 221-10
10:469
manner unless a less frequent or more frequent schedule is allowed
by the Health Officer.
(2) All underground storage facilities or parts thereof must be
provided with a means of monitoring frequently and accurately for
any leakage and spillage that might occur. All leak-detection
systems and tanks shall be monitored by the facility operator at
least on a weekly basis, and the results recorded and kept with the
product records. All leak-detection systems shall be approved by
the Health Officer, Construction Official or Township Engineer. The
leak-detection system shall be periodically inspected to ensure that
it is functioning properly. Permanent records of all monitoring shall
be kept for a period of five years.
(3) It shall be unlawful for the owner or other person in possession or
control of a storage facility or part thereof to fail to comply with any
of the requirements of this subsection and of any regulations and
standards promulgated pursuant thereto.
G. Overfill protection.
(1) A means of overfill protection shall be provided for all new
underground storage facilities or parts thereof and for all
replacement underground storage facilities or parts thereof.
Overfill protection shall consist of either an overfill-prevention
device or a product-tight containment capable of intercepting and
preventing the release to the ground or groundwater of an overfill
spill.
(2) It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator or lessee to fail to
provide satisfactory overfill protection for any new underground
storage facility or part thereof in accordance with the provisions of
this subsection and any regulations and standards promulgated
pursuant thereto.
H. Removal from service.
(1) It shall be unlawful for the owner or any other person in possession
or control of an underground storage facility or part thereof to
remove it from service unless:
(a) Said storage facility or part thereof is declared abandoned,
emptied immediately and removed within 90 days of so
declaring and is disposed of after first rendering it vapor free
and by sufficiently perforating it so as to render it unfit for
further use; or nonhazardous for resale;
(b) Said storage facility or part thereof is declared abandoned,
emptied immediately and removed within 90 days for reuse for
the storage of toxic or hazardous materials after having met all
of the requirements of Subsection A and all regulations and
standards promulgated pursuant thereto;
§ 221-10 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 221-10
10:470
§ 221-11. Outdoor aboveground storage facilities.
(c) Said storage facility or part thereof is declared abandoned,
emptied immediately and removed within 90 days for the
storage of other than toxic and hazardous materials in which
case the facility shall be emptied, cleaned of all residue and
made safe and vapor free;
(d) Said storage facility is declared temporarily out of service and
maintained in accordance with Subsection H(3) of this section;
(e) Said storage facility or part thereof is declared abandoned,
emptied immediately and made inert by completely filling with
sand or concrete within 90 days; or
(f) Said storage facility is declared to be suspected of leaking and
maintained in accordance with Subsection E.
(2) Any declaration of facility abandonment or of taking a facility
temporarily out of or returning a facility to service must be made to
the Health Officer in writing.
(3) It shall be unlawful for the owner or any other person in possession
or control of any underground storage facility or part thereof to
render it temporarily out of service unless said storage facility or
part thereof is planned to be returned to active service within two
years of the placement of it temporarily out of service, and it is
returned to active service within said two years, it is emptied of its
contents immediately, and the fill line, gauge opening and pump
suction are capped and secured against tampering, and the vent
line is left open and the facility is otherwise maintained. No facility
in a temporarily out of service condition shall be returned to use
prior to notification to the Health Officer and prior to the successful
completion of any tightness testing due under Subsection D.
(4) It shall be unlawful for anyone to place toxic or hazardous materials
in a facility which is temporarily out of service.
(5) All toxic and hazardous materials shall be removed, transported or
disposed of in an environmentally safe manner and in accordance
with all rules and regulations of the Department of Environmental
Protection and the Environmental Protection Agency.
A. New storage facilities.
(1) For the purpose of this section, a new aboveground storage facility
shall be one for which construction actually begins on or after
December 9, 1983.
(2) It shall be unlawful to fabricate, construct, install or use or
maintain any new aboveground storage facility or part thereof in a
manner which will allow the discharge of a toxic or hazardous
§ 221-10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 221-11
10:471
material to the ground, groundwaters or surface waters of the
Township of Old Bridge.
(3) It shall be unlawful to fabricate, construct, install, use or maintain
any new aboveground storage facility or part thereof without
having constructed around and under it an impervious containment
and dike enclosing the storage facility or part thereof, conforming
to the following requirements:
(a) The volume of the diked area shall be at least 110% of the
volume of the largest tank contained therein, excluding the
volume below the dike level occupied by other tanks.
Additional volume up to 10% of the total volume of all other
tanks or vessels contained in the diked area may be required if
the configuration, arrangement and spacing of the tanks and
dikes do not meet National Fire Protection Association
standards.
(b) The dikes and the entire area enclosed by the dikes, including
the area under the tanks, shall be made impervious to the types
of products expected to be stored in the tanks. A tank cannot
be switched from one product to another unless the barrier is
impervious to the new material stored.
(c) Drainage of precipitation from within the diked area shall be
controlled in a manner that will prevent any toxic or hazardous
material from entering the ground, groundwaters or surface
waters of the Township of Old Bridge.
(4) It shall be unlawful to construct, fabricate, install, use or maintain
any new aboveground storage facility without providing a positive
means of detecting an overfilling condition therein before any
spillage can occur, which detection system shall include, but shall
not necessarily be limited to, both visual and audible alarms at a
point on the storage facility most frequently manned. The overflow
point must be clearly visible to the operator filling the facility or the
operator at the receiving facility where possible. If not possible,
adequate means must be provided to immediately detect an
overflow.
(5) It shall be unlawful to fabricate, construct, install, use or maintain
any new aboveground storage facility or part thereof without
conforming to all regulations and standards promulgated pursuant
to this section, related to such new storage facilities.
(6) It shall be unlawful to fabricate, construct, install, use or maintain
any new aboveground storage facility sitting on the ground and
making contact therewith or partially buried in the ground and
making contact therewith, or part thereof, unless and until the
exterior surface of the areas in contact with the ground are
cathodically protected in conformance with a design approved by
the Construction Official.
§ 221-11 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 221-11
10:472
B. Existing storage facilities.
(1) An existing aboveground storage facility is one for which
construction actually begins prior to December 9, 1983.
(2) Commencing January 1, 1992, it shall be unlawful for any person to
use, maintain or fill with toxic or hazardous materials any existing
aboveground storage facility or part thereof without conforming to
all of the requirements of Subsection A above and all regulations
and standards promulgated pursuant thereto, with one exception.
It will not be required to place an impervious barrier directly
beneath an existing tank that is sitting on or partially in the ground
and is too large to be moved. In this case, the interior bottom of the
tank shall be coated with a glass-fiber-reinforced-epoxy coating or
approved equivalent. In achieving the above compliance, the
following schedule shall be adhered to:
(a) By January 1, 1986, all interior coating of facilities shall be
completed.
(b) By January 1, 1986, all facilities shall be protected against
overfill.
(c) By January 1, 1988, installation of cathodic protection shall be
completed on all facilities in contact with the ground which
were built prior to 1968.
(d) By January 1, 1989, installation of cathodic protection shall be
completed on all facilities in contact with the ground which
were built between 1968 and 1973.
(e) By January 1, 1990, installation of cathodic protection shall be
completed on all facilities in contact with the ground which
were built between 1973 and 1978.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any person to use, maintain or fill with toxic
or hazardous materials an existing aboveground storage facility or
part thereof without complying with the following inspection
schedule and all regulations and standards promulgated thereto
and without submitting to the Health Officer a statement of proof of
inspection:
(a) Any owner or other person in possession or control of an
aboveground storage facility or part thereof shall have said
tanks and vessels inspected and shall file a proof of inspection
with the Health Officer by January 1, 1986. Where interior
coating has not yet been applied, such inspection will be
performed before coating.
(b) For the purpose of this section, "inspection" means the
inspection of all aboveground tanks and other vessels for the
§ 221-11 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 221-11
10:473
storage of toxic or hazardous materials constituting an
aboveground storage facility or part thereof.
(c) An inspection of an existing aboveground storage facility of
greater than ten-thousand-gallon capacity or part thereof as
required by this subsection shall be performed in accordance
with a written protocol submitted to and approved by the
Health Officer by an authorized tank inspection firm or person
or by a professional engineer licensed to practice professional
engineering in the State of New Jersey, and it shall be
performed in compliance with any regulations and standards
promulgated pursuant to this section relating to such
inspections.
(d) Aboveground storage facilities or parts thereof sitting on the
ground and in contact therewith or partially buried in the
ground and in contact therewith shall be emptied and cleaned
to facilitate inspection of portions thereof not accessible from
the outside.
(e) Proofs of inspection must be filed with the Health Officer on a
form provided by the Health Officer or one acceptably
equivalent thereto, within 30 days of each inspection and
before the tank is refilled, and a copy of such form shall be kept
and maintained by both the owner or other person in
possession or control of the aboveground storage facility or
part thereof and the inspector for a period of not less than five
years from the date of the inspection. The proof of inspection
form shall be subscribed by both the owner or other person in
possession or control of the aboveground storage facility
inspected and the inspector. This proof of inspection form shall
contain a legally authorized form notice to the effect that false
statements made knowingly therein are punishable pursuant to
§ 221-25 of this chapter.
(4) It shall be unlawful for any person to substantially modify or cause
the substantial modification of any aboveground storage facility or
part thereof without complying with the provisions of Subsection A
above and all regulations and standards promulgated pursuant
thereto.
C. General provisions.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon an aboveground
storage facility or part thereof without first cleaning out all residue,
venting it until dry and safe and leaving all of the hatches open or
with all connections severed and valves blank flanged. For the
purpose of this subsection, an "abandoned aboveground storage
facility or part thereof" means one that has remained substantially
empty and unattended for one year or more without being declared
§ 221-11 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 221-11
10:474
temporarily out of service or has been temporarily out of service
for two years or more.
(2) It shall be unlawful for the owner or other person in possession or
control of an aboveground storage facility or part thereof to remove
it from service unless:
(a) Said storage facility or part thereof is disposed of as junk by
first rendering it vapor free and by sufficiently perforating it so
as to render it unfit for further use and demolishing it and
removing it from the site; or
(b) Said storage facility or part thereof is demolished for sale or
use elsewhere, in which case it must be first cleaned and made
vapor free to be safe in transit; and such reuse shall be in
accordance with all pertinent portions of this chapter if
relocation is to be within the Township of Old Bridge.
(c) Said storage facility is declared abandoned; or
(d) Said storage facility is declared temporary out of service; and
(e) The Health Officer has been notified of the intended status of
removal from service.
(3) It shall be unlawful for the owner or other person in possession or
control of an aboveground storage facility or part thereof to render
it temporarily out of service unless said storage facility or part
thereof is planned to be returned to active service within two years
of its placement temporarily out of service, and it is returned to
active service within said two years pursuant to the provisions of
Subsections C(6) and (7) following, and it is drained of all liquid,
and the fill line, gauge opening and discharge line are capped and
blind flanged and secured against tampering, and the vent line is
left open.
(4) It shall be unlawful for anyone to place toxic or hazardous materials
in an abandoned or temporarily out of service aboveground storage
facility.
(5) It shall be unlawful for any person to bring an abandoned
aboveground storage facility back into service without meeting all
of the requirements of Subsection A above. No abandoned facility
shall be brought back into service without a complete inspection
acceptable to the Health Officer.
(6) It shall be unlawful for any person to bring a temporarily out of
service facility back into use after January 1, 1991, (the year eight
years from the year of effectiveness of this chapter) without first
meeting all the requirements of Subsection A above.
(7) An aboveground storage facility properly declared to be
temporarily out of service may be returned to service prior to 1991
§ 221-11 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 221-11
10:475
(the year eight years from the year of effectiveness of this chapter)
by written notification to the Health Officer if the requirements of
Subsection B(2) have been met.
(8) It shall be unlawful for the owner or other person in possession or
control of an aboveground storage facility or part thereof to fail to
empty, clean and inspect pursuant to Subsection B(3)(c) above, to
file proof of inspection pursuant to Subsection B(3)(e) above, to
leak test and/or to recoat if necessary every seven years each tank
or vessel for the storage of toxic or hazardous materials within said
storage facility or part thereof.
(9) It shall be unlawful for any person to replace or cause the
replacement of any aboveground storage facility or part thereof for
any reason without complying with the new storage requirements
of Subsection A above and without complying with the inspection
and proof of inspection requirements of Subsection B(3)(c) and
B(3)(e), respectively.
(10) It shall be unlawful for any person to use, maintain, construct,
fabricate, modify or install any aboveground storage facility or part
thereof without conforming to all plans and specifications
submitted to and approved by the Health Officer, Township
Engineer and Construction Official prior to such use, maintenance,
construction, fabrication, modification or installation.
D. Leaks; repairs.
(1) When an aboveground storage facility or part thereof is found to be
leaking, it must immediately be emptied of all contents therein
contained and removed from service unless approval is specifically
granted by the Health Officer to do otherwise.
(2) It shall be unlawful for the owner or other person in possession or
control of a leaking aboveground storage facility or part thereof to
cause or permit it to remain in service or to continue to retain its
toxic or hazardous contents after said owner or other person knows
or should have known of the existence of the leak.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any person to reuse and repair or cause the
reuse and repair of an aboveground storage facility or part thereof
which is leaking or which has leaked without:
(a) Performing or having said repairs performed in accordance
with a written protocol submitted to an approved by the Health
Officer prior to said repairs; and
(b) Inspecting or having said leaking storage facility or part
thereof inspected by a person whose qualifications are
acceptable to the Health Officer, with such inspection in
accordance with Subsection B(3)(c) above and filing a proof of
inspection in accordance with Subsection B(3)(e) above, with
§ 221-11 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 221-11
10:476
§ 221-12. Piping, fittings and connections.
such inspection performed and proof of inspection filed prior
to reuse of the storage facility or filed prior to reuse of the
storage facility or part thereof before filling it with a toxic or
hazardous material after repairs have been effected.
A. New installations.
(1) For the purpose of this section, "new installations" means piping,
pipelines, fittings, connections for use with toxic or hazardous
materials for which installation or construction actually begins on
or after December 9, 1983.
(2) All new installations shall be:
(a) Fabricated, constructed and installed in a manner that will
prevent the escape of the toxic or hazardous materials
contained therein to the ground, groundwater, surface waters
or air of the Township of Old Bridge.
(b) Protected against corrosion by the use of noncorrosive
materials, cathodic protection with coatings approved by the
Township Engineer, Construction Official, Health Officer or the
functional equivalent of the foregoing options approved by the
Township Engineer, Construction Official, Health Officer.
(c) Designed, constructed and installed with access points as
required by the Health Officer to permit periodic pressure
testing of all underground piping without the need of extensive
excavation.
(d) Designed, constructed and installed with a simple, effective,
reliable means of monitoring the new installation for leakage,
including a warning device to indicate the presence of a leak,
spill or other failure or breach of integrity for piping installed
underground or in areas where piping is not clearly visible.
(e) Constructed of double-walled pipe or be constructed in
product-tight trenches or galleries where the piping is buried
or below grade, except that single-walled piping will be
allowed for facilities containing products with a specific gravity
less than one and only slightly soluble in water, such as
gasoline and fuel oil.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any person to fabricate, construct, install,
use or maintain or to cause the fabrication, construction,
installation, use or maintenance of any new substantial installation
or part thereof for use with toxic or hazardous materials:
§ 221-11 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 221-12
10:477
(a) Without previously having submitted plans therefor to the
Health Officer and without having received approval of said
plans;
(b) Without complying with the plans submitted to and approved
by the Health Officer as required in Subsection A(3)(a) above;
and
(c) Without complying with the provisions of Subsections A(1) and
(2) above and any regulations and standards promulgated
thereunder.
B. Existing installations.
(1) For the purpose of this section, "existing installations" shall mean
piping, fittings and connections for use with toxic or hazardous
materials for which installations or construction actually begins
prior to the date of this chapter.
(2) Commencing January 1, 1997, it shall be unlawful to use or
maintain any existing installation or part thereof in association with
any storage facility or part thereof unless said existing installation
complies with all of the provisions of Subsection B above and all
regulations and standards promulgated pursuant thereto.
(3) It shall be unlawful for the owner or other person in possession or
control of any existing piping installation or part thereof associated
with any storage facility or part thereof to fail to pressure test said
existing piping or part thereof whenever the associated storage
facility or part thereof is tested.
(4) It shall be unlawful for the owner or other person in possession or
control of an existing installation or part thereof when testing or
contracting to test said installation or part pursuant to Subsection
B(3) above to:
(a) Fail to test or have said installation or part thereof tested by a
person whose qualifications are acceptable to the Health
Officer;
(b) Fail to test or have tested said installation in a manner
acceptable to the Health Officer;
(c) Fail to test or have installation tested in accordance with a
written protocol submitted to and approved by the Health
Officer prior to said test;
(d) Fail to test or have tested said installation in accordance with
any regulations or standards which may be promulgated under
this subsection relating to said testing; and
(e) Fail to submit to the Health Officer within 30 days of said test a
completed certificate of test completion form, pursuant to
§ 221-12 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 221-12
10:478
§ 221-10D(3) through (6) and any regulations and standards
promulgated thereunder.
C. General provisions.
(1) Notwithstanding the requirements of Subsection B(3) above, it
shall be unlawful for the owner or other person in possession or
control of a new or existing installation or part thereof not to test
said installation or part in accordance with the procedures set forth
in Subsection B(3) above and in all regulations and standards
promulgated thereunder, whenever the Health Officer has
determined that such a test is necessary or whenever the Health
Officer has ordered that such a test be performed.
(2) Whenever an existing or new installation or part thereof is found to
be leaking, it must immediately be emptied of all contents therein
contained and removed from service.
(a) It shall be unlawful for the owner or other person in possession
or control of said leaking installation or part thereof to cause or
permit it to remain in service or to continue to retain its toxic
or hazardous contents after said owner or other person knows
or should have known of the existence of the leak.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to repair or cause the repair
of any new or existing installation or part thereof which has
leaked or otherwise failed without performing said repairs or
having said repairs performed in a manner approved by the
Health Officer.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person to reuse or cause the reuse
of any new or existing installation or part thereof which had
leaked or otherwise failed without repairing said installation
pursuant to the provisions of Subsection C(2)(b) above and all
regulations and standards promulgated thereunder.
(d) It shall be unlawful for any person to reuse or to cause the
reuse of any new or existing installation or part thereof which
had leaked or otherwise failed without repairing said
installation or part so as to conform to the requirements of
Subsection A above and all regulations and standards
promulgated thereunder.
(e) It shall be unlawful for any person to reuse or cause the reuse
of any new or existing installation or part thereof which had
leaked or otherwise failed without inspecting or having said
installation or part inspected subsequent to the completion of
any repairs but prior to said reuse by a person whose
qualifications are acceptable to the Health Officer in
accordance with § 221-11B(3)(d) and any regulations and
standards promulgated thereunder and without filing with the
Health Officer a proof of inspection prior to said reuse in
§ 221-12 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 221-12
10:479
§ 221-13. Transfer of toxic or hazardous materials.
accordance with § 221-11B(3)(e) and any regulations and
standards promulgated thereunder.
A. Transfer facilities.
(1) "Transfer facilities" means truck fill stands and/or any other facility
for the loading or unloading of toxic or hazardous materials.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to fabricate, construct or install
a transfer facility or part thereof:
(a) Without first submitting plans therefor to the Health Officer
and without first obtaining the Health Officer's approval
thereof;
(b) Without fabricating, constructing and installing said transfer
facility or part thereof in accordance with the plans submitted
and approved pursuant to Subsection A(2)(a) above;
(c) Without providing a simple, effective, reliable means of
monitoring the transfer facility or part thereof for leakage or
spillage, including a warning device; and
(d) Without providing a level of spill protection equivalent to that
provided by a fill stand area completely paved and curbed with
an impervious material and drained to a holding tank of
adequate size to contain any spill that could reasonably be
expected to occur from the normal operation of the facility and
roofed so as to exclude precipitation which would otherwise
tend to fill the holding tank.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, maintain or use a
transfer facility or part thereof so as to permit the escape
therefrom of toxic or hazardous materials to the ground,
groundwaters, surface waters or air of the Township of Old Bridge.
All holding tanks associated with spill control shall be maintained
in an empty condition at all times to provide maximum storage
capacity at the time of a spill.
(4) It shall be unlawful for any person to fabricate, construct, install,
use, operate or maintain any transfer facility or part thereof
without doing so in accordance with all regulations and standards
pertaining thereto which may be promulgated by the Health
Officer.
B. Transfer operations.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to transfer, cause the transfer or
permit the transfer of toxic or hazardous materials to or from a
storage facility, part thereof or vehicle, where conditions at the
transfer facility are inadequate at the time of said transfer to
§ 221-12 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 221-13
10:480
§ 221-14. Indoor storage facilities.
ensure a safe transfer operation without the occurrence of spills,
leaks or accidents.
(2) Failure of a transfer facility to conform and comply with the
provisions of Subsection A and all regulations and standards
promulgated thereunder shall constitute a rebuttable presumption
that conditions at said transfer facility are inadequate for the
purposes of Subsection B(1) above.
(3) The transfer of toxic or hazardous materials to any storage facility
or part thereof which does not comply with all provisions of this
chapter applicable thereto and any regulations and standards
promulgated under this chapter applicable thereto shall constitute
a rebuttable presumption that conditions at said transfer facility
are inadequate for the purposes of Subsection B(1) above.
(4) Conditions at the transfer facility shall be deemed to be inadequate
at the time of a transfer if:
(a) The transfer facility is constructed so that all possible points of
overflow are not visible from the loading and unloading
locations; or
(b) The truck, storage facility or part thereof being delivered to
does not have adequate capacity to contain the amount of toxic
or hazardous material being transferred or to be transferred,
or if a person performing or causing said transfer does not
ensure by some reliable means that the truck, storage facility
or part thereof has adequate capacity to contain the amount of
toxic or hazardous material being transferred or to be
transferred.
A. General provisions. An indoor storage facility is specifically intended to
include within its meaning all tanks, vessels and appurtenant plumbing
which contain or are to contain or be used for the transmission of toxic
or hazardous materials regardless of the volume of said tanks and
vessels and regardless of the duration of time said tanks and vessels
may contain the toxic or hazardous materials and regardless of their
use.
(1) All processing baths and tanks, including dip tanks and rinse tanks
and tanks associated with wastewater treatment located indoors,
shall constitute an indoor storage facility or part thereof.
(2) All portable containers and tanks with an individual volume of
greater than 90 gallons, stored or located indoors and used to
contain toxic or hazardous materials, shall be deemed to be an
indoor storage facility or part thereof and shall be subject to all of
the provisions of this section and any regulations and standards
§ 221-13 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 221-14
10:481
promulgated pursuant hereto, and not the provisions of § 221-15
and the regulations and standards created thereunder.
B. New storage facilities.
(1) A new indoor storage facility or part thereof is one for which
construction, fabrication or installation actually begins on or after
December 9, 1983, or one consisting of portable containers and/or
tanks each with an individual volume in excess of 90 gallons, for
which indoor storage of said portable containers and/or tanks
containing toxic or hazardous materials actually begins on or after
December 9, 1983.
(2) It shall be unlawful to fabricate, construct or install a new indoor
storage facility or part thereof unless:
(a) Plans and specifications for said storage facility have been first
submitted to and approved by the Health Officer;
(b) Said fabrication, construction or installation is accomplished in
accordance with the approved plans and specifications
submitted pursuant to Subsection B(2)(a) above;
(c) Said fabrication, construction or installation is accomplished in
accordance with all regulations and standards which may be
promulgated under this subsection;
(d) The fabrication, construction or installation provides for
impervious secondary containment for the new storage facility
or part thereof equal to or greater than 110% of the entire
volume to be contained;
(e) Said storage facility or part thereof is fabricated, constructed
or installed in a manner which will prevent the release into the
ground, groundwater, surface waters or air of the Township of
Old Bridge of any toxic or hazardous materials;
(f) Any open tanks or vessels containing or to contain toxic or
hazardous materials within the storage facility or part thereof
in a building equipped with a sprinkler system are provided
with head deflectors or automatic covers or the equivalent
thereof acceptable to the Health Officer to prevent the
overflow of the tanks by reason of flow from the sprinkler
system; and
(g) High level alarms or other adequate means of detecting an
impending overfill condition have been provided for all tanks
not readily visible by the operator controlling filling.
(3) It shall be unlawful to operate, maintain or use a new indoor
storage facility or part thereof unless:
§ 221-14 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 221-14
10:482
§ 221-15. Portable containers and tanks.
(a) Said storage facility or part thereof has been fabricated,
constructed and installed in accordance with all of the
provisions of Subsection B above and any regulations and
standards promulgated thereunder;
(b) Said storage facility or part thereof has been inspected prior to
said operation, maintenance or use pursuant to the provisions
of § 221-11B(3)(c) and any regulations and standards
promulgated thereunder;
(c) Proof of inspection is filed with the Health Officer within 30
days of the inspection conducted pursuant to Subsection
B(3)(b) above and such filing occurs prior to said operation,
maintenance or use, and said proof of inspection conforms to
all of the provisions of § 221-11B(3)(e) and any regulations and
standards promulgated thereunder; and
(d) Said storage facility or part thereof is operated, used or
maintained in a manner which will prevent the discharge of
toxic or hazardous materials therefrom into the ground,
groundwaters, surface waters or air of the Township of Old
Bridge.
(4) It shall be unlawful to repair and reuse a new indoor storage facility
or part thereof without complying with all of the provisions of
Subsection B(2) above and all regulations and standards
promulgated pursuant thereto.
C. Existing storage facilities.
(1) An existing indoor storage facility includes all indoor storage
facilities or parts thereof as described in Subsection A above, not
within the class of storage facilities described in Subsection B(1)
above as new indoor storage facilities.
(2) Commencing December 9, 1983, it shall be unlawful to fabricate,
construct, install, modify, operate, maintain or use any indoor
storage facility or part thereof which does not conform to all of the
provisions of Subsection B above and all regulations and standards
promulgated thereunder.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, maintain or use an
existing indoor storage facility or part thereof in a manner which
will allow the discharge of toxic or hazardous materials therefrom
into the ground, groundwaters, surface waters or air of the
Township of Old Bridge.
A. Storage facilities.
§ 221-14 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 221-15
10:483
(1) It shall be unlawful to fabricate, construct, install or otherwise
create a storage facility or part thereof for portable containers and
tanks containing toxic or hazardous materials if the facility has to
be used for more than 30 days without:
(a) First having submitted satisfactory plans and specifications
therefor to the Health Officer;
(b) Constructing, installing, fabricating or otherwise creating said
storage facility in accordance with the reports and plans
submitted pursuant to Subsection A(1)(a) above;
(c) Constructing, installing, fabricating or otherwise creating said
storage facility so as to prevent the discharge of any of the
toxic or hazardous contents of the portable containers therein
to the ground, groundwaters, surface waters or air of the
Township of Old Bridge;
(d) Providing a chemically resistant pad on which to place the
portable containers or tanks, impervious to the toxic or
hazardous materials being stored in said containers and tanks;
and
(e) Constructing, fabricating, installing or otherwise creating a
storage facility or part thereof in accordance with all
regulations and standards promulgated under this subsection.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to use, maintain or operate a
storage facility containing portable containers or tanks for the
storage of toxic or hazardous materials without:
(a) Preventing the discharge of any of the toxic or hazardous
contents of the portable containers or tanks to the ground,
groundwaters, surface waters or air of the Township of Old
Bridge;
(b) Properly securing the portable containers or tanks containing
toxic or hazardous materials so as to protect them from
vandalism, unauthorized access and damage by traffic,
machinery or falling objects;
(c) Storing the portable containers and tanks containing toxic or
hazardous materials indoors, except where such storage is
prevented by fire regulations or where sufficient evidence is
presented that physical or financial constraints of the facility
make indoor storage impractical. Waiver of the indoor storage
requirement shall be only by permission of the Health Officer;
(d) Protecting any outdoor storage of portable containers or tanks
containing toxic or hazardous materials from damage from
heat, cold, rust and other weather-related conditions and
vandalism or unauthorized access;
§ 221-15 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 221-15
10:484
(e) Complying with all regulations and standards promulgated
relating to the maintenance, use or operation of a storage
facility containing portable containers containing toxic or
hazardous materials;
(f) Complying with all of the provisions of Subsection B below and
any regulations and standards promulgated thereunder.
B. Handling of portable containers or tanks. It shall be unlawful for the
owner or other person in possession or control of a storage facility
containing portable containers or tanks which contain toxic or
hazardous materials to:
(1) Stack said portable containers or tanks more than two high without
using a properly designed storage rack for that purpose or to
attempt any stacking without adequate equipment;
(2) Store said portable containers or tanks in a manner so as to prevent
all sides thereof from being available for inspection;
(3) Fail to maintain current inventory records indicating deliveries,
consumption, sale and final disposal of all toxic or hazardous
materials stored in portable containers or tanks and to maintain
said records for five years from the occurrence recorded;
(4) Fail to handle said portable containers or tanks in accordance with
any regulations and standards promulgated pursuant to this
subsection; and
(5) Store said portable containers in numbers in excess of the
maximum allowed by the approved design of the storage facility.
C. Inspections.
(1) Times and records of inspection.
(a) It shall be unlawful for the owner or other person in possession
or control of a storage facility containing portable containers
or tanks for the storage of toxic or hazardous materials to fail
to have said facility or part thereof containing said portable
containers or tanks inspected:
[1] Prior to application for the renewal of a permit to operate a
storage facility issued pursuant to § 221-7;
[2] Subsequent to any substantial modification of the storage
facility or part thereof containing said portable containers
or tanks and prior to the using or putting into service a
storage facility or part thereof; and
[3] Prior to the using or putting into service said storage
facility or part thereof after repairs had been performed on
it.
§ 221-15 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 221-15
10:485
§ 221-16. Bulk storage of toxic or hazardous materials.
(b) There should be daily inspection and records maintained
documenting the inspection and who did the inspection by
owner/operator. Also there should be periodic unannounced
inspections by the Health Officer.
(2) It shall be unlawful to fail to have the inspections required by
Subsection C(1) above performed in accordance with the provisions
of § 221-11B(3)(c) and all regulations and standards promulgated
pursuant thereto and those promulgated under this subsection.
(3) It shall be unlawful to fail to file a proof of inspection with the
Health Officer within 30 days of the performance of an inspection
required by Subsection C(1)(a) above complying with the
provisions of § 221-11B(3)(e) and any regulations and standards
promulgated pursuant thereto.
D. Unlawful activity. It shall be unlawful for any person to repair or modify
or to cause or permit said repairs or modifications of a storage facility
or part thereof containing portable containers or tanks for the storage
of toxic or hazardous materials without performing said reports or
modifications or having them performed pursuant to a written protocol
previously submitted to and approved by the Health Officer.
E. Waiving of certain requirements. At the discretion of the Health Officer,
Subsection A(1)(d) and (e) and Subsection C may be waived for
temporary facilities, such as spill cleanup operations.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to fabricate, construct, install, repair
or modify any bulk storage facility or part thereof without doing so in
accordance with a written protocol previously submitted to and
approved by the Health Officer.
B. Requirements.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to fabricate, construct, install,
modify, repair, use, maintain or operate any bulk storage facility or
part thereof without:
(a) Doing so in a manner that will prevent the toxic or hazardous
materials contained therein from coming into contact with
precipitation or other sources of moisture unless there is
provision made for collecting and treating the leachate and
runoff generated so as to prevent a discharge of toxic or
hazardous materials to the ground, groundwaters, surface
waters or air of the Township of Old Bridge and so as to
prevent the development of an explosive, incendiary or other
hazardous or dangerous condition;
(b) Providing for the segregation of and without segregating
potentially reactive chemicals which are toxic or hazardous
§ 221-15 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 221-16
10:486
§ 221-17. Reporting; records; cleanup.
materials or which may react so as to form toxic or hazardous
materials, which reaction may present or cause a hazardous or
dangerous condition;
(c) Providing for and storing bagged toxic or hazardous materials
on pallets and within a roofed structure which prevents
precipitation from reaching the bags;
(d) In the case of an indoor bulk storage facility, providing for and
providing an impervious floor without floor drains with a
surrounding impervious dike so as to provide containment for
hazardous or toxic materials generated from fire fighting
within the building;
(e) Providing for and providing adequate security so as to protect
the storage facility and toxic or hazardous contents therein
from vandalism and accident; and
(f) Complying with any regulations and standards which may be
promulgated pursuant to this section.
(2) As an alternative to an impervious floor as described in Subsection
B(1)(d) above, a closed system drain within an impervious dike
leading to a spill containment sump may be utilized.
C. Road deicing salt and other deicing materials are toxic or hazardous
materials. In addition to the foregoing provisions of this section, road
deicing salt may be stored in areas where no adverse environmental
impact will occur without brine control so long as the Health Officer's
approval for such a storage facility has been applied for and received in
advance.
A. It shall be unlawful for the owner or other person in possession or
control of any storage facility or part thereof to fail to report any
unauthorized discharge, spill, leak or recognizable loss of toxic or
hazardous materials therefrom or the failure of said storage facility to
the Health Officer within two hours of the time such owner or other
person had sufficient evidence that he knew or should have known of
said unauthorized discharge, spill, leak, loss or failure. Within 24 hours
of the telephone report, the owner, operator or person in charge shall
submit to the Old Bridge Department of Health and Welfare a written
report setting forth the time, place, date, persons present, with
addresses, and details of the discharge of the hazardous substance.
These reports shall set forth the amount of the discharge and a
thorough description of the hazardous substance, method of abatement
and estimated cost of removal. A report of all steps being taken to clean
up the discharge shall be filed every 72 hours thereafter to the
satisfaction of the Department of Health and Welfare. The requirement
for follow-up reports may be waived, in writing, by the Health Officer of
§ 221-16 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 221-17
10:487
the Department of Health and Welfare of the Township of Old Bridge.
A report to the Health Officer pursuant to this subsection shall not
be deemed compliance with any reporting requirement of any other
federal, state or local law.119
B. It shall be unlawful for the owner or other person in possession or
control of any storage facility or part thereof to fail to keep records, in
writing, reflecting the types and amounts of toxic or hazardous
materials stored in said storage facility or part thereof at any given
time.
(1) It shall be unlawful for the owner or other person in possession or
control of any storage facility or part thereof to fail to keep records
of the disposal or other transfer in or out of said storage facility or
part thereof, such records reflecting the types and amounts of toxic
or hazardous materials involved in the transfer. The name and
vehicle license and registration numbers or the transporter and the
intended destination must also be included if the material is waste.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person required to keep records by any
provision of this chapter to fail to maintain said records available
for inspection by the Health Officer for at least five years from the
date of the event, occurrence or transaction recorded. Copies shall
be provided by the owner or operator for the Health Officer if
requested.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any person required to keep records by any
provision of this chapter to fail to keep, record and maintain said
records in accordance with any regulations and standards
promulgated pursuant to this section.
C. It shall be the responsibility and obligation of any person who
discharges or causes or permits the discharge of any toxic or hazardous
material to the ground, groundwaters, surface waters or air of the
Township of Old Bridge to cease said discharge, to reclaim, recover
and/or properly dispose of the discharged toxic or hazardous material
and any other substance contaminated therefrom, to restore the
environment to a condition and quality acceptable to the Health Officer
and to repair any damages caused thereby, all to the satisfaction of the
Health Officer.
(1) It shall be unlawful for the owner or any other person in possession
or control of any source discharging toxic or hazardous materials to
the ground, groundwaters, surface waters or air of the Township of
Old Bridge to fail to cease said discharge immediately upon
obtaining knowledge or notice of its existence.
(2) It shall be unlawful for the owner or any other person in possession
or control of any source discharging or which has discharged toxic
119. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 221-17 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 221-17
10:488
or hazardous materials to the ground, groundwaters, surface
waters or air of the Township of Old Bridge to fail to reclaim,
recover and/or dispose of the discharged toxic or hazardous
materials. Where time permits, cleanup shall be in accordance with
a written protocol previously submitted to and approved by the
Health Officer.
(3) It shall be unlawful for the owner or other person in possession or
control of any premises to place, to fail to reclaim, recover and/or
otherwise dispose of any toxic or hazardous materials discharged
thereto, in accordance with a written protocol previously submitted
to and approved by the Health Officer, in the event that the persons
described in Subsection C(2) above are not ascertainable or
otherwise fail to comply with the provisions of Subsection C(2).
This provision shall not abridge any existing right of action in any
person, nor shall it create any new right of action in any person.
(4) It shall be unlawful for the owner or any person in possession or
control of any source which has discharged toxic or hazardous
materials to the ground, groundwaters, surface waters or air of the
Township of Old Bridge to fail to restore the environment
contaminated or damaged by said discharge to its condition prior to
the discharge, repairing any damages caused thereby in
accordance with a written protocol previously submitted to and
approved by the Health Officer.
(5) It shall be unlawful for any person required by this chapter or by
any order of the Health Officer to reclaim, recover or otherwise
dispose of discharged toxic or hazardous materials and other
substances contaminated therefrom, and/or to restore the
environment to the condition that existed prior to the discharge of
toxic or hazardous materials thereto, to fail to perform said
required acts pursuant to any regulations and standards
promulgated pursuant to this subsection.
(6) Records of the disposition of hazardous substances or
contaminated materials recovered as a result of an unintentional
discharge or as a result of normal operating procedures shall be
retained for a period of five years.
D. Employee rights.
(1) Any employee of the state or any political subdivision thereof, or
any collective bargaining agent or employee, may request, in
writing, from his employer a copy of a material safety data sheet
filed pursuant to this chapter for the facility at which he is
employed. The employer shall provide any material safety data
sheet so requested within five normal business days of the request.
If the request for a material safety data sheet is not honored, any
worker shall have the right to refuse to work with a chemical for
§ 221-17 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 221-17
10:489
§ 221-18. Confidentiality of records.
which a request was made without loss of pay or any other right or
privilege until the request is honored.
(2) Any employee or an employee's representative who believes that an
employer has not complied with the provisions of this section may
file a complaint with the Commissioner of the Department of Labor.
(3) No employer shall discharge or cause to be discharged or
otherwise discipline or in any way penalize or discriminate against
any employee because the employee or the employee's collective
bargaining agent has filed any complaint or has instituted or
caused to be instituted any proceedings related to the provisions of
this chapter or has exercised any right provided in this Act. If an
employer takes any disciplinary action against a worker within 90
days after the worker has exercised any right provided in this
chapter, there is a rebuttable presumption that the employer's
action was in retaliation to the worker's exercise of these rights.
A. Any information relating to secret processes or methods of manufacture
or production obtained in the course of an inspection or investigation or
submitted to the Health Officer shall be kept confidential except for the
use and purpose of the Health Officer in the enforcement of this chapter
and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder.
B. In the event that a person claims to be unable to file complete records
and/or plans and specifications on the grounds that it relates to and is
part of a secret process or method of manufacture or production, an
affidavit signed by an authorized person must be filed with the Health
Officer, stipulating:
(1) The location of process or equipment, specifying the building and
the section or part of the building in which it is located.
(2) In general terms, the name of the process equipment.
(3) The means to be employed for the control of water contaminants.
(4) The nature and estimated rate of discharge of contaminants to the
ground- or surface waters.
(5) The authority of the person signing the affidavit.
(6) A statement that the installation is related to a secret process or
method of manufacture or production.
(7) The means to be employed for control of water contaminants.
C. In the event that any such affidavit is filed, the Health Officer shall
determine the extent to which an exemption should be granted. Any
information relating to secret processes, methods of manufacture or
§ 221-17 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 221-18
10:490
§ 221-19. Posting and labeling.
§ 221-20. Waivers.
Any requirement, mandate, prohibition or time limitation imposed by this
chapter or any regulation, standard or order generated hereunder may be
waived or modified by order of the Health Officer for good cause.
§ 221-21. Inspections and right of entry.
production which may be required, ascertained or discovered by the
Health Officer shall not be disclosed and shall be kept confidential.
A. It shall be unlawful for the owner or other person in possession or
control of any place, building, land, vehicle or thing to store toxic or
hazardous materials therein without conspicuously posting a notice
thereat or thereon, warning of the presence of such materials and
providing any safety information necessary to protect the public and
assist emergency response personnel in carrying out their
responsibilities.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to use, maintain or operate any
storage facility or part thereof without:
(1) Clearly labeling the specific contents of each portable container
conspicuously on said container;
(2) Clearly labeling the specific contents of each indoor and
aboveground tank or vessel conspicuously thereon;
(3) Clearly labeling the specific actual intended and possible contents
of piping associated with any storage facility or part thereof at or
near the points of filling or drawing; and
(4) Conspicuously posting any permit issued pursuant to this chapter.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely post or label any container
or storage facility or to post an invalid permit.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to use, maintain or operate any
storage facility or part thereof without complying with all regulations
and standards promulgated pursuant to this section.
A. All buildings and premises subject to this chapter are subject to
inspection from time to time by the Health Officer or his/her duly
authorized representatives. All rooms and areas in the buildings and
premises shall be available and accessible for such inspection, which
shall be made during usual business hours if the premises is used for
nonresidential purposes; provided, however, that inspections may be
made at other times if the premises is not available during the
foregoing hours for inspections, or if there is reason to believe that
violations are occurring on the premises which can only be
§ 221-18 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 221-21
10:491
§ 221-22. Search warrant.
apprehended and proved by inspection during other than the
prescribed hours or if there is reason to believe a violation exists of a
character which is an immediate threat to health or safety, requiring
inspection and abatement without delay. Authorized representatives
shall include the Health Officer of the Township of Old Bridge and his/
her agents or employees.
B. Emergency inspection may be made without warrant if the Health
Officer has reason to believe that a condition exists which poses an
immediate threat to life, health or safety. Such procedure shall take
place only where the time required to apply and secure the issuance of
a warrant would render ineffective the immediate action necessary to
abate the condition.
C. Where the Health Officer or his/her duly authorized representatives are
refused entry or access or are otherwise impeded or prevented by the
owner, occupant or operator from conducting an inspection of the
premises, such person shall be in violation of this chapter.
A. The Health Officer may personally apply to the Judge of the Municipal
Court of the Township of Old Bridge, who must take his affidavit or
testimony for a search warrant, setting forth factually the actual
conditions and circumstances that provide a reasonable basis for
believing that a violation of this chapter may exist on the premises,
including one or more of the following:
(1) That the premises requires inspection according to the cycle
established by the Township of Old Bridge for periodic inspections
or premises pursuant to this chapter.
(2) That observation of external condition (for example, smoke, liquids,
vapors and/or odors) of the premises and its public areas indicates
that probable cause exists.
(3) Circumstances, such as the age and design of the storage
equipment and/or system, piping, the particular use of premises or
another factor which renders systematic inspections of such
buildings necessary in the interest of public health and safety.
B. If the Judge of the Municipal Court of the Township of Old Bridge is
satisfied that grounds for granting the application exist or that there is
probable cause to believe they exist, he shall date and issue the warrant
identifying the property to be seized, naming or describing the person
or place to be searched and specifying the hours when it may be
executed. The warrant shall be directed to any Health Officer of the
Township of Old Bridge without naming him, and it shall state the basis
for its issuance and the names of the persons whose affidavits or
testimony have been taken in support thereof. The warrant shall direct
that it be returned to the Judge who issued it.
§ 221-21 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 221-23
10:492
§ 221-23. Establishment of fees.
§ 221-24. Injunction against violation.
If any person violates any of the provisions of this chapter, the Health
Department may institute a civil action in the Superior Court in the name
of the state, on relation of the Health Department, for injunctive relief to
prohibit and prevent the continuance of such violation or violations.
§ 221-25. Violations and penalties; restoration.
§ 221-26. Construal of provisions.
This chapter is to be liberally construed to effectuate the purposes herein
described. Nothing herein is to be construed as repealing or abridging
the emergency powers of any agency of government except to the extent
expressly set forth herein.
Chapter 226
HEATING DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 108. Fire prevention — See Ch. 185.
A. The Health Officer shall establish fees adequate to cover his/her, or his/
her duly authorized representatives, time and other specific resources
required to process and monitor registrations and permits called for by
this chapter.
B. The fee structure established pursuant to Subsection A shall be
reviewed and revised as necessary every two years.
A. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or
who shall fail to comply therewith or with any of the requirements
thereof shall be punishable as set forth in Chapter 1, Article II,
Penalty.120
B. The violation of any section or subsection of this chapter shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense independent of the violation
of any other section or subsection or of any order issued pursuant to
this chapter. Each day of violation shall constitute an additional,
separate and distinct offense.
C. In violations producing environmental damage, the violator will be
responsible for cost of clean containment, removal and restoration of
the environment.
120. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 221-23 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 221-26
10:493
§ 226-1. Definitions.
As used herein, the following words and phrases shall be defined as
indicated:
BUILDING — Any building or structure, whether used as a dwelling or
otherwise, except for single-family, regardless of their size and regardless
of the purpose for which such building or structure is used where more than
five people habitually congregate.
PERSON — Includes person, persons, firm, corporation, partnership or
family.
§ 226-2. Portable oil/kerosene heating devices prohibited.
No person shall use, keep for use or store and maintain for use in any
building or portion of a building a portable oil/kerosene heating device.
For the purpose of this section, a "portable oil/kerosene heating device"
is defined as any heater, stove or appliance designed for heating space
in buildings, using or designed for using kerosene, liquid fuel or other
flammable liquid, which is neither flue nor chimney connected and which is
not permanently affixed to any part of a structure and which is capable of
being moved or upset.
§ 226-3. Violations and penalties.121
Any person who violates this chapter shall be subject to the penalties
included in Chapter 1, Article II, Penalty.
Chapter 230
HOMEBUYERS' PROTECTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Notification of conservation easements — See
Ch. 103.
§ 230-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit.
121. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 221-26 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 230-1
10:494
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — All subdivisions not classified as minor
subdivisions.
OFFICIAL MAP — A map adopted by ordinance pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-32 et seq.
OWNER — Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership or
corporation having sufficient proprietary interest in the land subdivided
and to be sold under this chapter or the Subdivision Regulations of the
Township.
PLAT — The map or other drawing of a subdivision.
SALES MAP — The map of sufficient accuracy to be used by the owner for
the purpose of sale of the lots within the subdivision.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, viaduct,
alley or other way which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway,
or a street or way shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law
or approved by official action, or a street or way on a plat duly filed and
recorded in the office of the County Recording Officer, and includes the
land between the street lines, whether improved or unimproved, and may
comprise pavements, shoulders, gutters, sidewalks, parking areas and other
areas within the street.
SUBDIVIDER — Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership,
corporation, trust or any other legal entity proceeding under the Township
Subdivision Regulations to effect a subdivision of land hereunder, for
himself or for another.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two
or more lots, sites or other divisions of land for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of sale or building development.
§ 230-2. Regulations and requirements.
A. Any owner or seller of land within the Township of Old Bridge, within a
major subdivision who has obtained a preliminary approval to subdivide
said land and construct homes thereon, shall, prior to the sale of said
lots or homes upon said lots, maintain a sales office, either within or
without the Township.
B. The sales office shall be opened during normal business hours and shall
have prominently displayed therein the following:
(1) A sales map in the sales office in a place that may be observed and
reviewed by any person(s) calling at the office.
(2) A copy, on standard legal size paper, in type or clear print, of any
proposed protective or restrictive covenants and easements to be
applied to all or any portion of the lands within the subdivision.
(3) An approved and fully executed copy of the subdivision map, site
plan and construction plans in the sales office in a place that may
be observed and reviewed by any person(s) calling at the office.
§ 230-1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 230-2
10:495
(4) A copy of any Board approved revisions to the site plan or
subdivision, and all approved revisions or field changes to
construction plans. Any such revised item or plan sheet shall have a
notation marked on the original document that it is "REVISED as of
(date)." The corresponding item or revision sheet shall note
thereon the following: "ORIGINAL DOCUMENT DATED (date) HAS
BEEN REVISED ON (include all dates)."
(5) A public offering statement for the entire development if the tract
of land is to be developed as a planned unit development, as that
term is defined in the Municipal Land Use Act,122 as filed with the
New Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
C. The sales map shall be based on the Official Tax Map information or
some other similarly accurate base at a scale of not less than 100 feet
equals one inch throughout the map, which said scale shall be clearly
indicated thereon and shall be consistent in all directions shown
thereon. The map shall show the owner's approved subdivision and all
lands contiguous thereto for a distance of 1,000 feet, within or without
the Township of Old Bridge.
D. The sales map shall clearly show and include for the area within 1,000
feet of the subdivision, in all directions, the following information,
which shall be maintained current:
(1) The location of proposed streets and the layout of proposed lots
within the subdivision.
(2) The location of all state, county and municipal roads in existence on
the date of the final approval of the subdivision.
(3) The location of all state, county and municipal roads proposed and
approved by any governmental agency having jurisdiction to
establish such roads. The location of all such roads shall be as
shown on the Official Master Plan adopted by the appropriate
agency of the state, county or municipality.
(4) The location of all existing structures and wooded areas within the
subdivision.
(5) A designation of the zoning district to be subdivided and the zoning
districts of all contiguous properties within the distance of 1,000
feet.
(6) The location of all railroads and railroad rights-of-way for public
utilities.
(7) The location of all public or private utility plants; the location of all
sanitary landfill and hazardous waste sites operations in existence
or proposed.
122. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 230-2 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 230-2
10:496
(8) The location of all schools, parks, playgrounds, public buildings and
sidewalks.
(9) The location of all streams, ponds and watercourses, and a legend
reference as to whether flood hazard insurance is required.
(10) The location and description of any use approved by the Board of
Adjustment or other governmental agency having jurisdiction
during the previous three years.
(11) The location of all drainage ditches within the area shown on the
sales map.
(12) The size of each parcel in the subdivision to be sold, whether
improved or unimproved.
(13) A map legend setting forth the present tax, water and sewer rates
of any public authority servicing the subdivision.
(14) A map legend setting forth the phone numbers and extensions for
the Township Clerk, Township Administrator, Planning Board and
Board of Adjustment.
(15) The location of any and all structures proposed on each parcel.
E. At or before the execution of the contract of sale for any lot within a
major subdivision, the seller shall provide the purchaser with a plot
plan of the individual lot to be sold. Such map shall be drawn to scale
and depict the boundaries of the lot, the location of any existing or
proposed structures, and the location of any easements on the lot. The
seller must obtain the purchaser's signature on the plot plan and keep
the original signed copy on file. The seller shall provide copies of all
signed plot plans for a major subdivision to the Township Department of
Community Development at the time the seller applies for certificate of
occupancy for the lot being sold. [Added 11-8-1999 by Ord. No.
33-99]
F. At or before the execution of the contract of sale for any lot within a
major subdivision, the seller, at his or her own cost, shall provide the
purchaser with a copy of the Old Bridge Township Environmental
Commission brochure on conservation easements. The purchaser shall
sign an acknowledgment of receipt for this document at the time of
receiving same. This acknowledgment shall be filed with the Township
Department of Community Development at the time the seller applies
for a certificate of occupancy for the lot being sold. [Added 11-8-1999
by Ord. No. 33-99]
G. In the event any seller fails to deliver the signed plot plan and/or
acknowledgment of the Environmental Commission brochure as set
forth above, the seller shall be liable under the general penalty clause
of this Code.123 Violations shall be prosecuted in Municipal Court.
[Added 11-8-1999 by Ord. No. 33-99]
§ 230-2 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 230-3
10:497
§ 230-3. Approval of sales map and related information; fees.124
§ 230-4. Certificate of compliance.
A. The information to be depicted on the sales map shall be based on the
most recent Zoning and Street Maps, Federal Insurance Rate Maps and
the prospective development map on file with the office of the Township
Planner. The completed sales map shall be submitted for review to the
Township Planner, prior to its being posted, who shall review it for
compliance with the requirements of this chapter. There shall be a
charge of $200 for the review and certification of compliance by the
Township Planner, which shall be paid by check payable to the
Township of Old Bridge at the time of submission for approval.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer shall review each sales map and any
revisions to it or the other items required under § 230-2 displayed
pursuant to the terms of this chapter not less than every three months
and shall require such additional information as he may deem
necessary to maintain these documents in an up-to-date condition.
There shall be a charge for the inspection of the information, which
shall be $75 per visit, made payable by check to the Township of Old
Bridge. The Code Enforcement Officer may from time to time, as he
deems necessary, direct the owner or seller to display additional
information on the documents so that same may be maintained in an upto-
date condition. New information obtained by the owner or seller shall
be included in the sales map or related documents within 30 days of
receipt of such information. The Code Enforcement Officer shall affix
his approval, upon his satisfaction of the inspection of the documents,
indicating the date thereof.
A. At or before the execution of the contract of sale for any lot within a
subdivision, the seller shall obtain, on a form approved by the
governing body, a certification from the purchaser that:
(1) The sales map was on display and available for inspection on any
occasion of his visit to the sales office.
(2) He had a reasonable opportunity to study and review the sales
map.
(3) He had the opportunity to visit the site of the lot he is purchasing at
least once before he executed the contract of sale.
(4) He had the opportunity to review any protective or restrictive
covenants and easements prior to the execution of the contract of
sale.
123. Editor's Note: See Ch. 1, Art. II, Penalty.
124. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 230-3 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 230-4
10:498
§ 230-5. Additional notice provisions.
In the event that the owner or seller of land files an application to amend
a previously received approval from the Zoning Board of Adjustment or
Planning Board (site plan, subdivision or variances), including but not
limited to recreation facilities, bikeways or trails, drainage, sewerage or
open space easements, lighting details or other items deemed to be
significant by the Township Planner, each previous purchaser who is an
owner at the time of such application and each contract purchaser of any
such lot or unit shall be advised, in writing, of the hearing date on such
revisions and that a copy of the proposal is available for review in the sales
office and the office of the Township Planner.
§ 230-6. Disclosure of tax information. [Added 3-23-1995 by Ord.
No. 16-95]
The owner or seller of any new residential dwellings in the Township of
Old Bridge within a major subdivision or planned development shall prior
to executing a contract of sale with a buyer make the following written
disclosure:
(5) He had the opportunity to review the construction plans for the
structure he is buying and all related common elements.
(6) The seller did not refuse or decline to answer any questions
directed to him pertaining to the sales map or the protective or
restrictive covenants or easements.
(7) The seller has complied with Chapter 103, Conservation
Easements, Notification of, of the Code of the Township of Old
Bridge prior to the execution of the contract of sale by delivering
the applicable notice (CEN-A or CEN-B) to the intended
purchaser(s) and has thereby apprised the intended purchaser(s) of
any conservation easement burdening the property to be
purchased or burdening lands belonging to a homeowners'
association which are adjacent to the lands to be purchased.
[Added 1-27-1994 by Ord. No. 5-94]
B. The seller shall file the certificate mentioned in Subsection A hereof
with the Code Enforcement Officer within 20 days of the full execution
of the contract of sale.
A. The current certified general tax rate for the Township of Old Bridge.
B. The office hours and phone numbers of the Old Bridge Township Tax
Assessor's office.
C. A statement saying: "We encourage all prospective new homebuyers to
contact the Tax Assessor's office to obtain an estimate of the annual
property taxes which will have to be paid on the property you are
considering purchasing."
§ 230-4 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 230-7
10:499
§ 230-7. Violations and penalties; injunctive relief.
§ 230-8. Applicability of provisions.
All the requirements set forth in this chapter with regard to the sale of
lots shall apply with equal force and effect to the lands which have been
previously subdivided pursuant to the law, and from and after the effective
date of this chapter, all owners of subdivided land shall comply forthwith.
However, it is understood that the requirements of this chapter shall apply
only to the first sale of a lot or lots of the subdivision to an individual
homebuyer.
A. If any person engages in the sale of a lot or lots within a subdivision
without first displaying the sales map and other related documents or
the protective or restrictive covenants or easements as required herein,
the owner of the subdivision shall be subject to a fine for each such lot
sold or contracted to be sold provided hereinafter.
B. The owner of a subdivision who shall fail to file the certification of
compliance as required herein or fails to disclose to the purchaser the
information as provided by the representative of the Planning Division,
through his or the fault of any person engaging in the sale of lots on his
behalf, shall be subject to a fine as provided for hereinafter.
C. Any person, firm or corporation found guilty in the Municipal Court of
the Township of Old Bridge of a violation of the terms of this chapter
shall be subject to the penalty set forth in Chapter 1, Article II, Penalty.
Except as otherwise provided, each and every day in which a violation
of any provision of this chapter exists shall constitute a separate
violation. In addition, each violation of this chapter shall be considered
a separate offense upon each and every day in which a violation
exists.125
D. In addition to the foregoing, if the owner or his agents continuously, for
a period of 30 days or more, fail and refuse to comply with the
requirements of this chapter, the municipality may institute and
maintain an action for injunctive relief to prohibit the continued sale of
the lots within the subdivision until the owner is in compliance with this
chapter, in addition to the suspension of the issuance of any further
building permits for the subdivision or conducting of any inspections for
approvals required under subdivision approval.
125. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 230-7 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 230-8
10:500
Chapter 235
HOUSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 108.
Fences — See Ch. 164.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 185.
Graffiti — See Ch. 215.
Heating devices — See Ch. 226.
Homebuyers' protection — See Ch. 230.
Littering — See Ch. 265.
Mosquito breeding control — See Ch. 284.
Multiple dwellings — See Ch. 290.
Nuisances — See Ch. 305.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 309.
Pesticide control — See Ch. 355.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 366.
Rental property — See Ch. 388.
Solid waste — See Ch. 429.
Stormwater quality — See Ch. 432.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 463.
§ 230-8 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 230-8
10:501

ARTICLE I
Housing Standards
[Adopted by Ord. No. D-29 (Sec. 11-2 of the 1973 Revised General
Ordinances)]
§ 235-1. Adoption of standards.
There is hereby adopted a code to establish and maintain every person's
right to a decent home, located in a desirable, suitable and well-kept
neighborhood environment; to establish minimum standards governing the
required plumbing, heating and electrical facilities and their maintenance;
to establish minimum standards governing the condition and maintenance
of dwellings and other structural things and conditions on the inside and
outside of dwellings and the premises surrounding dwellings; to make
dwellings safe, sanitary and fit for decent living; to establish minimum
standards governing the conditions of dwellings offered for rent; to fix the
responsibilities of both owners and occupants of dwellings; to authorize and
command the inspections of dwellings and the condemnation of dwellings
unfit for human habitation; and to fix the penalties for violations.
§ 235-2. Definitions.
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BASEMENT — That portion of a building located partly underground
but having half or more than half of its clear floor-to-ceiling height
above the average grade of the adjoining ground.
BATHROOM — A room which has a floor area including fixtures of at
least 35 square feet and which contains a minimum of one flush water
closet, one wash basin and one bathtub or shower stall.
BOARDINGHOUSE — Any private dwelling or dwelling unit where the
owner, tenant or operator thereof is engaged in keeping one or more
roomers or boarders who are not husband or wife, son or daughter,
mother or father or sister or brother of the owner, tenant or operator
and in serving food to some or all of such lodgers for a part of a day or
longer period under expressed contract or rate of payment.
CELLAR — That portion of a building located partly or wholly
underground and having more than half of its clear floor-to-ceiling
height below the average grade of the adjoining ground.
CONSTRUCTION OFFICIAL — The officer of the Township or his
authorized representative designated to enforce this article.
DWELLING — Any building or structure or part thereof which is wholly
or partly used or intended to be used for toilet and bathing needs,
living, sleeping and cooking by human occupants.
DWELLING UNIT, APARTMENT, FLAT, LIVING UNIT or OTHER
SIMILAR DESIGNATION — Any room or group of rooms located within
§ 235-1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 235-2
10:503
a dwelling or building and forming a single habitable unit, for one or
more persons, for the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking and toilet and
bathing needs.
GARBAGE — The animal and vegetable and other organic wastes
resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of
food.
INFESTATION — The presence of any insects, rodents or other pests
within or around a dwelling.
MULTIPLE DWELLING or APARTMENT HOUSE — Any dwelling
containing more than two dwelling units.
OCCUPANT — Any person, over one year of age, living, sleeping,
cooking or eating in, or having actual possession of, a dwelling,
dwelling unit, rooming unit, apartment, flat or living unit.
OPERATOR — Any person who has charge, care, or control of a
building, or part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are
let.
OWNER — Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others:
PLUMBING — Includes all the following: supplied piping, facilities and
equipment; the house sewer from the septic tank, cesspool, curb or
property line to the building foundation; the water service from the
curb or property line to the building foundation; or from the well
to the building foundation, the system of soil, vent and waste pipes
from their connection at the foundation to the house sewer, to their
connections to the various plumbing fixtures and to their termination
through the roof; all hot and cold water lines in the dwelling or building;
every plumbing fixture, trap, floor drain, or any fixture directly or
indirectly connected to the plumbing system; the gas piping from the
gas meter to the connections to the various gas appliances and any
other similar supplied fixtures, together with all connections to water,
sewer or gas lines, and any other installed receptacles or devices which
are supplied with water or which receive or discharge liquid waste
or sewage into the drainage system with which they are directly or
indirectly connected.
Has legal title to any dwelling, dwelling unit, hotel, motel, rooming
house, rooming unit or boardinghouse, with or without
accompanying actual possession thereof; or
(1)
Has charge, care or control of any dwelling, dwelling unit, hotel,
motel, rooming house, rooming unit, or boardinghouse as owner
or agent of the owner, or as executor, executrix, administrator,
administratrix, trustee, or guardian of the estate of the owner. Any
such person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound
to comply with the provisions of this article and the rules and
regulations adopted pursuant thereto to the same extent as if he
were the owner.
(2)
§ 235-2 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 235-2
10:504
§ 235-3. Inspections; right of entry.
The Construction Official shall make inspections to determine the condition
of dwellings, dwelling units, hotels, motels, rooming units, boardinghouses
and premises located in the Township in order that he may perform his
duty of safeguarding the health and safety of the occupants of dwellings
and of the general public. For the purpose of making such inspections,
the Construction Official may enter, examine, inspect and survey at any
time deemed necessary by him all dwellings, dwelling units, hotels, motels,
rooming units, boardinghouses or their premises, and the person in charge
thereof shall give the Construction Official or his agent free access at all
reasonable times for the purpose of making such inspection, examination
and survey. Every occupant of a dwelling, dwelling unit, hotel, motel or
rooming unit shall give the owner thereof, or his agent or employee, access
to any dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit, or its premises, at all
reasonable times for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations
which are necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of this article
or other ordinances in force in the Township or of New Jersey statutes
pertaining to this article.
ROOMING HOUSE — Any dwelling or part of any dwelling containing
one or more rooming units in which space is let by the operator to one
or more persons who are not husband or wife, son or daughter, mother
or father or sister or brother of the owner or operator or of the spouse
of the owner, tenant or operator.
ROOMING UNIT — A room or group of rooms containing no cooking
facilities forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be used
for living and sleeping and having a private bathroom or the use of
a common bathroom with other rooming units in the same building,
within the meaning of this article.
RUBBISH — Includes all combustible and noncombustible waste
material (except garbage) and including boxes, barrels, sticks, stones,
bricks, bottles, cans, metal drums, iron pipe, old sheet metal, old
furniture, unused motor vehicles and boats, auto parts, tires, unused
bicycles and bicycle parts, filth, junk, trash, debris, old lumber or
firewood, unless such lumber or firewood is neatly stacked or piled
on supports or platform at least eight inches above the ground. It
shall also include weeds or grass that have attained a growth of more
than 10 inches in height. It shall also include any articles which the
Construction Official, in his judgment, declares to be rubbish.
SUPPLIED — Paid for, furnished, or provided by or under the control of
the owner or operator.
B. Meaning of certain words. Whenever the words "dwelling," "dwelling
unit," "flat," "semidetached house," "row house," "apartment," "living
unit," "rooming house," "hotel," "motel," "rooming unit,"
"boardinghouse" or "premises" are used, they shall be construed as
though they were followed by the words "or any part thereof."
§ 235-2 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 235-4
10:505
§ 235-4. Enforcement; service of notices and orders; emergencies.
§ 235-5. Safe, sanitary and aesthetic maintenance of dwellings.
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy
any dwelling, hotel, motel, rooming house or boardinghouse for the purpose
of living therein which does not comply with the following requirements:
A. Whenever the Construction Official determines that there are
reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any
provision of this article or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant
thereto, notice of such alleged violation shall be given to the person
responsible therefor as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall:
(1) Put in writing the various violations and section and paragraph
violated.
(2) Allow a reasonable time to abate or correct such violations not to
exceed 60 days from the date of such notice.
(3) Be served personally on the owner or occupant or shall be sent by
registered mail to the owner's last known address, or a copy posted
on the building where the violations occur or be served by any
other method authorized under the laws of New Jersey.
B. At the expiration of the time given to abate a nuisance or correct a
condition as set forth in any notice of violation where a reasonable
effort, in the discretion of the Construction Official, has not been made
by the owner or occupant to abate or correct the violations enumerated,
the Construction Official shall summon such person before the
Municipal Court of the Township or any other court having jurisdiction.
C. Whenever the Construction Official finds that an emergency exists
which requires immediate action to protect the public health, he may,
without written notice or hearing, issue a verbal order reciting the
existence of such an emergency and requiring that such action be taken
as he deems necessary to meet the emergency. Any person to whom
such an order is directed shall comply therewith immediately.
A. Every foundation shall adequately support the building at all points,
shall be kept in good repair, and shall be free of breaks, holes or cracks
which make the building unsafe to occupy or which admit rain, cold air,
dampness, rodents, insects or vermin, and any exterior parts thereof
subject to corrosion or deterioration shall be kept well painted.
B. The outside building walls shall not have any holes, loose boards, or any
broken, cracked or damaged finish, which admit rain, cold air,
dampness, rodents, insects or vermin.
C. Every exterior door, window and cellar or basement entrance shall be
reasonably weathertight, watertight and rodentproof and shall open
§ 235-4 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 235-5
10:506
§ 235-6. Minimum standards for footage, egress and stairways.
No person shall occupy or let to another for occupancy, for the purpose of
living therein, which does not comply with the following requirements:
and close easily, and their locks, hinges, pulleys and hardware shall be
kept in good repair.
D. All interior walls and ceilings shall be so constructed and maintained
that there shall not be any cracks, voids, holes, loose paper, peeling
paint or loose trim which provide a harborage for insects or vermin.
E. Wallpaper or paint shall cover the entire wall or ceiling on which it is
placed. No person shall paper or paint an interior wall or ceiling
without first having removed all the old paper and thoroughly cleansed
the walls and ceilings.
F. Every roof, roof gutter, flashing, rain conductor and roof cornice shall
be weathertight and raintight and shall be kept in good repair.
G. All exterior wood surfaces shall be reasonably protected against the
elements and against decay by paint or other approved protective
coating applied in a workmanlike fashion.
H. The floor of every room and porch and every inside and outside stair
and their supports and every appurtenance thereto shall be so
constructed and maintained as to be safe to use and capable of
supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon
and shall be kept in good repair and sound condition. The floors of every
room shall not have any holes, loose boards or cracked, broken or wornthrough
spots in such floor coverings.
I. Every foundation, floor and wall of a dwelling shall be free from chronic
dampness.
J. Every porch, balcony, roof or similar place higher than 30 inches from
the ground, used for egress or for use by occupants, shall be provided
with adequate railings or parapets; such protective railings or parapets
shall be properly balustraded and be not less than three feet in height.
A. Occupancy of cellars for dwelling purpose is prohibited.
B. Every dwelling and dwelling unit shall contain at least 150 square feet
of floor space for the first occupant thereof and at least 100 square feet
of additional floor space for every additional occupant thereof, the floor
space to be calculated on the basis of total habitable room area. The
kitchen, bathroom, shed and porch are not to be included in total
habitable area.
C. Every dwelling and dwelling unit, hotel, motel, rooming house and
boardinghouse shall provide at least 450 cubic feet of air space for each
adult for sleeping purposes. Children shall have at least 350 cubic feet
of air space for sleeping purposes. The cubic feet of air space shall be
§ 235-5 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 235-6
10:507
§ 235-7. Minimum standards for light and ventilation.
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy
any dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein, which does
not comply with the following requirements:
calculated in the room in which persons sleep and not the total
habitable area.
D. The habitable area of every dwelling and dwelling unit shall not be used
for business or commercial purposes, and if so used that area used for
business or commercial purposes shall be subtracted and shall not be
included in the total habitable area.
E. Every dwelling, dwelling unit or lodging unit shall have safe and
unobstructed means of egress. Such means of egress shall not be
through any other dwelling unit or part thereof and shall lead to a safe
and open space at ground level accessible to a street.
F. A room used for sleeping purposes under the provisions of § 235-13E
shall be provided with a safe and unobstructed means of egress leading
directly to an outside area accessible to a street.
G. Every inside and outside stairway, porch and appurtenance thereto
shall be so constructed as to be safe to use and capable of supporting
the load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon, and shall be
kept in sound condition and good repair. Every stairway having three or
more steps shall be properly banistered and safely balustraded.
A. Every habitable room shall have at least one window facing directly to
the outdoors. The minimum total window area, measured between
stops for every habitable roof, shall be 10% of the floor area of such
room. Whenever the only window in a room is a skylight-type window in
the top of such room, the total window area of such skylight shall equal
at least 15% of the total floor area of such room. Skylight-type windows
of less than 15% of the total floor area existing prior to July 7, 1971,
may be increased to 15%, but no skylight-type window shall be installed
in lieu of a window where a skylight has not previously existed.
B. Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight which
can easily be opened, or such other device which adequately ventilates
the room. The total of openable window area in every habitable room
shall be equal to at least 50% of the minimum window area size or
minimum skylight-type window size as mentioned above except where
there is supplied some other device affording adequate ventilation and
approved by the Construction Official.
(1) Ventilation requirements for bathrooms and toilet rooms shall
comply with the requirements of the Uniform Construction Code.
C. Every operable window, exterior door, skylight, and other opening to
the outdoors shall be supplied with properly fitting screens in good
§ 235-6 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 235-7
10:508
§ 235-8. Solid waste disposal; exterior maintenance.
§ 235-9. Plumbing requirements; bathrooms.
repair from May 1 to October 1 of each year. Such screens shall have a
mesh of not less than No. 16.
A. Every building, dwelling, dwelling unit and all other areas of the
premises shall be clean and free from garbage or rubbish and hazards
to safety. Lawns, hedges and bushes shall be kept trimmed and shall not
be permitted to become overgrown and unsightly. Fences shall be kept
in good repair.126
B. All garbage kept on the outside of any building shall be kept in flytight,
covered, metal or plastic or other approved material garbage
containers.
C. All garbage shall be drained of its moisture and properly wrapped in
heavy paper before such garbage is placed outside. Garbage shall be
placed at the curb according to the provisions of § 429-4. Ashes, bottles,
cans and rubbish must be placed at the curb in boxes, baskets, cans or
other receptacles easily handled by the garbage collector.127
D. The front, side and back yard, the driveway, walks or other parts of the
outside premises of any building or of any lot on which no building is
located shall not contain any boxes, barrels, sticks, stones, bricks,
bottles, cans, metal drums, iron pipe, old sheet metal, old furniture,
unused motor vehicles and boats, auto parts, old tires, unused bicycles
or parts, filth, junk, rubbish, trash, debris, old lumber or firewood
unless such lumber or firewood is neatly stacked or piled on supports at
least eight inches above the ground; nor shall the grass or weeds on
such premises be allowed to attain a growth of more than 10 inches.
Shrubs and flowering woody plants shall be kept under control and not
allowed to grow beyond the boundaries of the premises on which a
building is located. Shacks and outbuildings, including toolhouses,
storage sheds and garages, shall be repaired or improved so that they
shall be aesthetically acceptable or shall be demolished.
E. Every fence which wholly or partially encloses a premises on which a
building is located shall be maintained in a manner that is aesthetically
acceptable and shall not have broken posts or supporting members, nor
have holes or voids in such fences.128
A. Every dwelling used or occupied to house individual families living
separately for the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking, eating, bathing
and defecating shall comply with the following supplied requirements:
126. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 164, Fences.
127. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
128. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 164, Fences.
§ 235-7 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 235-9
10:509
Every kitchen sink, wash basin, bathtub or shower stall shall be
properly connected with supplied water-heating facilities which are
capable of heating water to such a temperature as to permit an
adequate amount of water drawn to each fixture at a temperature of
not less than 120º F., and to a cold water line. Families or individuals
living separately in the same dwelling or building shall not share the
same bathroom or the use of a kitchen.
B. In every hotel, rooming house and boardinghouse, where separate
bathroom accommodations are not supplied for each room or suite,
separate bathroom accommodations shall be provided for each sex as
follows: One water closet, one wash basin and one bathtub or shower
stall for each five persons, or fraction thereof, who room or board
therein.
(1) In hotels, rooming houses and boardinghouses where separate
bathrooms are provided for each sex, the door openings to each
bathroom shall be placed so as to afford privacy and shall be plainly
marked for male and female usage.
(2) Bathrooms in hotels, rooming houses and boardinghouses shall be
located so as to be accessible from a common hall or passageway to
persons using the facilities. Such hall or passageway shall be
directly accessible from a roomer's or boarder's rooming unit and
not through any other rooming unit.
C. Where rooming units are provided on more than one floor, except in a
rooming house or boardinghouse operated and inhabited by the owner,
separate bathrooms shall be provided for each sex on each floor. Such
an establishment which has rooming units on more than one floor may
have one bathroom in the building for both sexes, if the total combined
number of occupants, including both owner's family and roomers, male
and female, adults and children, does not exceed five. Where the
combined number of occupants exceeds five, the bathroom facilities for
the roomers shall comply with Subsection B above.
D. Every water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower for each dwelling
unit or lodging house shall be accessible from within the building
without passing through any part of any other dwelling unit or lodging
unit and in a lodging house shall be located no farther than one floor
above or below the lodging units served. Such water closet, lavatory
and bathtub or shower shall be contained in a room or rooms which are
separated from all other rooms by walls, doors, or partitions that afford
privacy.
E. All water closets shall flush easily, and completely discharge the waste
matter in a single operation. All plumbing fixtures shall function
perfectly at all times. The finish of toilet seats shall not be chipped or
cracked and shall have a smooth finish. Water closets shall be set after
the finished floor is laid. There shall be no leaking faucets, leaking or
clogged traps, clogged drains, broken handles on fixtures, nor anything
§ 235-9 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 235-9
10:510
§ 235-10. Minimum standards for heating.
that would cause any part of the plumbing system or fixtures to be
unsanitary, inconvenient to use or in any way detrimental to the health
of the individual. The plumbing fixtures and floors, walls and ceilings
in bathrooms and kitchens shall be kept in a sanitary condition at all
times. Every water closet compartment floor and bathroom floor shall
be constructed and maintained as to be reasonably impervious to water
so as to permit such floor to be kept in a clean condition.
F. All plumbing installed in dwellings, hotels, motels, rooming houses or
boardinghouses shall conform to this article and to the Uniform
Construction Code and shall be maintained in good working condition.
G. Plumbing fixtures and other facilities and their uses in kitchens of
hotels and boardinghouses shall conform to the "Restaurant"
requirements of the Uniform Construction Code and sanitary code of
the Township.
H. Owners of buildings located beyond the public sewer system that are
used for human habitation and which do not have installed therein a
water closet, wash basin and bathtub or shower, shall, before the abovementioned
plumbing facilities and the individual sewage disposal
system connected therewith is installed, cause to be obtained a
percolation test of the soil in the area of the proposed sewage disposal
system. The installation of the sewage disposal system shall comply
with the Township individual sewage disposal system code.
I. Every dwelling unit and lodging house shall be provided with a safe
supply of potable water meeting the standards as set forth in "Potable
Water Standards" as published by the New Jersey State Department of
Health and Senior Services.
J. The source of such water supply shall be approved by the New Jersey
State Department of Health and Senior Services or the Construction
Official.
K. The minimum rate of flow of hot or cold water issuing from a faucet or
fixture shall be not less than one gallon per minute.
A. It shall be the duty of every owner of a dwelling who permits to be
occupied any dwelling unit or lodging unit therein, and who contracts,
undertakes or agrees, orally or in writing, to heat or furnish heat for
any dwelling unit or lodging unit within the Township, to furnish
sufficient heat to any occupied part of such building to maintain at all
times between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., a minimum
temperature of 68º F., and to maintain in buildings or portions of
buildings occupied as residences, at all times between the hours of
11:50 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., a minimum temperature of 65º F. The
required supply of heat shall be furnished for or to all buildings or parts
thereof used for business or living purposes from October 1 in each
§ 235-9 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 235-10
10:511
year to May 1 of the succeeding year and on all other days of the
year when the outside temperature falls below 40º F., provided that the
requirements of this article shall not apply to buildings or parts thereof
used for any trade or business in which high or low temperatures are
essential. The term "contracted" as used in this section shall mean
and include any written or implied contract, lease or letting, and the
presence of any heating outlets, radiators, risers or returns in any hall,
room or other part of a building shall be prima facie evidence of an
implied contract. The presence of any central heating plant, furnace or
boiler under the control of the owner, lessee or person in charge of a
building shall also be prima facie evidence of an implied contract.
B. A central heating system in any dwelling, hotel, motel, rooming house
and boardinghouse shall be kept in good repair and shall not have any
leaks in the heater furnace, boiler, smoke pipes, flues, pipe fittings,
valves or other appurtenance of the heating system, and shall be kept in
such condition that all inhabitable rooms can safely and adequately be
maintained at a temperature of 70º F. under average winter conditions.
C. Every dwelling, hotel, motel, rooming house and boardinghouse shall
have a tight masonry chimney lined with fire clay or a chimney of other
approved noncombustible material properly constructed and supported
so as to avoid overheating adjacent combustible elements.
D. Every dwelling, hotel, rooming house and boardinghouse shall be
prohibited from using a room heater, heating stove, space heater, or
tank water heater designed for the use of kerosene, gasoline, oil, gas,
wood, coke, charcoal or coal as a fuel unless it has a direct smoke pipe
or flue connection to a properly constructed chimney capable of
carrying all the products of combustion to the outer air.129
E. Every hotel, motel, rooming house and boardinghouse shall comply
with Subsection A above as to the temperature to be kept and the hours
it is to be maintained for all rooms occupied or used by roomers,
lodgers and boarders.
F. In the absence of a contract or agreement to the contrary, an owner
shall be obliged to provide heat wherever heating facilities are under
the control of the owner or whenever two or more dwelling units are
heated by a common facility.
G. The owner shall be responsible for compliance with all provisions of this
article not specified as the responsibility of occupants.
H. Every dwelling shall have heating facilities which are properly installed,
maintained in good and safe working condition, and are capable of
safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and
water closet compartments located therein in conformance with the
regulations in Subsection A. The temperature shall be read at a height
of three feet above floor level at the center of the room.
129. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 226, Heating Devices.
§ 235-10 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 235-10
10:512
§ 235-11. Minimum standards for electrical facilities and lighting.
I. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 26:3-31, the following regulations shall
apply:
(1) To require that the aforesaid standards for heating shall be met.
(2) To act as the agent for a landlord in the engaging of repairmen and
the ordering of any parts necessary to restore to operating
condition the furnace, boiler or other equipment essential to the
proper heating of any residential unit rented by the landlord,
provided that at least 24 hours have elapsed since the tenant has
lodged a complaint with the Township Department of Health and
Welfare, prior to which a bona fide attempt has been made by the
tenant to notify the landlord of the failure of the heating
equipment, and the landlord has failed to take appropriate action,
and the outside air temperature is less than 55° F.130
(a) Any person who supplies material or services in accordance
with this article shall bill the landlord directly and by filing a
notice approved by the Township Department of Health and
Welfare, with the County Clerk, shall have a lien on the
premises where the materials were used or services supplied.
A. Every dwelling shall be provided with electric service.
B. Every habitable room shall contain at least two separate wall-type
electric convenience outlets, or one such convenience outlet and one
ceiling or wall-type electric light fixture. Every such outlet and fixture
shall be maintained in good and safe condition, and shall be connected
to the source of electric power. No temporary wiring shall be used
except extension cords which run directly from portable electrical
fixtures to convenience outlets, and which do not lie under rugs or other
floor coverings, or extend through doorways, transoms, or other
openings through structural elements.
C. Every portion of each staircase, hall, cellar, basement, landing, furnace
room, utility room, and all similar nonhabitable space located in a
dwelling shall have either natural or artificial light available at all
times, with an illumination of at least two lumens per square foot (two
footcandles) in the darkest portions.
D. Every portion of any interior or exterior passageway or staircase
common to two or more families in a dwelling shall be illuminated
naturally or artificially at all times with an illumination of at least two
lumens per square foot (two footcandles) in the darkest portion of the
normally traveled stairs and passageways. In dwellings comprising two
dwelling units, such illumination shall not be required at all times if
separate switches, convenient and readily accessible to each dwelling
130. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 235-10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 235-11
10:513
§ 235-12. Responsibilities of owners and occupants.
unit, are provided for the control of such artificial light by the occupants
thereof.
E. Every bathroom and water closet compartment shall have either
natural or artificial light available at all times, with an illumination of at
least three lumens per square foot (three footcandles). Such light shall
be measured 36 inches from the floor at the center of the room.
Artificial lighting shall be controlled by a wall switch so located as to
avoid danger of electrical hazards.
F. Where changes have been made to the original electrical installation or
where deterioration is apparent, a certificate of approval shall be
supplied by the owner from the Fire Underwriters. Every electrical
installation, addition to, or any part thereof shall comply with the
current revision of the National Electrical Code with a certificate
supplied by the Middle Department Association of Fire Underwriters.
A. Every owner and operator of a multiple dwelling or apartment house
containing two or more dwelling units shall be responsible for
maintaining in a sanitary condition the shared or public areas of the
dwelling and premises.
B. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall keep in a clean and
sanitary condition that part of the dwelling, dwelling unit, and premises
thereof which he occupies and controls.
C. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all his
rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in rubbish
containers required by § 235-8B and C.
D. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all his
garbage or any other organic waste which might provide food for
rodents, insects or vermin, in a clean and sanitary manner, by placing it
in the garbage storage containers required by § 235-8B and C. It shall
be the responsibility of the owner to provide such garbage containers
for all dwelling units in a multiple dwelling containing more than two
dwelling units. In all other cases it shall be the responsibility of the
occupant to furnish such garbage containers.
E. Every dwelling shall be free from rodents, vermin and insects. Every
occupant, owner or operator of a dwelling shall be responsible for such
extermination whenever his dwelling unit is infested. Notwithstanding
the foregoing provisions of this subsection, whenever infestation is
caused by failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a ratproof or
reasonably insect proof condition, extermination shall be the
responsibility of the owner. Whenever infestation exists in two or more
dwelling units in any dwelling, or in the common parts of a dwelling
containing two or more dwelling units, extermination thereof shall be
the responsibility of the owner.
§ 235-11 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 235-12
10:514
F. Every occupant, owner or operator of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall
keep all plumbing fixtures therein in a clean and sanitary condition and
shall maintain the inside of the dwelling or dwelling unit and the
outside premises over which he has control, clean and orderly.
G. No owner or occupant shall cause any services, facilities, equipment or
utilities which are required under this code to be removed from, shut
off, or discontinued in any occupied dwelling let or occupied by him,
except for such temporary interruption as may be necessary while
actual repairs or alterations are in process or during temporary
interruption as may be necessary while actual repairs or alterations are
in process or during temporary emergencies when discontinuance of
service is authorized by the Construction Official. In the event that any
service or utility, which the owner has agreed to supply, is discontinued,
the owner shall take immediate steps to cause the restoration of such
service or utility.
H. The owner of a dwelling located in an area found by the Construction
Official to be infested by rats, insects or other vermin shall carry out
such rat stoppage, vermin proofing, or other means of preventing
infestations of the dwelling as may be required by the Construction
Official.
I. No owner shall occupy or let to an occupant any vacant dwelling unit or
lodging unit unless it is clean and sanitary.
J. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, unless otherwise provided for
under lease agreement, to provide for the orderly maintenance of the
premises. The storage of objects or materials not covered in
Subsections C and D or not otherwise prohibited by municipal
ordinances shall be done in an orderly manner so as to not constitute a
health, safety or fire hazard.
K. In dwellings containing no more than three dwelling units, it shall be
the responsibility of the occupant of each dwelling unit to furnish the
receptacles outside the dwelling unit as are needed for the storage of
garbage and rubbish until removal from the premises. In lodging
houses and in dwellings containing four or more dwelling units, it shall
be the responsibility of the owner to furnish such receptacles outside
the lodging units or dwelling units as are needed for the storage of
garbage and rubbish until removal from the premises.
L. Every occupant of a dwelling unit in a dwelling containing no more than
three dwelling units shall be responsible, unless provided for otherwise
under a lease agreement, for the periodical removal of all garbage and
rubbish from the premises each week in accordance with such
regulations of the Township for the collection of garbage and
rubbish.131
131. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 429, Solid Waste.
§ 235-12 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 235-12
10:515
§ 235-13. Use and occupancy of space.
§ 235-14. Safe and sanitary maintenance of hotels, boardinghouses
and similar establishments; license requirements; fees.
M. The Construction Official may order the owner to clean, repair, paint,
whitewash or paper any wall or ceiling within a dwelling which has
deteriorated so as to provide a harborage for rodents or vermin, or
when such wall or ceiling has become stained or soiled, or the plaster,
wallboard or other covering has become loose or badly cracked or
missing. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed so as to place
upon the nonresident owner responsibilities for cleanliness contained
in Subsection B.
A. Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 150 square feet of floor space
for the first occupant thereof and at least 100 additional square feet of
floor space for every additional occupant thereof, the floor space to be
calculated on the basis of total habitable room area.
B. In every dwelling unit of two or more rooms, every room occupied for
sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 70 square feet
of floor space, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more
than one occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor space for
each occupant thereof. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in every lodging
unit every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall
contain at least 80 square feet of floor space, and every room occupied
for sleeping purposes by more than one occupant shall contain at least
60 square feet of floor space for each occupant thereof.
C. At least one half of the floor area of every habitable room shall have a
ceiling height of at least seven feet. The floor area of that part of any
room where the ceiling is less than five feet shall not be considered as
part of the floor area in computing the total floor area of the room for
the purpose of determining the maximum permissible occupancy
thereof.
D. No room in a dwelling may be used for sleeping if the floor level of the
room is lower than 3 1/2 feet below the average grade of the ground
adjacent to and within 15 feet of the exterior walls of the room.
E. A room located below the level of the ground but with the floor level
less than 3 1/2 feet below the average grade of the ground adjacent to
and within 15 feet of the exterior walls of the room may be used for
sleeping, provided that the walls and floor thereof in contact with the
earth have been damp proofed in accordance with a method approved
by the Construction Official, and provided that the windows thereof are
at least 15 feet from the nearest building or wall.
A. No person shall operate, manage, conduct or maintain a hotel, motel,
rooming house, rooming unit or boardinghouse without first having
obtained a license therefor.
§ 235-12 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 235-14
10:516
B. An application for a license to construct, carry on or manage the
business of a hotel, motel, rooming house, rooming unit or
boardinghouse shall be made in writing, under oath, signed by the
operator, to the Construction Official, on such form or forms as may be
provided and shall set forth the following:
(1) Full name and address of proprietor, manager or operator of such
hotel, motel, rooming house, rooming unit or boardinghouse.
(2) Full name of the owner of the premises and his address.
(3) Location of the hotel, motel, rooming house, rooming unit or
boardinghouse.
(4) The number and location of bedrooms to be used for rooming or
boarding and the size of each room.
(5) Statement as to the number of toilets, wash basins, urinals,
bathtubs or showers, and their location in such hotel, motel,
rooming house, rooming unit and boardinghouse.
C. Each application shall be referred to the Construction Official for his
inspection and report. The Construction Official shall also request an
investigation by the Police Department of each applicant. If the report
of the Construction Official or the Police Department discloses the
applicant was convicted of a crime involving morals or the sanitary code
in the Township or in any other municipality, no license shall be issued.
If the report of the Construction Official discloses no violation of the
sanitary code and the report of the Chief of Police is favorable, a license
shall be issued, which license shall be for the calendar year.
D. All applications for renewal of licenses shall be made by December 1 of
the year preceding the license year.
E. Fees shall be as follows:
(1) For one to three beds: $5.
(2) For four or more beds: $5 for each bed.
F. All fees shall accompany the application for the total number of beds
desired in any calendar year. No more beds shall be allowed in any
motel, hotel, rooming unit or boardinghouse in any calendar year than
the number enumerated on the application. All licenses shall be for the
calendar year and shall expire on December 31 of the year of issue,
unless surrendered or revoked because of a violation of this article or
any applicable ordinances or statutes. Surrender or revocation of any
license issued prior to December 31 of the year of issue shall not entitle
the licensee to reimbursement for any pro rata portion thereof. The
license fees fixed for issuance of such licenses is imposed for the
purpose of regulation and not for revenue.
§ 235-14 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 235-14
10:517
G. Each building or room licensed as a hotel, motel, rooming house,
rooming unit or boardinghouse may be inspected at any hour deemed
necessary and as often as the Construction Official may deem it
necessary. If any inspection discloses a condition existing in the
building tending to create a violation of the sanitary code and such
condition is not corrected within 10 days after notice in writing to the
owner or operator of the business, the Construction Official, upon
notice to the licensee, may order him to show cause before him, on
notice of not less than five days, why the license shall not be revoked.
Whenever the Construction Official finds that an emergency exists
which requires immediate action, he may give verbal order to the owner
or operator of a hotel, motel, rooming house, rooming unit or
boardinghouse and it shall have the same effect and force as a written
notice and shall be complied with immediately or within the time that
the Construction Official stipulates.
H. No room in any hotel, motel, rooming house, rooming unit or
boardinghouse shall be so constructed that there shall be afforded less
than 450 cubic feet of air space for each child under 12 years of age.
Where the same room is used for both living and sleeping, there shall be
at least 550 cubic feet of air space for each adult and 450 cubic feet of
air space for each child under 12 years of age.
I. Every sleeping room in a hotel, motel, rooming house, rooming unit or
boardinghouse shall have a clear height between floor and ceiling of not
less than seven feet. In sleeping rooms with sloping ceilings, more than
50% of the floor area of such sleeping room shall have a clear height
between floor and ceiling of seven feet. The least horizontal dimensions
of a sleeping room shall not be less than seven feet.
J. Every room used for sleeping purposes in a hotel, motel, rooming
house, rooming unit or boardinghouse shall have a window placed in an
outside wall. The openable area of such window shall comply with
§ 235-7, and the window shall be constructed so that it can be opened
and closed easily by the occupant of the room.
K. All windows in hotels, motels, rooming houses, rooming units and
boardinghouses in sleeping rooms, dining rooms, kitchens, halls,
bathrooms and all other outside openings and outside doors shall have
placed on the outside of such windows, openings or doors a full-length
screen of a size mesh to provide adequate ventilation while excluding
mosquitoes and insects and kept in good repair, shall be placed thereon
on May 1 of each year and remain thereon until October 1 of the same
year. Those owners of such establishments who install a combination
storm and screen window in which only a half window or screen is
available shall comply with the meaning of this subsection.
L. In every hotel, motel, rooming house, rooming unit or boardinghouse,
there shall be a water closet, wash basin, urinal, bath or shower as
provided in § 235-9 herein and in the Uniform Construction Code. All
doors on toilet rooms and bathrooms shall be equipped with self-closing
§ 235-14 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 235-14
10:518
springs or other devices to close the door, and such doors shall be kept
closed at all times. On each toilet room or bathroom door there shall be
an adequate locking device on the inside of such door, so that privacy
can be had by the user of the room.
M. Clean sanitized sheets and pillow cases shall be provided for each bed
occupied in all hotels, motels, rooming houses, rooming units and
boardinghouses. They shall be changed for each occupant and for
continued occupancy shall be changed each week.
N. In every hotel, motel, rooming house, rooming unit or boardinghouse,
all wool, cotton or mixed fabric rugs or other coarse floor coverings
shall be kept in a sanitary condition. All exposed wooden floors or
diverse impervious floor coverings shall be washed thoroughly with hot
water and soap or detergent at least once a week or cleansed by other
methods approved by the Construction Official.
O. In every hotel, motel, rooming house, rooming unit or boardinghouse,
adequate lighting of at least 25 watts of illumination shall be provided
over the entrance, in the entrance hall and in all interior halls.
Bathrooms shall be provided with at least 40 watts of illumination.
P. In every hotel, motel, rooming house, rooming unit or boardinghouse,
garbage pails shall be cleansed thoroughly at least once a week or
oftener if deemed necessary by the Construction Official.
Q. Every hotel, motel, rooming house, rooming unit and boardinghouse
shall maintain heat to comply with § 235-10A.
R. Every hotel, motel, rooming house, rooming unit and boardinghouse
shall be kept free and clean of and shall not harbor nor have on their
premises rats, mice, fleas, bedbugs, cockroaches, ants, silverfish or
other insects or vermin.
S. In every hotel, motel, rooming house, rooming unit and boardinghouse
there shall not be kept, harbored or maintained in any room in such
establishment or on the outside grounds or premises any rabbit,
parakeet, chicken, pigeon, dog, goat, sheep, cat or any other animal,
bird or fowl, unless the facilities for maintaining the same are such that
an unsanitary or unsafe condition shall not be created or maintained.
T. The exterior grounds and premises of every hotel, motel, rooming
house, rooming unit and boardinghouse shall be kept clean and orderly
and shall comply with § 235-8C.
U. No occupant of any hotel, motel, rooming house, rooming unit or
boardinghouse shall cook food, keep food or have in such room the
utensils for cooking food, nor shall any occupant have a heating device
in his room that does not comply with § 235-10C and D.
V. Every hotel, motel, rooming house, rooming unit and boardinghouse
shall keep a day book showing the name and permanent address of each
§ 235-14 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 235-14
10:519
§ 235-15. Posting of buildings unfit for human habitation.
Whenever the owner of a building used for human habitation fails to comply
with a notice of violation to repair, alter or improve or, at the option of the
owner, to vacate and close the dwelling, the Construction Official shall post
a sign on the building declaring it unfit for human habitation, and it shall
be unlawful to use the building for human habitation thereafter until it is
repaired, altered or improved in compliance with this article.
§ 235-16. Certificate of approval required prior to transfer; fee.
[Amended 3-2-1981 by Ord. No. 4-81; 1-3-1983 by Ord. No. 26-82;
10-3-1983 by Ord. No. 19-83; 1-7-1985 by Ord. No. 4-85; 9-29-1994
by Ord. No. 57-94; 9-12-2005 by Ord. No. 28-2005; 6-25-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-16; 6-30-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-22]
guest and showing the room occupied by each guest. Such book shall
be kept up-to-date and shall be available for inspection at all times by
the Construction Official.
W. There shall be posted in a conspicuous place in every hotel, motel,
rooming house, rooming unit and boardinghouse a copy of this article,
which copy shall be furnished by the Township.
X. Every room occupied for sleeping purposes in a hotel, motel, rooming
house, rooming unit or boardinghouse shall contain at least 70 square
feet of floor space, and every room occupied by two persons for
sleeping purposes shall contain at least an additional 50 square feet of
floor space.
Y. The owner or operator of every hotel, motel, rooming house, rooming
unit and boardinghouse shall be responsible for the clean and sanitary
maintenance of all floors, walls and ceilings and for the maintenance in
a clean and sanitary condition of every other part of such
establishment.
A. No owner, agent of owner, real estate agent or broker, firm, company,
partnership, corporation or person or persons shall sell, rent, transfer,
grant lease, let, mortgage with right of occupancy or otherwise dispose
of the ownership or occupancy thereof, whether or not for a
consideration and whether such disposal of ownership or occupancy is
temporary or permanent, any dwelling, dwelling unit, hotel, motel,
rooming house, rooming unit, boardinghouse or premises on which a
building is located and is used or intended to be used for human
occupancy, until a certificate of approval is obtained from the
Construction Official stating that the building and premises comply
with the requirements of this article. Any person occupying such
premises or any person contracting with the owner for occupancy of the
premises by another shall be bound by the provisions of this section and
the penalties imposed for the violation of the same.
§ 235-14 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 235-16
10:520
B. There shall be a fee of $150 for all single-family dwellings or duplexes
and a fee of $125 per unit for each unit located within a multiple
dwelling or apartment house, hotel, motel, rooming house, rooming unit
or boardinghouse, or similar type building and structure, to cover the
cost of inspection necessary to the issuance of the certificate of
approval, as required in this section, which shall be paid by the person
disposing of the ownership or occupancy of the property. In the event
the Township Construction Official is called upon by the owner to make
an inspection and, having made said inspection, determines that the
unit inspected is in such a condition as to require denial of a certificate
and must therefore be reinspected, an additional fee, equivalent to the
initial inspection fee, shall be charged.
§ 235-16 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 235-16
10:521

ARTICLE II
Affordable Housing
[Adopted 2-24-1997 by Ord. No. 6-97]
§ 235-17. Purpose.
This article sets forth regulations regarding low- and moderate-income
housing units in the Township of Old Bridge that are consistent with the
provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:93 et seq., as effective on June 6, 1994. These
rules are pursuant to the Fair Housing Act of 1985132 and Township of Old
Bridge's constitutional obligation to provide for its fair share of low- and
moderate-income housing.
§ 235-18. Fair share plan.
A. Old Bridge Township's new construction or inclusionary component will
be divided equally between low- and moderate-income households as
per N.J.A.C. 5:93-2.20.
B. Except for inclusionary developments constructed pursuant to lowincome
tax credit regulations:
(1) At least half of all rental units within each inclusionary
development will be affordable to low-income households; and
(2) At least half of all rental units will be affordable to low-income
households; and
(3) At least one-third of all units in each bedroom distribution pursuant
to N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.3 will be affordable to low-income households.
C. Inclusionary developments that are not restricted to senior citizens will
be structured in conjunction with realistic market demands so that:
(1) The combination of efficiency and one-bedroom units is at least
10% and no greater than 20% of the total low- and moderateincome
units; and
(2) At least 30% of all low- and moderate-income units are twobedroom
units; and
(3) At least 20% of all low- and moderate-income units are threebedroom
units; and
(4) Low- and moderate-income units restricted to senior citizens may
utilize a moderate bedroom distribution. At a minimum, the number
of bedrooms will equal the number of senior citizens low- and
moderate-income units within the inclusionary development.
D. In conjunction with realistic market information, the following criteria
will be used in determining maximum rents and sale prices:
132. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.
§ 235-17 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 235-18
10:523
(1) Efficiency units will be affordable to one-person households; and
(2) One-bedroom units will be affordable to one-and-one-half-person
households; and
(3) Two-bedroom units will be affordable to three-person households;
and
(4) Three-bedroom units will be affordable to four-and-one-half-person
households; and
(5) Median income by household size will be established by a regional
weighted average of the uncapped Section 8 income limits
published by HUD as per N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.4(b); and
(6) The maximum average rent and price of low- and moderate-income
units within each inclusionary development will be affordable to
households earning 57.5% of median income; and
(7) Moderate-income sales units will be available for at least three
different prices, and low-income sales units will be available for at
least two different prices; and
(8) For both owner-occupied and rental units, the low- and moderateincome
units will utilize the same heating source as market units
within an inclusionary development; and
(9) Low-income units will be reserved for households with a gross
household income less than or equal to 50% of the median income
approved by COAH; moderate-income units will be reserved for
households with a gross household income less than 80% of the
median income approved by COAH as per N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.15; and
(10) The regulations outlined in N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.15 and 9.16 will be
applicable for purchased and rental units.
E. For rental units, developers and/or municipal sponsors may:
(1) Establish one rent for a low-income unit and one for a moderateincome
unit for each bedroom distribution; and
(2) Gross rents, including an allowance for tenant-paid utilities, will be
established so as not to exceed 30% of the gross monthly income of
the appropriate household size as per N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.4(a). The
tenant-paid utility allowance will be consistent with the utility
allowance approved by HUD for use in New Jersey.
F. For sale units.
(1) The initial price of a low- and moderate-income owner-occupied
single-family housing unit will be established so that, after a down
payment of 5%, the monthly principal, interest, homeowner and
private mortgage insurances, property taxes (based on the
restricted value of the low- and moderate-income unit) and
§ 235-18 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 235-18
10:524
condominium or homeowner fee do not exceed 28% of the eligible
gross monthly income; and
(2) Master deeds of inclusionary developments will regulate
condominium or homeowner association fees or special
assessments of low- and moderate-income purchasers at 75% of
those paid by market purchasers. This 75% is consistent with the
requirement of N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.4(e). Once established within the
master deed, the 75% will not be amended without prior approval
from COAH; and
(3) The Township of Old Bridge will follow the general provisions
concerning uniform deed restriction liens and enforcement through
certificates of occupancy or reoccupancy on sale units as per
N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.3; and
(4) Township of Old Bridge will require a certificate of reoccupancy for
any occupancy of a low- or moderate-income sales unit resulting
from a resale as per N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.3(c); and
(5) Municipal, state, nonprofit and seller options regarding sale units
will be consistent with N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.5 through 9.8. Municipal
rejection of repayment options for sale units will be consistent with
N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.9; and
(6) The continued application of options to create, rehabilitate or
maintain low- and moderate-income sale units will be consistent
with N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.10; and
(7) Eligible capital improvements prior to the expiration of controls on
sale units will be consistent with N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.11; and
(8) The regulations detailed in N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.12 through 9.14 will be
applicable to low- and moderate-income units that are for sale
units.
G. In zoning for inclusionary developments, the following is required:
(1) Low- and moderate-income units will be built in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.6(d):
Minimum Percent of
Low/Moderate-Income
Units Completed
Percent of Market Housing Units
Completed
0% 25%
10% 25% + 1 unit
50% 50%
75% 75%
100% 90%
100%
§ 235-18 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 235-18
10:525
(2) A design of inclusionary developments that integrates low- and
moderate-income units with market units is encouraged as per
N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.6(e).
H. A development fee ordinance was approved by COAH and adopted by
Old Bridge Township on April 7, 1996.
I. To provide assurances that low- and moderate-income units are created
with controls on affordability over time and that low- and moderateincome
households occupy these units, Old Bridge Township will
designate Affordable Housing Management Service (AHMS) with the
responsibility of ensuring the affordability of sales and rental units over
time. The AHMS will be responsible for those activities detailed in
N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.1(a).
(1) In addition, the AMHS will be responsible for utilizing the
verification and certification procedures outlined in N.J.A.C.
5:93-9.1(b) in placing households in low- and moderate-income
units; and
(2) Newly constructed low- and moderate-income sale units will
remain affordable to low- and moderate-income households for at
least 30 years. The Old Bridge Housing Authority will require all
conveyances of newly constructed units to contain the deed
restriction and mortgage lien adopted by COAH and referred to as
Technical Appendix E as found in N.J.A.C. 5:93; and
(3) Housing units created through the conversion of a nonresidential
structure will be considered a new housing unit and will be subject
to thirty-year controls on affordability. The Old Bridge Housing
Authority will require COAH's appropriate deed restriction and
mortgage lien.
J. Regarding rehabilitated units.
(1) Rehabilitated owner-occupied single-family housing units that are
improved to code standard will be subject to affordability controls
for at least six years; and
(2) Rehabilitated renter-occupied housing units that are improved to
code standard will be subject to affordability controls for at least 10
years.
K. Regarding rental units.
(1) Newly constructed low- and moderate-income rental units will
remain affordable to low- and moderate-income households for at
least 30 years. The Old Bridge Housing Authority will require the
deed restriction and lien and deed easement referred to as
Technical Appendix H as found in N.J.A.C. 5:93; and
(2) Affordability controls in accessory apartments will be for a period
of at least 10 years, except if the apartment is to receive a rental
§ 235-18 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 235-18
10:526
bonus credit pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.13, then the controls on
affordability will extend for 30 years; and
(3) Alternative living arrangements will be controlled in a manner
suitable to COAH, that provides assurances that such a facility will
house low- and moderate-income households for at least 10 years
except if the alternate living arrangement is to receive a rental
bonus credit pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.13, then the controls on
affordability will extend for 30 years.
L. Section 14(b) of the Fair Housing Act,133 N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.,
incorporates the need to eliminate unnecessary cost-generating
features from Old Bridge Township's land use ordinances. Accordingly,
Old Bridge Township will eliminate development standards that are not
essential to protect the public welfare and to expedite or fast track
municipal approvals/denials on inclusionary development applications.
Old Bridge Township will adhere to the components of N.J.A.C.
5:93-10.1 through 10.3.
M. The Township of Old Bridge has a fair share obligation of 659 units of
which 438 is new construction. This article will apply to all
developments that contain proposed low- and moderate-income units
that are listed below and any future development that may occur:
Highpointe Estate Development
Woodhaven Village (Application 24-89P)
Oaks Development (Application)
Olympia and York [Application 45-88 (A)(1)]
Kaplan at Spring Knolls (Application 68-89P)
Kapa Presidential (Application 95-882)
L&C Tobonowski (Application 65-912)
Yardley Development (Application 53-94P)
(1) The affirmative marketing plan is regional marketing strategy
designed to attract buyers and/or renters of all majority and
minority groups, regardless of sex, age or number of children, to
housing units which are being marketed by a developer/sponsor,
municipality and/or designated administrative agency of affordable
housing. The plan will address the requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:93-11.
In addition, the plan prohibits discrimination in the sale, rental,
financing or other services related to housing on the basis of race,
color, sex, religion, handicap, age, familial status/size or national
origin. The Township of Old Bridge is in the housing region
consisting of Middlesex. The affirmative marketing program is a
continuing program and will meet the following requirements:
133. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-314b.
§ 235-18 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 235-18
10:527
(a) All newspaper article, announcements and requests for
applications for low- and moderate-income units will appear in
the following daily regional newspaper/publications: Home
News and Tribune.
(2) The primary marketing will take the form of at least one press
release sent to the above publication and a paid display
advertisement in each of the above newspapers. Additional
advertising and publicity will be on an as-needed basis.
(3) The advertisement will include a description of the:
(a) Street address of the unit;
(b) Direction to housing units;
(c) Number of bedrooms per unit;
(d) Range of prices/rent;
(e) Size of units;
(f) Income information;
(g) Location of applications, including business hours; and
(h) Where/how applications may be obtained.
(4) All newspaper articles, announcements and requests for
applications for low- and moderate-income housing will appear in
the following neighborhood oriented weekly newspapers, religious
publications and organizational newsletters within the region:
Home News and Tribune, and Suburban.
(5) The following regional radio and/or cable television stations(s) will
be used: Township Cable TV 29.
(6) The following is the location of applications, brochure(s), sign(s)
and/or poster(s) used as part of the affirmative marketing program,
including specific employment centers within the region:
(a) Municipal administrative building.
(b) Municipal library.
(c) Developer's sales office.
(d) Major employers in region.
(7) The following is a list of community contact person(s) and/or
organization(s) in Somerset, Middlesex and Hunterdon Counties
that will aid in the affirmative marketing program with particular
emphasis on contacts that will reach out to groups that are least
likely to apply for housing within the region:134
§ 235-18 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 235-18
10:528
The Honorable James T. Phillips
Township of Old Bridge
One Old Bridge Plaza
Old Bridge, NJ 08857
Jerome J. Convery, Esq.
Township of Old Bridge
One Old Bridge Plaza
Old Bridge, NJ 08857
Municipal Clerk
Township of Old Bridge
One Old Bridge Plaza
Old Bridge, NJ 08857
Sebastian Rizzo, PP, PE
Township of Old Bridge
One Old Bridge Plaza
Old Bridge, NJ 08857
KAPA Residential, Highpointe Estates/Kapa Resid.
61 Village Court
Hazlet, NJ 07730
Brunetti
1655 Highway 9
Old Bridge, NJ 08857
K. Hovanian Central Acquisitions
110 Fieldcrest Avenue
CN 7825
Edison, NJ 08818-7825
134. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 235-18 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 235-18
10:529
Jeffrey Lehrer, Esq.
DiFrancesco, Bateman, Coley
15 Mountain Boulevard
Warren, NJ 07059
Michael S. Jacobs, Administrator
Old Bridge Township
One Old Bridge Plaza
Old Bridge, NJ 08857
Parminder Sumal, P.E., Acting Engineer
Old Bridge Township
One Old Bridge Plaza
Old Bridge, NJ 08857
Thomas O'Leary
Executive Director
Old Bridge Housing Authority
One Old Bridge Plaza
Old Bridge, NJ 08857
Yardley Development, Yardley Manor
61 Village Court
Hazlet, NJ 07730
Woodhaven Village, Atlantic Realty
90 Woodbridge Center Drive
Woodbridge, NJ 08857
(8) Quarterly flyers and applications will be sent to each of the
following agencies for publication in their journals and for
circulation among their members (list counties in housing region):
Board of Realtors in Somerset, Middlesex and Hunterdon Counties.
(9) Applications will be mailed to prospective applicants upon request.
(10) Additionally, quarterly informational circulars and applications will
be sent to the chief administrative employees of each of the
following agencies in the Counties of Somerset, Middlesex, and
Hunterdon:
(a) Welfare or Social Service Board.
§ 235-18 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 235-18
10:530
(b) Rental Assistance Office (local office of DCA).
(c) Office on Aging.
(d) Housing Agency or Authority.
(e) Library.
(f) Area Community Action Agencies.
(11) The following is a description of the random selection method that
will be used to select occupants of low- and moderate-income
housing: Per AHMS Procedures.
(12) The AHMS is the agency under contract with Old Bridge Township
to administer the affirmative marketing program. The AHMS has
the responsibility to income qualify low- and moderate-income
households; to place income-eligible households in low- and
moderate-income units upon initial occupancy; to provide for the
initial occupancy of low- and moderate-income units with incomequalified
households; to continue to qualify households for
reoccupancy of units as they become vacant during the period of
affordability controls; to assist with advertising and outreach to
low- and moderate-income households; and to enforce the terms of
the deed restriction and mortgage loan as per N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.1. The
Director of the Old Bridge Township Housing Authority within Old
Bridge Township is the designated housing officer to act as liaison
to AHMS. The Old Bridge Housing Authority will provide
counseling services to low- and moderate-income applicants on
subjects such as budgeting, credit issues, mortgage qualification,
rental lease requirements and mortgage qualification, rental lease
requirements and landlord/tenant law. The following service
providers have agreed to perform the above services: Old Bridge
Housing Authority and AHMS; screening and certificates.135
(13) Households who live or work in the COAH-established housing
region may be given preference for sales and rental units
constructed within that housing region. Applicants living outside
the housing region will have equal opportunity for units after
regional applicants have been initially serviced. The Township of
Old Bridge intends to comply with N.J.A.C. 5:93-11.7.
(14) All developers of low- and moderate-income housing units will be
required to assist in the marketing of the affordable units in their
respective developments.
(15) The marketing program will commence at least 120 days before the
issuance of either temporary or permanent certificates of
occupancy. The marketing program will continue until all low- and
135. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 235-18 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 235-18
10:531
moderate-income housing units are initially occupied and for as
long as affordable units are deed restricted and occupancy and
reoccupancy of units continue to be necessary.
(16) The Old Bridge Township Housing Authority will comply with
monitoring and reporting requirements as per N.J.A.C. 5:93-11.6
and 12.1.
N. Old Bridge Township will undertake a rehabilitation program to
rehabilitate 93 substandard housing units occupied by low- and
moderate-income households. Old Bridge Township has designated Old
Bridge Housing Authority to administer the rehabilitation program. The
Old Bridge Housing Authority will prepare a marketing plan for the
rehabilitation program. The rehabilitation program will be consistent
with N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.2(b) through 5.2(1).
§ 235-18 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 235-18
10:532
Chapter 242
PRECIOUS METALS AND SECONDHAND GOODS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Business establishments — See Ch. 86.
Flea markets — See Ch. 193.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 347.
§ 242-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCEPTABLE IDENTIFICATION — A current valid New Jersey driver's
license or identification card, a current valid photo driver's license issued
by another US state, a valid United States passport, or other verifiable
US government-issued identification, which will be recorded on the receipt
retained by the dealer and subsequently forwarded to the local police
department on request.
DEALER — Any person, partnership, limited liability company, corporation,
or other entity who, either wholly or in part, engages in or operates any
of the following trades or businesses: the buying for purposes of resale
of precious metals, jewelry, or other secondhand goods as defined herein;
pawnbrokers as defined herein; itinerant businesses as defined herein. For
the purposes of this chapter, transient buyers, as defined herein, are subject
to the same licensing and reporting requirements as any other dealers.
ITINERANT BUSINESS — A dealer who conducts business intermittently
within the municipality or at varying locations.
MUNICIPAL CLERK — The statutory officer whose duties are defined in
N.J.S.A. 40A:9-133 and may refer to the duly appointed clerk of the city,
town, Township, village, or borough.
PAWNBROKER — Any person, partnership, association or corporation:
lending money on deposit or pledge of personal property, other than choses
in action, securities, or printed evidences of indebtedness; purchasing
personal property on condition of selling it back at a stipulated price; or
doing business as furniture storage warehousemen and lending money on
goods, wares or merchandise pledged or deposited as collateral security.
PRECIOUS METALS — Gold, silver, platinum, palladium, and their alloys as
defined in N.J.S.A. 51:5-1 et seq. and N.J.S.A. 51:6-1 et seq.
PUBLIC — Individuals and retail sellers, not to include wholesale
transactions or transactions between other merchants.
REPORTABLE TRANSACTION — Every transaction conducted between a
dealer and a member of the public in which precious metals, jewelry, or any
other secondhand goods as defined herein are purchased or pawned.
§ 235-18 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 242-1
10:533
SECONDHAND GOODS — Used goods such as antiques, gold, silver,
platinum, or other precious metals, jewelry, coins, gemstones, gift cards,
any tools, telephones, typewriters, word processors, GPS devices,
computers, computer hardware and software, television sets, radios, record
or stereo sets, electronic devices, musical instruments, sporting goods,
automotive equipment, collectibles, game cartridges, DVDs, CDs, and other
electronically recorded material, firearms, cameras and camera equipment,
video equipment, furniture, clothing, and other valuable articles. For the
purposes of this chapter, "secondhand goods" shall not include goods
transacted in the following manner: i) judicial sales or sales by executors or
administrators; ii) occasional or auction sales of household goods sold from
private homes; iii) auctions of real estate; iv) the occasional sale, purchase,
or exchange of coins or stamps by a person at his permanent residence or
in any municipally owned building who is engaged in the hobby of collecting
coins or stamps and who does not solicit the sale, purchase, or exchange
of such coins or stamps to or from the general public by billboard, sign,
handbill, newspaper, magazine, radio, television, or other form of printed or
electronic advertising.
SELLER — A member of the public who sells or pawns used goods such as
precious metal, jewelry, or other secondhand goods to a dealer.
TRANSIENT BUYER — A dealer, as defined herein, who has not been in
a registered retail business continuously for at least six months at any
address in the municipality where the dealer is required to register or who
intends to close out or discontinue all retail business within six months.
§ 242-2. License requirement for dealers.
No person, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other
entity shall engage in the business of buying, selling, or pawning of precious
metals or other secondhand goods, as defined above, within the jurisdiction
of the municipality, without having first obtained a license therefor from
the Municipal Clerk, which license shall bear a number issued by the
Municipal Clerk. The application for a license to the Municipal Clerk shall
set forth the name, date of birth, and address of the dealer, whether or
not he or she is a citizen of the United States, and whether or not he or
she has ever been convicted of any crime(s), disorderly persons offense(s),
or municipal ordinance violation(s), and the date(s) thereof. Advertising
in any print or electronic media or by sign that any of those articles or
secondhand goods referred to in § 242-1 above are being bought in any
location within the municipality shall constitute engaging in business as
a dealer of secondhand goods for purposes of this chapter. No person,
partnership, limited liability company, corporation or other entity shall
place or cause to be placed any advertisement for purchase of such articles
or goods without stating in the advertising the license number issued to a
person or entity by the municipality. In any print advertisement, the license
number shall appear in type no smaller than eight point in the lower-righthand
corner of the advertisement. In any advertisement in electronic media,
the license number shall be visually or audibly stated. Failure to state or
§ 242-1 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 242-2
10:534
indicate the license number shall be a violation of this chapter and shall be
subject to the penalties established in § 242-8.
§ 242-3. Application process for dealers; approval or denial.
A. Upon receipt of an application completed pursuant to this chapter, and
payment of appropriate fee pursuant to § 242-7, the Municipal Clerk
shall refer such application to the Chief of Police, who shall make an
investigation of the prospective licensee pursuant to this chapter for
the purpose of determining the suitability of the applicant for licensing.
The investigation shall include, but shall not be limited to the following:
(1) The experience of the applicant in the business of purchase and
sale of those articles or goods referred to in § 242-1 above,
although nothing in this section shall be construed to warrant
denial of a license solely on the basis of lack of experience;
(2) The reputation of the applicant for fair dealing in the community,
which shall be made among credible sources, which sources shall
be disclosed to the applicant in the event of a denial of any license;
(3) Any criminal record of the applicant including any past convictions
for any crime(s), disorderly persons offense(s), or municipal
ordinance violation(s) within this or any other jurisdiction. The
Chief of Police may, as part of the application process, require a
fingerprint criminal background check through the Federal Bureau
of Investigation, Criminal Justice Information Services Division,
which may require an additional fee from the applicant.
(4) The type of operation contemplated to be conducted by the
applicant, particularly whether the business is to be operated from
a fixed location, whether it is to be conducted from a location
primarily devoted to the purchase and sale of precious metal or
other secondhand goods, and other factors bearing on whether the
licensed business will be of a fixed and permanent nature. This
section shall not be construed to require denial of any license solely
on the grounds that the business is not from a fixed location or that
the applicant is a transient buyer or itinerant business; however,
applicants who fall under the category of a transient buyer or
itinerant business must state with specificity on the license
application the business address where transaction records
required by § 242-5D of this chapter will be stored as well as the
location where purchased goods will be retained during the
mandatory inspection period required under § 242-5A.
B. The Chief of Police shall complete any investigation pursuant to this
chapter within 30 days of the submission of the application to the
Municipal Clerk, fully completed by the applicant. If a criminal record
check has been requested within the thirty-day period and has not been
received by the Chief of Police within that period, the Chief of Police
§ 242-2 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 242-3
10:535
§ 242-4. Identification of seller; recordkeeping requirements for
dealers.
For every reportable transaction between a dealer and the public, the
dealer shall be required to do as follows:
may, if all other factors are satisfactory, recommend a conditional
issuance of the license subject to the finding regarding criminal record.
C. The Chief of Police shall, upon completion of the investigation,
recommend grant or denial of the license to the Municipal Clerk, who
shall grant or deny the license. Any recommendation of the Chief of
Police shall be in writing and, in the case of a recommendation of
denial, shall state fully and specifically the reasons for said
recommendation. If the Municipal Clerk accepts the recommendation
of the Chief of Police to deny any license, the applicant shall be notified
in writing within 10 days of such denial and the Clerk shall forward to
the applicant a statement of the reason or reasons for such denial.
D. Grounds for recommending denial of license may include reliable
information indicating that the applicant has in the past engaged in
fraudulent or deceptive business practices in a business identical to or
similar to a dealer in secondhand goods. A license may be denied if the
investigation reveals a conviction of the applicant or any of its principal
officers or employees of any crime(s), disorderly persons offense(s) in
which deceit or misrepresentation is an element; or any conviction of
any crime(s), disorderly persons offense involving theft or the receiving
of stolen goods, regardless of whether the applicant was a principal,
accessory before the fact, after the fact, or a co-conspirator; or any
prior municipal ordinance violation(s) by the applicant or any of its
principal officers or employees in this or any other jurisdiction. A
license may be denied if the applicant fails to demonstrate an ability to
satisfactorily comply with the electronic reporting requirements
specified in § 242-4, the retention and inspection requirements of
§ 242-5, or any other portion of this chapter. Upon receipt of the
recommendation of the Chief of Police, the Municipal Clerk shall issue
or deny the license accordingly, contingent upon the receipt of a bond
as required by § 242-8 of this chapter.
E. Whenever any application for a permit is denied, the applicant shall be
entitled to a hearing before a three-person panel appointed by the Chief
of Police, at which time the applicant shall be permitted to introduce
such evidence as may be deemed relevant to such denial. Any applicant
exercising the right to appeal must file a written notice of appeal within
10 days of receiving written notice of denial of a license to act as a
dealer of secondhand goods.
F. No license shall be assignable by the dealer.
A. Require of each person selling or pawning precious metals or other
secondhand goods acceptable identification as defined above in § 242-1.
§ 242-3 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 242-4
10:536
B. Require each seller to execute a "declaration of ownership," which shall
contain the following certification: "My signature confirms that I am the
sole legal owner of and am legally authorized to sell the goods being
sold. By signing below I certify that I did not obtain and do not possess
the identified goods through unlawful means. I am the full age of 18
years and the identification presented is valid and correct."
C. Record and issue to each person selling or pawning such goods on a
sequentially numbered receipt:
(1) The name, address, and telephone number of the purchaser,
including the clerk or employee of the licensee making the
purchase;
(2) The name, address, date of birth, and telephone number of the
seller or sellers;
(3) A photographed recording of the seller in a format acceptable to
the Chief of Police, along with a physical description of the seller,
including height and weight (approximate), hair color, eye color,
facial hair, if any, etc.;
(4) A photographed recording of the seller's presented acceptable
identification, as set forth in § 242-1, in a format acceptable by the
Chief of Police;
(5) A photographed recording of all items sold in a format acceptable
by the Chief of Police. When photographing, all items must be
positioned in a manner that makes them readily and easily
identifiable. Items should not be grouped together when
photographing or imaging. Each item should have its own
photograph;
(6) The receipt number;
(7) A detailed, legible description of the item(s) and the manufacturer
and model of the item(s) if known; in the case of jewelry, the
descriptions must include style, length, color, design, and stones, if
any; any identifying marks, including numbers, dates, sizes,
shapes, initials, names, monograms, social security numbers
engraved thereon, serial numbers, series numbers, or any other
information, which sets apart the particular object from others of
like kind;
(8) The price paid for the purchase or pawn of the item(s);
(9) If precious metals, the net weight in terms of pounds Troy,
pennyweight (Troy) or kilograms/grams; fineness in terms of karats
for gold, and sterling or coin for silver, in accordance with N.J.S.A.
51:5-1, N.J.S.A. 51:6-1 et seq.;
(10) The time and date of the transaction.
§ 242-4 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 242-4
10:537
§ 242-5. Retention; revocation; other restrictions.
D. The information outlined in Subsection C above must additionally be
electronically documented through the use of an electronic database
system authorized by the Chief of Police. Installation and training in this
software will be made mandatory as of the effective date of this chapter
and licensing will be conditional upon compliance with proper use of
the system as described herein. These records shall be subject to the
inspection of any authorized police officer or any sworn law
enforcement officer acting in the performance of their duty as set forth
in Subsection F below. Through the use of applicably required computer
equipment, and using the electronic format approved by the Chief of
Police, every dealer shall enter all reportable transactions into the
electronic database by the end of the close of business on the same date
as the purchase or receipt of property for pawn or consignment. The
information entered must contain all pertinent information outlined in
Subsection C above.
E. In the event of a database failure, or dealer's computer equipment
malfunction, all transaction information is required to be submitted on
paper forms approved by the Chief of Police within 24 hours from the
date of purchase. In the event that paper forms are used, the dealer is
responsible to enter all transaction information set forth in Subsection
C above into the database as soon as possible upon the dealer's
equipment being repaired or replaced, or the database coming back
into service. Failure by the dealer to properly maintain computer
equipment in a reasonable fashion, or failure by the dealer to replace
faulty computer equipment, may result in the dealer being cited for a
violation of this chapter and subsequently being subject to the penalties
for doing so including revocation of the dealer's license as described in
§ 242-5.
F. It shall be the requisite duty of every dealer, and of every person in the
dealer's employ, to admit to the premises during business hours any
member of the police department to examine any database, book,
ledger, or any other record on the premises relating to the reportable
transactions of precious metals or other secondhand goods, as well as
the articles purchased or received and, where necessary, relinquish
custody of those articles as provided in § 242-5. Itinerant businesses
and transient buyers will be responsible for notifying the Chief of Police
of the address where these records and articles will be stored.
A. All precious metals, jewelry, and other secondhand goods purchased,
received for pawn, or received for consignment as described above, are
to be made available for inspection by the Chief of Police or designee
thereof at the designated business address for a period of at least seven
calendar days from the date the transaction information is actually
reported to the Chief of Police in the approved manner described above
in § 242-4. All precious metal or other secondhand goods subject to
inspection must remain in the same condition as when purchased or
§ 242-4 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 242-5
10:538
received for pawn and shall not be sold, disposed of, changed, modified,
or melted by the dealer until the seven-day retention period has
expired. Itinerant businesses and transient buyers will be responsible
for notifying the Chief of Police of the location where the purchased
item(s) are being held.
B. Upon probable cause that goods held by a dealer are stolen, and
provided that the seller signed the mandatory statement required by
§ 242-4B upon the sale of those goods, a law enforcement officer with
jurisdiction should charge the seller with theft by deception under
N.J.S.A. 2C:20-4 on behalf of the dealer, who shall be considered the
victim of the offense for the purposes of N.J.S.A. 2C:43-3. The officer
shall seize the goods, provide the dealer with a receipt, and issue a
criminal complaint against the seller for theft by deception and any
other criminal charges for which the officer has probable cause that the
seller has committed. If convicted of theft by deception and if so found
by an order of a court of valid jurisdiction, the seller will be responsible
for providing restitution to the dealer under N.J.S.A. 2C:44-2 for the
amount paid by the dealer to the seller for the stolen goods.
C. It shall be an affirmative defense to any prosecution or administrative
proceeding brought against a dealer for a violation of this section if
retention for the time period required would have resulted in serious
and substantial economic losses to the dealer, or the probability of such
losses was significant due to rapid and highly fluctuating market
conditions, provided that the persons so charged shall prove the
existence of the market conditions giving rise to the aforesaid defense
by a preponderance of the evidence. Market conditions, in order to be a
defense hereunder, must be such that financial analysts would
characterize trading as at or approaching a level or occurrence so as to
clearly distinguish trading conditions from normal variations in market
movement in response to economic news or other events.
D. In addition to all other reporting requirements, every dealer shall
maintain for at least five years a written record of all purchases of
precious metals and other secondhand goods in the form prescribed in
§ 242-4C.
E. No dealer shall purchase any item covered by this chapter from any
person under the age of 18 or in the absence of providing prior
notification of such purchase to the Chief of Police or business designee
identifying the individual from whom such purchase is to be made and
the item to be purchased.
F. Suspension. The Chief of Police or a designee thereof is hereby
empowered to temporarily suspend for cause any dealer's license and
rights to operate thereunder. This penalty shall be in addition to any
fines and penalties the dealer may incur pursuant to § 242-8 of this
chapter.
§ 242-5 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 242-5
10:539
(1) Grounds for suspension. The following shall constitute grounds for
suspension: violation of any provisions of this chapter, including
failure to comply with any training or fees associated with the
electronic database software system in use by the municipality;
violation of any other statute, regulation, or local ordinance; or any
other illegal, improper, or fraudulent activity.
(2) Procedure for suspension. Upon determination that appropriate
grounds exist and that a suspension is warranted, the Chief of
Police or a designee thereof shall issue a written notice of
suspension of license to the offending dealer and to the Municipal
Clerk, which shall set forth the grounds for the suspension and
notify the dealer of his or her right to appeal pursuant to
Subsection H. A temporary suspension shall issue immediately,
pending the outcome of any appeal taken. Suspended dealers must
immediately cease engaging in the business of purchasing for
resale, receiving for pawn, and/or selling of precious metals and/or
other secondhand goods in the municipality until reinstatement.
(3) Reinstatement. Suspended dealers may be reinstated only when
the grounds leading to the suspension have, in the determination of
the Chief of Police or the Chief's designee, been cured, corrected,
or appropriately rectified; or if reinstatement is deemed
appropriate by the three-person panel appointed by the Chief of
Police, upon the timely filing of an appeal as provided in Subsection
H.
G. Revocation. A license issued under this chapter may be revoked by the
Municipal Clerk upon written recommendation from the Chief of Police
or the Chief's designee that the dealer is no longer qualified, capable or
competent to comply with the requirements of this chapter. This penalty
shall be in addition to any fines and penalties the dealer may incur
under § 242-8.
(1) Grounds for revocation. The following shall constitute grounds for
revocation: a third violation under this chapter; a second violation
under this chapter less than one year after an earlier violation
under this chapter; conviction for a criminal offense within this or
any jurisdiction; or multiple violations of any other regulations or
local ordinances within this or any jurisdiction.
(2) Procedure for revocation. Upon a determination that appropriate
grounds exist and that a revocation is warranted, the Chief of
Police or the Chief's designee shall so report to the Municipal Clerk
in writing. A temporary suspension will immediately and
automatically issue, if one is not already in effect, pending the
outcome of the charge. A three-person panel, appointed by the
Chief of Police, shall review the stated grounds for revocation and
the panel shall issue an appropriate disposition of either
suspension, revocation, or reinstatement. If the panel determines
that revocation is the appropriate disposition, it shall set forth the
§ 242-5 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 242-5
10:540
§ 242-6. Bond.
Each dealer covered under this chapter shall deliver a bond to the
Municipal Clerk executed by the applicant as principal and executed by a
surety company authorized to do business under the laws of the State of
New Jersey as surety. The bond shall be subject to review and approval by
the Municipal Attorney, as defined in N.J.S.A. 40A:9-139, and shall be in the
penal sum of $10,000, conditioned for the due and proper observance of
and compliance with the provisions and requirements of all ordinances of
the municipality in force or which may be adopted respecting the conduct of
this business and conditioned also that the bond shall be and remain for the
benefit of any person or persons who shall have received judgment against
the dealer licensed under this chapter, which damage shall be established
by a judgment of a court of proper jurisdiction. Said bond shall contain the
following language: "The obligation of this bond shall, in addition to the
Township of Old Bridge, be and remain for the benefit of any person who
shall obtain a judgment against obligor as a result of damage sustained in
operation pursuant to any license granted under this chapter." Said bond
shall be kept for a minimum of one year from the date of issuance of license
and must be renewed annually along with the license. Said bond must be
irrevocable for the entire one-year period plus 30 days.
§ 242-7. Fees; period of license validity.
A nonrefundable fee for initial application and license for a pawnbroker or a
dealer in precious metals or other secondhand goods, as covered under this
chapter, is $300. The annual renewal fee for a license is $250. These fees
are separate from and in addition to any fees the dealer must pay in relation
grounds for the same in writing in the form of a notice of
revocation, which shall be provided to the dealer. The notice shall
advise the dealer of the right to appeal. If the panel determines
that suspension is the appropriate disposition, it shall provide the
dealer with a notice of suspension that shall advise the dealer of the
right to appeal. Following revocation, the dealer must relinquish
his or her license and must immediately and indefinitely cease
operating as a dealer of precious metals or other secondhand goods
within the municipality.
H. Appeal. Any applicant wishing to appeal an issuance of a suspension or
revocation shall be entitled to a hearing before a three-person panel,
appointed by the Chief of Police, at which time the applicant shall be
permitted to introduce such evidence as may be deemed relevant to
such suspension or revocation. Any applicant exercising the right to
appeal must file a written notice of appeal within 10 days of receiving
written notice of revocation or suspension of license.
I. A dealer shall have the right to change the location of the licensed
business, provided that he or she notifies the Municipal Clerk, in
writing, of the street address of said new location.
§ 242-5 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 242-7
10:541
to the mandatory electronic database system designated by the Chief of
Police, as provided by § 242-4D of this chapter. Payments are to be made in
the manner directed by the Municipal Clerk. A license is valid for a one-year
period from the date of its issuance.
§ 242-8. Violations and penalties.
Violation of any provision of this chapter by any dealer shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not in excess of the limitations
of N.J.S.A. 40:49-5 or by a term of imprisonment or a period of community
service not exceeding 90 days in addition to a suspension or revocation of
operating license as provided in § 242-5F and § 242-5G above. Each and
every violation shall be considered a separate violation. Each violation shall
result in an additional suspension period. Any person who is found guilty
of violating the provisions of this chapter within one year of the date of
a previous violation and who was fined for the previous violation may be
sentenced by the court to an additional fine as a repeat offender and, in
addition, may be subject to revocation proceedings as provided in § 242-5G.
The additional fine imposed as a repeat offender shall not be less than the
minimum or exceed the maximum fine provided herein, and same shall be
calculated separately from the fine imposed for the violation of this chapter.
§ 242-9. Time limit for conformance.
Any person, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other
entity engaging in the business of a pawnbroker, or a dealer in precious
metals or other secondhand goods shall conform to the provisions of this
chapter within 90 days following the effective date of this chapter.
Chapter 247
JUNKYARDS
§ 247-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
JUNKYARD — An area, covered or uncovered, used for the purpose of
buying, selling, exchanging or storing old or secondhand metals, bottles,
glassware, tinware, paper, lumber, plumbing fixtures, dismantled or
inoperable automobiles or any other thing which is no longer used or usable
for its intended purpose but which may have value because of the parts or
materials it contains.
§ 247-2. License required.
No person shall operate a junkyard in the Township without having first
obtained a license from the Clerk and paid the required license fee.
§ 242-7 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 247-3
10:542
§ 247-3. License fee; expiration.136
There shall be charged and collected for the license an annual fee as set
forth in § 347-4. The license shall expire at the end of each calendar year.
The license fee shall be payable to the Township Clerk for each year or part
thereof.
§ 247-4. Application information.
In addition to the information required by § 247-2, the application for a
license under this chapter shall be accompanied by a plot plan in triplicate
and drawn to scale showing the dimensions of the premises, the location of
all fences and screening and any other information which may appropriately
be required for the effective enforcement of this chapter.
§ 247-5. Bond required.
The application shall be accompanied by a bond to the Township in the
penal sum of $1,000, with a surety or sureties or collateral security
approved by the Mayor and Council, conditioned for the due observance
during the term of the license of all laws, ordinances, rules and regulations
in force or thereafter adopted by the duly constituted authorities of the
Township applicable to junkyards or junkyard business.
§ 247-6. Certificate of occupancy.
No license shall in any event be issued unless the applicant has obtained a
certificate of occupancy of the location to be used therefor.
§ 247-7. Investigation.
In addition to the investigation provided for by § 247-2, the Construction
Official shall inspect the premises for which a license is desired to
determine whether it complies with the provisions of this chapter. He shall
report the results of his investigation to the Clerk. No license shall be issued
unless the Construction Official's report is favorable. In addition, no license
shall be issued until the Administrator has verified that the junkyard sought
to be licensed is a legal nonconforming use.
§ 247-8. Fencing.
Each licensed place or premises shall at all times be entirely surrounded or
fenced by a fence extending from the ground to a height not greater than
eight feet. It shall be of cinder block or other masonry construction firmly
supported on adequate concrete footing. The fence shall not be used for
advertising purposes either by the operator of the business or by any other
person, except that there may be affixed to the fence a sign not larger than
60 inches by 20 inches, setting forth the name of the business.
136. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 247-3 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 247-9
10:543
§ 247-9. Health and safety regulations.
§ 247-10. Location.
No license issued hereunder shall entitle the licensee to operate thereunder,
at, in or on any other lot, building or location than that which is specified in
the license.
§ 247-11. Inspection.
The Construction Official may inspect any junkyard at any reasonable time
to ascertain whether the provisions of this chapter are being complied with.
A. Adequate precautions shall be taken in every junkyard to prevent fire
from breaking out or spreading. In particular, no explosive or extremely
inflammable material shall be stored in a junkyard.
B. No material shall be treated, separated or prepared by burning the
same by means of fire unless such burning shall be by a mechanically
controlled method approved by the Fire Official, provided that the Fire
Official may from time to time grant special permits to allow burning by
fire without any mechanical control thereof at such places and times
and with such precautions as may be deemed safe to life and property in
the neighborhood. [Amended 1-3-1989 by Ord. No. 70-88]
C. Junk shall be stored and stacked so as to permit customers of the
junkyard and other persons to move about easily and without risking
injury.
D. No material shall be stored or deposited on any licensed premises to a
height greater than the height of the fence required to be constructed
around such premises.
E. It shall be unlawful to hammer or pound any metals, or other materials
on the premises, between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on
weekdays, or at any time on Sundays.
F. No automobiles, parts thereof or other junk or material shall be
stacked, placed or kept within 20 feet of the inside sidewalk line of any
street.
G. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to permit any of the materials
regulated herein to be placed upon the licensed premises in such a
manner as to permit rainwater to collect and remain in and about the
premises for a period longer than 24 hours.
H. No operator of a junkyard shall permit rodents or conditions likely to
attract rodents, or any other unhealthy or unsanitary conditions, to
exist on the premises.
§ 247-9 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 247-12
10:544
§ 247-12. Police and fire regulations; inspection; report.
The licensed place or premises shall at all times comply with all necessary
police or fire regulations imposed by the Police and Fire Departments
of the Township in order to prevent conflagration and the storage and
disposition of stolen property. The business and the place and premises
where conducted shall be subject to reasonable inspection by police and fire
authorities of the Township. It shall be the duty of the Fire Official and the
Chief of Police to immediately report in writing to the Administrator any
violation of any regulation imposed by their respective departments. The
report shall set out the specific regulation violated and the nature of the
violation.
§ 247-13. Daily record required.
Each licensee shall keep a daily record, in ink or indelible pencil and in
the English language, of all motor vehicles or parts thereof purchased,
including an accurate description of the person from whom purchased; a
complete description of the purchase which shall include the name of the
motor, body, axle, coil, starter, carburetor, magneto, steering gear, radiator
and manufacturer's number and any other serial number; the style of the
body, model, color and license number thereof; and the day and hour of
the purchase and the price paid. Such record shall at all reasonable times
be open for inspection to any member of the Police Department of the
Township or to any person duly authorized by the Administrator.
§ 247-14. Junkyards. [Added 3-23-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-06]
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ACCEPTABLE IDENTIFICATION — A current valid New Jersey driver's
license or identification card, a current valid photo driver's license
issued by another US state, a valid United States passport, or other
verifiable US government-issued identification, which will be recorded
on the receipt retained by the dealer and subsequently forwarded to the
local police department on request.
DEALER — Any person, partnership, limited liability company,
corporation, or other entity who, either wholly or in part, engages in
or operates a scrap metal business involving the buying and/or selling
of scrap metal as defined herein, including itinerant businesses, and
transient buyers as defined herein.
ITINERANT BUSINESS — Any scrap metal dealer who conducts
business intermittently within the municipality or at varying locations.
MUNICIPAL CLERK — The statutory officer whose duties are defined in
N.J.S.A. 40A:9-133 and who is duly appointed as municipal clerk of the
Township of Old Bridge.
PUBLIC — Individuals and retail sellers, not to include wholesale
transactions or transactions between other merchants.
§ 247-12 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 247-14
10:545
REPORTABLE TRANSACTION — Every transaction conducted between
a dealer and a member of the public in which scrap metal is purchased
or pawned.
SCRAP METAL — Used, discarded, or previously owned items that
consist predominantly of ferrous metals, aluminum, brass, copper, lead,
chromium, tin, nickel, or alloys.
SCRAP METAL BUSINESS — A commercial establishment, which, as
one of its principal business purposes, purchases scrap metal for
purposes of resale or processing including transient buyers of scrap
metal and itinerant businesses, as defined herein.
SELLER — A member of the public who sells scrap metal to a dealer.
TRANSIENT BUYER — An operator of a scrap metal business, as
defined herein, who has not been in the scrap metal business
continuously for at least six months at any address in the municipality
where the dealer is required to register or who intends to close out or
discontinue the scrap metal business within six months.
B. License requirements for dealers. No person, partnership, limited
liability company, corporation, or other entity shall engage in a scrap
metal business, as defined above, within the jurisdiction of the
municipality, without having first obtained a license therefor from the
Municipal Clerk, which license shall bear a number issued by the
Municipal Clerk. The application for a license to the Municipal Clerk
shall set forth the name, date of birth, and address of the dealer,
whether or not he or she is a citizen of the United States, and whether
or not he or she has ever been convicted of any crime(s), disorderly
persons offense(s), or municipal ordinance violation(s), and the date(s)
thereof. Advertising in any print or electronic media or by sign
regarding the purchase of scrap metal at any location within the
municipality shall constitute engaging in business as a dealer of scrap
metal within the jurisdiction of the municipality for purposes of this
chapter. No person, partnership, limited liability company, corporation
or other entity shall place or cause to be placed any advertisement for
purchase of such item(s) without stating in the advertising the license
number issued to a person or entity by the municipality. In any print
advertisement, the license number shall appear in type no smaller than
eight point in the lower-right-hand corner of the advertisement. In any
advertisement in electronic media, the license number shall be visually
or audibly stated. Failure to state or indicate the license number shall
be a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the penalties
established in § 247-14H.
C. Application process for dealers; approval or denial.
(1) Upon receipt of an application completed pursuant to this chapter,
the Municipal Clerk shall refer such application to the Chief of
Police, who shall make an investigation of the prospective licensee,
pursuant to this chapter for the purpose of determining the
§ 247-14 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 247-14
10:546
suitability of the applicant for licensing. The investigation shall
include, but shall not be limited to the following:
(a) The experience of the applicant in the business of purchase
and sale of scrap metal, although nothing in this section shall
be construed to warrant denial of a license solely on the basis
of lack of experience;
(b) The reputation of the applicant for fair dealing in the
community, which shall be made among credible sources,
which sources shall be disclosed to the applicant in the event of
a denial of any license;
(c) Any criminal record of the applicant including any past
convictions for any crime(s), disorderly persons offense(s), or
municipal ordinance violation(s) within this or any other
jurisdiction. The Chief of Police may, as part of the application
process, require a fingerprint criminal background check
through the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Criminal Justice
Information Services Division, which may require an additional
fee from the applicant.
(d) The type of operation contemplated to be conducted by the
applicant, particularly whether the business is to be operated
from a fixed location, whether it is to be conducted from a
location primarily devoted to the purchase and sale of scrap
metal, and other factors bearing on whether the licensed
business will be of a fixed and permanent nature. This section
shall not be construed to require denial of any license solely on
the grounds that the business is not from a fixed location or
that the applicant is a transient buyer or itinerant business,
however applicants who fall under the category of a transient
buyer or itinerant business must state with specificity on the
license application the business address where transaction
records required by § 247-14E(4) of this chapter will be stored
as well as the location where scrap metal goods purchased will
be retained during the mandatory inspection period required
under § 247-14E(1).
(2) The Chief of Police shall complete any investigation pursuant to
this chapter within 30 days of the submission of the application to
the Municipal Clerk, fully completed by the applicant. If a criminal
record check has been requested within the thirty-day period and
has not been received by the Chief of Police within that period, the
Chief of Police may, if all other factors are satisfactory, recommend
a conditional issuance of the license subject to the finding
regarding criminal record.
(3) The Chief of Police shall, upon completion of the investigation,
recommend grant or denial of the license to the Municipal Clerk,
who shall grant or deny the license. Any recommendation of the
§ 247-14 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 247-14
10:547
Chief of Police shall be in writing and, in the case of a
recommendation of denial, shall state fully and specifically the
reasons for said recommendation. If the Municipal Clerk accepts
the recommendation of the Chief of Police to deny any license, the
applicant shall be notified in writing within 10 days of such denial
and the Clerk shall forward to the applicant a statement of the
reason or reasons for such denial.
(4) Grounds for recommending denial of license may include reliable
information indicating that the applicant has in the past engaged in
fraudulent or deceptive business practices in a business identical to
or similar to a scrap metal business. A license may be denied if the
investigation reveals a conviction of the applicant or any of its
principal officers or employees of any crime(s), disorderly persons
offense(s) in which deceit or misrepresentation is an element; or
any conviction of any crime(s), disorderly persons offense involving
theft or the receiving of stolen goods, regardless of whether the
applicant was a principal, accessory before the fact, after the fact,
or a co-conspirator; or any prior municipal ordinance violation(s) by
the applicant or any of its principal officers or employees in this or
any other jurisdiction. A license may be denied if the applicant fails
to demonstrate an ability to satisfactorily comply with the
electronic reporting requirements specified in § 247-14D, the
retention and inspection requirements of § 247-14E, or any other
portion of this chapter. Upon receipt of the recommendation of the
Chief of Police, the Municipal Clerk shall issue or deny the license
accordingly, contingent upon the receipt of a bond as required by
§ 247-14F of this chapter.
(5) Whenever any application for a permit is denied, the applicant shall
be entitled to a hearing before a three-person panel appointed by
the Chief of Police, at which time the applicant shall be permitted
to introduce such evidence as may be deemed relevant to such
denial. Any applicant exercising the right to appeal must file a
written notice of appeal within 10 days of receiving written notice
of denial of a license to act as a scrap metal business. Notice must
be filed with the municipal clerk of Old Bridge Township.
(6) No license shall be assignable by the dealer.
D. Identification of seller; recordkeeping requirements for dealers. For
every reportable transaction between a dealer and the public, the
dealer shall be required to do as follows:
(1) Require of each member of the public selling scrap metal
acceptable identification as defined above in § 247-14A.
(2) Require each seller to execute a "declaration of ownership," which
shall contain the following certification: "My signature confirms
that I am the sole legal owner of and am legally authorized to sell
the goods being sold. By signing below I certify that I did not obtain
§ 247-14 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 247-14
10:548
and do not possess the identified goods through unlawful means. I
am the full age of 18 years and the identification presented is valid
and correct."
(3) Record and issue to each person selling scrap metal on a
sequentially numbered receipt:
(a) The name, address, and telephone number of the purchaser,
including the clerk or employee of the licensee making the
purchase;
(b) The name, address, date of birth, and telephone number of the
seller or sellers;
(c) A photographed recording of the seller in a format acceptable
to the Chief of Police, along with a physical description of the
seller, including height and weight (approximate), hair color,
eye color, facial hair, if any, etc.;
(d) A photographed recording of the seller's presented acceptable
identification, as set forth in § 247-14A, in a format acceptable
to the Chief of Police;
(e) A photographed recording of all items sold in a format
acceptable to the Chief of Police;
(f) The receipt number;
(g) A full description of the item(s) purchased, including but not
limited to the manufacturer, type, amount, form, model, any
identifying marks, numbers, dates, sizes, shapes, initials,
monograms, and serial numbers;
(h) The price paid for the item(s);
(i) The make, model and license plate of the motor vehicle
delivering the scrap metal;
(j) The time and date of the transaction,
(4) The information outlined in Subsection D(3) above must
additionally be documented through the use of an electronic
database software system authorized by the Chief of Police.
Installation and training in this software will be made mandatory as
of the effective date of this chapter and licensing will be conditional
upon compliance with proper use of the system as described
herein. These records shall be subject to the inspection of any
authorized police officer or any sworn law enforcement officer
acting in the performance of their duty as set forth in Subsection
D(6) below. Through the use of applicably required computer
equipment, and using the electronic format approved by the Chief
of Police, every dealer shall enter all reportable transactions into
the electronic database by the end of the close of business on the
§ 247-14 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 247-14
10:549
same date as the purchase. The information entered must contain
all pertinent information outlined in Subsection D(3) above.
(5) In the event of a database failure, or dealer's computer equipment
malfunction, all transaction information is required to be submitted
on paper forms approved by the Chief of Police within 24 hours
from the date of purchase. In the event that paper forms are used,
the dealer is responsible to enter all transaction information set
forth in Subsection D(3) above into the database as soon as possible
upon the dealer's equipment being repaired or replaced, or the
database coming back into service. Failure by the dealer to
properly maintain computer equipment in a reasonable fashion, or
failure by the dealer to replace faulty computer equipment, may
result in the dealer being cited for a violation of this chapter and
subsequently being subject to the penalties for doing so including
revocation of the dealer's license as described in § 247-14E.
(6) It shall be the requisite duty of every dealer, and of every person in
the dealer's employ, to admit to the premises during business hours
any member of the police department to examine any database,
book, ledger, or any other record on the premises relating to the
reportable transactions of scrap metal as well as the articles
purchased and, where necessary, relinquish custody of those
articles as provided in § 247-14E. Itinerant businesses and
transient buyers will be responsible for notifying the Chief of Police
of the address where records and articles will be stored.
(7) For all reportable transactions between a dealer and a member of
the public, the dealer may only accept delivery of scrap metal for
purchase by motor vehicle and the license plate of the motor
vehicle must be recorded as provided in Subsection D(3) above.
(8) No scrap metal business shall, except as provided in Subsection
D(9) below, purchase:
(a) Any metal marked with identification of a telephone, cable,
electric, water, other public utility, or other government entity;
(b) Any utility access or water meter cover;
(c) Any street light pole or fixture;
(d) Any road or bridge guard rail;
(e) Any highway or street sign, traffic directional or control sign,
or light signal;
(f) Any metal beer keg that is clearly marked as being the
property of the beer manufacturer;
(g) Any historical marker, grave marker, or burial vase;
§ 247-14 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 247-14
10:550
(h) Any central air conditioner evaporator coils or condensers or
catalytic converters that are not attached to a vehicle; or
(i) Any metal bleachers or benches.
(9) The provisions of Subsection D(8) shall not apply to purchases of
scrap metal from entities who manage such metal in the ordinary
course of business. These entities include manufacturing,
industrial, government, contractor, individual, or other commercial
vendors or scrap metal businesses that generate or purchase or
process scrap metal in the ordinary course of business.
E. Retention; suspension and revocation; other restrictions.
(1) All scrap metal purchased by a dealer in a reportable transaction
are to be made available for inspection by the Chief of Police or
designee thereof at the designated business address for a period of
at least seven calendar days from the date the transaction
information is actually reported to the Chief of Police in the
approved manner described above in § 247-14D. All scrap metal
subject to inspection must remain in the same condition as when
purchased and shall not be sold, disposed of, changed, modified, or
melted by the dealer until the seven-day retention period has
expired. Itinerant businesses and transient buyers will be
responsible for notifying the Chief of Police of the location where
the purchased scrap metal is being held.
(2) Upon probable cause that goods held by a dealer are stolen, and
providing that the seller signed the mandatory statement required
by § 247-14D(2) upon the sale of those goods, a law enforcement
officer with jurisdiction should charge the seller with theft by
deception under N.J.S.A. 2C:20-4 on behalf of the dealer, who shall
be considered the "victim" of the offense for the purposes of
N.J.S.A. 2C:43-3. The officer shall seize the goods, provide the
dealer with a receipt, and issue a criminal complaint against the
seller for theft by deception and any other criminal charges for
which the officer has probable cause that the seller has committed.
If convicted of theft by deception and if so found by an order of a
court of valid jurisdiction, the seller will be responsible for
providing restitution to the dealer under N.J.S.A. 2C:44-2 for the
amount paid by the dealer to the seller for the stolen goods.
(3) It shall be an affirmative defense to any prosecution or
administrative proceeding brought against a dealer for a violation
of this section if retention for the time period required would have
resulted in serious and substantial economic losses to the dealer, or
the probability of such losses was significant due to rapid and
highly fluctuating market conditions, provided that the persons so
charged shall prove the existence of the market conditions giving
rise to the aforesaid defense by a preponderance of the evidence.
Market conditions, in order to be a defense hereunder, must be
§ 247-14 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 247-14
10:551
such that financial analysts would characterize trading as at or
approaching a level or occurrence so as to clearly distinguish
trading conditions from normal variations in market movement in
response to economic news or other events.
(4) In addition to all other reporting requirements, every dealer shall
maintain for at least eight years a written record of all purchases of
scrap metal in the manner prescribed in § 247-14D(3).
(5) No dealer shall purchase any item covered by this chapter from any
person under the age of 18 or in the absence of providing prior
notification of such purchase to the Chief of Police or his/her
designee or business designee identifying the individual from
whom such purchase is to be made and the item to be purchased.
(6) Suspension. The Chief of Police or a designee thereof is hereby
empowered to temporarily suspend for cause any dealer's license
and rights to operate thereunder. This penalty shall be in addition
to any fines and penalties the dealer may incur pursuant to
§ 247-14H of this chapter.
(a) Grounds for suspension. The following shall constitute grounds
for suspension: violation of any provisions of this chapter,
including failure to comply with any training or fees associated
with the electronic database software system in use by the
municipality; violation of any other statute, regulation, or local
ordinance; or any other illegal, improper, or fraudulent activity.
(b) Procedure for suspension. Upon determination that
appropriate grounds exist and that a suspension is warranted,
the Chief of Police or a designee thereof shall issue a written
notice of suspension of license to the offending dealer and to
the Municipal Clerk, which shall set forth the grounds for the
suspension and notify the dealer of his or her right to appeal,
pursuant to Subsection E(8). A temporary suspension shall
issue immediately, pending the outcome of any appeal taken.
Suspended dealers must immediately cease all purchasing
and/or selling of scrap metal in the municipality until
reinstatement.
(c) Reinstatement. Suspended dealers may be reinstated only
when the grounds leading to the suspension have, in the
determination of the Chief of Police or the Chief's designee,
been cured, corrected, or appropriately rectified; or if
reinstatement is deemed appropriate by the three-person
panel appointed by the Chief of Police, upon the timely filing of
an appeal as provided in Subsection E(8).
(7) Revocation. A license issued under this chapter may be revoked by
the Municipal Clerk upon written recommendation from the Chief
of Police or the Chief's designee that the dealer is no longer
qualified, capable or competent to comply with the requirements of
§ 247-14 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 247-14
10:552
this chapter. This penalty shall be in addition to any fines and
penalties the dealer may incur under § 247-14H.
(a) Grounds for revocation. The following shall constitute grounds
for revocation: a third violation under this chapter; a second
violation under this chapter less than one year after an earlier
violation under this chapter; conviction for a criminal offense
within this or any jurisdiction; or multiple violations of any
regulations or local ordinances within this or any jurisdiction.
(b) Procedure for revocation. Upon a determination that
appropriate grounds exist and that a revocation is warranted,
the Chief of Police or the Chief's designee shall so report to the
Municipal Clerk in writing. A temporary suspension will
immediately and automatically issue, if one is not already in
effect, pending the outcome of the charge. A three-person
panel, appointed by the Chief of Police, shall review the stated
grounds for revocation and the panel shall issue an appropriate
disposition of either suspension, revocation, or reinstatement.
If the panel determines that revocation is the appropriate
disposition, it shall set forth the grounds for the same in
writing in the form of a notice of revocation, which shall be
provided to the dealer. The notice shall advise the dealer of the
right to appeal. If the panel determines that suspension is the
appropriate disposition, it shall provide the dealer with a
notice of suspension that shall advise the dealer of the right to
appeal. Following revocation, the dealer must relinquish his or
her license and must immediately and indefinitely cease
operating a scrap metal business within the municipality.
(8) Appeal. Any applicant wishing to appeal an issuance of a
suspension or revocation shall be entitled to a hearing before a
three-person panel, appointed by the Chief of Police, at which time
the applicant shall be permitted to introduce such evidence as may
be deemed relevant to such suspension or revocation. Any
applicant exercising the right to appeal must file a written notice of
appeal within 10 days with the Township of Old Bridge Municipal
Clerk of receiving written notice of revocation or suspension of
license.
(9) A dealer shall have the right to change the location of the licensed
business, provided that he or she notifies the Municipal Clerk, in
writing, of the street address of said new location.
F. Bond. Each dealer covered under this chapter shall deliver a bond to
the Municipal Clerk executed by the applicant as principal and
executed by a surety company authorized to do business under the laws
of the State of New Jersey as surety. The bond shall be subject to review
and approval by the Municipal Attorney, as defined in N.J.S.A.
40A:9-139, and shall be in the penal sum of $10,000, conditioned for the
due and proper observance of and compliance with the provisions and
§ 247-14 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 247-14
10:553
requirements of all ordinances of the municipality in force or which
may be adopted respecting the conduct of this business and conditioned
also that the bond shall be and remain for the benefit of any person or
persons who shall have received judgment against the dealer licensed
under this chapter, which damage shall be established by a judgment
of a court of proper jurisdiction. Said bond shall contain the following
language: "The obligation of this bond shall, in addition to the Township
of Old Bridge, be and remain for the benefit of any person who shall
obtain a judgment against obligor as a result of damage sustained in
operation pursuant to any license granted under this chapter." Said
bond shall be kept for a minimum of one year from the date of issuance
of license and must be renewed annually along with the license. Said
bond must be irrevocable for the entire one-year period plus 30 days.
G. Fees; period of license validity. A nonrefundable fee for initial
application and license for an operator of a scrap metal business, as
covered under this chapter, is $300. The annual renewal fee for a
license is $250. These fees are separate from and in addition to any fees
the dealer will be required to pay in relation to the mandatory
electronic database system designated by the Chief of Police, as
provided by § 247-14D(4) of this chapter. Payments are to be made in
the manner directed by the Municipal Clerk. A license is valid for a oneyear
period from the date of its issuance.
H. Violations and penalties. Violation of any provision of this chapter by
any dealer shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not in
excess of $2,000 but no less than $250 or by a term of imprisonment or
a period of community service not exceeding 90 days in addition to a
suspension or revocation of operating license as provided in
§ 247-14E(6) and (7) above. Each and every violation shall be
considered a separate violation. Each violation shall result in an
additional suspension period. Any person who is found guilty of
violating the provisions of this chapter within one year of the date of a
previous violation and who was fined for the previous violation may be
sentenced by the court to an additional fine as a repeat offender and, in
addition, may be subject to revocation proceedings as provided in
§ 247-14E(7). The additional fine imposed as a repeat offender shall not
be less than the minimum or exceed the maximum fine provided herein,
and same shall be calculated separately from the fine imposed for the
violation of this chapter.
I. Time limit for conformance. Any person, partnership, limited liability
company, corporation, or other entity engaging in the scrap metal
business shall conform to the provisions of this chapter within 90 days
following the effective date of this chapter.
§ 247-14 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 247-14
10:554
Chapter 250
LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental Commission — See Ch. 5, Art.
XVIII.
Historic Preservation Commission — See Ch.
5, Art. XXI.
Adult entertainment — See Ch. 14.
Notification of conservation easements — See
Ch. 103.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 108.
Right to farm — See Ch. 151.
Fences — See Ch. 164.
Flea markets — See Ch. 193.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 198.
Housing — See Ch. 235.
Junkyards — See Ch. 247.
Township maps and photographs — See Ch.
277.
Noise — See Ch. 300.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 366.
Public records — See Ch. 380.
Holiday sales and Christmas tree sales — See
Ch. 394.
Public swimming pools — See Ch. 438.
Trees — See Ch. 457.
§ 247-14 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 247-14
10:555

ARTICLE I
General
§ 250-1. Short title.
This chapter, comprising Chapter 250 of the Code of the Township of Old
Bridge, shall be known and may be cited as the "Old Bridge Township Land
Development Ordinance."
§ 250-2. Purpose.
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to exercise the authority
delegated to municipalities by the New Jersey Municipal Land Use Law
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.) and, in conformance with the purposes of such
law:
A. To guide the appropriate use or development of all lands within the
boundaries of the Township of Old Bridge in a manner that will promote
and protect the public health, safety, morals and general welfare and
which is consistent with the availability and capacity of public facilities
and services;
B. To secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other natural and man-made
disasters;
C. To provide adequate light, air, and open space;
D. To ensure that the development of the municipality does not conflict
with the development and general welfare of neighboring
municipalities, the county and the state as a whole;
E. To establish population densities and concentrations which:
(1) Provide for a moderate increase in the existing rural and suburban
areas of the municipality so as to avoid scattered development and
premature construction of public facilities;
(2) Will contribute to the well-being of persons, neighborhoods,
communities and regions and the preservation of the environment;
and
(3) Are consistent with the character and density of surrounding
developed areas, topography, adequacy of circulation and other
community facilities;
F. To encourage the appropriate and efficient expenditure of public funds
by the coordination of public development with land use policies;
G. To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for a variety of uses
and open space, both public and private, according to their respective
environmental requirements;
§ 250-1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-2
10:557
H. To encourage the location and design of transportation routes that will
promote the free flow of traffic while discouraging locations of such
facilities and routes that result in congestion or blight;
I. To promote a desirable visual environment through creative
development techniques, good civil design and arrangements;
J. To promote the conservation of open space and valuable natural
resources and to prevent urban sprawl and degradation of the
environment through improper use of land;
K. To encourage senior citizen community housing construction;
L. To encourage coordination of the various public and private procedures
and activities shaping land development with a view to lessening the
cost of such development and to the more efficient use of land;
M. To promote the conservation of energy through the use of planning
practices designed to reduce energy consumption and to provide for
maximum utilization of renewable energy sources;
N. To achieve the desired ends of the Township's growth management
policies by limiting development which is dependent on public facilities
outside of growth areas to a fixed number of permits per annum, in
accordance with the Old Bridge Township Master Plan and Capital
Improvements Program, unless it is otherwise determined that the
Township has sufficient resources to accommodate land development
over and above the planned growth rate, as therein set forth;
O. To preserve the ecology of water-related areas, such as freshwater and
saltwater wetlands, floodplains, and aquifer recharge areas;
P. To preserve the visual character of existing open spaces;
Q. To encourage rural residential clustering for the preservation of open
space;
R. To encourage a large lot, single-family land use pattern in appropriate
locations;
S. To reinforce the single-family land use pattern on smaller lots using
intensive landscaping and classical fencing;
T. To promote the development of a new town center for the Township of
Old Bridge through the mix and distribution of appropriate land uses
and densities;
U. To promote the rehabilitation of housing and the improvement of
deteriorating neighborhoods;
V. To reinforce the existing urban areas with sidewalks, landscaping and
street furniture;
§ 250-2 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-2
10:558
§ 250-3. Interpretation.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, all such
provisions shall be held to be the minimum standards and requirements for
the promotion of the public safety, health, convenience and general welfare.
In the event of a conflict between the provisions of any sections of this
chapter, the more restrictive provision shall control. Where this chapter
imposes a greater restriction upon the use of any structure or land, or
the height of structures, or requires larger open spaces or areas than are
imposed or required by other ordinances or private easements, covenants
or other agreements, the provisions of this chapter shall control.
§ 250-4. Authentication and maintenance of Zoning Map and
ordinances.
W. To promote extensive landscaping, including street trees at close
spacing, landscaping in industrial, commercial, as well as residential
areas;
X. To encourage the rehabilitation of existing commercial areas, with
particular consideration given to the issues of curbing, landscaping,
front and rear facade improvements and buffering, through the use of
creative design standards;
Y. To limit high density residential development to detached or
semidetached homes with intensive landscaping along the streetscape;
or townhouses with fenced front yards with intensive street
landscaping;
Z. To promote the renewal of the Raritan Bay waterfront area;
AA. To promote the creation of new and innovative recreational and leisure
activities for all residents; and
BB. To promote the purposes of good design of developments as set forth in
Article X hereof.
A. Subsequent to the adoption of this chapter, including without limitation
the Zoning Map adopted pursuant to Article VII, and any revisions to
the Zoning Map or this chapter, three copies of the Zoning Map and this
chapter shall be authenticated by the Mayor's signature, and the Seal of
the municipality, attested by the Township Clerk, under the following
certificates:
(1) With respect to this chapter:
"I certify that this document includes the Official Land
Development ordinances of the Township of Old Bridge, New
Jersey, adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., including
without limitation ordinances regarding zoning, site plan and
subdivision control."
§ 250-2 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-4
10:559
(2) With respect to the Zoning Map:
"I certify that this is the Official Zoning Map of the Township of Old
Bridge, New Jersey, referred to in the ordinances of the Township
of Old Bridge, New Jersey."
B. Maintenance of the Zoning Map and this chapter. Authenticated copies
of the Zoning Map and this chapter shall be maintained in the office of
the Township Clerk and the Township Department of Community
Development and shall be made available for public reference. Copies
of all or a part of the Zoning Map and this chapter may be reproduced
for public distribution. One authenticated copy of the Official Zoning
Map and this chapter shall be forwarded to the Middlesex County
Planning Board by the Township Clerk in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-16. However, the original copy of the Official Zoning Map and
this chapter shall be maintained in the office of the Township Clerk and
shall be the final authority as to the current status of zoning districts
and land development regulations in the Township of Old Bridge.
§ 250-4 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-4
10:560
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 250-5. Purpose.
Unless otherwise expressly stated in this chapter, the following terms shall
have the meanings set forth in this Article II, for the purposes of this
chapter, any resolution of an approving board or the governing body
adopted hereunder, or any report of the Township's professional or
administrative staff or consultants issued in connection with an application
for development hereunder. Where certain words or phrases are not defined
in this Article II, their meanings shall be as defined in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et
seq.
§ 250-6. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY USE, BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — A use, building or
structure subordinate to the principal use of a building or structure on the
same lot and serving a purpose customarily incidental to the use of the
principal building or structure and dependent on the principal use to the
extent that the accessory use cannot exist in the absence of the use to which
it is subordinate. Where an accessory building or structure is attached in a
substantial manner by a wall or roof to a principal building or structure, it
shall be considered a part of the principal building or structure.[Amended
10-25-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-31]
ADDITION — The construction of a new improvement as part of an existing
improvement when such new improvement changes the exterior
appearance of buildings or structures.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The person who has primary responsibility
for coordinating and managing the administrative procedures under the
MLUL and this chapter. Except as to the administration of the issuance of
zoning permits, the administrative officer shall be the Township Planner.
With respect to the administration of the issuance of zoning permits, the
administrative officer shall be the Zoning Officer.
ADULT CABARET — A cabaret which features exotic dancers, strippers,
male or female impersonators, or sexually oriented entertainers.[Amended
3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-03]
ADULT COMMUNITY — A development designed to meet the needs of, and
which is exclusively for, the residents of an age-restricted segment of the
population above a minimum age of 55 years.[Amended 3-15-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-03]
ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building with a
capacity of less than 50 persons used for presenting material distinguished
or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating
§ 250-5 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-6
10:561
to specified sexual activities, or specified anatomical areas, defined as set
forth in the definition of "adult stores."
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building with a
capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material distinguished
or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating
to specified sexual activities, or specified anatomical areas, defined as set
forth in the definition of "adult stores."
ADULT STORES and ADULT BOOKSTORES — An establishment having
a substantial portion of its stock-in-trade in books, magazines, other
periodicals, movies and videos which are distinguished or characterized by
their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to "specified
sexual activities," or "specified anatomical areas," defined as follows:
ADVERSE EFFECT — Conditions or circumstances that the approving board
determines are likely to be created by a proposed development and likely
to impose, aggravate or lead to impractical, unsafe or unsatisfactory
conditions on adjoining properties or the surrounding community, including,
but not limited to, inadequate drainage facilities, unsuitable street grades,
street locations that fail to compose a safe system, excessive noise,
obnoxious odor and failure to provide or make future allowances for access
to the interior portion of adjoining lots or for other facilities contemplated
by this chapter, the Master Plan, or the Capital Improvements Program.
AGGRESSIVE SOILS — Soils which are likely to be corrosive to cast iron
and ductile iron pipe.
AISLE — The traveled way by which cars enter and depart parking spaces.
ALLEY — A public or private street primarily designed to serve as secondary
access to the side or rear of those properties whose principal frontage is on
some other street.
A. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation and arousal.
B. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy.
Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttock or female breast.
C.
Specified anatomical areas:
Less than completely and opaquely covered:
(a) Human genitals or pubic region;
(b) Buttock; and
Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areola; and
(c)
(1)
Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
(2)
D.
§ 250-6 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-6
10:562
ALTERATION — A change or rearrangement in the structural parts of a
building or structure.
ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE — Mounting structures that
camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers.[Added
3-27-2000 by Ord. No. 06-00]
AMUSEMENT CENTER — A business establishment utilized, wholly or in
part, for the accommodation of not more than two amusement devices or
facilities.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL — A place where animals or pets are given medical or
surgical treatment.
ANIMAL KENNEL — Any building, structure or premises in which animals
are kept, boarded, bred or trained for commercial gain.
APPLICANT — A developer submitting an application for development.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — The application form and all
accompanying documents and fees required by this chapter for approval of
a subdivision plat, site plan, planned development, conditional use, zoning
variance or direction for the issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-34 or N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36.
APPROVING BOARD — Either the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, whichever board has jurisdiction over the application for
development.
AQUIFER — A subterranean bed or stratum of earth, gravel or porous stone
that contains water and forms a natural reservoir for underground water.
AQUIFER RECHARGE AREA — An area important to the replenishment of
an aquifer.
ARTERIAL ROAD OR STREET — See "street."
AUCTION — A sale of items to the highest bidder.
AUTOMOTIVE GASOLINE STATION — Any establishment servicing motor
vehicles, including self-service, with fuel and oil, but not including repairs,
changing of tires or any other replacement of accessory parts.
AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR GARAGE — Any establishment servicing motor
vehicles, including, but not limited to, major repair services, vehicle parts
sales, wrecker and hauling services, body work and painting and heavy
repair requiring engine or drive-train dismantling. Whenever trucks or
heavy equipment are repaired even for oil changes, lubrication, minor tuneups,
installation of batteries, tires, wiper blades and similar minor repairs,
the establishment shall be considered to be an "automotive repair garage."
AUTOMOTIVE SALES AND SERVICES — Any establishment selling or
leasing motor vehicles, new or used, supplies and accessories; provided that
such use may include the functions of an automotive repair garage as an
ancillary use.
§ 250-6 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-6
10:563
AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE STATION — Any establishment servicing motor
vehicles with gas, oil, lubrication services, lubricants and other vehicle
maintenance supplies and parts and equipment not requiring extensive or
prolonged mechanical work for installation. Service work offered should be
limited to towing, oil changes, lubrication, minor tune-ups, installation of
batteries, tires, wiper blades and similar equipment, wheel balancing and
alignment and the replacement of minor mechanical parts such as hoses,
spark plugs, ignition wiring, points, alternators, water pumps and similar
parts.
AVERAGE DAILY TRAFFIC — The mean number of cars per twenty-fourhour
period that pass over a given point.
BACKHAUL NETWORK — The lines that connect a provider's towers/cell
sites to one or more cellular telephone switching offices, and/or long
distance providers or the public switched telephone network.[Added
3-27-2000 by Ord. No. 06-00]
BANNER — Any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is
mounted to a pole or a building. National flags, state or municipal flags,
or the official flag of any institution or business shall not be considered a
banner.
BARRIER CURB — A steep-faced curb intended to prevent encroachments.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building which is partly below and partly
above grade, and having 1/2 or more of its height, measured from floor to
ceiling, above the average finished grade.
BEDROOM — A room planned or used primarily for sleeping.
BELGIAN BLOCK CURB — A type of paving stone generally cut in a
truncated, pyramidal shape, laid with the base of the pyramid down.
BERM — A mound of soil, either natural or man-made.
BICYCLE-COMPATIBLE ROADWAY — A road designed to accommodate the
shared use of the roadway by bicycles and motor vehicles.
BICYCLE LANE — A lane at the edge of a roadway reserved and marked for
the exclusive use of bicycles.
BICYCLE PATH — A pathway separated from the roadway, designed
specifically to satisfy the physical requirements of bicycling.
BILLBOARD — A commercial sign that directs attention to a business,
commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered at a location
other than the premises on which the sign is located.[Amended
10-25-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-28]
BLOCK — The area bordered by one or more streets or a municipal
boundary of sufficient size to accommodate a lot or lots of the minimum size
required by this chapter.
BOARD — The Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment of the
Township of Old Bridge as the context of this chapter so requires.
§ 250-6 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-6
10:564
BOARDINGHOUSE — A residential building offering at least three but not
more than six rooms for rent with meals, and in which no transients are
accommodated.
BUFFER — An area within a property or site, generally adjacent to and
parallel with the property line, either consisting of natural existing
vegetation or created by the use of trees, shrubs, fences, and/or berms,
designed to limit a continuous view of and/or sound from the site to adjacent
sites or properties. Buffers are intended to minimize the impact of new
developments on existing development or to insulate new development from
potentially adverse surrounding influences.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a construction adapted to
permanent, temporary or continuous occupancy and having a roof.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The measurement of area, expressed as a
percentage of the total lot area, by which all buildings occupy a lot, as
measured on a horizontal plane around the periphery of the facades,
including without limitation the area under the roof of any structure
supported by columns, but not having walls, as measured around the
outside of the outermost extremities of the roof above the columns.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the average
elevation of the proposed finished grade at the front of the building to the
highest point of the roof. Except as otherwise regulated herein, projections
usually appurtenant to buildings such as chimneys, spires, water towers,
elevator penthouses, tanks and similar projections, but not including signs,
are excluded from building height.[Amended 10-25-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-31]
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building on a lot in which the principal use of
that lot is conducted.
CALIPER — The diameter of a tree trunk measured in inches, six inches
above ground level for trees up to four inches in diameter and measured 12
inches above ground level for over four inches in diameter.
CAMPER —
A self-propelled, vehicular structure built as one unit on a chassis and
designed for temporary living for travel, recreation, vacation or other
short-term uses which may contain cooking, sleeping, and sanitary
facilities.
A.
An immobile structure containing cooking and sleeping facilities for
travel, recreation, vacation, or other short-term use and designed to
be attached to the body of another vehicle for transporting from one
location to another.
B.
A portable, vehicular structure built on a chassis, designed for camping,
the body of which is basically rectangular with a flat top not more than
four feet above the surface of the ground. The camper is designed to
have a temporary tent erected above the four-foot level for camping
activities.
C.
§ 250-6 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-6
10:565
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PROGRAM — A proposed schedule of all future
projects listed in order of construction priority together with cost estimates
and the anticipated means of financing each project.
CARPORT — A structure with a roof for storing automobiles, enclosed by
not more than three sides.
CARTWAY — The actual road surface area from curbline to curbline which
may include travel lanes, parking lanes, and deceleration and acceleration
lanes. Where there are no curbs, the "cartway" is that portion between the
edges of the paved, or hard surface, width.
CAR WASH — A building or structure, or portion thereof, used in a
commercial enterprise where vehicles are washed or cleaned with the use
of mechanical devices.
CELLAR — See "basement."
CEMETERY — A use of land for the burial of the dead.
CENTER LINE OF STREET — The midpoint of width of any right-of-way.
CENTER LINE OFFSET OF ADJACENT INTERSECTIONS — The gap
between the center line of roads adjoining a common road from opposite or
same sides.
CHANNEL — The bed and banks of a watercourse which convey the
constant or intermittent flow of the watercourse.
CHANNELIZATION — The straightening and deepening of channels and/or
the surfacing thereof to permit water to move rapidly and/or directly.
CIRCULATION — Systems, structures and physical improvements for the
movement of people, goods, water, air, sewage or power by such means as
streets, highways, railways, waterways, towers, transmission lines, airways,
pipes and conduits, and the handling of people and goods by such means
as terminals, stations, warehouses and other storage buildings or
transhipment points.
CLINIC — Any place used for the administering of medical or dental
treatment free or at a low cost, or any place used as an inpatient or
outpatient medical or dental treatment center wherein certain medical
and dental conditions and disorders are treated primarily through surgical
intervention that is not commonly performed in traditional, private medical
or dental practice offices.
CLUB — A nonprofit corporation, organization or association of persons
who are members thereof which owns or leases a building, or part thereof,
for the use of members or guests. Said "clubs" or lodges shall have been
principally established for the promotion of a common objective and shall
A portable structure built on a chassis, designed for towing and as
a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation, vacation and other shortterm
uses and having an outside body width not exceeding eight feet
and a length not exceeding 30 feet, and which may contain cooking,
sleeping and sanitary facilities.
D.
§ 250-6 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-6
10:566
be distinctly not considered as a semipublic use under the provisions of
this chapter. Food, meals and alcoholic beverages may be served as an
incidental function.
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT — A development meeting the criteria of the
cluster option set forth in § 250-62.
COLLECTOR ROAD OR STREET — See "street."
COLLOCATION — The attachment of commercial wireless
telecommunication antenna to an existing tower.[Added 3-27-2000 by
Ord. No. 06-00]
COLUMBARIUM — A structure, located in a cemetery, which has vaults
lined with recesses for cinerary urns.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLES — Vehicles used for business, retail, service or
industrial purposes which are required to be registered as such under the
laws governing the registration of such vehicles.
COMMERCIAL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES —
Licensed commercial wireless telecommunication services including
cellular, personal communication services, specialized mobilized radio,
enhanced specialized mobilized radio, paging and similar services that are
marketed to the general public.[Added 3-27-2000 by Ord. No. 06-00]
COMMON LATERAL — A lateral serving more than one unit.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — An open space area within or related to a
site designated as a development and designed and intended for the use
or enjoyment of residents and/or owners of the development. As defined
herein, "common open space" may contain such complementary structures
and improvements as are necessary and appropriate for the use or
enjoyment of residents and owners of the development.
COMMON PROPERTY — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water, or a
combination of land and water, together with the improvements thereon and
designed and intended for the ownership, use and enjoyment shared by the
residents and owners of the development. Common property may contain
such complementary structures and improvements as are necessary and
appropriate for the benefit of the residents and owners of the development.
COMMUNITY IMPACT STATEMENT — A written and, if appropriate,
graphic analysis, containing, as a minimum, the information required by
§ 250-13F, and projecting the impact of the proposed development on
existing municipal facilities and services, and projecting future
requirements for such facilities and services, together with their estimated
cost.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE FOR DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED — A
community residential facility licensed pursuant to P.L. 1977, c. 448
(N.J.S.A. 30:11B-1 et seq.), providing food, shelter and personal guidance
under such supervision as required to not more than 15 developmentally
disabled or mentally ill persons who require assistance, temporarily or
permanently, in order to live in the community, and shall include, but not
§ 250-6 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-6
10:567
be limited to, group homes, halfway houses, intermediate care facilities,
supervised apartment living arrangements and hostels.
COMMUNITY SHELTER FOR VICTIMS OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE — Any
shelter approved for a purchase of service contract and certified pursuant
to standards and procedures established by regulation of the New Jersey
Department of Human Services, providing food, shelter, medical care, legal
assistance, personal guidance, and other services to not more than 15
persons who have been victims of domestic violence, including any children
of such victims, who temporarily require shelter and assistance in order to
protect their physical or psychological welfare.
COMPLETE APPLICATION — An application certified as complete by the
administrative officer when it meets all of the submission requirements as
specified in § 250-13G.
CONCEPT PLAN — A preliminary presentation and attendant
documentation of a proposed subdivision or site plan of sufficient accuracy
to be used for the purpose of discussion and classification.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district only
upon a showing that such use in a specified location will comply with
the conditions and standards for the location or operation of such use as
contained in this chapter.
CONDOMINIUM — Ownership of real property combining ownership in fee
simple of a portion of dwelling unit extending inward from the center of the
exterior walls, upward from the center of the floor partition and downward
from the center of the ceiling partition, and undivided ownership in common
with other dwelling unit owners of the common elements in the remainder
of the structure and the land and its appurtenances.
CONSTRUCTION OFFICIAL — The officer or other designated authority
charged with the administration and enforcement of the New Jersey
Uniform Construction Code within the Township.137
CONVENIENCE STORE — A retail establishment of greater than 2,000
square feet and up to 5,000 square feet selling primarily food products,
household items, newspapers and magazines, candy and beverages, and
freshly prepared foods such as sandwiches and salads for off-premises
consumption.[Amended 3-11-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-05]
CONVENTIONAL DEVELOPMENT — Development other than a planned or
cluster option development.
COUNTY PLANNING BOARD — The Middlesex County Planning Board.
COURTYARD — An open, unoccupied space bounded on at least two
opposing sides by a building wall, but not a front, side or rear yard.
CRITICAL AREA — Land which lies within freshwater wetlands (and the
statutorily required transition area related thereto), tidal and coastal
137. Editor's Note: The definition of "construction standards," which previously followed this
definition, was repealed at time of adoption of Land Development Codification (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. IV).
§ 250-6 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-6
10:568
wetlands, floodways, lakes and ponds, and areas with slopes in excess of
30%.
CUL-DE-SAC — A local street with only one outlet and having the other end
designed for the reversal of traffic movement.
CULVERT — A structure designed to convey a watercourse not incorporated
in a closed drainage system under a road or pedestrian walk.
CURB — A vertical or sloping edge of a roadway. See also "Belgian block
curb," "barrier curb," "mountable curb."
CUT (WITH RESPECT TO LAND) — Any act by which soil or rock is cut into,
dug, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced or relocated.
DANCE HALL, DANCE CLUB or DISCO — An establishment wherein the
primary attraction is dancing to either live or recorded music.[Added
8-1-2005 by Ord. No. 21-2005]
DAY-CARE CENTER — A facility duly licensed by the New Jersey State
Department of Human Services for the care and accommodation of six or
more children.
DAYS — Calendar days.
DEDICATION — The act of transferring legal fee simple title in real
property, or an interest therein, to a governmental or quasi-governmental
entity for public or quasi-public purposes.
DEMOLITION — The partial or total razing or destruction of any building,
structure or other improvement.
DESIGN FLOOD — The relative size or magnitude of a major flood of
reasonable expectancy, which reflects both flood experience and flood
potential and is the basis of the delineation of the floodway, the flood hazard
area, and the water surface elevations.
DESIGN FLOOD PROFILE — The elevations of the water surface of the
floodway design flood and flood hazard area design flood.
DETENTION BASIN — A man-made or natural water collection facility
designed to collect surface and subsurface water in order to impede its flow
and to release the same gradually into natural or man-made outlets at a
controlled rate consistent with sound downstream stormwater management
practices.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any
land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including the
holder of an option or contract to purchase, or any other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, alteration, relocation or
enlargement of any building or other structure or of any mining, excavation
or landfill facility, and any change in use of any building or other structure
or land or extension of use of land, including alteration to a site. The
alteration of the facade of an existing building, other than a one- or two-
§ 250-6 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-6
10:569
dwelling-unit building, shall be considered a development for purposes of
this chapter.
DISTRICT — The zone districts established under this chapter.
DIVIDED STREET — A street having an island or other barrier separating
moving lanes.
DOG KENNEL — See "animal kennel."
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by
drains, grading, or other man-made or material means, including control
of runoff during and after construction or development to minimize erosion
and sedimentation to assure the adequacy of existing and proposed culverts
and bridges, to induce water recharge into the ground where practical, to
lessen non-point pollution, to maintain the integrity of stream channels for
their biological functions as well as for drainage, and the means necessary
for water supply preservation or alleviation of flooding.
DRAINAGE FACILITY — Any component of the drainage system.
DRAINAGE STRUCTURE — Any structure, regardless of material(s),
whether installed on, above or below the surface of a parcel of land that
aids in the drainage system, as defined herein. The term includes, but is not
limited to, pipes, inlets, manholes, headwalls, retaining walls, and inlet and
outlet structures.[Added 4-9-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-10]
DRAINAGE SYSTEM — The system through which drainage water flows
from the land, including all watercourses, waterbodies and wetlands.
DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment, other than a drive-in
restaurant, in which the primary use is designed to provide, either wholly or
in part, service to customers while in their automobiles parked or standing
upon the premises.
DRIVEWAY — A paved or unpaved area used for ingress and egress of
vehicles to or from a street, and allowing access from a street to a building
or other structure or facility.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A building not more than 2 1/2 stories and
not more than 30 feet in height, on one lot, used and designed primarily as
horizontal construction units and as a residence for three or more families
living independently of each other.
DWELLING, PATIO HOME — A single-family detached housing type on a
separate lot, characterized by a zero lot line configuration with little or no
side yard setback on one boundary, and outdoor living space (e.g., patio or
courts) integrated into the building design.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED — A detached building, located
on a separate lot and other than a patio home dwelling, designed for, or
occupied exclusively by, one family.
DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE — A dwelling consisting of more than two
attached single-family residences, constructed in a continuous row, in a
§ 250-6 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-6
10:570
development within which each residential unit is primarily a vertical
construction unit served by its own utilities and other services.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY (DUPLEX) — A building designed for, or
occupied exclusively by, two families living independently of each other.
DWELLING UNIT (D/U) — A house, trailer or other structure or a portion
of any building or structure designed, arranged or used for living quarters
for one or more persons living as a single housekeeping unit with cooking
and bathroom facilities, but not including units in hotels or other structures
designed for transient residence.
EASEMENT — A right granted, but not dedicated, to a governmental or
quasi-governmental entity for limited use of private land for a public or
quasi-public purpose.
EAVES — The lowest horizontal line of a sloping roof.
ELEVATION — A vertical distance above or below a fixed reference level.
ELEVATION DRAWING — A flat scale drawing of the front, rear or side of a
building.
ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION — The Old Bridge Township
Environmental Commission.138
ENVIRONMENTAL CONSTRAINTS — Features, natural resources, or land
characteristics that are sensitive to improvements and may require
conservation measures or the application of creative development
techniques to prevent degradation of the environment, or may require
limited development, or in certain instances may preclude development.
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT — A written and graphic
statement describing, analyzing and assessing the anticipated effects of a
proposed development on environmental constraints and critical lands.
ERECT — To build, construct, attach, place, suspend, or affix, and shall also
include the painting of wall signs and the painting of signs or displays on
the exterior surface of the building, structure or material surface.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice, and gravity.
EXTERIOR WALL — Any wall which defines the exterior boundaries of a
building or structure.
EXTERNAL ILLUMINATION — A sign illuminated by floor lights or
spotlights affixed to the exterior of a sign, its supporting structure or the
ground.
FACADE — The total wall surface, including door and window areas of a
building's face. Each wall surface shall be considered a separate facade.
FACADE SIGN — See "attached sign."
138. Editor's Note: See Ch. 5, Art. XVIII, Environmental Commission.
§ 250-6 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-6
10:571
FAMILY — One or more persons occupying a premises and living as a single
nonprofit housekeeping unit.
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME — Any private dwelling approved by the New
Jersey Division of Youth and Family Services or an organization with which
said division contracts for daily day care in which child care services are
regularly provided to no less than three and no more than five children for
no less than 15 hours per week.
FARM — An area of land which is actively devoted to agricultural,
silvicultural or horticultural use and which occupies no less than three
acres, exclusive of the land upon which the farmhouse is located and such
additional land as may be provided in accordance with N.J.S.A. 54:4-23.4,
4-23.5 and 4-23.11
FARM BUILDING — Any building used for the housing of agricultural
equipment, produce, livestock, or poultry or for the incidental or customary
processing of farm produce, provided that such building is located on,
operated in conjunction with, and necessary to the operation of the farm.
FEE SIMPLE — Ownership of real property combining ownership of a
building or structure and the lands upon which it is situated.
FENCE — An artificially constructed barrier of wood, masonry, stone, wire,
metal or any other manufactured material or combination of materials.
FENCE, OPEN — A fence which is greater than 50% open to the direct line
of vision; provided that a fence used in connection with a nonresidential use
shall be an open fence only if it is greater than 75% open to the direct line
of vision.
FENCE, SOLID — A fence which is less than 50% open to the direct line of
vision.
FINAL PLAT — The final map of all or a portion of the subdivision which is
presented to the municipal agency as provided for in this chapter.
FLEA MARKET — An indoor or outdoor market at which new or secondhand
merchandise is sold by individual vendors from booths, stalls or parked
vehicles.
FLOOD ELEVATION DETERMINATION — A determination of the water
surface elevations of the design flood.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry areas from:
FLOOD FRINGE AREA — The portion of the flood hazard area outside the
floodway.
FLOOD HAZARD AREA — Land in the floodplain subject to a 1% or greater
chance of flood in any given year.
A. Inland or tidal waters; and
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface water from any
source.
B.
§ 250-6 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-6
10:572
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP — The current Federal Emergency
Management Agency Map of the Township on which the boundaries of the
flood area having special hazards have been designated.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP — The current Federal Emergency
Management Agency Map of the Township on which has been delineated
the special flood hazard areas in the Township for flood insurance purposes.
FLOODPLAIN — The relatively flat area adjoining a water channel which
has been or may be covered by floodwater of the channel, including the
floodway, flood fringe area, and the flood hazard area.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — State or local regulations,
or any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of
flood damage prevention or reduction.
FLOODWAY — The river or other watercourse and the adjacent land area
that must be reserved in order to discharge the design flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than 0.2 foot.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS — See "gross floor area."
FLOOR AREA, NET HABITABLE — See "net habitable floor area."
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR) — The sum of the gross floor areas of all
buildings or structures compared to the total area of the site proposed for
development; provided, however, that the amount of gross floor occupied
or proposed to by occupied by a day-care center which is accessory to and
operated solely for the benefit of the employees of the primary business
shall not be included in calculating the FAR.[Amended 3-15-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-03]
FORESTRY — See "silviculture."
FRESHWATER WETLANDS — Areas that are inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence
of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
commonly known as "hydrophytic vegetation"; provided, however, that the
three-parameter approach (i.e., hydrology, soils and vegetation)
enumerated in the April 1, 1987 extension - final draft "Wetlands
Identification and Delineation Manual" adopted by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency, and any subsequent amendments
thereto, shall be utilized in designating a wetland.
FRONTAGE — See "lot frontage."
GARAGE, PARKING — A building, or part thereof, which is used for
commercial purposes and is used only for the storage of motor vehicles.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — An accessory building or part of a principal building
used only for the storage of motor vehicles as an accessory use. In a
residential zone, a "garage" is intended for and used for storing privately
owned motor vehicles, boats and trailers and personal belongings of the
family or families resident in the principal residential use on the lot.
§ 250-6 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-6
10:573
GARDEN APARTMENT — See "dwelling, multifamily."
GARDEN CENTER — A retail or wholesale operation which sells nursery
plants, seasonal plants, gardening supplies and equipment. Outside storage
of live plants is normally associated with the operation; however, all other
storage need not be located outside a building or structure.
GAS STATION — See "automotive gasoline station."
GENERAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN — A plan outlining general, rather than
detailed, development intentions. It describes the basic parameters of a
major development proposal, rather than giving full engineering details. As
such, it allows general intentions to be proposed and discussed without the
extensive costs involved in submitting a detailed proposal.
GENERAL TERMS AND CONDITIONS — The conditions under which
preliminary approval is granted, including zoning standards, subdivision
plat and site plan details, to the extent reviewed by the approving board,
off-site improvements and design standards.
GOLF COURSE — Any tract having an area of 50 or more acres set aside
for playing the game of golf and containing at least nine holes in length,
together with the necessary and usual accessory uses and structures,
including, but not limited to, clubhouse facilities; dining and refreshment
facilities; swimming pools; and tennis courts; provided, however, that the
operation of such facilities is incidental and subordinated to the operation
of the golf course.
GOVERNING BODY — The Township Council of the Township of Old Bridge.
GRADE — The slope of land specified in percentage (%) terms.
GRADE, FINISHED — The design or as-built elevation and slope of lawns,
walks, pavements, roads and other surfaces brought to grade as shown on
official plans or designs relating thereto.
GRADE LEVEL OF SIGNS — The lowest point of the elevation of the finished
surface of the ground where the sign support meets the ground.
GRADIENT — The degree of rise or descent of a sloping surface above or
below a horizontal plane.
GREENHOUSE — An enclosed structure of glass or clear plastic.
GROSS DENSITY — The number of dwelling units per gross acre of land to
be developed.
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The sum of the areas of all floors of a nonresidential
building, including without limitation interior halls, basements and
mezzanines, but excluding exterior balconies, decks, porches and garages.
In determining gross floor area, all horizontal dimensions of each floor
are to be measured by the exterior faces of walls of each such floor. In
residential buildings, finished and unfinished basements shall be excluded
from the calculation of gross floor area.[Amended 11-19-2018 by Ord.
No. 2018-28]
§ 250-6 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-6
10:574
GROSS LEASABLE AREA — The total floor area for which a tenant pays rent
and which is designed for the tenant's occupancy and exclusive use.
GROSS PARKING AREA — The number of off-street parking spaces required
by this chapter multiplied by 320 square feet.
GROUND COVER — Low-growing plants or sod that, in time, form a dense
mat covering the area in which they are planted preventing soil from being
blown or washed away and preventing the growth of undesirable plants.
GUTTER — A shallow channel usually set along a curb or the pavement
edge of a road for purposes of catching and carrying runoff water.
HEAVY INDUSTRIAL — Such uses including but not limited to oil, mining,
shipbuilding, steel, chemicals, machinery manufacturing and similar
industries that do not meet the definition, bulk and performance standards
of a light industrial use, and which produce a product to be used by
intermediates rather than end users.[Added 3-11-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-05]
HEIGHT — When referring to a tower, the "height" shall mean the distance
measured from the finished grade of the parcel to the highest point on the
tower or other structure, including the base pad and any antenna.[Added
3-27-2000 by Ord. No. 06-00]
HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION — The Old Bridge Township
Historic Preservation Commission established pursuant to Chapter 5,
Article XXI, Historic Preservation Commission, of the Code of the Township
of Old Bridge.
HISTORIC SITE OR STRUCTURE — Any building, structure, site, or object
which is designated as being of historical, archaeological, cultural, scenic or
architectural significance in a document entitled "The Historic, Cultural and
Architectural Resources of the Township of Old Bridge," dated December
1981 (revised through August 1982) which document is incorporated into
and constitutes the historic preservation plan element of the Master Plan.
HOME BUSINESS — An occupation, other than a home occupation or home
professional office, conducted entirely within a detached dwelling unit,
which occupation is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the lot for
residential purposes.
HOME OCCUPATION — An occupation conducted entirely within a dwelling
unit by residents of the dwelling unit, which occupation is clearly incidental
and secondary to the use of the dwelling unit for residential purposes and
with respect to which occupation:
A. There is no exterior evidence of the occupation;
B. There are no employees other than the residents;
C. No deliveries of stock or inventory are made to the premises;
No sounds related to the occupation are audible outside the dwelling
unit;
D.
§ 250-6 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-6
10:575
HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATION — A community association which is
organized in a development in which individual unit owners share common
interests in open space or facilities, and/or common ownership and
maintenance responsibilities for such open space or facilities.
HOME PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — An office maintained in a residence
incidental to and part of a residential detached dwelling unit on the lot
and used as the office of a dentist, architect, engineer, physician, surgeon,
accountant, lawyer, teacher or similar recognized professional occupation.
HOSPITAL — An institution which maintains and operates organized
facilities and services for the diagnosis, treatment or care of persons
suffering from illness, injury or deformity and/or for obstetrics and in which
all diagnosis, treatment and care are administered by, or performed under
the direction of, persons licensed to practice medicine or osteopathy in
the State of New Jersey and which is required to conform to the revised
standards for hospital facilities as adopted by the State Board of Control of
the Department of Health.
HOTEL/MOTEL — A series of attached, semiattached, or detached dwelling
units operated as a single business, containing individual sleeping or living
units with bathrooms and closet space, with or without kitchens, and
designed for or used to provide housing accommodations, for a
consideration, to tourists, transients and travelers, and held out to the
public as accommodations by the day, week or month.
HOUSE OF WORSHIP —
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been compacted or covered
with a layer of material so that it is resistant to infiltration by water.
IMPOUNDMENT — A body of water, such as a pond, confined by a dam,
dike, floodgate or other barrier.
IMPROVED STREET — Any street which is described in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-35
and which conforms to the construction standards.
No equipment used in the occupation causes interference with radio
and television reception in neighboring residences;
E.
The occupation does not utilize, handle or store hazardous wastes or
substances; and
F.
Except with respect to the provision of day-care services by a family
day-care home, the residents do not meet at the premises with patrons
or clients of the occupation. A family day-care home constitutes a home
occupation.
G.
A church, mosque, synagogue, temple, or other facility that is used for
prayer by persons of similar beliefs.
A.
A special-purpose building that is architecturally designed and
particularly adapted for the primary purpose of conducting formal
religious services on a regular basis.
B.
§ 250-6 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-6
10:576
IMPROVEMENT — Any man-made, immovable item which becomes part of,
placed upon, or is affixed to, real estate.
INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — A septic tank, seepage pit
sewage disposal system, or any other approved sewage treatment device
serving a single unit.
INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION — An educational institution of
higher learning chartered by the state, or a private educational institution
approved by, and subject to regulations prescribed by, the state and giving
instructions or affording facilities for study and research in academic or
technical subjects, primarily at or above the college level.
INTERESTED PARTY — Any person, whether residing within or without
the Township of Old Bridge, whose right to use, acquire, or enjoy property
is, or may be, affected by any action taken pursuant to this chapter, or
whose right to use, acquire, or enjoy property has been denied, violated or
infringed by an action or a failure to act pursuant to this chapter.
INTERNALLY ILLUMINATED — Any sign whose sole source of artificial
illumination is contained within the display portion of the sign.
ISLAND (IN STREET DESIGN) — A raised area usually curbed, placed to
guide traffic, separate lanes, or used for landscaping, signage or lighting.
JUNKYARD OR SALVAGE YARD — A lot or structure, or part thereof, used
primarily for the collection, storage and sale of wastepaper, rags, scrap
metal or discarded material, or for the collection, dismantling, storage and
salvaging of machinery and/or motor vehicles.
KENNEL — See "animal kennel."
LAKE — A natural or artificial body of water which retains water yearround.
LAND — Real property, including improvements and fixtures on, above, or
below the surface.
LAND DISTURBANCE — Any activity involving the clearing, excavating,
storing, grading, filling of land or transporting of soil, surface water channel
alteration or any other activity which cause soil to be exposed to the danger
of erosion.
LANDLOCKED — Property which has no lot line, or portion thereof,
adjacent to a public street.
LANDSCAPE AREA RATIO — The amount of landscaped area after
development compared to the total lot area.
LANDSCAPED AREA — Areas containing trees, shrubs and ground covers,
pedestrian and recreation areas, ponds, streams or any other similar areas
but not including areas occupied by buildings or structures, paving for
parking, loading or access thereto, required buffers or areas utilized for
outside storage.
LIGHT INDUSTRIAL — Fabrication, assembly or processing of food, goods
or materials, or the storage of bulk goods and materials where such
§ 250-6 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-6
10:577
activities or materials create no hazard from fire or explosion, or produce
toxic or corrosive fumes, gas, smoke, obnoxious dust or vapor, offensive
noise or vibration, glare, flashes or objectionable effluent and are subject
to performance standards included in § 250-43 of the LDO. Most light
industrial products are produced for end users rather than as intermediates
for use by other industries.[Added 3-11-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-05]
LIVESTOCK — Animals grown, raised or bred for sale for human
consumption or pleasure.
LOADING SPACE — An off-street space or berth, other than a required offstreet
parking space, on the same lot with a building or group of buildings,
having direct access to an access aisle, and used for the temporary parking
of a commercial vehicle while loading or unloading.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat, or
otherwise as permitted by law, and to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit.
LOT AREA — An area of land which is determined by the limits of the lot
lines bounding the area and expressed in terms of square feet or acres, not
including any portion of a lot included in a street right-of-way.
LOT, CORNER — A lot or parcel of land abutting two or more intersecting
streets when the interior angle of the intersection does not exceed 120°.
LOT DEPTH — The shortest horizontal distance between the front lot line
and a line drawn parallel to the front lot line through the midpoint of the
rear lot line.[Amended 6-25-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-10]
LOT FRONTAGE — The horizontal distance between side lot lines measured
along the street line.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINE — The legal boundary line of a parcel of land.
LOT LINE, FRONT — The lot line separating the lot from the road right-ofway.
With respect to a corner lot, the narrower of the lot lines separating
the lot from the road rights-of-way shall be the front lot line.
LOT LINE, REAR — The lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot
line.
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. With
respect to a corner lot, the line opposite the longer of the right-of-way lines
shall be the side lot line.[Amended 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-03]
LOT, THROUGH — A lot running through from one street to another.
LOT WIDTH — The straight and horizontal distance between side lot lines
at setback points on each side lot line measured an equal distance back
horizontally from the street line.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE — Cash or a maintenance bond insured by a
surety company, or an irrevocable bank letter of credit required to secure
the costs of maintaining any improvements required by this chapter.
§ 250-6 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-6
10:578
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision other than a minor subdivision.
MANHOLE — An inspection chamber whose dimensions allow ease of entry
and exit and working room for a person inside.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A unit of housing which:
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET — A service street that runs parallel to a
higher-order street which, for purposes of safety, provides access to
abutting properties and separation from through traffic.
MASTER PLAN — The document entitled "Old Bridge Township Master
Plan," dated December 1987, as amended from time to time by the Planning
Board, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28.
MAUSOLEUM — A structure, located in a cemetery, which has vaults for
the storage of caskets.
MEDIAN — That portion of a divided highway separating the traveled ways
of traffic proceeding in opposite directions.
MEMBER OF THE IMMEDIATE FAMILY — A parent, grandparent,
guardian, child, sibling, ward, or the spouse, or sibling of a parent,
grandparent, guardian, child, sibling or ward.
MINI MART — A retail establishment of up to 2,000 square feet that is
located on the same lot and is accessory to a gasoline station.[Added
3-11-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-05]
MINOR SITE PLAN — See "site plan, minor."
MINOR SUBDIVISION — See "subdivision, minor."
MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENT — A development which includes residential,
public, quasi-public, commercial, office, and open space uses, and which
has significant functional and physical integration of project components,
including without limitation uninterrupted pedestrian connections, and
which is in conformance with a comprehensive design plan.
MOTEL — See "hotel/motel."
Consists of one or more transportable sections which are substantially
constructed off site and, if more than one section, are joined together
on site;
A.
B. Is built on a permanent chassis;
Is designed to be used, when connected to utilities, as a dwelling unit
with a permanent foundation; and
C.
Is manufactured in accordance with the standards promulgated for a
manufactured home pursuant to the "National Manufactured Housing
Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974," Pub. L. 93-383 (42
U.S.C. 5401 et seq.) and the standards promulgated for a manufactured
mobile home by the Commissioner of the New Jersey Department of
Community Affairs pursuant the "State Uniform Construction Code
Act," P.L. 1975, c. 217 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.).
D.
§ 250-6 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-6
10:579
MOUNTABLE CURB — A low curb with a flat slope designed to be crossed
easily without discomfort.
MOVING LANE — Any traffic lane where traffic movement is the primary if
not sole function.
MULCH — A layer of wood chips, dry leaves, straw, hay, plastic, or other
materials placed on the surface of the soil around plants to retain moisture,
prevent weeds from growing, hold the soil in place, and aid plant growth.
MULTIPLE OCCUPANCY AND TENANCY SIGN — A single sign relating to a
use or facility, such as a shopping center, industrial park or office complex,
where there is more than one occupancy and/or tenancy of uses, where said
multiple occupancy and tenancy use a common parking facility and/or a
common private drive or roadway and where the names and professions or
business names of the various tenants and/or occupants are displayed.
MUNICIPAL AGENCY — Either the Planning Board or the Zoning Board
of Adjustment or the governing body, when acting pursuant to the MLUL,
depending on which Board has reviewing authority. The word "agency" shall
mean "municipal agency."
MUNICIPAL BUILDING — A building owned, operated and utilized for
municipal purposes.
MUNICIPAL BUILDING FACILITY AND USE — Any building used, or facility
owned, operated, subsidized or otherwise assisted by act of the Township of
Old Bridge.
NET HABITABLE FLOOR AREA — The sum of the horizontal area of all
the stories of a residential building as measured from the exterior face of
exterior building walls, or from the center of a wall separating two buildings
and having headroom of at least 7 1/2 feet. In such residential building any
garages, carports, half stories and basement, cellar or attic, including walkout
basements, shall not be included in the calculation of net habitable floor
area.[Amended 11-19-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-28]
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of this chapter.
NEW JERSEY FLOOD HAZARD AREA DESIGN FLOOD — The discharge
resulting from a flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in
any given year plus 25%.
NEW JERSEY FLOODWAY DESIGN FLOOD — The discharge from a flood
having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
NIGHTCLUB — An establishment wherein live entertainment is the primary
attraction and which operates primarily at night, caters to adult patrons,
offers food and/or drink, and wherein an area for dancing may also be
provided. For purposes of this chapter, comedy clubs shall be considered
nightclubs.[Added 8-1-2005 by Ord. No. 21-2005]
NURSERY SCHOOL — A school licensed by the State of New Jersey to
provide daytime care or instruction for two or more children from two to
five years of age, inclusive, and operated on a regular basis.
§ 250-6 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-6
10:580
NURSING HOME — A home for the aged, chronically ill or incurable
who are housed or lodged and furnished with food and nursing care for
compensation.
OCCUPANCY — The specific purpose for which land or a building is used,
designed or maintained.
OFF-SITE — Located outside the lot lines of the lot in question but within
the property which is the subject of a development application, or a
contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way.
OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE — A temporary storage area for a motor
vehicle that is directly accessible to an access aisle, and that is not located
on a dedicated street right-of-way.
OFF-TRACT — Not located on the property which is the subject of a
development application, or on a contiguous portion of a street or right-ofway.
ON-SITE — Located on the zone lot which is the subject of a development
application.
ON-STREET PARKING SPACE — A temporary storage area for a motor
vehicle which is located on a dedicated street right-of-way.
ON-TRACT — Located on the property which is the subject of a development
application, or on a contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way.
OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved
and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public or private use
or enjoyment, or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of
land adjoining or neighboring such open space, provided that such areas
may be improved with only those buildings, structures, streets and off-street
parking and other improvements that are designed to be incidental to the
natural openness of the land.
OPEN SPACE RATIO — The amount of land that is landscaped or left in a
natural state after development compared to the total site area.
ORGANIZATIONAL FACILITY — Facility operated by a club.
OWNER — Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership or
corporation having a proprietary interest in the land which is the subject of
a development application.
PAD SITE — A freestanding use within a shopping center or commercial
development generally leased or sold for commercial activities such fastfood
restaurants, chain restaurants, banks, pharmacies and similar
uses.[Added 3-11-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-05]
PARK AND RIDE FACILITY — A parking area designated as a transportation
internodal transfer point terminal, most frequently used for transfer from
private automobile to bus or other common carrier or public transportation.
PARKING LANE — A lane, set on the sides of streets, designed to provide
on-street parking for vehicular traffic.
§ 250-6 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-6
10:581
PARKING LOOP — A private street with perpendicular parking.
PARKING SPACE — An off-street space available for the parking of a motor
vehicle.
PARTY IMMEDIATELY CONCERNED — Any applicant, the owners of the
subject property and all owners of property and governmental agencies
entitled to notice under § 250-13H.
PARTY WALL — A common wall shared between two separate structures,
buildings, or dwelling units.
PATIO HOME — See "dwelling, patio home."
PAVEMENT — The artificial surface used in covering streets, sidewalks,
parking areas and similar areas.
PENNANT — Any lightweight plastic, fabric or other material, suspended
from a rope, wire or string, usually in series, and designed to move with the
wind.
PENNY ARCADE — An establishment with more than two coin-operated
amusement games, such as pinball machines, electronic games, coinoperated
bowling games and the like, or more than one jukebox.
PERC TEST (PERCOLATION TEST) — A test designed to determine the
ability of ground to absorb water, and used in determining the suitability of
a soil for drainage or for the use of a septic system.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE — Cash, a performance bond insured by a
surety company, or an irrevocable bank letter of credit required to secure
the proper construction of any improvements required by this chapter;
provided, however, that no more than 10% of the total performance
guaranty shall be required in the form of cash.
PERMITTED USE — Any use of land or buildings as permitted by this
chapter.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
PERSONAL SERVICES — Establishments primarily engaged in providing
services involving the care of a person or his or her personal goods or
apparel including but not limited to barbershops, beauty salons, dry
cleaning, self-service laundries, shoe repair, tailoring, household services
and similar uses except for escort services, tattooing and body piercing,
massage parlors, steam and sauna baths, which shall be excluded.[Added
3-11-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-05]
PERVIOUS SURFACE — Any material that permits full or partial absorption
of stormwater into previously unimproved land.
PHYSICALLY HANDICAPPED — A person who suffers from a physical
impairment which confines the person to a wheelchair, causes the person to
walk with difficulty or insecurity, affects the sight or hearing to the extent
that the person functioning in public areas is insecure or exposed to danger,
causes faulty coordination or reduces mobility, flexibility, coordination and
§ 250-6 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-6
10:582
perceptiveness to the extent that facilities are needed to provide for the
safety of the person.
PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of the Township of Old Bridge
established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23 and § 250-8 of this chapter.
PLAT — A map or maps of a subdivision.
POND — See "lake."
POTABLE WATER SUPPLY — Water suitable for drinking or cooking
purposes.
PREEXISTING TOWER AND ANTENNA — Any tower or antenna for which
a building permit has been properly issued prior to the effective date of
this chapter including permitted towers or antennas that have not yet been
constructed so long as such approval is current and not expired.[Added
3-27-2000 by Ord. No. 06-00]
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — A building in which is conducted the main or
principal use of the lot on which said building is situated.
PRINCIPAL USE — A use which is the primary use of the lot. In any
residential zone, a dwelling on a lot shall be deemed the principal use of
that lot.
PRIOR NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot, the area, dimension, or location
of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of this
chapter, but fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in
which it is located by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment.
PRIOR NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure, the size,
dimension or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or
amendment of this chapter, but which fails to conform to the requirements
of the zoning district in which it is located by reason of such adoption,
revision or amendment.
PRIOR NONCONFORMING USE — A use or activity which was lawful prior
to the adoption, revision or amendment of this chapter, but which fails to
conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by
reason of such adoption, revision or amendment.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — The office of a member of a recognized
profession, including without limitation doctors, ministers, dentists,
architects, professional engineers, lawyers, accountants and other similar
professional occupations.
PROJECTION — An extension of a building which protrudes or juts out from
the vertical plane of the building.
PROPORTIONATE SHARE — The portion of the total capital improvement
costs for off-tract water, sewer, drainage and street improvements that are
reasonably attributable to new development pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-43
(also entitled "pro rata share").
PROVISIONAL USE — A permitted primary use solely in conjunction with a
residential cluster or planned development pursuant to § 250-62 or 250-63.
§ 250-6 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-6
10:583
PUBLIC DRAINAGEWAY — The land reserved or dedicated for the
installation of stormwater sewers or drainage ditches or required along a
natural stream or watercourse for preserving the channel and providing
for the flow of water to safeguard the public against flood damage,
sedimentation and erosion.
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE — An open space area conveyed or otherwise
dedicated to the municipality, board of education, state or county agency
or other public body for recreational or conservational uses and which
may include buffers required by other sections of this chapter, or by state
regulations.
PUBLIC SEWER AND/OR WATER SYSTEM — Any system, other than an
individual sewage disposal system or individual well, that is operated by
the municipality, a government agency, homeowners' association or a public
utility for the collection, treatment and disposal of wastes and/or the
furnishing of potable water.
PUBLIC USE — Any use of the land or structures thereon which is owned
and used by the federal, state, county or municipal governments, or
agencies thereof. "Public use" shall also include property not owned by a
governmental entity, but which is leased or used by that entity.
QUASI-PUBLIC USE — Any use which is public in nature but which is owned
and used by a private interest group.
QUORUM — The majority of the full authorized membership of a municipal
agency.
RECREATION FACILITY — A place designed and equipped for the conduct
of sports and leisure-time activities, and operated as a business and open to
the public for a fee or operated by a nonprofit organization and open only
to bona fide members and guests of such nonprofit organization or open to
general public.[Added 3-11-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-05]
REPAIR — The reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing building
for the purpose of its maintenance.
RESERVE STRIP — A privately owned strip of land of less than the lot depth
required by this chapter and bounded on one side by a proposed street
and on the other by the boundary of a subdivision containing said proposed
street.
RESIDENTIAL AGRICULTURE — The growing and harvesting of plant life
and/or the keeping of farm animals for the enjoyment of the residents on
the property and not primarily for commercial purposes; provided, however,
that a roadside produce stand of no more than 100 square feet may, subject
to all applicable regulations set forth in this chapter, be included as a
part of the residential agriculture use.[Amended 6-25-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-10]
RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER — An area to be developed as a single entity
according to a plan containing residential housing units, employing the
reduction in lot area provided for under § 250-62 of this chapter and having
a common or public open space area as an appurtenance.
§ 250-6 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-6
10:584
RESIDENTIAL STREET — A street, or portion thereof, which primarily
serves abutting residential land uses and/or a residential area.
RESIDENTIAL USE — The use of a building, or part thereof, as a dwelling
unit.
RESTAURANT — Any establishment, however designated, at which food is
sold primarily for consumption on the premises. However, a snack bar or
refreshment stand at a public or community swimming pool, playground,
golf course, play field or park, operated solely by the agency or group
operating the recreational facility and for the convenience of patrons of
the facility, shall not be deemed to be a restaurant. Similarly, a small
eating area within or associated with a larger use such as a department
store, bowling alley, commercial recreation facility, nightclub, dance hall,
bus, train or other mass-transit station, shall not be deemed to be a
restaurant.[Amended 8-1-2005 by Ord. No. 21-2005]
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN — Any restaurant, refreshment stand, snack bar,
dairy bar, hamburger stand or hot dog stand where food is served primarily
for consumption at counters, stools or bars outside the building or primarily
in automobiles by the customer or by employees of the restaurant,
regardless of whether or not additional seats or other accommodations are
provided for customers inside the building.
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD — A public eating facility where patrons
purchase food while within the physical premises of the restaurant, which
is obtained by self-service or from an employee of the establishment over a
counter, for consumption either within the establishment or away from the
premises. Cafeterias constitute "fast-food restaurants."
RESTRICTIVE COVENANT — A restriction on the use of land usually set
forth in the deed and which is binding upon subsequent property owners.
RESUBDIVISION — The further division or relocation of lot lines of any
lot or lots within a subdivision previously made and approved or recorded
according to law, or the alteration of any streets or the establishment
of any new streets within any subdivision previously made and approved
or recorded according to law, but does not include conveyances so as to
combine existing lots by deed or other instrument.
RETAIL CONVENIENCE WITH FUELING SERVICE — A retail
establishment with fueling service, where the retail convenience is greater
than 5,000 square feet and sells primarily food products, household items,
newspapers and magazines, candy and beverages, and freshly prepared
foods, such as sandwiches and salads for off-premises consumption.[Added
3-11-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-05]
RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — Any fixed facility in which food or drink
is offered or prepared primarily for retail use.[Added 3-11-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-05]
RETAIL SALES OR SERVICES — Establishments engaged in selling goods
or merchandise to the general public for personal or household
§ 250-6 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-6
10:585
consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale of such
goods.[Added 3-11-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-05]
RETAINING WALL — A structure erected between lands of different
elevation to protect structures and/or to prevent the washing down or
erosion of earth from the upper slope level.
RETENTION BASIN — A pond, pool or basin used for the permanent
storage of water.
RIGHT-OF-WAY (ROW), PRIVATE — A private strip of land over which
certain designated parties have the right to pass, traverse or install utilities.
RIGHT-OF-WAY (ROW), PUBLIC — A publicly owned strip of land over which
the general public has the right to pass, traverse or install utilities.
ROOMING HOUSE — A dwelling unit containing rooms for rent and
providing lodging only for individuals.
SATELLITE ANTENNA — An apparatus or structure which is designed for
the purpose of receiving television, radio, microwave, satellite or similar
signals, in connection to what is commonly referred to as a "dish-type
antenna."
SCHOOL, PRIVATE — A use primarily engaged in the education and
instruction of individuals in academic or religious subjects from prekindergarten
through Grade 12 and not operated under the administrative
authority of a duly constituted state, county, region or municipal board of
education or other governmental entity.
SCHOOL, PUBLIC — Any school operated under the administrative
authority of a duly constituted state, county, regional or municipal board of
education or other governmental entity.
SCREEN — A structure or planting consisting of fencing, berms, and/or
evergreen trees or shrubs providing a continuous view obstruction within a
site on property.
SEDIMENTATION — The deposit of soil that has been transported from
its site of origin by water, ice, wind, gravity, or other natural means as a
product of erosion.
SENIOR CITIZEN — A person who has attained the age of 62 years, or the
surviving unmarried spouse of a deceased senior citizen.
SENSITIVE AREA — Land which lies within wetland transition areas,
special flood hazard areas, stream encroachment areas of delineated and
nondelineated streams, shallow water table areas, aquifer outcrop areas,
and steep slopes between 15% and 30%.
SEPTIC SYSTEM — See "individual sewerage disposal system."
SEPTIC TANK — A watertight receptacle that receives the discharge of
sewage in an individual sewage disposal system.
§ 250-6 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-6
10:586
SERVICE DRIVE — A roadway which provides common access to two or
more uses and which is adjacent to, but separated from, a public right-ofway.
SETBACK — The minimum horizontal distance between the street right-ofway,
rear or side lot lines and the closest part of any building. The term
"setback" is synonymous with "required setback" and means a line beyond
which a building is not permitted to extend.
SEWER — Any pipe conduit used to collect and carry away sewage or
stormwater runoff from the generating source to treatment plants or
receiving bodies of water.
SHOPPING CENTER — A group of commercial establishments, in attached
or separate buildings, built on one tract of land that is planned and
developed as an operating unit providing on-site parking in definite
relationship to the type and total size of the stores.
SHOULDER — The graded part of a private or public right-of-way that lies
between the edge of the main traveled way and the curbline, or, if there is
no curbline, the edge of the pavement.
SIDEWALK — A pavement provided for pedestrian use and usually located
at the side of a road within the right-of-way.
SIGHT EASEMENT — An area of land, usually, but not necessarily,
established at street intersections, in which nothing is permitted to be
erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as to impair
or obstruct the line of sight of motorists or pedestrians.
SIGN — Any device, fixture, placard, or structure that uses any color, form,
graphic, illumination, symbol, or writing to advertise, announce the purpose
of, or identify the purpose of a person or entity, or to visually communicate
information of any kind to the public.
SIGN, ADD-ON — Signs, such as credit card insignias, arrows, etc., which
are attached to any structure or sign.
SIGN, ANIMATED DISPLAY — A sign with actions or motion, chasing,
scintillating, flashing or color changing, requiring electrical energy,
electronic or manufacturer's sources or supply, but not including windactivated
elements such as flags or banners. Effects such as time and
temperature, revolving, changeable copy or public information displays are
not included.
SIGN AREA — The square foot area of a sign computed by multiplying its
greatest width by its greatest length, exclusive of supporting structures and
bracing devices, unless such supporting structures and bracing devices are
illuminated or are in the form of a symbol or contain words or symbols, in
which case the supporting structure shall also be computed in determining
sign area. When there is a different message on each side of the sign, any
side will be considered and used in computing the sign area; provided,
however, that there shall be excluded from the computation of sign area
one side carrying the same message as any other side. In the case of
lettering attached to building facades, the "sign area" shall be the product
§ 250-6 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-6
10:587
of the maximum vertical dimension multiplied by the maximum horizontal
dimension of all lettering and symbols which form the sign, including the
empty space between the letters and symbols.
SIGN, ATTACHED — Any sign which is in any way affixed to any exterior
wall of a building and which projects not more than 12 inches from the
building facade and does not extend above the parapet, eaves or building
facade.
SIGN, CANOPY — Any sign or other identification that is a part of or
attached to an awning, canopy, or other fabric, plastic or structural
protective cover over a door, entrance, window or outdoor service area. A
marquee is not a canopy.
SIGN, ELECTRICAL — Any sign which has characters, letters, figures,
designs, facts, backgrounds or outlines illuminated by incandescent or
fluorescent lamps or luminous tubes as part of the sign proper and may be
either internally or externally illuminated.
SIGN, FACIA — See "sign, attached."
SIGN, FREESTANDING — A sign, which is supported by one or more
columns, poles, uprights, or braces in or upon the ground and which is not
attached to or part of a building.
SIGN HEIGHT — The measure computed from grade level to the highest
point on the sign.
SIGN, MOBILE — Any sign, other than temporary signs, not permanently
attached to real estate, buildings or other permanent structure, or a sign
designed to be transported, including but not limited to, signs upon
motorless vehicles such as wagons, trailers, flatbed trucks and on vehicles
with motors, if the motors have become inoperable and are unable to propel
the vehicle, signs to be transported on wheels, sandwich board signs, signs
on balloons and umbrellas and the like.[Amended 10-25-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-28]
SIGN, OFFICIAL — Any sign, symbol, or device erected and maintained
by a federal, state, county or local government agency for the purpose of
informing or guiding the public; or for the protection of the health, safety,
convenience or general welfare of the public.
SIGN, OUTDOOR ADVERTISING — See "billboard."
SIGN, PAINTED WALL — A sign painted on the exterior of a structure.
SIGN, PROJECTING — Any sign affixed to a building or wall in such a
manner that any portion of the sign extends more than 12 inches from the
building or wall; or any sign which extends over or into public property or
beyond the property line.
SIGN, ROOF — Any sign erected on the roof or parapet of a building, the
entire face of which is situated above the eaves or highest architectural
point of the building and which is wholly or partially supported by said
building.
§ 250-6 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-6
10:588
SIGN, TEMPORARY — A sign which is not permanently attached to a
building or structure and which may be erected for a limited period of time
in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
SIGN, WINDOW — Any sign erected, constructed or maintained in or on a
window of a building and visible from the outside of the building.
SILVICULTURE — The growing, care and harvesting of forests for sale.
SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots on which is shown:
SITE PLAN, MAJOR — Any site plan other than a minor site plan.
SITE PLAN, MINOR — A plan for the development (other than subdivision)
of less than 1,000 square feet of floor area and/or less than 4,000 square
feet of impervious surface; provided, however, that such plan:
SOIL CEMENT — A mixture of portland cement and locally available soil,
serving as a soil stabilizer.
SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — A scheme which
indicates land treatment measures to minimize soil erosion and
sedimentation, including without limitation a sequence of development list
with the proposed starting date of each phase in the sequence and the
proposed date to complete each phase of development.
SOLAR ACCESS — A property owner's right to have the sunlight shine on
his land.
The existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including but not
necessarily limited to topography, vegetation, drainage, floodplains,
marshes, and waterways;
A.
The location of all existing and proposed buildings, drives, parking
spaces, walkways, means of ingress and egress, lighting, and screening
devices; and
B.
C. Any other information that may be required pursuant to this chapter.
Does not involve a planned development, any new street, or extension
of any off-tract improvement, the cost of which is to be prorated
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42;
A.
Does not require the granting of any variances from the zoning
requirements of Article VII this chapter or waivers from the design
standards of Article X of this chapter;
B.
Does not involve any lot, tract, parcel, building or structure that was
approved as a minor or major site plan within the preceding 18 months;
and
C.
Contains the information reasonably required in order to make any
informed determination as to whether the requirements established by
this chapter for approval of a minor site plan have been met.
D.
§ 250-6 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-6
10:589
STABILIZED TURF OR EARTH — Turf, or earth (soil), strengthened usually
by the mixing of cement or lime with the original material to achieve
increased strength, thereby reducing shrinkage and movement.
STAGGERED SETBACKS — Front setbacks of residential units that are
varied in horizontal location.
STEEP SLOPES — Slopes of over 25%.
STORY — A portion of a building included between the upper surface of a
floor and the upper surface of the floor or roof next above. Underground
space shall be considered a "story" when the upper surface of the floor
next above is more than six feet above the adjacent ground elevation at any
point.
STORY, HALF — A space under a sloping roof that has the line of
intersection of the roof and wall face not more than three feet above the
floor level and in which space the possible floor area with headroom of five
feet or less occupies at least 40% of the total floor area of the story directly
beneath.[Added 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-03]
STREAM RIGHT-OF-WAY — The distance or width located on both sides of
a stream or watercourse which has been dedicated, deeded or granted by
easement to any government agency for stream right-of-way or which has
been indicated in an officially adopted stream improvement program.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive
or other way which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway;
or which is shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law; or
which is shown upon a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the
Middlesex County Clerk prior to the appointment of the Planning Board and
the grant to such Board of the power to review plats; and includes the land
between the street lines, whether improved or unimproved, and includes
the pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, parking areas and other
areas within the street lines.
STREET FURNITURE — Man-made, aboveground items that are usually
found in street rights-of-way, including benches, kiosks, plants, canopies,
shelters, and phone booths.
STREET HARDWARE — The mechanical and utility systems within a street
right-of-way such as hydrants, manhole covers, traffic lights and signs,
utility poles and lines, parking meters and the like.
STREET HIERARCHY — The conceptual arrangement of streets based upon
function from high traffic arterial roads down to streets whose function
is residential access in order to promote safety, efficient land use, and
residential quality.
STREET LINE — The line determining the limit of the right-of-way whether
existing or contemplated. Where a definite right-of-way width has not been
established, the street line shall be assumed to be at the future right-of-way
line as adopted in the Master Plan.
§ 250-6 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-6
10:590
STREET LOOP — A street that has its only ingress and egress at two points
on the same collector street.
STRIPPING — Any activity which significantly disturbs vegetated or
otherwise stabilized soil surface, including without limitation clearing and
grubbing operations.
STRUCTURE —
STUB STREET — A portion of a street for which an extension is anticipated.
SUBDIVIDER — Any person commencing proceedings under this chapter to
effect a subdivision of land hereunder for himself or for others.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two or
more lots, tracts, parcels, or other divisions of land for sale or development.
The following shall not be considered "subdivisions" within the meaning of
this chapter, if no new streets are created:
SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN COMMITTEE — A committee, consisting
of four members of the Planning Board appointed by the Chairman of
the Planning Board, which has the purpose of reviewing, commenting on
and making recommendations with respect to subdivision and site plan
applications and having the power to approve minor site plans and
subdivisions pursuant to § 250-15.
A combination of materials to form a construction for occupancy, use
or ornamentation whether installed on, above, or below the surface of
a parcel of land, including without limitation stadiums, parking lots,
platforms, radio towers, storage bins, and swimming pools.
A.
For the purposes of § 250-57, "structure" or "structures" are defined
as a preexisting tower, including water towers and any other facility
or building at least three stories in height that can be used for the
collocation of towers and/or antenna(s) without significantly altering
the visual appearance of the facility or building. [Added 3-27-2000 by
Ord. No. 06-00]
B.
Divisions of land found by the approving board to be for agricultural
purposes where all resulting parcels are five acres or larger in size;
A.
B. Divisions of property by testamentary or intestate provisions;
Divisions of property upon court order, including without limitation
judgments of foreclosure;
C.
Consolidation of existing lots by deed or other recorded instrument;
and
D.
The conveyance of one or more adjoining lots, tracts or parcels of land,
owned by the same person or persons and all of which are found and
certified by the administrative officer to conform to the requirements of
the municipal development regulations and are shown and designated
as separate lots, tracts or parcels on the tax map or atlas of the
Township.
E.
§ 250-6 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-6
10:591
SUBDIVISION, MINOR —
SUBGRADE — The natural ground lying beneath a finished surface.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT —
SWIMMING POOL, COMMERCIAL — All pools installed and used in
connection with other than one-family and two-family dwellings.
SWIMMING POOL, PORTABLE — A swimming pool that is not permanently
installed and meets all of the following criteria: does not require water
filtration, circulation and purification; does not exceed 24 inches in depth;
does not exceed a water surface of 250 square feet; and does not require
braces or supports.
SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL — A pool, other than a portable
swimming pool, that is located on a lot principally used for dwelling units by
one or two housekeeping units, and including all buildings, structures, and
equipment appurtenant thereto.
A subdivision of land that:
(1) Involves the creation of three or fewer lots;
Does not involve a planned development, any new streets or the
extension of any off-tract improvement, the cost of which is to be
prorated pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42;
(2)
Does not involve any lot, tract or parcel that was approved as a
minor or major subdivision within the preceding 18 months.
(3)
A.
The number of lots created shall include the new lots and the lands
remaining.
B.
Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost
of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure
either:
(1) Before the improvement or repair is started; or
Before the damage occurred if the structure has been damaged and
is being restored.
(2)
A.
For the purpose of this definition, "substantial improvements" are
considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor
or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term
does not, however, include either:
Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with the
existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications
solely necessary to assure safe occupancy conditions; or
(1)
Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.
(2)
B.
§ 250-6 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-6
10:592
TAVERN or BAR — An establishment where the serving of liquor by the
drink to the general public is the principal use and the serving of food or the
sale of packaged liquors, if any, are accessory to the principal use. All such
establishments shall conform to all Alcoholic Beverage Control regulations
of the State of New Jersey and the Township of Old Bridge.139[Added
8-1-2005 by Ord. No. 21-2005]
TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA — Any structure or device used for
the purpose of collecting or transmitting electromagnetic waves, including
but not limited to directional antennas, such as panels, microwave dishes,
satellite dishes and omni-directional antennas.[Added 3-27-2000 by Ord.
No. 06-00]
TEMPORARY STRUCTURE — A structure without any foundation or
footings and which is removed when a specifically designated time period,
activity or use for which the temporary structure was erected has ceased.
TOPSOIL — The upper layer of soil material which is usually darker and
richer than the subsoil and which by its humus content supports vegetation.
TOWER — Any ground or roof-mounted pole, spire, structure or
combination thereof that is designed and constructed primarily for the
purpose of supporting one or more antennas for telephone, radio and
similar communications purposes, including supporting lines, cables, wires,
braces and masts. The term includes radio and television transmission
owners, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative
tower structures, and the like.[Added 3-27-2000 by Ord. No. 06-00]
TOWER, MULTI-USER — A tower to which is attached the antennas of
more than one commercial wireless telecommunication service provider or
governmental entity.[Added 3-27-2000 by Ord. No. 06-00]
TOWNSHIP — The Municipality of the Township of Old Bridge.
TRACT — An area of land composed of one or more lots adjacent to each
another, having sufficient dimensions and area to make one parcel of land
meeting the requirements of this chapter for the use or uses intended. The
original land area may be divided by one existing public street and still be
considered one tract, provided that the street is not an arterial or collector
road and that a linear distance equal to more than 75% of the frontage
of the side of the street having the larger street frontage lies opposite an
equivalent linear distance of street frontage on the other side of the street.
TRAILER — A structure standing on wheels, towed or hauled by another
vehicle and used for short-term human occupancy, carrying materials,
goods or objects, or as a temporary office.
TRAILER HOME — Any dwelling unit for living or sleeping purposes which
is equipped with wheels or some device used for the purpose of transporting
such unit from place to place, whether by motor vehicle or other means,
or any factory-built unit equipped with wheels used for living or sleeping
139. Editor's Note: See Ch. 30, Alcoholic Beverages.
§ 250-6 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-6
10:593
purposes, whether the same is on blocks, posts, or any other type of
foundation. "Mobile home" shall be synonymous with "trailer home."
TRAILER, TEMPORARY CONSTRUCTION — A trailer used for construction
purposes within a section of a development having final approval for the
period of construction beginning with the issuance of the initial
construction permit and concluding with the issuance of the final certificate
of occupancy within said section; provided said trailer(s) is on the site
where construction is taking place and is set back at least 25 feet from all
street and lot lines with a buffer of evergreen trees and shrubs.
TRANSCRIPT — A typed or printed verbatim record of the proceedings or
reproduction thereof.
TREE — Any living tree having a trunk of a diameter greater than eight
inches DBH or any living Dogwood (Cornus Florida) or American Holly (Hex
Opaca) tree having a diameter of one inch or greater DBH.
TREE REMOVAL — Any act which causes a tree to die within a period of two
years, including without limitation damage inflicted upon the root system by
machinery, storage of materials, and soil compaction, changing the natural
grade above the root system or around the trunk; damage inflicted on the
tree permitting infection or pest infestation, excessive pruning, paving with
concrete, asphalt or other impervious material within such proximity as to
be harmful to the tree.
TRIP — A single or one-way vehicle movement to or from a property or study
area. "Trips" can be added together to calculate the total number of vehicles
expected to enter and leave a specific land use or site over a designated
period of time.
TRIP GENERATION — The total of trips produced or expected to be
produced by a specific land use or activity within a specified period of time.
USE — The specific purpose for which land or a building or structure
is designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it may be occupied or
maintained.
UTILITY — Any agency which, under public franchise or ownership, or
under certificate of convenience and necessity, provides the public with
electricity, gas, heat, steam, communication, transportation, water, sewage
collection, or other similar service.
VARIANCE — Permission granted by the approving board hereunder to
depart from the literal requirements of the zoning standards of this chapter.
WELLNESS CENTER AND SPA — A wellness center is an establishment
that offers health services for the body and mind. Wellness centers usually
offer skin care services and body services such as fitness, personal training
and nutrition consulting and alternate services such as chiropractic,
acupuncture, or holistic medicine. This does not include services rendered
by centers for drug, methadone, alcoholic treatment, and halfway
houses.[Added 3-11-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-05]
§ 250-6 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-6
10:594
WHOLESALE TRADE — Establishments or places of business primarily
engaged in selling merchandise to retailers; to industrial, commercial,
institutional, or professional business users; to other wholesalers; or acting
as agents or brokers and buying merchandise for, or selling merchandise to,
such individuals or companies.[Added 3-11-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-05]
YARD — An open space on the same lot with a principal building,
unoccupied and unobstructed by buildings from the ground to the sky,
except as otherwise provided in this chapter. The minimum required "yard"
shall have the same meaning as the required setback.
YARD FRONT — The yard extending across the entire width of the lot
between the front lot line and the nearest part of a principal building.
Corner lots are considered to have front yards along each street.[Amended
3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-03]
YARD, REAR — The yard extending across the entire width of the lot
between the nearest part of the principal building and the rear lot line, or,
in cases where no rear lot line exists, the point at which the two side lot
lines meet.
YARD, SIDE — A yard extending along the side lot line from the front yard
to the rear yard and lying between the side lot line and the nearest part of
the principal building.
ZONE LOT — A lot or combination of lots proposed to be used, developed,
or built upon as an integrated unit.
ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT — The Zoning Board of Adjustment
established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69 and § 250-9 of this chapter.
ZONING OFFICER — The individual responsible for enforcement and
interpretation of the zoning sections of this chapter.
ZONING PERMIT — A document signed by the Zoning Officer, in
consultation with the Township Engineer, which shall be required as herein
set forth and which acknowledges that:
A use, structure or building complies with the provisions of this chapter,
or variance(s) therefrom duly authorized by the appropriate municipal
agency;
A.
The developer of such a use, structure, building or other development
has obtained all final site plan or subdivision approvals otherwise
required by this chapter;
B.
Such use, structure, building or other development conforms to the
final approvals granted hereunder; and
C.
All conditions of such approvals required to be satisfied prior to the
issuance of a construction permit or certificate of occupancy, as the
case may be, have been satisfied.
D.
§ 250-6 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-7
10:595
§ 250-7. Abbreviations.
As used in this chapter, the following abbreviations shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADT — Average daily traffic.
AISC — American Institute of Steel Construction.
ASCE — American Society of Civil Engineers.
ASTM — American Society for Testing Materials, Philadelphia.
AWWA — American Water Works Association.
B and B — Balled and burlapped.
BOCA — Building Officials Conference of America.
CAFRA — Coastal Area Facilities Review Act.
DBH — Diameter breast high.
DCA — N.J. Department of Community Affairs.
DEP — NJ Department of Environmental Protection.
DOT — NJ Department of Transportation.
DU — Dwelling unit(s).
DU/AC — Dwelling units per acre.
EPA — United States Environmental Protection Agency.
FA — Gross floor area.
FAA — Federal Aviation Administration. [Added 3-27-2000 by Ord. No.
06-00]
FCC — Federal Communications Commission. [Added 3-27-2000 by
Ord. No. 06-00]
FEMA — Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FIRM — Flood Insurance Rate Map.
GDP — General development plan.
IES — Illuminating Engineering Society.
ITE — Institute of Transportation Engineers.
MLUL — Municipal Land Use Law.140
N.J.A.C. — New Jersey Administrative Code
N.J.S.A. — New Jersey Statutes Annotated.
OBMUA — Old Bridge Township Municipal Utilities Authority.
OC — On center.
PD — Planned development.
SCD — Freehold Soil Conservation District.
140. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 250-7 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-7
10:596
SCS — Soil Conservation Service.
SF — Square feet.
SMSA — Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area.
ULI — Urban Land Institute.
USACOE — United States Army Corps of Engineers.
USDA — United States Department of Agriculture.
USGS — United States Geologic Survey.
§ 250-7 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-7
10:597

ARTICLE III
Administration
§ 250-8. Planning Board.141
A. Establishment; membership. There is hereby established a Planning
Board, known as the "Planning Board of the Township of Old Bridge,"
consisting of nine members in four classes. The classes of members,
membership requirements, qualifications, terms and vacancies are
established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23.
B. Alternate members. The Mayor shall appoint two alternate members to
the Planning Board, in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23.1.
Membership requirements, qualifications, terms and vacancies are
established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23.1.
C. Organization of Planning Board. The Planning Board shall elect a
Chairman and Vice Chairman and select a Secretary in accordance with
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-24.
D. Planning Board Attorney. There is hereby created the office of Planning
Board Attorney. The Planning Board may annually appoint a Planning
Board Attorney who shall be an attorney other than the Township
Attorney, Director of Law, Assistant Township Attorney or Municipal
Prosecutor. He shall serve at a rate of compensation and upon such
other terms fixed by ordinance and not exceeding the amount
appropriated by the Township Council for the Planning Board's use, in
accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-24.
E. Experts and staff. The Planning Board may also employ and contract for
the services of experts and other staff and services as it may deem
necessary, in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-24. The
Planning Board's expenditures shall not, however, exceed the sum of
the amount appropriated by the Township Council for its use and
whatever gifts or grants it may have received. In no event shall any
expenditure of an amount not appropriated be made in anticipation of
reimbursement through gift or grant.
F. Relation to fee and escrow ordinance. Anything contained in this
§ 250-8 to the contrary notwithstanding, Subsections D and E shall not
be construed as limiting the Planning Board's authority to employ and
contract for the services of such experts and other staff as it may deem
necessary pursuant to the provisions of § 250-105 12-2 hereof.
G. Powers and duties of the Planning Board. The Planning Board shall have
the following authorities and duties:
(1) To make, adopt and, from time to time, to amend a Master Plan to
guide the use of lands within the Township in a manner consistent
141. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Land Development Codification (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. IV).
§ 250-8 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-8
10:599
with the purposes of this chapter. Said Master Plan shall contain
the elements set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28 and Article V of this
chapter and shall be reviewed by the Planning Board for the
purpose of considering amendments thereto when appropriate, but
at intervals of not greater than six years.
(2) To administer the provisions of this chapter relating to conditional
use permit approval, subdivision approval and site plan review.
(3) To participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans
required by state or federal law or regulations.
(4) To assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuous
planning process.
(5) To prepare annually, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-29 to 40:55D-31,
inclusive, and Article VI of this chapter, a program of municipal
capital improvement projects projected over a term of six years,
and amendments thereto, and recommend same to the Township
Council.
(6) In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26, to consider and make a
report to the Township Council as to any proposed development
regulation, including without limitation revisions to this chapter,
and also pass upon other matters specifically referred to the
Planning Board by the Township Council, pursuant to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26(b), except for any matter under the
jurisdiction of the Zoning Board of Adjustment. In the event that
the Planning Board is acting under this Subsection G(6) in response
to the Township Council's referral to it of a proposed development
regulation, then the Planning Board shall make such report within
35 days of such referral.
(7) Whenever an application for development requires approval of a
subdivision, site plan or conditional use, but not a variance
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d and § 250-9G(5) of this chapter, to
grant to the same extent and subject to the same restrictions as the
Zoning Board of Adjustment:
(a) Variances pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c and § 250-9G(3) and
(4) of this chapter;
(b) Direction, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36, for the issuance of a
permit for the construction of a building or structure not
abutting a street giving access to such building or structure;
and
(c) Direction, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34, for the issuance of a
permit for a building or structure in the bed of a mapped street
or public drainageway, flood control basin or public area
reserved pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32.
§ 250-8 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-8
10:600
§ 250-9. Zoning Board of Adjustment.
(8) To consider and make a report to the Zoning Board of Adjustment,
in connection with any requests pending before the Zoning Board
of Adjustment for relief pursuant to § 250-9G(5) of this chapter, as
to the impact of such request on the intent and purposes of the
zone plan, this chapter and the Master Plan.
(9) To perform such other advisory duties as are assigned to it by
ordinance or resolution of the governing body or other agencies or
officers.
(10) To exercise the powers set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-25.
H. Planning Board powers not to be exercised by any other body. No power
expressly authorized by this chapter to be exercised by the Planning
Board shall be exercised by any other body except as otherwise
provided in this chapter.
I. Advisory Committee. The Mayor may appoint one or more persons as a
citizen's advisory committee to assist or collaborate with the Planning
Board in its duties, but such person or persons shall have no power to
vote or take other action required of the Board. Such person or persons
shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor.
J. Rules and regulations. The Planning Board shall adopt such rules and
regulations as may be necessary to carry into effect the provisions and
purposes of this article.
A. Establishment; composition.
(1) A Zoning Board of Adjustment is hereby established, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., consisting of seven residents of the
Township of Old Bridge appointed by the Township Council to serve
for terms of four years, commencing January 1 of the year of their
appointment. No member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment may
hold any elective office or position in the Township. A vacancy
occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled for
the remainder of the unexpired term by appointment as
hereinabove provided for.
(2) The Township Council shall appoint two alternate members to
serve on the Zoning Board of Adjustment. Alternate members shall
have the same qualifications as full members. Alternate members
shall be designated at the time of their appointment as "Alternate
No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2." A vacancy in the alternate
membership occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall
be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term by appointment as
hereinabove provided for. Alternate members may participate in
discussions of the proceedings but may not vote, except in the
absence or disqualification of a regular member, including without
limitation a disqualification of a regular member for conflict of
§ 250-8 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-9
10:601
interest or failure of a member to certify in writing that he has read
the transcript or listened to the recording of portions of a hearing
at which he was absent. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a
regular member shall vote instead of an alternate member. In the
event that a choice must be made as to which alternate member is
to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote.
B. Officers. The Zoning Board of Adjustment annually shall elect a
Chairman and Vice Chairman from its members and shall also select a
Secretary who may or may not be a Board member or a municipal
employee.
C. Zoning Board of Adjustment Attorney. There is hereby created the office
of Zoning Board of Adjustment Attorney. The Zoning Board of
Adjustment may annually appoint a Zoning Board of Adjustment
Attorney, who shall be an attorney other than the Township Attorney,
Director of Law, Assistant Township Attorney or Municipal Prosecutor.
He shall serve at a rate of compensation fixed by ordinance and not
exceeding the amount appropriated by the Township Council for the
Zoning Board of Adjustment's use.
D. Experts and staff. The Zoning Board of Adjustment may also employ or
contract for the services of experts and other staff and services as it
may deem necessary. The Board's expenditures shall not, however,
exceed the sum of the amount appropriated by the governing body for
its use and whatever gifts or grants it may have received. In no event
shall any expenditure of an amount not appropriated be made in
anticipation of reimbursement through gift or grant.
E. Relation to fee and escrow ordinance. Anything contained in this
§ 250-9 to the contrary notwithstanding, Subsections C and D shall not
be construed as limiting the Zoning Board of Adjustment's authority to
employ and contract for the services of such experts and other staff as it
may deem necessary pursuant to the provisions of § 250-105 of this
chapter.
F. Rules and regulations. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall adopt
such rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry into effect the
provisions and purposes of this chapter.
G. Powers and duties of the Zoning Board of Adjustment. The Zoning
Board of Adjustment shall have the following authorities and duties:
(1) To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is error in
any order, requirement, decision or refusal made by the
administrative officer based on or made in the enforcement of the
zoning provisions of this chapter. In this regard, the Zoning Board
of Adjustment may reverse or affirm wholly or partly or may modify
the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from,
or make such other order requirement, decision or determination
as ought to be made, and have all the powers of the administrative
officer from whom the appeal was taken.
§ 250-9 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-9
10:602
(2) To hear and decide requests for interpretation of the Zoning Map or
zoning provisions of this chapter.
(3) Where, by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, or shape
of a specific piece of property, by reason of exceptional topographic
conditions or physical features uniquely affecting a specific piece of
the property, or by reason of an extraordinary and exceptional
situation uniquely affecting a specific piece of property or the
structures lawfully existing thereon, the strict application of any
regulations in the zoning provisions of this chapter would result in
peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties, or exceptional and
undue hardship upon the owner of such property, to grant, upon an
application or an appeal relating to such property, a variance from
such strict application, so as to relieve such difficulties or hardship.
(4) Where, in an application or appeal relating to a specific piece of
property, the purposes of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. and this chapter
would be advanced by a deviation from the requirements of the
zoning sections of this chapter and the benefits of the deviation
would substantially outweigh any detriment, to grant a variance to
allow departure from such requirements.
(5) In particular cases and for special reasons, grant a variance to
allow departure from the requirements of the zoning sections of
this chapter to permit a use or principal structure in the district
restricted against such use or principal structure; an expansion of a
nonconforming use; deviation from a specification or standard set
forth in § 250-41 and pertaining solely to a conditional use; an
increase in the permitted floor area ratio; an increase in the
permitted gross or net density, except as applied to the required lot
area for a lot or lots for detached one- or two-dwelling-unit
buildings, which lot or lots are either an isolated undersized lot or
lots resulting from a minor subdivision; or a height of a principal
structure which exceeds by 10 feet or 10% the maximum height
permitted in the district for a principal structure. A variance under
this Subsection G(5) shall be granted only by the affirmative vote of
at least five Board members. In the event a developer fails to
occupy and utilize property granted a variance under this
Subsection G(5) in the manner authorized by the variance, the
developer's right to the variance shall expire on the later of one
year from the date of its approval, or the expiration date of any
related site plan, subdivision or general development plan approval
granted in connection with the deviation out of which such variance
arises; provided that the later date shall govern only if such
application for site plan, subdivision, or general development plan
approval is filed prior to the expiration of the aforesaid one-year
period. If the developer or his successor or assignor occupies and
utilizes the property in the manner authorized under the variance
and pursuant to the deadline stated hereinabove, the variance shall
§ 250-9 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-9
10:603
be deemed perfected and rights thereunder shall vest. [Amended
11-2-1992 by Ord. No. 42-92]
(6) If an application for development requests one or more variances
but not a variance for a purpose enumerated in Subsection G(5) of
this section, the decision on the requested variance or variances
shall be rendered under Subsection G(3) of this section.
(7) Anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding, no variance from
those departures enumerated in Subsection G(5) shall be granted
under Subsections G(3) and (4) and the Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall have no authority to grant variances under
Subsections G(3) and (4) if the proposed development requires
approval by the Planning Board of a subdivision, site plan or
conditional use in conjunction with which the Planning Board has
the power to review a request for a variance pursuant to
§ 250-8G(7) of this chapter. Anything herein to the contrary
notwithstanding, no variance or other relief may be granted under
the provisions of the above subsections unless such variance or
other relief can be granted without substantial detriment to the
public good and without substantially impairing the intent and
purpose of the zone plan and this chapter. Any request for relief
under any subsection of this section may be referred to any
appropriate person or agency for its report. Any request for relief
under Subsection G(5) above shall be referred to the Planning
Board for its report relative to the impact of the request on the zone
plan, this chapter, and the Master Plan. Such referrals shall not
extend the period of time within which the Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall act.
(8) To direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 for a
building or structure in the bed of a mapped street or public
drainageway, flood control basin or public area reserved on the
Official Map.
(9) To direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36 for a
building or structure not related to a street.
(10) To grant, to the same extent and subject to the same restrictions as
the Planning Board, subdivision, site plan or conditional use
approval whenever the proposed development requires approval by
the Zoning Board of Adjustment of a variance pursuant to
Subsection G(5) above. Any such application for development
seeking approval of a subdivision or site plan shall be referred to
the Subdivision and Site Plan Committee for its review and
recommendations.
(11) The Board of Adjustment shall not exercise the powers otherwise
granted under Subsections G(7) and (8) if the proposed
development requires approval by the Planning Board of a
subdivision, site plan or conditional use in conjunction with which
§ 250-9 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-9
10:604
§ 250-10. Provisions applicable to both the Planning Board and
Zoning Board of Adjustment.
the Planning Board has the power to review a request for the
issuance of a permit pursuant to § 250-8G(7) of this chapter.
(12) At least once a year, to review its decisions on applications and
appeals for variances and prepare and adopt by resolution a report
to the governing body and the Planning Board on its findings on the
zoning sections of this chapter which were the subject of variance
requests and its recommendations for the amendment on such
sections, if any.
A. Conflicts of interest. No member or alternate of the Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act on any matter in which he has
either directly or indirectly any personal or financial interest. Whenever
any such member or alternate shall disqualify himself from acting on a
particular matter, he shall not continue to sit with the Board on the
hearing of such matter nor participate in any discussion or decision
relating thereto.
B. Meetings. Meetings of both the Planning Board and the Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall be scheduled and conducted in accordance with the
general ordinances of the Township of Old Bridge.
(1) If the Planning Board lacks a quorum because any of its regular or
alternate members is prohibited by this section from acting on a
matter, regular members of the Board of Adjustment shall be called
upon to serve, for that matter only, as temporary members of the
Planning Board in order of seniority of continuous service to the
Board of Adjustment until there are the minimum number of
members necessary to constitute quorum to act upon the matter
without personal or financial interest therein, whether direct or
indirect. If a choice has to be made between regular members of
equal seniority, the Chairman of the Board of Adjustment shall
make the choice.
(2) If the Board of Adjustment lacks a quorum because any of its
regular or alternate members is prohibited by this section from
acting on a matter, Class IV members of the Planning Board shall
be called upon to serve, for that matter only, as temporary
members of the Board of Adjustment. The Class IV members of the
Planning Board shall be called upon to serve in order of seniority of
continuous service to the Planning Board until there are the
minimum number of members necessary to constitute a quorum to
act upon the matter without any personal or financial interest
therein, whether direct or indirect. If a choice has to be made
between Class IV members of equal seniority, the Chairman of the
Planning Board shall make the choice.
§ 250-9 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-10
10:605
C. Minutes. Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept and
shall include the names of the persons appearing and addressing the
Board and of the persons appearing by attorney, the action taken by the
Board, the findings, if any, made by it and reasons therefor. The minutes
shall thereafter be made available for public inspection during normal
business hours at the office of the Department of Community
Development. Any interested party shall have the right to compel
production of the minutes for use as evidence in any legal proceeding
concerning the subject matter of such minutes. Such interested party
shall be charged a fee for reproduction of the minutes for his use as
provided for in § 250-104 of this chapter.
D. Hearings.
(1) The officer presiding at the hearing, or such person as he may
designate, shall have the power to administer oaths and issue
subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the
production of relevant evidence, including witnesses presented by
the parties, and the provisions of the County and Municipal
Investigations Law, P.L. 1953, c. 1938 (N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq.)
shall apply.
(2) The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application for
development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the
presiding officer, or such person as he may designate, and the right
of cross-examination shall be permitted to all interested parties
through their attorneys, if represented, or directly if not
represented, subject to the discretion of the presiding officer and to
reasonable limitations as to time and number of witnesses.
(3) Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the hearings,
but the presiding officer may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or
unduly repetitious evidence.
(4) Each Board shall provide for the verbatim recording of the
proceedings by either stenographer, mechanical or electronic
means. The Board shall furnish a transcript or duplicate recording
in lieu thereof on request to any interested party at his or her
expense.
(5) Failure of a motion to receive the number of votes required to
approve an application for development pursuant to the applicable
voting requirements of this chapter shall be deemed an action
denying the application.
(6) A member of the Board who is absent for one or more of the
meetings at which a hearing was held shall be eligible to vote on
the matter upon which the hearing was conducted notwithstanding
his absence from one or more of the meetings; provided, however,
that such Board member has available to him the transcript or
recording of all of the hearings from which he was absent and
§ 250-10 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-10
10:606
certifies in writing to the Board that he has read such transcript or
listened to such recording.
E. Environmental Commission. The administrative officer shall make
available to the Environmental Commission an informational copy of
every application for development. Failure of the administrative officer
to make such informational copy available to the Environmental
Commission shall not invalidate any hearing or proceeding.
F. Historic Preservation Commission. The administrative officer shall
make available to the Historic Preservation Commission an
informational copy of every application for development affecting an
historic site or structure. Failure of the administrative officer to make
such informational copy available to the Historic Preservation
Commission shall not invalidate any hearing or proceeding.
§ 250-10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-10
10:607

ARTICLE IV
Procedure
§ 250-11. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish the procedure for approving board
review of and action with respect to applications for development. The
procedure is intended to provide orderly and expeditious processing of such
applications.
§ 250-12. Preapplication.
A. Preapplication conference.
(1) The applicant may request from the Director of the Department of
Community Development and, if requested, shall be entitled to the
holding of a preapplication conference. The purpose of this
conference is to:
(a) Acquaint the applicant with the substantive and procedural
requirements of this chapter;
(b) Provide for an exchange of information regarding the proposed
development plan and applicable elements of the Master Plan,
this chapter and other development requirements;
(c) Advise the applicant of any public sources of information that
may aid the applicant's prosecution of the application for
development;
(d) Otherwise identify policies and regulations that create
opportunities for, or pose significant constraints on, the
proposed development;
(e) Review any proposed concept plans and consider opportunities
to increase development benefits and mitigate undesirable
project consequences;
(f) Permit input into the general design of the project; and
(g) Identify, to the extent practicable at this stage of the process,
any variances, or design or submission waivers necessary for
the applicant to develop the proposed development.
(2) The municipal representatives at the preapplication conference
shall be designated, except as otherwise indicated, by the Director
of the Department of Community Development and shall include
the administrative officer and a representative of the Mayor
designated by the Mayor, and may include:
(a) The Municipal Engineer;
(b) The Municipal Planner;
§ 250-11 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-12
10:609
(c) The Municipal Construction Official;
(d) The Municipal Zoning Officer;
(e) Representatives from the Planning Board and/or the Zoning
Board of Adjustment; and
(f) Representatives from the Municipal Environmental, Historic
Preservation, and/or other Commissions.
(3) A request for a preapplication conference shall be made in writing
and shall include a project description, a tax lot and block
designation of the site in question, a concept plan and such
additional information as may be reasonably requested by the
Director of the Department of Community Development. The
Director of the Department of Community Development shall
schedule a preapplication conference within 15 days of receipt of
such request.
(4) The applicant shall not be required to pay a fee for the
preapplication conference; provided, however, that the applicant
shall post an escrow fee pursuant to Article XII of this chapter to
cover the costs of attendance at the preapplication conference of
professional consultants not employed by the Township. If
requested and paid for by the applicant, a brief written summary of
the preapplication conference shall be prepared by the Department
of Community Development and provided to the applicant within 15
working days after the final meeting. The fee for such summary
shall be that set forth in Article XII of this chapter.
(5) Neither the approving board, the applicant, nor any other
participant in the preapplication meeting shall be bound by the
determination of the preapplication process.
B. Concept plan review.
(1) In addition, or as an alternative, to the preapplication conference,
at the request of the applicant, the Planning Board, or a
subcommittee thereof, shall meet with the applicant for an informal
review of a concept plan for development for which the applicant
intends to prepare and submit an application for development to
the Planning Board. The purpose of the concept plan is to provide
Planning Board input in the formative stages of subdivision and site
plan design.
(2) A request to meet with the Planning Board for an informal concept
plan review shall be made in writing and shall include a project
description, a tax lot and block designation of the site in question,
the concept plan and such additional information as may be
reasonably requested by the Director of the Department of
Community Development.
§ 250-12 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-12
10:610
§ 250-13. Applications generally.
(3) A brief written summary of the concept plan review shall be
prepared by the Department of Community Development and
provided to the Planning Board members and the applicant.
(4) The applicant shall be charged the fee for concept plan review set
forth in Article XII hereof. The amount of such fee shall be a credit
towards fees or charges otherwise payable under Article XII for the
review of the application for development.
(5) The applicant shall not be bound by any conceptual plan for which
review is requested, nor shall the Planning Board, or any
subcommittee thereof, be bound by any such review. The Planning
Board shall require public and personal notice of the conceptual
plan review meeting in the same manner as that required by
§ 250-13H hereof. [Amended 11-2-1992 by Ord. No. 42-92]
A. Assignment. Upon submission of an application for development and as
a part of the completeness determination described in Subsection D
hereof, the administrative officer shall determine, to the extent
practicable, approvals required and the appropriate Board for hearing
an application for development. The administrative officer's
determination shall be presumed to be correct; provided, however, that
nothing contained herein shall preclude the administrative officer from
determining, subsequent to a completeness certification and based
upon a continuing planning and engineering review of an application
for development, that additional approvals are necessary to develop the
property in question in the manner proposed by the applicant. The
following applications may be filed:
(1) Exempt subdivision.
(2) Minor subdivision.
(3) Preliminary major subdivision.
(4) Final major subdivision.
(5) Minor site plan.
(6) Preliminary major site plan.
(7) Final major site plan.
(8) General development plan approval.
(9) Conditional use.
(10) Relief pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70a.
(11) Relief pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70b.
(12) Relief pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c.
§ 250-12 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-13
10:611
(13) Relief pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d.
(14) Direction of the issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34
or 40:55D-36.
B. Combination of actions. Certain applications for development may
involve a combination of actions; provided, however, that the applicant
shall not be granted final subdivision or site plan approval prior to the
granting of the related preliminary approval. [Amended 3-15-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-03]
C. Ancillary Board jurisdiction. In the event that the application for
development requires relief from the Planning Board pursuant to
§ 250-8G(7) of this chapter, or relief from the Zoning Board of
Adjustment pursuant to § 250-9G(9) of this chapter, the developer may
elect to submit a separate application requesting approval of the
variance or direction for the issuance of a permit and a subsequent
application for any required approval of a subdivision, site plan or
conditional use. The separate approval of the variance or direction of
the issuance of a permit shall precede and be conditioned upon a grant
of all required subsequent approvals by the approving board. No such
subsequent approval shall be granted unless the approval can be
granted without substantial detriment to the public good and without
substantial impairment of the intent and purposes of the zoning plan
and this chapter. In the case of relief requested from the Zoning Board
of Adjustment pursuant to § 250-9G(9) of this chapter and
notwithstanding the provisions of § 250-9G(5), the number of votes of
Board members required to grant such subsequent approval shall be as
otherwise provided in these ordinances. Notwithstanding any other
provision of this chapter to the contrary, any application for
development requiring the granting of a variance shall be acted upon
by the approving board within 120 days of the certification of the
application as a complete application, or such further time period as
may be consented to by the applicant.
D. Content. [Amended 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-03]
(1) An application for development shall include the information
specified in Appendix A,142 which constitutes the checklist of items
to be submitted for review by the approving board of each type of
application and referred to in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.3. A copy of the
relevant checklist shall be completed and signed by the applicant,
and submitted with the application for development.
(2) An applicant for development on an undersized lot shall submit
proof of the good faith effort to correspond with abutting property
owners to ascertain whether they have an interest in buying or
selling property. (See 250 Attachment 12A, 12B, and 12C.)143
142. Editor's Note: Appendix A, Completeness Checklist, is included at the end of this chapter.
143. Editor's Note: Said attachment is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 250-13 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-13
10:612
(3) Soil borings, as required by the completeness checklist, shall be
taken at each stormwater detention or retention facility, and
several at building locations representative of each dominant soil
type. The Township Engineering Department shall be notified 48
hours prior to performing the boring(s) to allow witnessing of the
test(s).
(4) All applications for development must be based upon a current and
accurate survey which shows the conditions of the property as of
the date of the application. In compliance with the New Jersey
State Board of Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors' Rule
Notice, only licensed land surveyors may show existing conditions
and exact locations of physical features on a survey. When
preparing a site development plan, a licensed professional
engineer may transfer the survey information to his plan but must
add a note identifying the date of the survey, who prepared the
survey and for whom the survey was performed. In addition, a
signed and sealed copy of the survey must accompany the
application.
E. Environmental impact statement. An environmental impact statement
(EIS) shall accompany all applications so noted in Appendix A of this
chapter, and shall include the information needed to evaluate the
effects of the proposed development upon the environment. An
environmental impact statement as required herein shall also be
submitted for all public or quasi-public projects unless such are exempt
by supervening county, state or federal law. An environmental impact
statement shall include, at a minimum, the following:
(1) Project description. A description of the proposed project including
information and technical data adequate to permit a careful
assessment of environmental impact, including:
(a) Reason for the project;
(b) The recommended or favored alternative mapped and/or
described;
(c) Parks, recreational sites, wildlife, refuges and historic sites
mapped and described;
(d) Existing land use, zoning and master plan delineation of
project area mapped and described;
(e) Ambient environmental conditions mapped and described;
(f) A listing of all licenses, permits or other approvals as required
by law and the status of each.
(2) Investigation and identification of environmental impacts. The
probable impact of the proposed project on the environment,
including impact on ecological systems such as wildlife, fish and
§ 250-13 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-13
10:613
marine life, involving any probable adverse environmental effects
which cannot be avoided with respect to:
(a) Water quality;
(b) Air quality;
(c) Noise;
(d) Undesirable land use patterns;
(e) Damage or destruction of significant plant or wildlife systems;
(f) Aesthetic values;
(g) Destruction of natural resources such as wetlands, coastal
areas, floodplains, air quality, water resources, topography and
geological features;
(h) Destruction of man-made resources, including historic and
archaeological sites.
(3) Mitigating measures. A thorough discussion of the steps to be
taken before, during and after construction of the project, to
minimize the adverse environmental effects as described in
Subsection E(2) of this section, including the effect on the rules,
regulations, and standards promulgated under state and/or federal
environmental statutes.
(4) Project alternatives. Alternatives to the proposed project,
including:
(a) That of no project;
(b) Description of alternative designs with an objective evaluation
of the alternatives that might avoid some or all of the adverse
environmental effects with the rationale for acceptability or
nonacceptability of each alternative.
(c) An analysis of the cost and social impact of the alternatives,
including construction problems and traffic services.
(5) Irreversible and irretrievable commitment of resources. A
quantifiable identification of any irreversible and irretrievable
commitments of resources which would be involved in the
implementation of the project.
(6) Relationship between short-term and long-term uses of the
environment. The relationship between local short-term uses of the
site and the maintenance and enhancement of long-term
productivity, assessing the project for cumulative long-term effects
from the perspective that each generation is a trustee of the
environment for future generations.
§ 250-13 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-13
10:614
F. Community impact statement. All applications so noted in Appendix A
of this chapter144 shall be accompanied by a community impact
statement analyzing the proposed development and its expected
impacts upon existing municipal facilities and services. The community
impact statement shall indicate why, in the applicant's opinion, the
proposed development is in the public interest, as well as providing
data and opinions concerning the following specific items: [Amended
6-25-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-10]
(1) Population impact. An analysis of the number of people expected to
be added to the municipal population as a result of the proposed
development according to the following age cohorts: preschoolaged
children, school-aged children, parents of family-bearing age,
middle-aged adults and retired people.
(2) School impact. An analysis of the anticipated number of pupils who
will be added to the student population in the municipality and the
ability of the existing public school facilities to absorb the expected
student population during a ten-year time period. Should expanded
or new school facilities and/or increased teaching staff be required,
the expected cost for such additions shall be specified.
(3) Facilities impact. An analysis of the existing facilities available to
serve the proposed development and the impact of the
development upon the facilities, including the adequacy of existing
public water facilities; public sewerage facilities; recreational
facilities; and library facilities. Should such facilities be determined
inadequate to serve the proposed development, the remedies,
either expected or proposed by the applicant, shall be indicated
along with the estimated costs for such additional facilities and
who, in the opinion of the applicant, should pay for them.
(4) Services impact. An analysis of the existing services provided by
the municipality to serve the proposed development and the impact
of the development upon services, including police protection, fire
protection, solid waste disposal, and street maintenance services.
(5) Traffic impact. An analysis of the existing road network available to
serve the proposed development as well as the proposed road
network within the development itself and the surrounding road
network which will be affected by the proposed development,
including the capacity of the existing and proposed roadways, the
anticipated traffic volumes as a result of the proposed development
as well as the increase in traffic volumes expected from other
developments within the area; and any problem spots in the overall
road network, including unsafe intersections, turns or grades.
(6) Financial impact. An analysis of the revenues expected to be
generated from the development compared to the anticipated costs
144. Editor's Note: Appendix A, Completeness Checklist, is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 250-13 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-13
10:615
which the proposed development is expected to generate.
Revenues and costs shall be shown for the municipality, the
municipal school systems and the county.
G. Certification of complete application.
(1) An application for development shall be complete for purposes of
commencing the applicable time period for action by the approving
board when so certified by the administrative officer. In the event
that the administrative officer does not certify the application to be
complete within 45 days of the date of its submission, the
application shall be deemed complete upon the expiration of the
forty-five-day period for purposes of commencing the applicable
time period, unless:
(a) The application lacks any of the information indicated on the
checklist of items to be submitted which is set forth in
Appendix A hereof145; and
(b) The administrative officer has notified the applicant in writing
of the deficiencies in the application within 45 days of the date
of submission of the application.
(2) The applicant may request, in writing, that one or more of the
submission requirements set forth in Appendix A may be waived, in
which event the approving board shall grant or deny the request
within 45 days of the date of its submission. Such request shall be
accompanied by an explanation setting forth the facts and
circumstances justifying the granting of the waiver so requested.
(3) Nothing set forth herein shall be construed as diminishing the
applicant's obligation to prove in the application process that the
applicant is entitled to approval of the application. The approving
board may subsequently require correction of any information
found to be in error, and the submission of additional information
not specified herein or in Appendix A, or any revision in the
documents accompanying the application for development as is
reasonably necessary to make an informed decision as to whether
the requirements necessary for approval of the application for
development have been satisfied. The application shall not be
deemed incomplete for lack of any such additional information or
any revisions in the accompanying documents so required by the
approving board.
(4) The applicant may appeal the administrative officer's decision
concerning completeness of an application to the approving board.
The approving board shall have 45 days after receipt of a written
appeal to determine if the application is complete. The board shall
affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the administrative officer.
145. Editor's Note: Appendix A, Completeness Checklist, is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 250-13 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-13
10:616
H. Notice requirements for hearings. Whenever a hearing is required with
respect to an application for development pursuant to Article IV of this
chapter, the applicant shall give notice thereof in accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12. [Amended 11-2-1992 by Ord. No.
42-92146]
I. Decisions.
(1) Each decision on any application for development shall be reduced
to writing and shall include findings of fact and conclusions based
thereon through a resolution adopted at a meeting held within the
time period provided in this chapter for action by the municipal
agency on the application for development, or a memorializing
resolution adopted at a meeting held not later than 45 days after
the date of the meeting at which the municipal agency voted to
grant or deny approval. Such resolution shall be adopted by vote of
a majority of the members of the municipal agency who voted for
the action taken. An action resulting from the failure of a motion to
approve an application shall be memorialized by resolution as
provided above and shall be adopted by vote of a majority of the
members of the municipal agency who voted against the motion for
approval. The vote on any such resolution shall be deemed to be a
memorialization of the action of the municipal agency and not to be
an action of the municipal agency. However, the date of such
adoption shall constitute the date of the decision for purposes of
the mailings, filings, and publications required by Subsections I(2)
and (3) below.
(2) A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the administrative officer
within 10 days of the date of decision to the applicant, or if
represented, then to his attorney without a separate charge. A copy
of this decision shall also be mailed to all persons who have
requested it and who have paid the fee prescribed by § 250-104 of
this chapter for such service. A copy of the decision shall also be
filed in the office of the administrative officer, who shall make a
copy of such filed decision available to any interested party upon
payment of the aforesaid fee. A copy of the decision shall be
available for public inspection at the office of the administrative
officer during regular municipal business hours.
(3) A brief notice of the decision shall be published in the official
newspaper of the municipality. Such publication shall be arranged
by the applicant and an affidavit of publication shall be filed with
the Board; provided, however, that, if the applicant, in the case of
the denial of an application for development, fails to so arrange for
such publication, then the Secretary of the Board shall arrange for
such publication.
146. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Land Development Codification (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. IV).
§ 250-13 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-13
10:617
J. Payment of taxes. Every application for development submitted to the
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be accompanied by
proof that no taxes or assessments for local improvements are due or
delinquent on the property which is the subject of such application.
K. Waiver of standards. The approving board, when acting upon an
application for minor subdivision, preliminary subdivision, or
preliminary site plan approval, shall have the power to grant such
exceptions from the design standards set forth in Article X as may be
reasonable and within the general purpose and intent of the provisions
of this chapter if the literal enforcement of one or more of such
provisions is impracticable or will exact undue hardship upon the
applicant because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the land which is
the subject of the application for development.
L. Simultaneous review. The approving board shall have the power to
review and approve or deny conditional uses or site plans
simultaneously with review for subdivision approval without the
developer being required to make further application to the approving
board or the approving board being required to hold further hearings.
The longest time period for action by the approving board, whether it
be for subdivision, conditional use, site plan or variance approval, shall
apply. Whenever approval of a conditional use is requested by the
developer pursuant to this section, notice of the hearing with respect to
the application for development shall include reference to the request
for such conditional use.147
M. A tree removal plan and report shall accompany all applications and
shall include the following information needed to evaluate the impact of
tree removal upon the proposed development: [Added 6-27-2006 by
Ord. No. 28-2006]
(1) Location on the property of all trees, specifically indicating the
following:
(a) The plan shall indicate all tree(s) to be removed, specifically by
an assigned number and the caliper of each tree.
(b) The plan shall indicate all tree(s) to remain and proposed
replacement trees, specifically by an assigned number.
(2) In lieu of Subsection M(1)(a) and (b) for any clearing greater than
three acres, or where determined to be appropriate by the
Conservation Officer for any clearing of less than three acres where
the property is heavily wooded, a representative 5% sampling of
the wooded areas proposed to be cleared shall be inventoried. The
representative 5% shall be determined by agreement between the
147. Editor's Note: Original Sec. 4-3M, Posting of notice of development application, which
previously followed this subsection, added 12-17-2001 by Ord. No. 52-01 and amended
3-25-2002 by Ord. No. 09-02 and 10-14-2002 by Ord. No. 47-02, was repealed at time of
adoption of Land Development Codification (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV).
§ 250-13 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-13
10:618
§ 250-14. Conditional uses.
§ 250-15. Minor subdivision and minor site plan procedure.
Conservation Officer and the applicant, provided that all specimen
trees shall be indicated on the plan.
(3) All reasonable efforts shall be made to preserve specimen trees,
including but not limited to, if feasible, relocation of infrastructure,
roadways and buildings. Removal of specimen trees shall require
the specific written recommendation of the Conservation Officer to
the Board and approval of the Township Council.
(4) The plan shall indicate a limit of disturbance line (i.e., where a fourfoot-
high standard wood snow fence will be erected by the
Conservation Officer).
A. An applicant may apply for conditional use approval by filing a complete
application therefor, as defined in § 250-13G, with the administrative
officer.
B. The approving board shall grant or deny an application for conditional
use approval within 95 days of a complete application to the
administrative officer, or within such further time as may be consented
to by the applicant. All applications for conditional use approval shall
require, prior to the approving board acting thereon, the holding of a
public hearing with notice thereof as required by § 250-13H of this
chapter.
C. The approving board shall grant or deny an application for a conditional
use upon its making specific findings that the application satisfies the
definite specifications and standards for the conditional use set forth in
§ 250-41.
A. The Subdivision and Site Plan Committee shall initially review and take
action with respect to a complete application for minor subdivision
approval or minor site plan approval. Such action shall be taken at a
meeting of said committee without any requirement for a public
hearing, or notice thereof.
B. Minor subdivision or minor site plan approval shall be deemed to be
final approval of the subdivision or site plan, as the case may be, by the
Planning Board; provided that the application for development is
unanimously approved with at least a quorum of members of the
Subdivision and Minor Site Plan Committee present and voting; said
committee shall have classified the sketch plat or site plan as a minor
subdivision or minor site plan, respectively, and this action shall be
noted on the sketch plat or site plan; and no variances or waivers of
design standards shall have been requested or required in order to
develop the site in the manner proposed by the applicant. If the
committee's vote is not unanimous, or if the proposed development
§ 250-13 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-15
10:619
necessitates the granting of a variance or waiver of design standards,
the minor subdivision or minor site plan shall be referred to the
Planning Board for a public hearing, and the applicant shall give such
notices as are otherwise required, pursuant to § 250-13H for an
application for preliminary major subdivision or site plan approval.
Such referral may be accompanied by the committee's recommendation
with respect to the merits of the application for development.
C. Without limiting the general authority of the Subdivision and Site Plan
Committee to impose reasonable conditions, approval of a minor
subdivision or minor site plan may be conditioned upon terms providing
for the installation and maintenance of required on-tract improvements
and the guaranty thereof, in the same manner as with respect to final
approval of a major subdivision or major site plan.
D. The action of the Subdivision and Site Plan Committee under this
section must be taken within 45 days of a complete application, as
defined in § 250-13G of this chapter, or within such further time as is
agreed to by the applicant and the committee. Failure of the committee
to act within the prescribed period shall constitute minor subdivision or
minor site plan approval, and a certificate of the administrative officer,
as to the failure of the committee to act, shall be issued on request of
the applicant, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-47.
E. Approval of a minor subdivision shall expire 190 days from the date on
which the resolution of municipal approval is adopted unless within
such period a plat in conformity with such approval and the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq., or a deed clearly describing the approved
minor subdivision, is filed by the applicant with the county recording
officer, the Municipal Engineer and the Municipal Tax Assessor. Any
such plat or deed accepted for such filing shall have been signed by the
Chairman and the Secretary of the approving board.
(1) The approving board may extend the one-hundred-ninety-day
period for filing a minor subdivision plat or deed if the developer
proves to the reasonable satisfaction of the board that the
developer was barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, from
filing because of delays in obtaining legally required approvals
from other governmental or quasi-governmental entities; and that
the developer applied promptly for and diligently pursued the
required approvals. The length of the extension shall be equal to
the period of delay caused by the wait for required approvals as
determined by the board. The developer may apply for the
extension either before or after what would otherwise be the
expiration date.
(2) The approving board shall grant an extension of minor subdivision
approval for a period determined by the board but not exceeding
one year from what would otherwise be the expiration date, if the
developer proves to the reasonable satisfaction of the board that
the developer was barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, from
§ 250-15 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-15
10:620
§ 250-16. Major subdivision and major site plan procedure.
proceeding with the development because of delays in obtaining
legally required approvals from other governmental entities and
that the developer applied promptly for and diligently pursued
the required approvals. A developer shall apply for the extension
before what would otherwise be the expiration date of minor
subdivision approval or the 91st day after the developer receives
the last legally required approval from other governmental entities,
whichever occurs later.
F. The zoning requirements and general terms and conditions, whether
conditional or otherwise, upon which a minor subdivision or a minor
site plan approval was granted, shall not be changed for a period of two
years after the date of minor subdivision or minor site plan approval.
The Planning Board shall grant an extension of this period for a period
determined by the board but not exceeding one year from what would
otherwise be the expiration date, if the developer proves to the
reasonable satisfaction of the board that the developer was barred or
prevented, directly or indirectly, from proceeding with the development
because of delays in obtaining legally required approvals from the other
governmental entities and that the developer applied promptly for and
diligently pursued the approvals. A developer shall apply for this
extension before what would otherwise be the expiration date, or the
91st day after the date on which the developer receives the last of the
legally required approvals from the other governmental entities,
whichever occurs later.
G. In cases where an application for minor subdivision or minor site plan
approval is combined with, or concerns property adjacent to property
subject to a related application for development that is within the
jurisdiction of the approving board, the application for minor
subdivision or minor site plan approval shall not be acted upon by the
Subdivision and Site Plan Committee and shall be referred to the
approving board and shall be subject to the hearing and notice
requirements otherwise applicable to preliminary subdivision and site
plan applications.
A. General development plan.
(1) An applicant for approval of a planned development pursuant to
§ 250-63 and containing at least 100 acres of contiguous property
shall have the option of bifurcating its preliminary approval into the
following two phases: Phase I — General Development Plan, and
Phase II — Preliminary Approval. An applicant may seek and offer
to justify variances for density, nonresidential floor area ratio or
use as part of its Phase I — General Development Plan application.
All other variances and waivers of design standards shall be sought
at the time of applying for Phase II — Preliminary Approval.
§ 250-15 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-16
10:621
(2) An applicant requesting Phase I — General Development Plan
approval shall submit to the administrative officer the items set
forth in Appendix A of this chapter.148
(3) An application for approval of a Phase I — General Development
Plan shall require a public hearing and notice in the same manner
as otherwise required herein for preliminary major subdivision
approval.
(4) The approving board shall, within 95 days or such further time as
may be consented to by the applicant, either grant approval of the
Phase I — General Development Plan as submitted or with changes
and/or conditions, or deny approval.
(5) Phase I — General Development Plan shall confer upon the
applicant the following rights for a period of no less than three
years, nor greater than 20 years, as determined by the approving
board, based upon the standards set forth herein:
(a) The total number and density of residential dwelling units and
the general type thereof (e.g., single-family detached
dwellings, townhouse dwellings, garden apartments, etc.).
(b) The amount and type of nonresidential uses (i.e., commercial,
office, institutional, industrial) and the floor area ratio.
(6) The approving board shall review the following features of the
proposed General Development Plan, which shall not vest, but be
presumed to be valid at Phase II — Preliminary Approval, subject to
engineering and environmental review:
(a) The location of major collector roads, and light, minor and
major arterials.
(b) The general location of the different uses and density by land
use area.
(7) In making its determination regarding the duration of the effect of
the approval of the General Development Plan, the approving board
shall consider the following:
(a) The number of dwelling units or amount of nonresidential floor
area proposed to be constructed;
(b) Prevailing economic conditions;
(c) The timing schedule proposed to be followed in completing the
proposed development and the likelihood of its fulfillment;
(d) The developer's capability of completing the proposed
development; and
148. Editor's Note: Appendix A, Completeness Checklist, is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 250-16 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-16
10:622
(e) The contents of the General Development Plan and any
conditions which the approving board attaches to the approval
thereof.
(8) The planned development shall be developed in accordance with
the approved General Development Plan, including without
limitation the timing schedule approved as part thereof,
notwithstanding any provision of this chapter adopted after the
date of such approval.
(a) In the event that the developer seeks to modify the approved
timing schedule, it shall obtain the approving board's approval
of such modification. The request for such modification shall
only be acted upon by the approving board after a hearing with
notice as otherwise required for approval of an application for
preliminary subdivision approval.
[1] In acting upon a request for modification of the approved
timing schedule, the approving board shall consider the
following:
[a] Prevailing economic and market conditions;
[b] Anticipated and actual need for dwelling units and
nonresidential space within the Township and the
region; and
[c] The availability and capacity of public facilities to
accommodate the proposed development.
(b) The developer shall be required to obtain the approving
board's approval, after a hearing upon the same notice as that
required for an application for preliminary major subdivision
approval, of any variation in the approved General
Development Plan with respect to the location of land uses, a
change in the approved density, or a change in the approved
floor area ratio of nonresidential development; provided,
however, that:
[1] Any such variation which the developer can demonstrate
to the satisfaction of the approving board is the direct
result of a negative decision or condition of approval
imposed by the NJDEP shall be approved by the approving
board; and
[2] The developer, in undertaking any section of the PD, may
without the prior approval of the approving board reduce
the number of dwelling units (other than those required in
order to satisfy the affordable housing requirements set
forth in Article IX) or the amount of nonresidential floor
space by no more than 15% or reduce the density or
nonresidential floor area ratio by no more than 15%.
§ 250-16 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-16
10:623
(9) In the event that a developer who has general development plan
approval does not apply for preliminary approval for the planned
development which is the subject of that general development plan
approval within five years of the date upon which the general
development plan has been approved by the approving board, the
municipality shall have cause to terminate the approval in the
manner set forth in § 250-89 of this chapter.
(10) In the event that a development which is the subject of an approved
general development plan is completed before the end of the term
of the approval, the approval shall terminate with the completion of
the development. For the purposes of this section, a development
shall be considered complete on the date upon which a certificate
of occupancy has been issued for the final residential or
nonresidential structure in the last section of the development in
accordance with the timing schedule set forth in the approved
general development plan and the developer has fulfilled all of his
obligations pursuant to the approval.
B. Preliminary approval of major subdivisions and major site plans.
(1) Subsequent to the approval of a Phase I — General Development
Plan, but prior to the date of its expiration, or initially, if the
applicant does not elect, or is not eligible, to seek Phase I —
General Development Plan approval, the applicant may apply for
preliminary major subdivision or preliminary major site plan
approval by filing a complete application therefor, as defined in
§ 250-13G, with the administrative officer.
(2) Prior to the approving board hearing the application, the
Subdivision and Site Plan Committee, if established, shall review
the application and shall comment and make recommendations to
the approving board.
(3) A complete application for a preliminary major subdivision of 10 or
fewer lots, or for a preliminary major site plan of 10 acres of land or
less or 10 dwelling units or less, shall be acted upon within 45 days
of the date of submission of a complete application, or 120 days if a
variance is required, or within such further time as may be
consented to by the applicant. A preliminary major subdivision of
more than 10 lots, or a preliminary major site plan that involves
more than 10 acres of land or more than 10 dwelling units shall be
acted upon within 95 days of the date of such submission, or 120
days if a variance is required, or within such further time as may be
consented to by the applicant. In the event that the approving
board shall fail to act within the time periods specified herein, the
approving board shall be deemed to have granted preliminary
major subdivision or preliminary major site plan approval to the
applicant.
§ 250-16 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-16
10:624
(4) All applications for preliminary major subdivision and preliminary
major site plan approval shall require, prior to the approving board
acting thereon, the holding of a public hearing with notice thereof
as required by § 250-13H of this chapter. If the approving board,
after notice and a hearing, shall determine that the zoning and
design standards set forth in this chapter have been satisfied by the
proposed development, it shall render its decision granting
preliminary approval of the major subdivision or major site plan.
Otherwise, it shall render its decision denying preliminary
approval. Preliminary approval may be conditioned upon
compliance with such requirements as the approving board shall
deem necessary to insure compliance with the aforesaid zoning and
design standards and all other applicable requirements of this
chapter, including, without limitation, the maintenance of open
space, the payment of the applicant's pro rata share contribution
pursuant to § 250-107, and compliance with the provisions of
Article IX regarding the provision of affordable housing. The
approving board shall condition such approvals upon the applicant
obtaining such other governmental approvals as are otherwise
legally necessary to develop the property in question in the manner
proposed by the applicant.
(5) If preliminary approval is granted, the Chairman and Secretary of
the Planning Board will affix their signatures to the preliminary
plat with a notation that it has received preliminary approval, and
the plat shall be returned to the applicant for compliance with final
approval requirements.
C. Effect of preliminary approval of major subdivisions and major site
plans. Preliminary approval of a major subdivision or major site plan
shall confer upon the applicant the following rights for a three-year
period from the date of the adoption of the resolution memorializing the
preliminary approval:
(1) That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary
approval was granted shall not be changed, including, without
limitation, use requirements; layout and design standards for
streets, curbs and sidewalks, lot sizes, yard dimensions, off-tract
improvements, and, in the case of a site plan, any requirements
peculiar to site plan approval, standards and requirements relating
to preservation of existing natural resources on the site, safe and
efficient vehicular and pedestrian circulation, parking and loading,
screening, landscaping and location of structures, exterior lighting
needed for safety reasons in addition to any requirements for
streetlighting, conservation of energy and use of renewable energy
resources, and recycling of designated recyclable materials.
Anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding, nothing herein
shall be construed to prevent the Township from enforcing
compliance with a standard or requirement adopted by ordinance
after the grant of preliminary approval; provided such standard or
§ 250-16 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-16
10:625
requirement is related to public health and safety. The approving
board shall require the applicant, prior to the granting of final
approval, to modify its subdivision or site plan to incorporate the
requirements or standards described in the preceding sentence.
(2) That the applicant may submit a complete application for final
approval, on or before the expiration date of preliminary approval,
with respect to the whole or a section or sections of the preliminary
subdivision plat or site plan, as the case may be; provided, however,
that the filing of an application for final approval of a section of a
development shall not constitute an extension or tolling of the
period of preliminary approval with respect to a section for which
the applicant has not filed an application for final approval; and
(3) That the applicant may apply for and the approving board, in its
discretion, may grant an extension of such preliminary approval for
additional periods of at least one year, but not to exceed a total
extension of two years; provided, however, that, if the design
standards set forth in Article X have been revised by ordinance,
such revised standards may govern, in the discretion of the
approving board.
(4) In the case of a subdivision or site plan for an area of 50 acres or
more, the approving board may grant the rights referred to in
Subsections C(1), (2) and (3) above for such period of time, longer
than three years, as shall be determined by the approving board to
be reasonable taking into consideration: the number of dwelling
units and nonresidential floor area permissible under preliminary
approval; economic conditions; the comprehensiveness of the
development; the period of approval of and timing schedule
approved under a Phase I — General Development Plan, if any. The
applicant may apply for and the approving board may, thereafter,
grant an extension of preliminary approval for such additional
period of time as shall be determined by the approving board to be
reasonable taking into consideration: the number of dwelling units
and nonresidential floor areas permissible under preliminary
approval; the number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor
area of the section or sections awaiting final approval; economic
conditions; the comprehensiveness of the development; and the
period of approval of and timing schedule approval under a Phase
I — General Development Plan, if any; provided, however, that if
the design standards have been revised since the granting of
preliminary approval, such revised standards may govern in the
approving board's discretion.
(5) Whenever the approving board grants an extension of preliminary
approval pursuant to Subsection C(3) or (4) of this section and
preliminary approval has expired before the date on which the
extension is granted, the extension shall begin on what would
otherwise be the expiration date. The developer may apply for the
§ 250-16 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-16
10:626
extension either before or after what would otherwise be the
expiration date.
(6) The approving board shall grant an extension of preliminary
approval for a period determined by the board but not exceeding
one year from what would otherwise be the expiration date, if the
developer proves to the reasonable satisfaction of the board that
the developer was barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, from
proceeding with the development because of delays in obtaining
legally required approvals from other governmental entities and
that the developer applied promptly for and diligently pursued the
required approvals. A developer shall apply for the extension
before what would otherwise be the expiration date of preliminary
approval or the 91st day after the developer receives the last
legally required approval from the other governmental entities,
whichever occurs later. An extension granted pursuant to this
subsection shall not preclude the Planning Board from granting an
extension pursuant to Subsection C(3) or (4) of this section.
D. Final approval of major subdivisions and major site plans.
(1) After receiving preliminary approval of a major subdivision or
major site plan, an applicant, within the period of preliminary
approval, may request final approval by the approving board by
submitting to the administrative officer the items set forth in
Appendix A of this chapter.149
(a) The approving board shall grant final approval, if:
[1] The final application for development shall have
incorporated into it all changes or modifications required
by the approving board at the time of preliminary
approval, unless the preliminary application was approved
without conditions;
[2] The applicant shall have satisfied, or otherwise made
provision to the approving board's satisfaction of, all
conditions of preliminary approval;150
[3] The applicant shall have incorporated into the final
application for development all changes or modifications
required by the approving board prior to approval of the
final application for development;
[4] The final application substantially conforms to the
preliminary application;
149. Editor's Note: Appendix A, Completeness Checklist, is included at the end of this chapter.
150. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Land Development Codification (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. IV).
§ 250-16 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-16
10:627
[5] The applicant has posted with the Township the
performance guarantees and off-tract pro rata share
contributions required by §§ 250-106 and 250-107,
respectively of this chapter; and
[6] In the case of a major subdivision, shall comply with the
standards prescribed by N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.
(b) All applications for final major site plan and final major
subdivision approval shall require, prior to the approving
board acting thereon, the holding of a public hearing as
required by § 250-13H of this chapter. Final approval shall be
granted or denied within 45 days after submission of a
complete application to the Administrative Office, or within
such further time as may be consented to by the applicant.
Failure of the approving board to act within the period
described shall constitute final approval and a certificate of the
administrative officer as to the failure of the approving board
to act shall be issued on request of the applicant, and it shall be
sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement or other evidence
of approval, herein required, and shall be so accepted by the
County Recording Officer for purposes of filing subdivision
plats and by the Municipal Construction Official for purposes
of the issuance of a construction permit in connection with a
site plan. Final approval of a major subdivision shall expire 95
days from the date of signing of the plat by the Chairman and
Secretary of the approving board, unless within such time the
plat shall have been duly filed. [Amended 11-2-1992 by Ord.
No. 42-92151]
(c) Final approval of a major subdivision shall expire 95 days from
the date of signing of the plat by the Chairman and Secretary
of the approving board, unless within such time the plat shall
have been duly filed by the developer with the county
recording officer. The approving board may, for good cause
shown, extend the period for recording for an additional period
not to exceed 190 days from the date of signing of the plat. The
board may extend the ninety-five-day or one-hundred-ninetyday
period if the developer proves to the reasonable
satisfaction of the board that the developer was barred or
prevented, directly or indirectly, from filing because of delays
in obtaining legally required approvals from other
governmental or quasi-governmental entities; and that the
developer applied promptly for and diligently pursued the
required approvals. The signatures of the Chairman and
Secretary of the approving board shall not be affixed until the
applicant has satisfied those conditions of final approval
required by the resolution of the approving board to be
151. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Land Development Codification (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. IV).
§ 250-16 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-16
10:628
satisfied prior to filing the subdivision plat. The length of the
extension shall be equal to the period of delay caused by the
wait for the required approvals, as determined by the Planning
Board. The developer may apply for an extension either before
or after the original expiration date.
(d) Whenever the approving board grants an extension of final
approval pursuant to Subsection D(1)(a) or (b) of this section
and final approval has expired before the date on which the
extension is granted, the extension shall begin on what would
otherwise be the expiration date. The developer may apply for
the extension either before or after what would otherwise be
the expiration date.
(e) The approving board shall grant an extension of final approval
for a period determined by the board but not exceeding one
year from what would otherwise be the expiration date, if the
developer proves to the reasonable satisfaction of the board
that the developer was barred or prevented, directly or
indirectly, from proceeding with the development because of
delays in obtaining legally required approvals from other
governmental entities and that the developer applied promptly
for and diligently pursued these approvals. A developer shall
apply for the extension before what would otherwise be the
expiration date of final approval; or the 91st day after the
developer receives the last legally required approval from
other governmental entities, whichever occurs later. An
extension granted pursuant to this subsection shall not
preclude the Planning Board from granting an extension
pursuant to Subsection D(1)(a) or (b) of this section.
(f) If all conditions of the applicant's final site plan or subdivision
approval are not satisfied within 180 days after the date of
such approval, the applicant's approval shall lapse; provided,
however, that the approving board may, in its discretion, grant
reasonable extensions of said time period and shall grant such
extensions if the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of
the approving board that it is unable to satisfy timely such
conditions as the direct result of delays beyond its control in
obtaining other required governmental approvals.
E. Effect of final approval of major subdivisions and major site plans.
(1) The zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary approval
granted and all other rights conferred upon the applicant pursuant
to preliminary approval, whether conditionally or otherwise, shall
not be changed for a period of two years after the date of adoption
of the resolution memorializing the final approval; provided that, in
the case of a major subdivision, the rights conferred by this section
shall expire if the plat has not been duly recorded within the time
period provided in § 250-16(C)(4). If the developer has followed the
§ 250-16 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-16
10:629
standards prescribed for final approval and, in the case of a
subdivision has duly recorded the plat, the approving board may
extend such periods of protection for extensions of one year, but
not to exceed three extensions. Notwithstanding any other
provisions of this chapter, the granting of final approval terminates
the time period of preliminary approval for the section granted final
approval.
(2) In the case of a subdivision or site plan for planned development of
50 acres or more, conventional subdivision or site plan for 150
acres or more, or site plan for development of a nonresidential floor
area of 200,000 square feet or more, the approving board may
grant the rights referred to in Subsection E(1) of this section for
such period of time, longer than two years, as shall be determined
by the approving board to be reasonable taking into consideration:
(a) The number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area
permissible under the final approval;
(b) Economic conditions;
(c) The comprehensiveness of the development; and
(d) The period of approval of and timing schedule approved in
connection with the Phase I — General Development Plan, if
any. The developer may thereafter apply for and the approving
board may thereafter grant an extension of final approval for
such additional period of time as shall be determined by the
approving board to be reasonable taking into consideration:
[1] The number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area
permissible under the final approval;
[2] The number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area
remaining to be developed;
[3] Economic conditions;
[4] The comprehensiveness of the development; and
[5] The period of approval and timing schedule approved in
connection with the Phase I — General Development Plan,
if any.
(3) Whenever the approving board grants an extension of final
approval pursuant to Subsection E(1) or (2) of this section and final
approval has expired before the date on which the extension is
granted, the extension shall begin on what would otherwise be the
expiration date. The developer may apply for the extension either
before or after what would otherwise be the expiration date.
(4) The approving board shall grant an extension of final approval for a
period determined by the board but not exceeding one year from
§ 250-16 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-16
10:630
§ 250-17. Town Centre Design Zone procedure.
All applications for development in this zone shall conform to and meet
the standards and procedures for either subdivision or site plan approval,
whichever is applicable.
§ 250-18. Appeals to governing body.
what would otherwise be the expiration date, if the developer
proves to the reasonable satisfaction of the board that the
developer was barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, from
proceeding with the development because of delays in obtaining
legally required approvals from other governmental entities and
that the developer applied promptly for and diligently pursued
these approvals. A developer shall apply for the extension before
what would otherwise be the expiration date of final approval or
the 91st day after the developer receives the last legally required
approval from other governmental entities, whichever occurs later.
An extension granted pursuant to this subsection shall not preclude
the Planning Board from granting an extension pursuant to
Subsection E(1) or (2) of this section.
F. Digitized copy required. [Added 11-2-1992 by Ord. No. 42-92;
amended 12-5-2005 by Ord. No. 37-2005]
(1) As a condition of each approval granted by the Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Adjustment, the applicant shall supply a digitized
copy of the final approved plans to the Municipal Engineer in a
format approved by said Municipal Engineer. The digitized copy
shall also contain the name and application number of the
subdivision and/or site plan, the name, title and address of the
applicant, and the date of the sheet(s) shown on the copy and any
revision dates.
(a) Exceptions may be granted by the approving board for
circumstances where production of a digitized copy presents
an undue hardship. In such case as where the original plans
are hand drawn, the approving board at its discretion may
require scanned copies in lieu of digitized copies.
(2) The final approved plans shall be submitted to the Township
Engineer's Office on a CAD generated data file. The file shall be
submitted on a compact disk, formatted for IBM PC's or PC
compatibles. The file shall be in one of the following formats: the
most current version of AutoCad drawing file (DWG): ESRI
shaperfile or Drawing Exchange (DXF) format file drawing
interchange file compatible with AutoCad.
A. Any interested party may appeal to the governing body any final
decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment approving an application
for development pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d and § 250-9G(5) of
§ 250-16 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-18
10:631
this chapter. Such appeal shall be made within 10 days of the date of
publication of such final decision pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10i and
§ 250-13I(3) of this chapter. The appeal to the governing body shall be
made by serving the Municipal Clerk in person or by certified mail,
with a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof, the name and
address of the appellant, and the name and address of his attorney, if
represented. Such appeal shall be decided by the governing body only
upon the record established before the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
B. Notice of the meeting to review the record below shall be given by the
governing body by personal service or certified mail to the appellant, to
those entitled to notice of a decision pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10h
and § 250-13I(2) of this chapter and the Zoning Board of Adjustment at
least 10 days prior to the date of the meeting. The parties may submit
oral and written argument on the record at such meeting and the
governing body shall provide for verbatim recording and transcripts of
such meeting pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10f and § 250-10D(4) of this
chapter.
C. The appellant shall, within five days of service of the notice of the
appeal pursuant to Subsection A herein, arrange for a transcript
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10f and § 250-10D(4) of this chapter for use
by the governing body and pay a deposit of $50 or the estimate cost of
such transcription, whichever is less; or within 35 days of service of the
notice of appeal submit a transcript as otherwise arranged to the
Municipal Clerk. If a transcript is on file with the Township Planning
Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, the applicant shall be obligated
to pay the standard cost of photocopies only [see § 250-104M(1)].
Otherwise, the appeal may be dismissed for failure to prosecute. The
governing body shall conclude a review of the record below no later
than 95 days from the date of publication of notice of the decision below
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10i and § 250-13I(3) of this chapter unless
the appellant consents in writing to an extension of such period. Failure
of the governing body to hold a hearing and conclude a review of the
record below and to render a decision within such specified period shall
constitute a decision affirming the action of the Board. [Amended
11-2-1992 by Ord. No. 42-92152]
D. The governing body may reverse, remand, or affirm, with or without
imposition of conditions, the final decision of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment approving a variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d.
E. The affirmative vote of a majority of the full authorized membership of
the governing body shall be necessary to reverse, or remand, to the
Zoning Board of Adjustment or to impose conditions upon or alter
conditions to any final action of the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
Otherwise the final action of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be
152. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Land Development Codification (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. IV).
§ 250-18 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-18
10:632
§ 250-19. Tolling of approval period.
In the event that during the period of effectiveness provided for the
approval of any application for development, the developer is barred or
prevented, directly or indirectly, from proceeding with the development
otherwise permitted under such approval by a legal action instituted by
any state agency, political subdivision or any party to protect the public
health and welfare or by a directive or order issued by any state agency,
political subdivision or court of competent jurisdiction to protect the public
health and welfare, and the developer is otherwise ready, willing and able to
proceed with such development, the running of the period of effectiveness
of approval under this chapter shall be suspended for the period of time
such legal action is pending or such directive or order is in effect.
§ 250-20. Preconstruction conference procedure.
determined to be affirmed; a tie vote of the governing body shall
constitute affirmance of the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
F. An appeal to the governing body shall stay all proceedings in
furtherance of the action in respect to which the decision appealed from
was made, unless the Board from whose action the appeal is taken
certifies to the governing body, after the notice of appeal shall have
been filed with such Board, that, by reasons of facts stated in the
certificate, a stay would, in its opinion, cause imminent peril to life or
property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by an
order of the Superior Court on application upon notice to the Board
from whom the appeal is taken and on good cause shown.
G. The governing body shall mail a copy of the decision to the appellant or,
if represented, to his attorney, without separate charge, and for a
reasonable charge to any interested party who has requested it, not
later than 10 days after the date of the decision. A brief notice of the
decision shall be published in the official newspaper of the municipality,
if there be one, or in a newspaper of general circulation in the
municipality. Such publication shall be arranged by the administrative
officer; however, the applicant may arrange for such publication if he so
desires. The governing body may make a reasonable charge for its
publication. The period of time in which an appeal to a court of
competent jurisdiction may be made shall run from the first publication,
whether arranged by the municipality or the appellant.
H. Nothing in this § 250-18 shall be construed to restrict the right of any
party to obtain a review by any court of competent jurisdiction
according to law.
A. Prior to issuance of a construction permit, all applicants for such
permits must attend a preconstruction conference with a
representative of the Township Engineer, a representative of the
Township Planner, and a representative of the Township Construction
Official.
§ 250-18 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-20
10:633
B. At the preconstruction conference the parties shall:
(1) Review all conditions of final approval, to determine whether the
applicant has satisfied those conditions required by the resolution
of the approving board to be satisfied prior to the issuance of a
construction permit;
(2) Discuss the staging of development construction; and
(3) Determine whether the applicant has obtained all of the necessary
permits.
C. The Construction Official shall utilize the recommendations of the
representative of the Township Engineer and the representative of the
Township Planner, based upon the above-mentioned criteria, in making
a determination as to whether a construction permit shall be issued to
the applicant.
§ 250-20 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-20
10:634
ARTICLE V
Master Plan
§ 250-21. Preparation, adoption and modification.
§ 250-22. Form and elements.153
The Master Plan shall generally comprise a report or statement of land use
and development proposals with maps, diagrams and text, presenting the
elements in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28.
A. The Planning Board shall prepare and adopt, and, subject to § 250-25
may from time to time amend or revise, a Master Plan, or component
parts thereof, to guide the use of lands within the Township in a manner
that protects public health and safety and promotes the general
welfare.
B. Prior to the adoption of the Master Plan or any revisions or
amendments thereto, a public hearing must be held regarding same.
C. Notice concerning Master Plan. The Planning Board shall give:
(1) Public notice of a hearing on adoption, revision or amendment of
the Master Plan; such notice shall be given by publication in the
official newspaper of the Township, if there be one, or in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Township at least 10 days
prior to the date of the hearing;
(2) Notice by personal service or certified mail to the Clerk of an
adjoining municipality of all hearings on adoption, revision or
amendment of a Master Plan involving properties situated within
200 feet of such adjoining municipality at least 10 days prior to the
date of any such hearing;
(3) Notice by personal service or certified mail to the Middlesex
County Planning Board.
(a) All hearings on the adoption, revision or amendment of the
municipal Master Plan at least 10 days prior to the date of the
hearing; such notice shall include a copy of any such proposed
Master Plan, or any revision or amendment thereto; and
(b) The adoption, revision or amendment of the Master Plan not
more than 30 days after the date of such adoption, revision or
amendment; such notice shall include a copy of the Master
Plan or revision or amendment thereto.
(4) Any notice hereunder shall state the date, time and place of the
hearing, and the nature of the matters to be considered.
153. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Land Development Codification (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. IV).
§ 250-21 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-23
10:635
§ 250-23. Staging.
The Master Plan and its plan elements may be divided into subplans and
subplan elements projected according to periods of time or staging
sequences.
§ 250-24. Relationship to other plans.
The Master Plan shall include a specific policy statement indicating the
relationship of the proposed development of the municipality, as developed
in the Master Plan, to the master plan of contiguous municipalities; the
master plan of the county in which the municipality is located; the state
development and redevelopment plan adopted pursuant to the State
Planning Act, P.L. 1985, c. 398 (N.J.S.A. 52:18A-196 et al); and the district
solid waste management plan required pursuant to the provisions of the
Solid Waste Management Act, P.L. 1970, c. 39 (N.J.S.A. 13:1E-1 et seq.) of
Middlesex County.
§ 250-25. Reexamination and report to be made periodically by
Planning Board.
A. The Planning Board shall, at least every six years, make a general
reexamination of the Master Plan and development regulations and
prepare a report on the findings of such reexamination. The Board shall
send a copy of the report to the governing body, the County Planning
Board and the Clerk of each adjoining municipality. The six-year period
shall commence with the submission of the preceding Planning Board
report.
B. The report of the Planning Board shall state:
(1) The major problems and objectives, if any, relating to land
development in the municipality at the time of the preceding
report.
(2) The extent to which such problems and objectives have been
reduced or have increased subsequent to such date.
(3) The extent to which there has been significant changes in the
assumptions, policies and objectives forming the basis for the
Master Plan or development regulations as last revised, with
particular regard to the density and distribution of population and
land uses, housing conditions, circulation, conservation of natural
resources, energy conservation, and changes in state, county and
municipal policies and objectives.
(4) The specific changes, if any, recommended for such plan or
regulations, including underlying objectives, policies and
standards, or the decision as to whether a new plan or regulation
should be prepared.
§ 250-23 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-25
10:636
ARTICLE VI
Capital Improvement Program
§ 250-26. Preparation of capital improvement program.154
A. The governing body may authorize the Planning Board from time to
time to prepare a program of municipal capital improvement projects
projected over a term of at least six years, and amendments thereto.
Such program may encompass major projects being currently
undertaken or future projects to be undertaken, with federal, state,
county and other public funds or under federal, state or county
supervision. The first year of such program shall, upon adoption by the
governing body, constitute the capital budget of the municipality as
required by N.J.S.A. 40A:4-43 et seq. The program shall classify projects
in regard to the urgency and need for realization, and shall recommend
a time sequence for their implementation. The program may also
contain the estimated cost of each project and indicate probable
operating and maintenance costs and probable revenues, if any, as well
as existing sources of funds or the need for additional sources of funds
for the implementation and operation of each project. The program
shall, as far as possible, be based on existing information in the
possession of the departments and agencies of the municipality and
shall take into account public facility needs indicated by the prospective
development shown in the Master Plan of the Township or as permitted
by other municipal land use controls.
(1) In preparing the program, the Planning Board shall confer, in a
manner deemed appropriate by the board, with the Mayor, the
chief fiscal officer, other municipal officials and agencies, and the
school board or boards.
(2) Any such program shall include an estimate of the displacement of
persons and establishments caused by each recommended project.
B. In addition to any of the requirements in Subsection A of this section,
whenever the Planning Board is authorized and directed to prepare a
capital improvements program, every municipal department, authority
or agency shall, upon request of the Planning Board, transmit to said
Board a statement of all capital projects proposed to be undertaken by
such municipal department, authority or agency, during the term of the
program, for study, advice and recommendation by the Planning Board.
C. In addition to all of the other requirements of this section, any
municipality that intends to provide for the transfer of development
within its jurisdiction pursuant to Section 3 of P.L. 2004, c. 2 (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-139) shall include within its capital improvement program
provision for those capital projects to be undertaken in the receiving
zone or zones required as a condition for adopting a development
154. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Land Development Codification (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. IV).
§ 250-26 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-26
10:637
§ 250-27. Adoption of capital improvement program.
Once the Planning Board has prepared a capital improvement program
pursuant to Section 6-1, it shall recommend such program to the governing
body, which may adopt such program with any modification approved by
affirmative vote of a majority of the full authorized membership of the
governing body and with the reasons for said modification recorded in the
minutes.
§ 250-28. Review of capital projects.155
transfer ordinance pursuant to Subsection b of Section 4 of P.L. 2004,
c. 2 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-140).
A. Whenever the Planning Board shall have adopted any portion of the
Master Plan, the Township Council or other public agency having
jurisdiction over the subject matter, before taking action necessitating
the expenditure of any public funds, incidental to the location,
character or extent of such project, shall refer the action involving such
specific project to the Planning Board for review and recommendation
in conjunction with such Master Plan and shall not act thereon, without
such recommendation or until 45 days have elapsed after such
reference without receiving such recommendation. This requirement
shall apply to action by a housing, parking, highway, special district, or
other authority, redevelopment agency, school board or other similar
public agency, state, county or municipal. In addition, this requirement
shall apply to any public entity taking any action to permit the location,
erection, use or maintenance of an outdoor advertising sign required to
be permitted pursuant to P.L. 1991, c. 413 (N.J.S.A. 27:5-5 et seq.).
B. The Planning Board shall review and issue findings concerning any
long-range facilities plan submitted to the Board pursuant to the
Educational Facilities Construction and Financing Act, P.L. 2000, c. 72
(N.J.S.A. 18A:7G-1 et al.), for the purpose of review of the extent to
which the long-range facilities plan is informed by, and consistent with,
at least the land use plan element and the housing element contained
within the Municipal Master Plan adopted pursuant to Section 19 of P.L.
1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28) and such other elements of the
Municipal Master Plan as the Planning Board deems necessary to
determine whether the prospective sites for school facilities contained
in the long-range facilities plan promote more effective and efficient
coordination of school construction with the development efforts of the
municipality. The Planning Board shall devote at least one full meeting
of the Board to presentation and review of the long-range facilities plan
prior to adoption of a resolution setting forth the Board's findings.
155. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Land Development Codification (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. IV).
§ 250-26 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-28
10:638
ARTICLE VII
Zoning
§ 250-29. Rules of general application.
The regulations set forth in this chapter for each district shall be the
minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class of structure or
land within the district, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 250-30. Construction and application.
The provisions of this chapter shall be construed and applied in accordance
with the following intents and purposes:
§ 250-31. Existing nonconformities.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the lawful use of the land or
a building or structure existing on the effective date of this chapter, or any
A. No building or structure shall hereafter be erected and no existing
building or structure shall be moved, altered, added to or enlarged, nor
shall any land or building or portion of a building or structure be used,
designed, or arranged to be used for any purpose, unless in conformity
with all of the regulations herein specified for the district in which is it
located.
B. No yard or lot existing on the effective date of this chapter shall be
reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set
forth herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this chapter
shall meet the minimum requirements established by this chapter.
C. Any restrictions or requirements with respect to buildings or land,
which appear in other ordinances of the Township or are otherwise
established by law and which are more stringent than those set forth
herein, shall take precedence over the provisions of this chapter.
D. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to customary
underground essential services, as defined herein.
E. The provisions of this chapter shall be the minimal standards, and
compliance shall entail meeting or exceeding these standards.
F. Every principal building shall be located on a lot as defined in this
chapter. Except for multifamily and nonresidential uses, no more than
one principal building and its accessory buildings shall hereafter be
erected on any one lot.
G. Every principal building shall be built upon a lot with frontage upon an
improved street, or for which such improvement has been guaranteed
by the posting of a performance guarantee pursuant to this chapter
unless relief has been granted under the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-36.
§ 250-29 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-31
10:639
amendment thereto, may be continued, notwithstanding the fact that such
use or building does not conform to the regulations specified by this chapter
for the zone in which such land or building is located; provided, however,
that:
A. A nonconforming use may not be expanded. In determining whether a
nonconforming use has been expanded, or is proposed to be expanded,
consideration shall be given to the quality, character and intensity of
such use viewed in its totality, prior to and after the alleged expansion,
and with regard to the overall effect on the neighborhood in which the
subject property is located and the zone plan for such neighborhood. By
way of illustration and not limitation, the following shall be deemed to
be expansions of a nonconforming use:
(1) Expansion of the lot area over which a use is conducted.
(2) Expansion of a building or structure within which a use is
conducted.
(3) Alteration of a building or structure within which a use is
conducted.
(4) A substantial increase in the period of time during which the use is
conducted.
(5) A change from the seasonal operation of the use to the year-round
operation of such use.
B. When a nonconforming use has been abandoned, such use shall not
thereafter be reinstated and any structure shall not thereafter be
reoccupied, except in conformance with this chapter. A nonconforming
use shall be deemed to be abandoned where there is an intention to
abandon and an external act, or omission to act, by which such
intention is carried into effect. It shall be prima facie evidence that a
nonconforming use has been abandoned when there occurs a total
cessation of such use for a continuous period of at least one year.
C. A nonconforming lot shall not be reduced in size.
D. A nonconforming building or structure, whether principal or accessory,
may not be enlarged, extended, increased in height, width or depth;
moved or relocated; or modified in such a way so as to increase
habitable or usable space, number of dwelling units or number of
bedrooms; unless it is changed so as to conform to the requirements of
this chapter. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, such a
nonconforming building or structure may be enlarged, extended, added
to, or otherwise constructed upon, provided that:
(1) The owner of the lot or lots upon which such building or structure
exists did not own any adjoining property at the time the ordinance
making the lot nonconforming was adopted; and
§ 250-31 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-31
10:640
§ 250-32. Doctrine of merger.
Where two or more lots, created by the filing of a map pursuant to the
former Map Filing Law (N.J.S.A. 46:23-1 to 9.6, inclusive), have not been
subsequently subdivided pursuant to the Municipal Planning Act (N.J.S.A.
40:55-1 et seq.) or the MLUL, and said lots have any contiguous lines and
are in single ownership and one or more of the lots is nonconforming in
any aspect, the lots involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel
for the purposes of this chapter, and no portion of said parcel shall be
conveyed or divided, except through the filing of an approved subdivision in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(2) The enlargement, extension, addition, or construction conforms to
all bulk requirements of this chapter.
E. The internal structure or the exterior facade of a nonconforming
building or structure may be altered, provided that the cost of
alterations does not exceed, in the aggregate, 25% of the market value
of the structure. More substantial alterations are not permitted unless
the building or structure is changed to conform to the requirements of
this chapter.
F. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the strengthening or restoring of
any portion of a structure which has been declared unsafe by the
Construction Official.
G. If any nonconforming building or structure shall be more than partially
destroyed, then the structure may not be rebuilt, restored or repaired,
except in conformance with this chapter. The building or structure shall
be deemed to have been more than partially destroyed in the event of
destruction to the extent that rebuilding, repair, or restoration requires
removal or demolition of all portions of the structure, except for the
foundation or exterior walls.
H. Nothing herein contained shall require any change in plans,
construction or designated use of a building for which a construction
permit has been heretofore issued and the construction of which shall
have been diligently prosecuted within three months of the date of such
permit, and the entire ground story framework shall have been
completed within six months of the date of the permit, and which entire
building shall be completed according to such plans as filed within one
year from the effective date of this chapter.
I. Whenever the boundaries of a district shall be changed so as to transfer
an area from one district to another district of a different classification,
the provisions of this chapter shall also apply to any nonconforming
uses existing therein or created thereby.
§ 250-31 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-33
10:641
§ 250-33. Zoning and zone use restrictions.
The purpose of the provisions of §§ 250-33 through 250-44 is to establish
restrictions and limitations on the use of land within the Township.
Deviation from the standards of §§ 250-33 through 250-44 will only be
permitted when a variance is granted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d and
§ 250-9G(5) of this chapter.
§ 250-34. Zones and Zoning Map.
The municipality is hereby divided into zones or districts, throughout which
uniform regulations are established hereunder.
§ 250-35. Zoning Map.
§ 250-36. Interpretation of boundaries.
In interpreting and construing the Zoning Map, the following rules shall
apply:
A. The official Zoning Map of the Township of Old Bridge dated July 13,
2017, is hereby amended by amended Map dated January 9, 2018, and
incorporated herein by reference. Copies of the amended Zoning Map
are on file in the office of the Township Clerk. [Amended 4-12-2004
by Ord. No. 07-04; 12-20-2004 by Ord. No. 38-04; 8-19-2013 by
Ord. No. 2013-14; 3-9-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-01; 8-7-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-19; 4-23-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-06]
B. Revisions to the Zoning Map shall be made as follows:
(1) When, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the
MLUL, revisions are adopted in the district boundaries or other
matters portrayed on the Zoning Map, such revisions will be made
with an entry bearing the date of adoption, ordinance number, a
brief description of the revisions and the date and initials of the
person recording the Zoning Map revisions. The Municipal
Engineer shall draft the amendment to the map within 20 days of
the adoption of the ordinance amending the map.
(a) Each ordinance amending the Zoning Map in any manner shall
include the provision that it shall not take effect until the
Zoning Map has been amended in accordance with these
provisions.
(2) No changes of any nature shall be made to the Zoning Map, except
in conformity with the above procedure. Any unauthorized
change(s) to the Zoning Map or its contents by any person or
persons shall be of no effect and shall constitute a violation of this
chapter and subject the person responsible for such change to the
fines and penalties herein provided for.
§ 250-33 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-36
10:642
§ 250-37. Establishment and purposes of zones.
The Township is hereby divided into the following zoning districts in the
manner set forth in the Zoning Map hereinabove provided for:
ER Environmentally Sensitive/Recreation Zone
The purpose of this zone is to preserve and protect the
groundwater table and water recharge areas for water supply
purposes, protection of the ecological system and to protect the
health and safety of the occupants of lands subject to seasonal
or periodic flooding, preserve freshwater wetlands and
recognize existing and proposed parklands.
R-120 Low Density/Severe Environmental Constraints Residential
Zone
The purpose of this zone is to designate specific areas for
suburban development at a low density (0.3 dwelling unit per
gross acre) in order to avoid disturbance of extensive areas of
highly sensitive and critical natural environment.
R-80 Low Density Residential Zone
The purpose of this zone is to designate specific areas for
suburban development at a low density (0.5 dwelling unit per
gross acre) in areas serviced by on-site wells or on-site
sewerage disposal, or containing lands of an environmentally
sensitive nature, but less extensive than lands in the R-120
Zone.
A. Zone district boundaries are intended to follow street, lot or property
lines, or other natural lines such as the center line of watercourses,
ditches or lagoons, unless such district or zone boundaries are fixed by
dimension on the Zoning Map or by description.
B. Boundaries indicated as following the center lines of streets, highways
or alleys or streams, rivers or other bodies of water shall be construed
to follow such center lines.
C. Boundaries indicated as approximately following plotted lot lines shall
be construed as following such lot lines.
D. Boundaries indicated as following railroad rights-of-way shall be
construed to be midway between the right-of-way lines.
E. Boundaries indicated as parallel to, or extensions of features indicated
above, shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the
Zoning Map shall be determined by the use of the scale appearing
thereon.
F. Where a zone boundary fixed by dimensions approximately follows and
is not more than 20 feet distant from a lot line, such lot line shall be
construed to be the zone boundary.
§ 250-36 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-37
10:643
R-40 Low Density Residential Zone
The purpose of this zone is to designate specific areas for
suburban development at a low density (1.0 dwelling unit per
gross acre) on larger lots in areas serviced by existing or
planned public sewer and water.
R-30 Low Density Residential Zone
The purpose of this zone is to designate specific areas for
suburban development at a low density (1.5 dwelling units per
gross acre) on smaller lots in areas serviced by existing or
planned public sewer and water.
R-20 Low/Medium Density Residential Zone
The purpose of this zone is to designate specific areas for
suburban development at a low/medium density (2.0 dwelling
units gross per acre) in areas serviced by existing or planned
public sewer and water.
R-15 Medium Density Residential Zone
The purpose of this zone is to designate specific areas for
suburban development at a medium density (2.5 dwelling units
gross per acre) in areas serviced by existing or planned public
sewer and water.
R-12 Medium Density Residential Zone
The purpose of this zone is to designate specific areas for
suburban development at a medium density (3.0 dwelling units
gross per acre) in areas serviced by existing or planned public
sewer and water.
R-9 Medium High Density Residential Zone
The purpose of this zone is to protect existing areas of intensive
suburban development at a medium high density (4.0 dwelling
units gross per acre).
R-7 Medium High Density Residential Zone
The purpose of this zone is to protect existing areas of intensive
suburban development at a medium high density (4.5 dwelling
units gross per acre).
R-6 Medium High Density Residential Zone
The purpose of this zone is to protect existing areas of intensive
suburban development at a medium high density (5.5 dwelling
units gross per acre).
§ 250-37 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-37
10:644
R-5 Medium High Density Residential Zone
The purpose of this zone is to protect existing areas of intensive
suburban development at a medium high density (7.5 dwelling
units per gross acre).
A-F Apartment-Family Residential Zone
The purpose of this zone is to designate specific areas to allow
for the development of multiplexes in areas where this pattern
has been firmly established.
A-R Apartment Retirement Residential Zone
The purpose of this zone is to designate specific areas to allow
for the development of multiplexes or townhouses specifically
designed for the needs of senior citizens.
PRC Planned Retirement Community District Zone
The purpose of this zone is to promote the planned development
of an active adult community which shall offer certain
recreational facilities for its residents in accordance with the
general development plan approved by the Planning Board.
[Added 4-12-2004 by Ord. No. 07-04156]
C-N Neighborhood Commercial Zone
The purpose of this zone is to establish areas which will provide
convenient shopping for the general neighborhoods in which
they are located. The lot areas and permitted uses are intended
to be small in operating scale to serve the needs of the
immediate neighborhood conveniently without attracting
regional traffic.
C-C Community Commercial Zone
The purpose of this zone is to establish areas which will provide
a greater variety of retail business and personal services for an
area embracing several neighborhoods.
C-M Marine Commercial Zone
The purpose of this zone is to provide an opportunity for the
continued development of marine and resort activities in unique
areas which have direct access to navigable waterways.
156. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Land Development Codification (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. IV).
§ 250-37 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-37
10:645
C-R Regional Commercial Shopping Zone
The purpose of this zone is to establish several locations within
the Township within which major shopping centers are
permitted providing the full array of retail and service uses
designed to serve all residents of the Township as well as the
regional population.
O-G General Office Zone
The purpose of this zone is to provide development
opportunities for establishments primarily engaged in
rendering a wide variety of services to individuals and business
establishments to serve residents of the entire Township as well
as the regional population.
SD Special Development Zone
The purpose of this zone is to establish areas which will provide
new development opportunities for large scale service and light
manufacturing uses with appropriate supporting facilities. The
lot areas and permitted uses are intended to serve the needs of
the Township as well as the regional population.
TCD Town Center Design Zone
The purpose of this unique zone is to insure that the
architectural appearance and site layout and design of all
development in the zone conforms to the established
architectural appearance, site layout and design of the
Township municipal complex. A planned mixture of residential,
commercial and related uses are permitted in specific areas, in
order to create concentrations of land use activities which will
complement and enhance the municipal complex.
EDO-1 Economic Development Opportunity Zone – 1:
The purpose of the EDO-1 zone (areas having a one-acre
minimum lot size) is to permit on a small scale a mix of office,
retail, and light industrial uses to allow Old Bridge Township
to attain the goals of accommodating market forces, increasing
the local ratable base, expanding the local and regional jobs
base, providing a more diverse mix of goods and services to
residents and businesses within the municipality and region,
achieving an improved balance of residential and
nonresidential development within the municipality, and
utilizing suitable land for development in a more efficient,
functional and aesthetic manner, while controlling and
managing highway access and traffic congestion, minimizing
impacts on adjacent and nearby residential development, and
protecting environmentally sensitive areas. [Added 3-9-2015
by Ord. No. 2015-01]
§ 250-37 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-37
10:646
EDO-3 Economic Development Opportunity Zone – 3:
The purpose of the EDO-3 zone (areas having a three-acre
minimum lot size) is to permit a mix of office, retail, and light
industrial uses to allow the Township to attain the goals of
accommodating market forces, increasing the local ratable
base, expanding the local and regional jobs base, providing
a more diverse mix of goods and services to residents and
businesses within the municipality and region, achieving an
improved balance of residential and nonresidential
development within the municipality, and utilizing suitable land
for development in a more efficient, functional and aesthetic
manner, while controlling and managing highway access and
traffic congestion, minimizing impacts on adjacent and nearby
residential development, and protecting environmentally
sensitive areas. [Added 3-9-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-01]
IH1 Inclusionary Housing Zone 1
The purpose of this zone is to permit an inclusionary
development on Block 17000, Lots 5 (formerly Lots 5 and 6.11)
and 28.112, which contain approximately 101 acres along Ferry
Road. The inclusionary development will consist of 252
multifamily apartments, of which 214 will be market-rate units
and 38 will be affordable family rentals (15% setaside). Fifteenpercent
of the affordable units will be very-low-income
affordable units. [Added 10-14-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-21]
IH2 Inclusionary Housing Zone 2
The purpose of this zone is to permit an inclusionary housing
development on Block 16000, Lot 1, which contains 6.7 acres
along Old Amboy Road, consisting of 150 multifamily
apartments, of which 120 will be market-rate units and 30
will be affordable family rentals (20% setaside). [Added
10-14-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-23]
H. Hospital Zone
This zone is adjacent to the IH1 Zone and is required for part of
the inclusionary development to be built on Block 17000, Lots 5
(formerly Lots 5 and 6.11) and 28.112. [Added 10-14-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-22]
§ 250-37 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-37
10:647
MU-IH Mixed Use-Inclusionary Housing Zone
The purpose of this zone is to permit an inclusionary
development with a mix of commercial and office uses on Block
2150, Lot 4.11, which contains approximately 94 acres along
Matawan Road. The inclusionary development will consist of
529 multifamily apartments, of which 423 will be market-rate
units and 106 will be affordable family rentals (20% setaside).
Fifteen percent of the affordable units will be very-low-income
affordable units. [Added 10-14-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-20]
Route 9
MU-IH
Route 9 Mixed Use-Inclusionary Housing Center Zone
The purpose of this zone is to permit an inclusionary
development with a mix of commercial, office and light
industrial uses on Block 5001, Lots 12.12 and 14, Block 6302,
Lot 9, Block 6303, Lot 6, Block 6303, portions of Lots 3.11
and 7, and Block 7000, a portion of Lot 1.13, which consist
of approximately 342 acres along Route 9 southbound. The
inclusionary development will consist of 2,148 dwelling units, of
which 1,718 will be market-rate units and 430 will be affordable
rental units (20% setaside). Of the 430 affordable units, 299 will
be affordable family rentals and 131 affordable age-restricted
rentals. Thirteen percent of the affordable units will be verylow-
income affordable units. [Added 11-21-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-25]
§ 250-38. Town Centre District Zoning and Design Standards.
[Added 7-9-2001 by Ord. No. 36-01]
Regulation of uses and design are contained in the ordinance document
entitled "Town Centre District Zoning and Design Standards" as revised
June 21, 2001, which is incorporated into this Land Development Ordinance
by this reference.
§ 250-38.1. Economic Development Opportunity District Zoning and
Design Standards. [Added 3-9-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-01; amended
3-11-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-05]
A. EDO-1 Zoning District.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of the EDO-1 Zone is to encourage a mix of
office, retail and commercial uses so as to enable Township of Old
Bridge to attain its goal of accommodating market forces and vision
for stimulating economic growth by permitting an assortment of
businesses coupled with light industrial uses within the zone. The
zone aims at creating small-scale nonresidential developments
along the highly traversed routes that generally cater to the needs
of the neighboring residential uses and Old Bridge residents.
§ 250-37 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-38.1
10:648
(2) Application of Land Development Ordinance. The provisions and
requirements of the Old Bridge Township Land Development
Ordinance shall apply to the EDO-1 Zoning District, except as
otherwise modified herein. Anything not covered under this section
shall be governed by applicable regulations elsewhere in the Land
Development Ordinance.
(3) Regulation of uses. Any use not specifically listed as a permitted
use, an accessory use or a conditional use shall be deemed a
prohibited use. This provision shall be liberally construed as
protective of the Township's zoning scheme and the public health,
safety, morals and general welfare. Any doubt as to the permitted
nature of any use shall be resolved in interpreting the doubtful use
as prohibited.
(4) Permitted uses. The land uses permitted in the EDO-1 District are
set forth herein below, except as otherwise indicated:
(a) Retail sales and services.
(b) Retail food establishment.
(c) Bank and financial institutions.
(d) Studio of a teacher of art, music and dance.
(e) Art galleries.
(f) Professional photography studio.
(g) Health and fitness center.
(h) Business offices.
(i) Medical offices.
(j) Professional offices.
(k) Personal services.
(l) Public and private parking areas.
(m) Restaurants: full-service restaurants, limited-service eating
places.
(n) Fast-food restaurants.
(o) Cafe and taverns.
(p) Day-care facilities: child-care and adult-care facilities.
(q) Animal day cares, kennels, hospitals and clinics, but not
including the outdoor keeping of animals or outdoor play
areas.
§ 250-38.1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-38.1
10:649
(r) Educational services: tutoring classes, training facilities,
cosmetology and barber schools, fine arts schools, language
schools, exam preparation and tutoring and similar uses
limited to 10,000 square feet.
(s) Mini-warehousing, including self-storage and flex warehousing
limited to 15,000 square feet.
(t) Mini-warehouse and office for electricians, carpenters,
plumbers, woodworking and cabinet makers and similar trades
limited to 15,000 square feet.
(u) Wellness center and spa.
(5) Conditionally permitted uses. The land uses that are conditionally
permitted in the EDO-1 District are listed below:
(a) Gasoline station with mini mart or convenience store.
(b) Retail convenience with fueling services.
(c) Drive-through facilities related to banks and/or financial
institutions, pharmacy or fast-food restaurants.
(d) Other services (except public administration):
[1] Automotive repair and maintenance.
[2] Religious organizations, grant making and giving services,
social advocacy organizations, civic and social
organizations and business, professional, labor, political
and similar organizations.
(6) Required conditions.
(a) Yard area and bulk requirements: With regard to bulk and yard
requirements for principal and accessory buildings associated
with principal permitted and conditional uses in the EDO-1
District, the following requirements shall apply. Anything not
covered under this section shall be governed by applicable
regulations elsewhere in the Land Development Ordinance.
Table 1
Yard and Bulk Requirements for Principal Buildings
Requirement Size
Minimum lot area 1 acre
Minimum lot width 125 feet
Minimum front yard setback
Along state highways 30 feet
§ 250-38.1 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-38.1
10:650
Table 1
Yard and Bulk Requirements for Principal Buildings
Requirement Size
Along Route 34 and Englishtown
Road
15 feet
Along all other streets 15 feet
Maximum front yard setback
Along state highways 50 feet
Along Route 34 and Englishtown
Road
50 feet
Along all other streets 50 feet
Minimum side yard setback 25 feet
Minimum total two-side yard setbacks 50 feet
Minimum rear yard setback 50 feet
Maximum height 2 stories, 30 feet
Minimum floor area ratio (FAR) 0.30
Minimum landscape area ratio (LAR) 0.40
Table 2
Yard and Bulk Requirements for Accessory Buildings
Requirement Size
Minimum side yard setback 25 feet
Minimum rear yard setback 25 feet
Maximum height 2 stories, 30 feet
(b) Accessory uses: Shall include accessory uses customarily
incidental and ancillary to a permitted or conditional use.
(c) Outdoor storage and trash enclosure: Outdoor storage and
trash enclosures shall be permitted in any of the yards except
for the front yard. Such areas shall be screened by landscaping
and a six-foot high fence.
(d) Signage: Signage shall comply with all sections of the Land
Development Ordinance related to signage.
(e) Buffers:
[1] There shall be a fifteen-foot-wide landscape buffer
between any property that abuts residential uses or zone.
[2] The requirements of § 250-54 of the LDO related to buffers
shall be met, except for § 250-54B, C and D.
§ 250-38.1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-38.1
10:651
[3] There shall be a fifteen-foot wide buffer along any street
right-of-way.
(f) Parking:
[1] Off-street parking shall be provided as regulated in
§ 250-55 and Schedule F and G of the Land Development
Ordinance.
[2] Parking areas and commercial buildings shall be separated
by a minimum five-foot-wide sidewalk.
(7) Design standards. In addition to the design standards otherwise set
forth in Article X of the Land Development Ordinance, the following
design standards shall apply to all developments in the EDO-1
Zoning District. Where standards contained herein conflict with the
standards otherwise set forth in Article X, the standards herein
shall govern.
(a) Orientation and spacing of buildings:
[1] All buildings shall be oriented toward adjoining public
rights-of-way of highways and roads.
[2] The front facades of commercial buildings shall be aligned,
as reasonably as possible, to one another.
[3] Buildings shall be designed with architectural treatments
(fenestration, porticos, recesses, porches, colonnades,
brick/stone/masonry accents, etc.) so that every facade
that can be easily seen from any street, public parking lot
or public area will not contain a blank wall space greater
than 40 feet in length.
(b) Street furniture:
[1] Benches, trash receptacles and planters shall be provided
in common sitting areas and, when provided, at bus stops.
[2] Bicycle parking spaces for bicycle racks shall be provided
at the following rates: minimum one space per 7,500
square feet of gross floor area for nonresidential uses.
(c) Site lighting:
[1] Site lighting shall comply with § 250-75 of the Land
Development Ordinance.
[2] Light fixtures attached to the exterior of the building shall
be architecturally compatible with the style, materials,
colors and details of the building.
§ 250-38.1 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-38.1
10:652
[3] Streetlights shall be decorative and blend with the overall
characteristics of the development. Box-type and cobrahead-
type shall be prohibited.
(d) Landscaping: Landscaping shall comply with § 250-74 of the
Land Development Ordinance.
(e) Sidewalks:
[1] Sidewalks which are at least five feet wide shall be
integrated connecting all parking areas throughout the
site.
[2] Sidewalks which are at least five feet wide shall be
provided along both sides of all other streets.
[3] Sidewalks which are at least five feet wide shall be
provided along the frontage of the site.
[4] Where buildings are set back at 15 feet, outdoor dining
may occupy the yard space between the front facade and
property line. If outdoor dining is proposed on a building
that is set back at more than 15 feet and less than 50 feet,
there shall be a sidewalk of a minimum 10 feet and
maximum 15 feet. In any instance, there shall be a
minimum five-foot-wide sidewalk abutting a commercial
building.
[5] The requirements contained herein enumerate general
sidewalk requirements. Sidewalks and bikeways along
county roads or state highways shall be held to Middlesex
County and NJDOT requirements, respectively.
B. Economic Development Opportunity Zone-3 (EDO-3).
(1) Purpose. The purpose of the EDO-3 Zone (areas having a three-acre
minimum lot size) is to permit a mix of office, retail, and light
industrial uses to allow the Township to attain the goals of
accommodating market forces, increasing the local ratable base,
expanding the local and regional jobs base, providing a more
diverse mix of goods and services to residents and businesses
within the municipality and region, and utilizing suitable land for
development in a more efficient, functional and aesthetic manner,
while controlling and managing highway access and traffic
congestion, minimizing impacts on adjacent and nearby residential
development, and protecting environmentally sensitive areas.
(2) Application of Land Development Ordinance. The provisions and
requirements of the Old Bridge Township Land Development
Ordinance shall apply to the EDO-3 Zoning District, except as
otherwise modified herein. Anything not covered under this section
§ 250-38.1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-38.1
10:653
shall be governed by applicable regulations elsewhere in the Land
Development Ordinance.
(3) Regulation of uses. Any use not specifically listed as a permitted
use, an accessory use or a conditional use shall be deemed a
prohibited use. This provision shall be liberally construed as
protective of the Township's zoning scheme and the public health,
safety, morals and general welfare. Any doubt as to the permitted
nature of any use shall be resolved in interpreting the doubtful use
as prohibited.
(4) Permitted uses. The land uses permitted in the EDO-3 District are
set forth herein below, except as otherwise indicated:
(a) Retail sales and services.
(b) Retail food establishment.
(c) Banquet facilities.
(d) Bank and financial institutions.
(e) Studio of a teacher of art, music and dance.
(f) Art galleries.
(g) Professional photography studio.
(h) Business offices.
(i) Medical offices.
(j) Personal services.
(k) Recreational facilities.
(l) Public and private parking areas/structured parking.
(m) Educational services: tutoring classes, training facilities,
cosmetology and barber schools, fine arts schools, language
schools, exam preparation and tutoring limited to 10,000
square feet.
(n) Restaurants: full-service restaurants, limited-service eating
places.
(o) Cafes.
(p) Taverns and micro-breweries.
(q) Wholesale trade including:
[1] Wholesale stores and showrooms involving sale in bulk or
quantity to retailers or others for resale to the ultimate
consumer;
§ 250-38.1 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-38.1
10:654
[2] Wholesale distribution centers;
[3] Warehouse clubs and supercenters.
(r) Light industrial use.
(s) Services/recreation/entertainment:
[1] Printing and duplicating;
[2] Postal, parcel and courier mailing, shipping and delivery
services;
[3] Health and fitness centers, including gyms, indoor tennis,
racquetball, swimming, skating, bowling and similar uses;
[4] Theaters for the performing arts, sports, etc.; movie
theaters and similar events (excluding adult
entertainment);
[5] Amusement parks;
[6] Funeral homes;
[7] Day-care facilities, including child-care and adult-care
centers;
[8] Animal day cares, kennels, hospitals and clinics, but not
including the outdoor keeping of animals or outdoor play
areas;
[9] Catering facilities.
(t) Warehousing:
[1] Mini-warehousing/self-storage facilities;
[2] Building and construction contractor equipment storage
buildings;
[3] Warehouse and office for electricians, carpenters,
plumbers, woodworking and cabinet makers and similar
trades.
(5) Conditional uses. The land uses that are conditionally permitted in
the EDO-3 District are listed below. For conditions related to each
use, refer to § 250-41:
(a) Retail gasoline stations, including gasoline station with
convenience store or mini mart.
(b) Retail convenience with fueling services.
(c) Drive-through facilities related to banks or financial
institutions, pharmacy or fast-food restaurants.
§ 250-38.1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-38.1
10:655
(d) Banks and restaurants on pad sites with or without drivethrough.
(e) New car dealers, used car dealers and recreational vehicle
dealers.
(f) Educational services.
(g) Accommodations and food services: hotels (except casino
hotels) lodging facilities and motels.
(h) Other services:
[1] Automotive repair and maintenance.
[2] Religious organizations, grantmaking and giving services,
social advocacy organizations, civic and social
organizations and business, professional, labor, political
and similar organizations.
(6) Required conditions.
(a) Yard area and bulk requirements. With regard to bulk and yard
requirements for principal and accessory buildings associated
with principal permitted and conditional uses in the EDO-3
District, the following requirements shall apply. Anything not
covered under this section shall be governed by applicable
regulations elsewhere in the Land Development Ordinance.
Table 3
Bulk Requirements for Principal Buildings
Requirement Size
Minimum lot area 3 acres
Minimum lot width 150 feet
Minimum front yard setback
Along state highways 35 feet
Along all other streets 25 feet
Maximum front yard setback
Along state highways 75 feet
Along all other streets 50 feet
Minimum side yard setback 25 feet
Minimum total two-side yard setbacks 50 feet
Minimum rear yard setback 100 feet
Maximum height 4 stories and 48 feet
Minimum floor area ratio (FAR) 0.35
§ 250-38.1 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-38.1
10:656
Table 3
Bulk Requirements for Principal Buildings
Requirement Size
Minimum landscape area ratio (LAR) 0.40
Table 4
Yard and Bulk Requirements for Accessory Buildings
Requirement Size
Minimum side yard setback 25 feet
Minimum rear yard setback 25 feet
Maximum height 2 stories and 30 feet
(b) Accessory uses: Shall include accessory uses customarily
incidental and ancillary to a permitted or conditional use.
(c) Outdoor storage and trash enclosure: Outdoor storage and
trash enclosures shall be permitted in any of the yards except
for the front yard. Such areas shall be screened by landscaping
and a six-foot-high fence.
(d) Signage: Signage shall comply with all sections of the Land
Development Ordinance related to signage.
(e) Buffers:
[1] A twenty-five-foot landscaped buffer shall be required to
shield adjacent roadways from parking lot illumination
headlight glare and fumes.
[2] The requirements of § 250-54 of the LDO related to buffers
shall be met, except for § 250-54B and C.
[3] Where the parking lot abuts a residential property or zone,
the parking setback shall be increased by additional 25
feet which shall comprise of a planted buffer area
containing evergreen trees.
(f) Parking:
[1] No parking area or off street loading space shall be located
closer than 25 feet to any rear and side lot line.
[2] Off-street parking shall be provided as regulated in
§ 250-55 and Schedule F and G of the Land Development
Ordinance.
[3] Parking areas and commercial buildings shall be separated
by a minimum distance of 15 feet.
§ 250-38.1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-38.1
10:657
(7) Design standards. In addition to the design standards otherwise set
forth in Article X of the Land Development Ordinance, the following
design standards shall apply to all developments in the EDO-3
Zoning District. Where standards contained herein conflict with the
standards otherwise set forth in Article X, the standards herein
shall govern.
(a) Orientation and spacing of buildings:
[1] The longer of the front facades of commercial buildings
shall be oriented, as reasonably as possible, to be parallel
to adjoining highways, roads and commercial streets.
[2] The front facades of commercial buildings shall be aligned,
as reasonably as possible, to one another.
[3] Commercial buildings shall be oriented toward adjoining
public rights-of-way of highways and roads.
(b) Street furniture:
[1] Benches, trash receptacles and planters shall be provided
in common sitting areas and, when provided, at bus stops.
[2] Bicycle parking spaces for bicycle racks shall be provided
at the following rates: minimum one space per 7,500
square feet of gross floor area for nonresidential uses.
(c) Site lighting: Site lighting shall comply with § 250-75 of the
Land Development Ordinance.
(d) Landscaping: Landscaping shall comply with § 250-74 of the
Land Development Ordinance.
(e) Sidewalks:
[1] Sidewalks which are at least five feet wide shall be
integrated connecting all parking areas throughout the
site.
[2] Sidewalks which are at least five feet wide shall be
provided along both sides of all commercial streets.
[3] Sidewalks which are at least five feet wide shall be
provided along the frontage of the site.
[4] Sidewalks which are at least 12 feet wide shall be provided
along the front access areas to commercial buildings.
NOTE: The requirements contained herein enumerate
general sidewalk requirements. Sidewalks and bikeways
along county roads or state highways shall be held to
Middlesex County and NJDOT requirements,
respectively.
§ 250-38.1 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-39
10:658
§ 250-39. Regulation of uses.
Any use not specifically listed as a permitted use, an accessory use or
a conditional use shall be deemed a prohibited use. This provision shall
be liberally construed as protective of the Township's zoning scheme and
the public health, safety, morals and general welfare. Any doubt as to the
permitted nature of any use shall be resolved in interpreting the doubtful
use as prohibited.
§ 250-40. Permitted uses.
A. The land uses permitted in the various zones are set forth in the
Schedule of Permitted Uses attached hereto as Appendix C.157 The said
Schedule of Permitted Uses is hereby declared to be expressly
incorporated herein and made part of this chapter. The code numbers
set forth in the Schedule of Permitted Uses with respect to some of the
uses set forth therein refer to descriptions of such uses contained in the
"Classification of Land Use Manual," copies of which are available for
inspection at the office of the Township Clerk and the Department of
Community Development. In the event of a conflict between the
description of a use in said manual and the definitional section of this
chapter, the definitional section of this chapter shall control.
B. Notwithstanding any contrary provision set forth in the Schedule of
Permitted Uses, any shopping center, retail service or retail sales use or
uses within the C-C or C-N Zones and consisting of three or more such
uses, or 4,000 or more square feet shall constitute conditional uses
subject to the provisions of § 250-41C.
C. In all zones where the growing of field and seed crops, orchards and
horticultural activities are permitted, customary farm buildings for the
processing and storage of products or equipment are permitted as
accessory uses, if located on the same parcel as the principal use.
D. Farm products may be displayed and sold at a roadside stand as part of
the permitted agricultural use.
E. The keeping of livestock and the raising and/or production of livestock
are permitted as accessory uses to a farm and the limitations, if any,
otherwise specified in the Code of the Township of Old Bridge.
F. In any zone in which any type of dwelling unit is a permitted use, such
permitted dwelling unit or units may be manufactured homes.
157. Editor's Note: Appendix C, Schedule of Permitted Uses, is included at the end of this
chapter.
§ 250-39 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-41
10:659
§ 250-41. Conditional uses.
The land uses shown on the Schedule of Permitted Uses158 as being
permitted as conditional uses in the various zones are set forth below, and
the conditions which must be demonstrated to the Planning Board in order
to support the approval of a conditional use permit in connection therewith
are specifically enumerated for each use.
A. Day-care centers and nursery schools. Day-care centers and nursery
schools are permitted in the R-30, R-20, R-15, R-12, R-9, R-7, R-6, R-5
and A-F Zones, provided that:
(1) The center meets the requirements set forth in Subchapter 5,
Physical Facility Requirements of the Manual of Standards for
Childcare Facilities, issued by the State of New Jersey, Department
of Human Services, Division of Youth and Family Services.
(2) The minimum lot size is one acre or more.
(3) Parking areas, driveways and dropoff areas must be screened and
buffered from adjoining properties which are zoned or used as
residential. This shall be a landscaped or natural buffer, and shall
be a minimum of 35 feet wide.
(4) On-site traffic circulation must be adequate to allow children to be
dropped off safely and to not cause grid-locking, stacking, or
otherwise impede the flow of traffic on the street which services
the site.
(5) Signage shall not be of a type normally associated with commercial
use such as mobile, flashing or neon. Signage shall be limited to
one freestanding sign with a surface area not exceeding eight
square feet. Facade signs shall not be permitted.
(6) The building exterior shall be finished with materials and in a
manner which is harmonious with the neighborhood. As an
example, the use of a metal shed or concrete and steel building in a
neighborhood of wood frame homes would not be considered
compatible.
(7) Day-care centers and nursery schools shall be restricted to local
and collector roadways.
B. Telephone and telegraph communications and all utilities. Telephone
and telegraph communications and all utilities are permitted in the
zones indicated on the Schedule of Permitted Uses as permitting them
as conditional uses only if:
(1) The proposed installation in a specific location must be reasonably
necessary for the satisfactory provision of service by the utility to
158. Editor's Note: Appendix C, Schedule of Permitted Uses, is included at the end of this
chapter.
§ 250-41 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-41
10:660
the neighborhood or area in which the particular use is to be
located;
(2) The design of any building in connection with such facilities must
conform to the general character of the area and not adversely
affect the safe and comfortable enjoyment of property rights in the
zone in which it is located;
(3) Adequate fences and other safety devices must be provided as may
be required. Fences, when used to enclose public utility facilities
such as electrical power substations, shall be built in accordance
with the applicable requirements of the New Jersey Board of Public
Utilities National Electrical Safety Code in effect at the time of
construction;
(4) Sufficient landscaping, including shrubs, trees and lawns, shall be
provided and maintained;
(5) Off-street parking shall be provided as determined by the Planning
Board during site plan review; and
(6) The traffic impact for the immediate area as well as the increased
traffic volume being created by the proposed use shall be analyzed
in written form by a qualified traffic engineer and shall conclude
that the proposed use satisfies the following standards: [Added
1-24-2000 by Ord. No. 04-00]
(a) The additional traffic resulting from the proposed use will not
exceed a volume/capacity ratio of 0.8 on the adjacent streets;
(b) The additional traffic resulting from the proposed use will not
increase the peak volume by 10% or more; and
(c) The additional traffic resulting from the proposed use will not
reduce the level of service at significantly impacted
intersection to "F" or below.
C. 159Clinics, health care facilities, centers for drug, methadone, alcoholic
treatment, and halfway houses. The structure or building for any clinic,
health care facility or center for the treatment and/or counseling of
former and present drug addicts and/or alcoholics or halfway houses
shall be permitted in the SD Zone, provided that said structure or
building is:
(1) At least 500 feet from the nearest property line of any land in any
residential zone;
(2) At least 1,000 feet from the nearest property line of any public,
private or parochial school, library, park, playground, or other
159. 51. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, Retail sales and services and shopping centers, as
amended, was repealed 3-11-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-05. This ordinance also provided for
the redesignation of former Subsections D through AA as Subsections C through Z,
respectively.
§ 250-41 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-41
10:661
recreational facility, whether commercial or nonprofit, any church,
convent, monastery, synagogue or similar place of worship;
(3) At least 1,000 feet from any bar, tavern or other facility licensed for
the consumption or sale of alcoholic beverages; and
(4) The traffic impact for the immediate area as well as the increased
traffic volume being created by the proposed use shall be analyzed
in written form by a qualified traffic engineer and shall conclude
that the proposed use satisfies the following standards: [Added
1-24-2000 by Ord. No. 04-00]
(a) The additional traffic resulting from the proposed use will not
exceed a volume/capacity ratio of 0.8 on the adjacent streets;
(b) The additional traffic resulting from the proposed use will not
increase the peak volume by 10% or more; and
(c) The additional traffic resulting from the proposed use will not
reduce the level of service at significantly impacted
intersection to "F" or below.
D. Adult stores and bookstores, adult motion-picture theaters, adult mini
motion-picture theaters and adult cabarets. Adult bookstores, adult
motion-picture theaters, adult mini motion-picture theaters and adult
cabarets are permitted in the C-C Zone, provided that:
(1) Adult bookstores, adult cabarets, adult motion-picture theaters or
adult mini motion-picture theaters shall be located in a building or
structure:
(a) At least 2,000 feet from the nearest property line of any land in
any residential zone;
(b) At least 2,000 feet from the nearest property line of any public,
private or parochial school, hospital, clinic, private or public or
semipublic institutions, library, park, playground or other
recreational facility, whether commercial or nonprofit, in any
other zone;
(c) At least 2,000 feet from the nearest property line of any
church, convent, monastery, synagogue or similar place of
worship; and
(d) At least 2,000 feet from any (other) bar, tavern, or similar
facility licensed for the consumption or sale of alcoholic
beverages;
(2) The proposed use will not be within 1,000 feet of any other adult
store or bookstore, adult motion-picture theater, adult mini motionpicture
theater or adult cabaret;
§ 250-41 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-41
10:662
(3) Advertisements, displays or other promotional materials shall not
be shown or exhibited so as to be visible to the public from
pedestrian sidewalks, or from other areas public or semipublic; and
such displays shall be considered as signs and, therefore, subject to
the Township sign regulations;
(4) All building openings, including, without limitation, entries and
windows, shall be located, covered, or screened in such a manner
so as to prevent a view into the interior of the building from any
public or semipublic area; and
(5) The traffic impact for the immediate area as well as the increased
traffic volume being created by the proposed use shall be analyzed
in written form by a qualified traffic engineer and shall conclude
that the proposed use satisfies the following standards: [Added
1-24-2000 by Ord. No. 04-00]
(a) The additional traffic resulting from the proposed use will not
exceed a volume/capacity ratio of 0.8 on the adjacent streets;
(b) The additional traffic resulting from the proposed use will not
increase the peak volume by 10% or more; and
(c) The additional traffic resulting from the proposed use will not
reduce the level of service at significantly impacted
intersection to "F" or below.
E. Sanitariums, convalescent, rest homes and hospitals. Sanitariums,
convalescent and rest homes are permitted in any residential zone and
the O-G Zone; hospitals are permitted in the R-120, O-G and SD zones,
provided that:
(1) The property proposed to be occupied by the use shall have a
minimum lot area of five acres, except hospital uses must have a
minimum lot area of 25 acres;
(2) Minimum front, rear, and side yard areas shall be 100 feet;
(3) The maximum lot coverage shall not exceed 25%;
(4) The height of structures may exceed the maximum height
requirements of this chapter; provided, however, that the front,
rear and side yard requirements set forth above shall be increased
by one foot for each foot by which the height of the structure
exceeds the maximum height which would be otherwise permitted
by this chapter, and further provided that in no case shall any
proposed structure exceed 50 feet in height;
(5) Hospitals located in the R-120 Zone shall provide a landscaped
buffer of not less than 75 feet from any property line; and
(6) The traffic impact for the immediate area as well as the increased
traffic volume being created by the proposed use shall be analyzed
§ 250-41 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-41
10:663
in written form by a qualified traffic engineer and shall conclude
that the proposed use satisfies the following standards: [Added
1-24-2000 by Ord. No. 04-00]
(a) The additional traffic resulting from the proposed use will not
exceed a volume/capacity ratio of 0.8 on the adjacent streets;
(b) The additional traffic resulting from the proposed use will not
increase the peak volume by 10% or more; and
(c) The additional traffic resulting from the proposed use will not
reduce the level of service at significantly impacted
intersection to "F" or below.
F. Organizational facilities. Organizational facilities are permitted in any
residential zone, provided that:
(1) A complete list of the proposed charter membership, including
names and resident addresses, shall be filed with the approving
board;
(2) The proposed use is a bona fide nonprofit organization operated
solely for the recreation and enjoyment of the members of said
organization;
(3) The property proposed to be occupied by such use shall have a
minimum lot area of three acres;
(4) Not more than 20% of the lot area proposed for such use shall be
occupied by buildings and structures;
(5) No building, structure or active recreation facility shall be located
within 100 feet of an adjacent residential property line; and
(6) The traffic impact for the immediate area as well as the increased
traffic volume being created by the proposed use shall be analyzed
in written form by a qualified traffic engineer and shall conclude
that the proposed use satisfies the following standards: [Added
1-24-2000 by Ord. No. 04-00]
(a) The additional traffic resulting from the proposed use will not
exceed a volume/capacity ratio of 0.8 on the adjacent streets;
(b) The additional traffic resulting from the proposed use will not
increase the peak volume by 10% or more; and
(c) The additional traffic resulting from the proposed use will not
reduce the level of service at significantly impacted
intersection to "F" or below.
G. Automotive gasoline stations, automotive repair garages, and
automotive service stations. Automotive gasoline stations, automotive
repair garages and automotive service stations are permitted in the C-
§ 250-41 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-41
10:664
M, C-N, C-C and SD Zones, provided that: [Amended 10-23-1995 by
Ord. No. 61-95; 1-24-2000 by Ord. No. 04-00160]
(1) Specifications and plot plans, certified by a licensed professional
engineer, shall be filed showing in detail the exact location of all
buildings and structures, the number of gasoline tanks to be
installed, the dimensions and capacity of each tank, the depth at
which the tank will be placed below ground, the number of pumps
to be installed, the type of structure and accessory buildings to be
constructed, the number of automobiles to be garaged, and a
written description of the nature and extent of the proposed use;
(2) The proposed use shall be located on a lot of not less than 20,000
square feet;
(3) All filling pumps and structures shall be located at least 25 feet
from the street line and side and rear property lines, and at least 50
feet from the boundary of a residential zone or existing residential
uses;
(4) No vehicle shall be permitted to be standing or parked on the
premises other than those used by the employees in the indirect or
direct operation of the establishment and customers' vehicles
awaiting repair;
(5) Any repair of motor vehicles shall be performed in a fully enclosed
building. No parts or partially dismantled motor vehicles may be
stored out-of-doors;
(6) Driveways shall not be more than 25 feet wide at any point.
Driveways must be at least 10 feet from any side lot line, and 25
feet from the intersection of street lines. No more than two
driveways shall be permitted for each 100 feet of street frontage;
(7) All outdoor vending machines are prohibited, exclusive of two soft
drinks and two newspaper vending machines which are accessory
uses, provided they are located no further than three feet from the
principal building;
(8) Accessory goods for sale may be displayed on the pump island and
the building island only. The outside storage of oil cans, antifreeze
and similar products may be displayed on the respective islands if
provided for in a suitable metal stand or rack;
(9) The exterior display of new or used tires shall be restricted to
single tires displayed on the pump and building islands only and
shall be prohibited from the vehicular circulation area;
(10) Gasoline service stations shall be permitted in the C-M Zone,
provided that the gasoline and other petroleum products and the
160. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Land Development Codification (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. IV).
§ 250-41 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-41
10:665
mechanical services provided are related solely to marine
activities; and
(11) The traffic impact for the immediate area as well as the increased
traffic volume being created by the proposed use shall be analyzed
in written form by a qualified traffic engineer and shall conclude
that the proposed use satisfies the following standards:
(a) The additional traffic resulting from the proposed use will not
exceed a volume/capacity ratio of 0.8 on the adjacent streets;
(b) The additional traffic resulting from the proposed use will not
increase the peak volume by 10% or more; and
(c) The additional traffic resulting from the proposed use will not
reduce the level of service at significantly impacted
intersection to "F" or below.
H. Stadiums, racetracks and airports. Stadiums, racetracks and airports
shall be permitted in the SD Zone, provided that:
(1) The site shall contain a minimum of 100 acres within which no
single facility and/or combination of facilities shall accommodate
more than 20,000 persons at any one time;
(2) In case of airports and other flying facilities, such facilities shall be
duly licensed by the appropriate state and federal authorities prior
to submission of an application;
(3) All areas which are potentially hazardous to the public shall be
enclosed with a six-foot-high chain link fence.
(4) In addition to the parking standards otherwise set forth in this
chapter, the following number of off-street parking spaces shall be
provided:
(a) Employees, participants, or registrants at stadiums and
racetrack events: one space per person.
(b) Airports: one space per employee plus one space per aircraft
permanently berthed at the facility.
I. Commercial recreation activities.
(1) Commercial recreation uses and activities, as hereinbelow set
forth, are permitted in the following zones: [Amended
10-23-1995 by Ord. No. 61-95161]
Miniature golf: C-C, C-M, ER, SD, R-120
Golf driving ranges: ER, SD, R-120
161. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Land Development Codification (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. IV).
§ 250-41 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-41
10:666
Tennis courts (nonresidential): O-G, C-C, SD
Gymnasiums and athletic clubs: O-G, C-M, C-N, C-C, SD, ER
Swimming pools (nonresidential): O-G, C-C, SD, C-M, ER
Go-cart tracks: SD
Dance halls and ball rooms: C-C
Billiard and pool rooms: C-C
Outdoor firearms and archery: ER
(2) Provided that, if proposed the use is proposed to take place in
freestanding structures on site, the following minimum bulk
regulations shall apply:
(a) Minimum lot size: one acre.
(b) Front yard: 75 feet.
(c) One side yard: 75 feet.
(d) Total two side yards: 150 feet.
(e) Rear yard: 50 feet.
(f) Maximum percent of lot coverage: 20%.
(3) Disturbance of land to provide for ingress and egress for the
parking areas shall be limited to the minimum required to properly
handle the volume of traffic anticipated to be attracted by the use.
(4) The traffic impact for the immediate area as well as the increased
traffic volume being created by the proposed use shall be analyzed
in written form by a qualified traffic engineer and shall conclude
that the proposed use satisfies the following standards: [Added
1-24-2000 by Ord. No. 04-00]
(a) The additional traffic resulting from the proposed use will not
exceed a volume/capacity ratio of 0.8 on the adjacent streets;
(b) The additional traffic resulting from the proposed use will not
increase the peak volume by 10% or more; and
(c) The additional traffic resulting from the proposed use will not
reduce the level of service at significantly impacted
intersection to "F" or below.
J. Miniwarehouses. Miniwarehouses are permitted in the C-C or SD
Zones, provided that they comply with the following standards:
(1) Area, yard, height and setback requirements:
(a) Minimum lot size: three acres.
(b) Front yard setback: 75 feet.
§ 250-41 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-41
10:667
(c) Rear yard: 75 feet.
(d) One side yard: 50 feet.
(e) Total two side yards: 100 feet.
(f) Maximum lot coverage: 30%.
(g) Maximum height: 15 feet.
(2) Required number of off-street parking spaces provided:
(a) One space for each 10 storage cubicles equally distributed
throughout the storage area.
(b) Two spaces for the managers' quarters.162
(3) All one-way driveways shall provide for one ten-foot parking lane
and one fifteen-foot travel lane. Traffic direction and parking shall
be designated by signing or painting. All two-way driveways shall
provide for one ten-foot parking lane and two twelve-foot travel
lanes. The parking lanes may be eliminated when the driveway
does not serve storage cubicles.
(4) Vehicular ingress and egress shall be limited to one point for each
side of property abutting any street lot line.
(5) Fencing shall be required around the perimeter of the project. Said
fence shall be a minimum of six feet in height and constructed of
decorative concrete block or chain link.
(6) All outdoor storage yards shall be screened from the view of
surrounding properties.
(7) One freestanding sign identifying the nature of the miniwarehouse
shall be permitted in the front yard not to exceed 15 feet in height
and 40 square feet in area.
(8) Miniwarehouse developments shall be limited to dead storage use
only.
(9) The traffic impact for the immediate area as well as the increased
traffic volume being created by the proposed use shall be analyzed
in written form by a qualified traffic engineer and shall conclude
that the proposed use satisfies the following standards: [Added
1-24-2000 by Ord. No. 04-00]
(a) The additional traffic resulting from the proposed use will not
exceed a volume/capacity ratio of 0.8 on the adjacent streets;
162. Editor's Note: Original Sec. 7-2B2k(2)(c), regarding off-street parking spaces for
prospective clients, which previously followed this subsection, was repealed at time of
adoption of Land Development Codification (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV).
§ 250-41 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-41
10:668
(b) The additional traffic resulting from the proposed use will not
increase the peak volume by 10% or more; and
(c) The additional traffic resulting from the proposed use will not
reduce the level of service at significantly impacted
intersection to "F" or below.
K. Pharmacies. Pharmacies and the sale of convalescent equipment and
supplies is permitted in the O-G Zone, provided that:
(1) The use may only include the preparation and dispensing of
medicines and drugs and the sale or rental of bandages,
wheelchairs, related medical equipment and supplies, in
conjunction with the operation of a medical arts building and
offices for at least 12 doctors, dentists and other medical
professions.
L. Automobile agencies. Automotive sales and service facilities are
permitted in the, SD, C-C and C-R Zones, provided that:
(1) The use shall be housed in a building having a floor area of not less
than 10,000 square feet.
(2) The traffic impact for the immediate area as well as the increased
traffic volume being created by the proposed use shall be analyzed
in written form by a qualified traffic engineer and shall conclude
that the proposed use satisfies the following standards: [Added
1-24-2000 by Ord. No. 04-00]
(a) The additional traffic resulting from the proposed use will not
exceed a volume/capacity ratio of 0.8 on the adjacent streets;
(b) The additional traffic resulting from the proposed use will not
increase the peak volume by 10% or more; and
(c) The additional traffic resulting from the proposed use will not
reduce the level of service at significantly impacted
intersection to "F" or below.
M. Beauty and barber shops. In the O-G Zone, beauty and barber shops are
permitted, provided that:
(1) The use is as an accessory use; and
(2) The use is operated within a building in which 75% of the building's
rentable space is for occupancy by a permitted primary use.
N. Houses of worship are conditionally permitted in the zones indicated in
Appendix C, Schedule of Permitted Uses, provided that: [Added
1-24-2000 by Ord. No. 04-00; amended 6-25-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-10; 10-25-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-31]
(1) A minimum lot area of two acres shall be required.
§ 250-41 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-41
10:669
(2) The total building area shall not exceed the FAR (floor area ratio)
permitted in the zone.
(3) Where a school is an accessory use to a house of worship, the
proposed school must satisfy the following:
(a) To be deemed an accessory use, the gross building area of the
school, including all classrooms and school-related areas, may
not be greater than 40% of the total building area of the
church, synagogue, temple, mosque or similar facility used for
prayer; and
(b) The school shall not be operated independently of the house of
worship.
(4) The minimum lot area shall be increased one acre for each 2,000
square feet of school gross floor area.
(5) The minimum lot area shall also be increased one acre for each
2,000 square feet of gross floor area of any accessory use, whether
attached or detached from the house of worship, including, but not
limited to, parish/meeting halls, residences (see below), counseling
offices, recreational facilities, day care, homeless shelters and
kitchens.
(6) Accessory buildings shall be actually and exclusively used for
religious worship. Accessory buildings (including residences
permitted below) larger than 250 square feet shall comply with the
minimum bulk yard and height requirements (as applicable) for
principal buildings in the zone.
(7) Religious quarters are permitted as accessory residence(s) to a
house of worship, provided that:
(a) Single-family detached or attached residences do not exceed
two, actually occupied as a parsonage by the officiating
clergymen of any religious corporation of the State of New
Jersey. Said residence(s) shall include not more than one
bedroom for each resident clergy and spouse, one bedroom for
each child, plus one guest bedroom and shall function as a
single housekeeping unit.
(b) Religious dormitories may be provided in lieu of single-family
detached or attached residences, provided that the number of
dormitory units does not exceed the number of permanent
officiating clergymen plus one for guests; the units do not
exceed 225 square feet each; and do not have individual
kitchen facilities or private bathroom facilities.
(8) The areas allocated for each accessory residence shall be not less
than the minimum lot area of the zone in which the property is
located, and said area shall be in addition to the minimum lot area
§ 250-41 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-41
10:670
required in Subsection O(1), (4), and (5) above. The residential FAR
shall not exceed the maximum FAR allowed in the zone based on
the land area allocated to the residential use.
(9) The traffic impact for the immediate area as well as the increased
traffic volume being created by the proposed use shall be analyzed
in written form by a qualified traffic engineer and shall conclude
that the proposed use satisfies the following standards:
(a) The additional traffic resulting from the proposed use will not
exceed a volume/capacity ratio of 0.8 on the adjacent streets;
(b) The additional traffic resulting from the proposed use will not
increase the peak volume by 10% or more; and
(c) The additional traffic resulting from the proposed use will not
reduce the level of service at significantly impacted
intersection to "F" or below.
O. Satellite antennas. Satellite antennas are permitted in the zones
indicated in Appendix C, Schedule of Permitted Uses, provided that:
[Amended 6-25-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-10]
(1) The use is located to the rear of the front building line of the
principal building, unless the approving board determines that
such location will interfere with the reception of transmission
intended to be received by the antenna;
(2) Satellite antennas shall be permitted as ground installations only,
unless the approving board determines that such installation will
interfere with the reception of transmission intended to be received
by the antenna;
(3) A maximum of one satellite antenna shall be permitted per lot;
(4) The satellite antenna shall be constructed with a wire mesh type
dish;
(5) The satellite antenna dish shall not exceed 12 feet at its widest
point;
(6) The overall height of the satellite antenna assembly shall not
exceed 15 feet, measured from grade with the dish facing at 0° to
horizontal, unless the approving board determines that such
limitation will interfere with the reception of transmissions
intended to be received by the antenna;
(7) The pedestal base of the satellite antenna shall be located at a
distance from any side or rear property line equal to the maximum
overall height of the antenna plus one foot, unless the approving
board determines that such limitation will interfere with the
reception of transmissions intended to be received by the antenna;
§ 250-41 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-41
10:671
(8) Wiring between the principal building and the antenna shall be
underground and at least 18 inches below finished grade; and
(9) Satellite antennas shall be screened by fencing or shrubbery of a
suitable height to reduce motor drive noise and to minimize the
visual impact from the street and the adjacent properties.
P. Home business. In all zones a home business is permitted; provided
that:
(1) The space devoted to such use does not exceed the lesser of 20% of
the gross floor area of the dwelling unit or 500 square feet;
(2) Such use shall be conducted solely by the residents of the detached
dwelling, except that no more than two persons not residents of the
building may be employed;
(3) No display of products shall be visible from the street;
(4) No occupational sounds shall be audible outside the building;
(5) No equipment shall be used which will cause interference with
radio and television reception in neighboring residences;
(6) The home business does not utilize, handle, or store hazardous
wastes or substances;
(7) The home business does not reduce the parking or yard
requirement compliance of the detached dwelling;
(8) No more than five off-street parking spaces, including residential
parking, shall be required and all parking shall be screened behind
hedging, landscaping or fencing from the street;
(9) All business-related parking must utilize the designated off-street
parking facilities;
(10) There is no exterior evidence of the home business other than one
nameplate sign identifying the home business, not exceeding one
square foot in area, either attached or freestanding, and set back at
least 15 feet from the street right-of-way; and
(11)No building with a home business shall be constructed or altered so
as to be inharmonious with the residential character of adjacent
structures. By way of illustration and not limitation, the types of
construction not considered to be residential in character include
storefront-type of construction, garage doors larger than needed
for passenger vehicles or light commercial vehicles, and unfinished
concrete blocks or cinder block wall surfaces.
Q. Home professional office. In all zones a home professional office is
permitted, provided that:
§ 250-41 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-41
10:672
(1) The space devoted to such use does not exceed the lesser of 40% of
the gross floor area of the dwelling unit or 800 square feet;
(2) Such use shall be conducted solely by the residents of the detached
dwelling, except that no more than two persons not residents of the
building may be employed;
(3) No display of products shall be visible from the street;
(4) No occupational sounds shall be audible outside the building;
(5) No equipment shall be used which will cause interference with
radio and television reception in neighboring residences;
(6) The home professional office does not utilize, handle, or store
hazardous waste or substances;
(7) The home professional office does not reduce the parking or yard
requirement compliance of the detached dwelling;
(8) No more than 10 parking spaces, including residential parking,
shall be required and all parking shall be screened behind hedging,
landscaping or fencing from the street;
(9) All business-related parking must utilize the designated off-street
parking facilities;
(10) There is no exterior evidence of the home professional office other
than one nameplate sign identifying the home professional office,
not exceeding one square foot in area, either attached or
freestanding and set back at least 15 feet from the street right-ofway;
and
(11)No building with a home professional office shall be constructed or
altered so as to be inharmonious with the residential character of
adjacent structures. By way of illustration and not limitation, the
types of construction not considered to be residential in character
include storefront-type of construction, garage doors larger than
needed for passenger vehicles or light commercial vehicles, and
unfinished concrete blocks or cinder block wall surfaces.
R. Community residences for developmentally disabled and community
shelters for victims of domestic violence. Community residences for
developmentally disabled and community shelters for victims of
domestic violence housing more than six persons shall be permitted in
all residential zones, provided that:
(1) Such use is not located within 1,500 feet of an existing such use;
and
(2) The aggregate number of persons, other than resident staff,
residing at existing such residences within the Township does not
exceed 0.5% of the Township's population.
§ 250-41 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-41
10:673
S. Townhouse dwellings and patio home dwellings. Townhouse dwellings
and patio home dwellings shall be permitted in the R-15, R-12, and R-6
Zones, provided that:
(1) The minimum number of dwelling units for a contiguous area to be
developed shall not be less than 25 units, based upon the density
allowed in the zone within which the development is proposed;
(2) The tract to be developed shall be adjacent to an existing
townhouse dwelling or patio home dwelling development; and
(3) The traffic impact for the immediate area as well as the increased
traffic volume being created by the proposed use shall be analyzed
in written form by a qualified traffic engineer and shall conclude
that the proposed use satisfies the following standards: [Added
1-24-2000 by Ord. No. 04-00]
(a) The additional traffic resulting from the proposed use will not
exceed a volume/capacity ratio of 0.8 on the adjacent streets;
(b) The additional traffic resulting from the proposed use will not
increase the peak volume by 10% or more; and
(c) The additional traffic resulting from the proposed use will not
reduce the level of service at significantly impacted
intersection to "F" or below.
T. Propane tanks. The retail sale of propane is permitted in the zones
indicated on the Schedule of Permitted Uses as a conditional use if the
applicant satisfies the following conditions: [Added 3-14-1994 by
Ord. No. 9-94]
(1) Propane tanks used in conjunction with the retail sale of propane
gas shall not be greater than 500 gallons.
(2) Propane tanks used in conjunction with the retail sale of propane
gas shall not be located any closer than 1,500 feet to a residential
zone line.
(3) Propane tanks shall be fenced and shall meet the requirements of
NFPA Section 58 as interpreted by the Fire Subcode Official and
the Fire Official of the appropriate district.
(4) No propane tank shall be located within the front yard of any lot
and shall be a minimum distance of 50 feet from any street right-ofway
line.
U. Museums. Museums shall be permitted in all residential zones,
provided they are in conjunction with a historic site duly recognized on
the County, State or Federal Registry of historical sites.163 [Added
163. Editor's Note: Original Sec. 7-2B2w, Microwave dishes and antennas, added 9-29-1994 by
Ord. No. 62-94 and amended 10-23-1995 by Ord. No. 61-95, which previously followed this
§ 250-41 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-41
10:674
3-14-1994 by Ord. No. 9-94; amended 10-23-1995 by Ord. No.
61-95]
V. Long-term storage of autos, boats, trailers etc., marine craft and
accessories sales. [Added 10-23-1995 by Ord. No. 61-95]
(1) Long-term storage of boats and boat trailers shall be permitted in
the C-M Zone only as an accessory use to a marina. Long-term
storage of autos shall not be permitted in the C-M Zone.
(2) No derelict, discarded or junked boats, no parts, scrap, partially
dismantled boats, boat motors, or trailers shall be stored out-ofdoors,
displayed or offered for sale in the C-M Zone.
(3) The traffic impact for the immediate area as well as the increased
traffic volume being created by the proposed use shall be analyzed
in written form by a qualified traffic engineer and shall conclude
that the proposed use satisfies the following standards: [Added
1-24-2000 by Ord. No. 04-00]
(a) The additional traffic resulting from the proposed use will not
exceed a volume/capacity ratio of 0.8 on the adjacent streets;
(b) The additional traffic resulting from the proposed use will not
increase the peak volume by 10% or more; and
(c) The additional traffic resulting from the proposed use will not
reduce the level of service at significantly impacted
intersection to "F" or below.
W. Variety stores, sporting goods, bicycles and toy sales, general retail
merchandise, drinking places, and drug proprietary stores. [Added
10-23-1995 by Ord. No. 61-95]
(1) Variety stores, sporting goods, bicycles and toy sales, sales of
general retail merchandise, drinking places, and drug and
proprietary stores are permitted in the C-M Zone as indicated in
the Schedule of Permitted Uses,164 provided that each individual
use does not exceed 6,000 square feet of gross floor area.
(2) The traffic impact for the immediate area as well as the increased
traffic volume being created by the proposed use shall be analyzed
in written form by a qualified traffic engineer and shall conclude
that the proposed use satisfies the following standards: [Added
1-24-2000 by Ord. No. 04-00]
(a) The additional traffic resulting from the proposed use will not
exceed a volume/capacity ratio of 0.8 on the adjacent streets;
subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Land Development Codification (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. IV).
164. Editor's Note: Appendix C, Schedule of Permitted Uses, is included at the end of this
chapter.
§ 250-41 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-41
10:675
(b) The additional traffic resulting from the proposed use will not
increase the peak volume by 10% or more; and
(c) The additional traffic resulting from the proposed use will not
reduce the level of service at significantly impacted
intersection to "F" or below.
X. Helistops. Helistops, as defined in the Licensing of Aeronautical and
Aerospace Facilities, NJDOT, shall be permitted as an accessory to an
office, industrial, commercial or hospital building in the O-G and SD
Zones, provided that: [Added 11-23-1998 by Ord. No. 84-98]
(1) The site acts strictly as a helistop with minimal or no support
facilities provided.
(2) The helistops may be located on a building or rooftop, providing it
is secured from public trespass, and providing the building is
certified by a structural engineer to be constructed to
accommodate the load. The building minimum height shall be at
least 40 feet.
(3) The site shall be duly approved and licensed by the appropriate
state and federal authorities.
(4) The helistops shall be located not less than 1,500 feet from another
helistop or heliport.
(5) The center of the helistop shall not be located less than 500 feet
measured horizontally from the nearest principal wall (excluding
chimneys, porches and other appurtenances) of any residence in
existence at the time of approval of the helistops.
Y. Mausoleums and columbaria shall be permitted in existing cemeteries,
provided they meet the following conditions: [Added 11-20-2006 by
Ord. No. 54-2006]
(1) Definitions. As used in this subsection, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
COLUMBARIUM — A building or structure containing niches for
placement of cremated human remains.
FAMILY MAUSOLEUM — A building or structure for the interment
of the dead having less than 20 interments.
MAUSOLEUM — A building or structure for the interment of the
dead having a minimum of 20 interments.
(2) Restrictions on numbers.
(a) There shall be only one mausoleum and one columbarium per
cemetery permitted.
(b) Family mausoleums shall be unlimited in number.
§ 250-41 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-41
10:676
(c) All mausoleums must be constructed in accordance with the
requirements of federal, state and local building codes,
including fire prevention and health codes.
(3) Height and location restrictions.
(a) Any mausoleum or columbarium shall not exceed an overall
height of 20 feet above ground level exclusive of any
ornamental spires, cupolas or the like which shall not exceed
10 feet in height.
(b) Any mausoleum or columbarium shall be built in conformity
with area and bulk restrictions as follows:
[1] Minimum front yard setback: 150 feet.
[2] Minimum side yard setback: 150 feet.
[3] Minimum rear yard setback: 150 feet.
(c) A landscape buffer of a minimum 25 feet in width shall be
provided along all property lines and shall include a
combination of the following: fences, walls, shrubbery, hedges
and trees. Where permitted, fences and walls as part of a
landscape buffer are to be no more than six feet in height.
(d) No mausoleum or columbarium shall be constructed without
written approval from the New Jersey Department of
Community Affairs of plans and specifications and without a
building permit from the Township Construction Official.
(4) Landscaping plan required. No building permit shall be issued by
the Building Subcode Official for any new building, structure or
addition nor shall a certificate of occupancy be issued unless the
applicant provides the parking area required by this chapter.
(5) Parking area requirement.
(a) No building permit shall be issued by the Building Subcode
Official for any new building, structure or addition nor shall a
certificate of occupancy be issued unless the applicant
provides the parking area required by this chapter.
(b) The Building Subcode Official may reduce the number of
parking spaces by 10% if, in his judgment, it will facilitate and
improve traffic safety and fire safety.
(6) Administration. The Building Subcode Official shall have exclusive
control over the administration of cemetery sites and issuance of
permits and certificates of occupancy required by this Subsection
Z.
§ 250-41 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-41
10:677
(7) Minimum design elements. The applicant must comply with the
required standard minimum design elements set forth in this
chapter.
Z. Billboards. Billboards are permitted in the corridors of State Routes 18
and 9 in the C-C Community Commercial, SD1 Special Development,
and O-G General Office Zones, provided that: [Added 11-22-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-32]
(1) No part of an advertising structure (billboard) shall be less than 10
feet nor more than 100 feet from the right-of-way line.
(2) The maximum area of the advertising surface shall be 1,000 square
feet on each side; the maximum height shall be 25 feet; and the
maximum length shall be 60 feet. All dimensions include border,
trim, cutouts, and extensions but exclude decorative bases and
supports.
(3) The overall height, including sign area and supports, shall not
exceed 45 feet from finished grade. For billboards which exceed the
building height permitted in the zone, the side and rear setbacks
shall be increased two feet for each foot above the building height
in conformance with § 250-51B(1).
(4) The billboard support shall not be located closer than 15 feet from
a parking lot, driveway, sidewalk, patio, pedestrian plaza,
pedestrian-way, bikeway and the like. Billboards shall not interfere
with or obscure driver sight distances.
(5) The location and design of an advertising structure shall comply
with N.J.S.A. 27:5-5 et seq. (P.L. 1991, c. 413) entitled "Roadside
Sign Control and Outdoor Advertising Act" and N.J.A.C. 16:41C-1.1
et seq. entitled "Chapter 41C, Roadside Sign Control and Outdoor
Advertising Act," and any other regulations adopted there under.
(6) Billboards shall not be located closer than 500 feet from a
residential zone line.
(7) Words used in the sign's message shall be of such size and brevity
as to be readable to the average driver at a minimum distance of
550 feet so its message can be read safely at highway speeds.
(8) Any billboard greater than 30 feet from the edge of the main travel
way of the highway shall be angled toward the driver's view.
(9) Billboards shall not be located closer than 2,000 feet from another
billboard to minimize highway sign clutter and allow time for driver
recognition with minimum distraction.
(10)No part of an advertising structure shall be located closer than 25
feet from any building. Billboards shall not be attached to, wrapped
around, painted, or projected on any building face or roof.
§ 250-41 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-41
10:678
Billboards shall be located so as not to obscure existing signs or
building facades.
(11) Billboards shall be expressly prohibited from the Town Centre
District.
(12) Billboards which flash, blink, move, simulate or create the illusion
of motion, or contain an animated display or full motion video shall
be prohibited.
(13) Billboards with digital, electronic, LED, or changeable copy, and
multiple message signs, shall be permitted, provided that the dwell
time for each message or message board is not less than 30
seconds. A message change shall be accomplished completely
within two seconds.
(14) The billboard advertising surface may be internally or externally
lighted from dusk until 11:00 p.m. Lighting fixtures shall be
directed so as not to cause glare on any street or building.
AA. Drive-through facilities related to banks or financial institutions,
pharmacy or fast-food restaurants are permitted in the EDO-1 and
EDO-3 Zone, provided that the following conditions are met: [Added
3-11-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-05]
(1) Lot size. A minimum lot size of 1.5 acres is required for any drivethrough
facility in an EDO-1 Zone. The minimum lot size
requirements for EDO-3 Zone shall apply to such uses.
(2) Other requirements.
(a) A separate delineated drive-through lane shall be provided.
(b) A drive-through window shall not be located along the front
facade.
(c) There shall be a minimum queuing space of six cars for any
facility with a drive-through.
(d) There shall be a bail-out lane for every such facility where cars
can safely leave the queue.
(e) No loudspeaker shall be permitted at such facilities.
(f) A canopy shall be provided over the drive-through window.
(g) Drive-through facility should operate only when the remainder
facility is open for business.
BB. Retail gasoline stations with mini mart or convenience store are
permitted in the EDO-1 and EDO-3 Zones, provided that the following
conditions are met: [Added 3-11-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-05]
§ 250-41 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-41
10:679
(1) Lot size. For gasoline stations with convenience store or
convenience store serving gasoline, a minimum lot size of three
acres is required. For gasoline stations with mini mart, a minimum
lot size of one acre is required.
(2) Yard requirements.
(a) Any building shall have a minimum rear yard setback of 25
from the property line.
(b) All filling pumps and structures shall be located at least 25 feet
from the street line and side and rear property lines, and at
least 50 feet from the boundary of a residential zone or existing
residential uses.
(c) The gas station canopy shall be located at a minimum setback
of 25 feet from street right-of-way line.
(3) Parking.
(a) With respect to gasoline stations having a mini mart and mini
mart serving gasoline, the parking requirements of Chapter
250, Attachment 6, Appendix F, Schedule of Required Parking
Spaces, Category: Office and Commercial; Use or Occupancy;
Retail and Services (5 or less stores) are to be met, except that
areas designated for automobile parking at gasoline islands
shall not be included in number of parking spaces provided.
(b) For purposes of determining the total number of parking
spaces provided, areas designated as garage bays or areas
where automobiles are parked on site awaiting repair or
having been repaired, shall not be included as part of the
calculation.
(4) Buffer. Buffer shall comply with individual zone requirements.
(5) Other requirements.
(a) All outdoor vending machines are prohibited.
(b) Accessory goods for sale may be displayed on the pump island
and the building island only.
(c) Gas pump islands are to serve both sides of an island
simultaneously.
CC. Retail convenience with fueling services is permitted in the EDO-1 and
EDO-3 Zone, Provided that the following conditions are met:
(1) Lot and building size. A minimum lot size of three acres is required.
The retail convenience store shall not exceed 5,500 square feet.
(2) Other requirements. All other requirements from § 250-41CC,
except for § 250-41CC(1) shall apply.
§ 250-41 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-41
10:680
DD. Banks and restaurants on pad sites with or without drive-through are
permitted in the EDO-3 Zone, provided that:
(1) Access. Banks and restaurants with or without drive-through are
permitted where the exclusive means of vehicular access to the
premises is through an interior mall, corridor or passageway
shared as the common shops, book and stationery stores, grocery
stores, department stores and similar uses.
(2) Area. The square footage for such a use shall not be included in the
maximum floor area calculations.
(3) Parking. The site shall meet any parking requirements for the
principal and pad site use. A shared parking analysis might enable
the Board to grant up to 20% reduction in the total parking
requirement.
(4) Drive-through requirements.
(a) A separate delineated drive-through lane shall be provided.
(b) There shall be a bail-out lane for every such facility where cars
can safely leave the queue.
(c) No loudspeaker shall be permitted at such facilities.
(d) A canopy shall be provided over the drive-through window.
(e) Drive-through facility should operate only when the remainder
facility is open for business.
EE. New car dealers, used car dealers and recreational vehicle dealers are
permitted in the EDO-3 Zone, provided that the following conditions are
met:
(1) Lot and building size. The minimum lot size shall be 4.5 acres for
such type of a use. The use shall be housed in a building having a
floor area of not less than 10,000 square feet.
(2) Height. No building shall exceed a height of 48 feet.
(3) Access. The property should have direct access from State Route 9
and Highway 18.
(4) Yards. Minimum yards shall be as follows:
(a) Front: 75 feet along State Highway Route 9 and 18:50 feet
along any other street.
(b) Rear: 100 feet.
(c) Side: 50 feet.
(d) Corner lot: front yard required on each street shall apply.
§ 250-41 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-41
10:681
(5) Parking. Front yard parking is permitted, provided there is a front
yard parking setback of 25 feet from the street right-of-way.
Landscaping and/or other site treatment shall be provided along
the front of the display/parking area in order to minimize the visual
impact from Route 9 and Highway 18 without completely
concealing the displayed vehicles.
(6) Buffer.
(a) There shall be a twenty-five-foot-wide landscape buffer along
the street right-of-way. No vehicles shall be displayed within
the required landscape buffer area.
(b) Where a lot abuts a residential zone or use, there shall be a
fifty-foot-wide landscape buffer.
(7) Signage. All signs shall comply with all sections of Chapter 250.
FF. Educational services are permitted in the EDO-3 Zone, provided that
the following conditions are met: junior colleges, colleges, universities
and professional schools, business schools and computer and
management training, technical and trade schools, other schools and
instruction, and educational support services, provided that:
(1) Lot size. Educational services with a total floor area of 10,001 to
45,700 square feet shall have a minimum lot size of three acres.
Any such uses with a total floor area of more than 45,700 square
feet shall have a minimum lot size of five acres.
(2) Buffer. Where a lot abuts a residential zone or use, there shall be a
fifty-foot-wide landscape buffer.
GG. Accommodations and food services: hotels (except casino hotels)
lodging facilities and motels are permitted in the EDO-3 Zone, provided
that the following conditions are met:
(1) Lot size. Minimum lot size of three acres.
(2) Height. Maximum building height of five stories and 65 feet.
(3) Yards. Minimum yards shall be as follows:
(a) Front: 75 feet along State Highway Route 9 and 18; 50 feet
along any other street.
(b) Rear: 100 feet.
(c) Side: 50 feet.
(d) Corner lot: front yard required on each street shall apply.
(4) Buffer. Where a lot abuts a residential zone or use, there shall be a
fifty-foot-wide landscape buffer.
§ 250-41 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-41
10:682
(5) Parking. Front yard parking is permitted, provided there is a front
yard parking setback of 25 feet from the street right-of-way.
Appropriate landscaping shall be provided along the front in order
to minimize the visual impacts of a parking area from Route 9 and
Highway 18.
HH. Automotive repair and maintenance is permitted in the EDO-1 and
EDO-3 Zone, provided that the following conditions are met:
(1) Lot size. The minimum lot size shall be consistent with the zone in
which the parcel lies.
(2) Location. Any automotive repair and maintenance use in the EDO-1
Zone shall not be located within 1,000 feet of another such use.
(3) Parking. For purposes of determining the total number of parking
spaces provided, areas designated as garage bays or areas where
automobiles are parked on site awaiting repair or having been
repaired shall not be included as part of the calculation.
(4) Yards. All structures shall be located at least 25 feet from the street
line and side and rear property lines, and at least 50 feet from the
boundary of a residential zone or existing residential uses.
(5) Buffer. Buffer shall comply with individual zone requirements.
(6) Fence. Fences shall not be erected or enlarged provided:
(a) There shall be no outdoor display, storage or sale of autos, any
products, equipment and materials within the front yard unless
such areas are screened by landscaping and a six-foot-high
fence. Such uses shall not be permitted within the required
front yard.
(b) The proposed placement is not within 25 feet of the
intersection of streets or roadway right-of-way lines.
(c) Is in such a manner so as to interfere with traffic visibility and
lines of sight across a street corner or site easement.
(7) Other requirements.
(a) No vehicle shall be permitted to be standing or parked on the
premises other than those used by the employees in the
indirect or direct operation of the establishment and
customers' vehicles awaiting repair;
(b) Any repair of motor vehicles shall be performed in a fully
enclosed building. No parts or partially dismantled motor
vehicles may be stored out-of-doors:
(c) The exterior display of new or used tires shall be restricted to
single tires displayed on the pump and building islands only
and shall be prohibited from the vehicular circulation area.
§ 250-41 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-41
10:683
§ 250-42. Prohibited uses. [Amended 3-11-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-05]
II. Religious organizations, grant-making and giving services, social
advocacy organizations, civic and social organizations and business,
professional, labor, political and similar organizations are permitted in
the EDO-1 and EDO-3 Zone, provided that:
(1) A minimum lot size of two acres is provided; and
(2) All conditions set forth in the Land Development Ordinance,
§ 250-41N are met.
A. The uses which are enumerated in this section are prohibited
throughout the Township. This proscription may not be altered,
modified or varied, except through amendment of this chapter. No
deviation may be authorized pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d or
§ 250-9G(5) of this chapter.
B. The following uses are prohibited in all zones:
(1) Refineries.
(2) Heavy industrial uses;
(3) Slaughterhouses and solid or liquid waste processing, storage or
disposal;
(4) No accessory building shall be used for residential purposes by any
person or persons, including members of the family of the
occupants of the principal building; except by domestic servants or
others employed on the premises by the occupant of the principal
building.
(5) Individual rooftop antennas on multifamily dwellings are
specifically prohibited. Multifamily dwellings shall be served by a
master antenna system, individual attic antennas, or cable system.
(6) Developments composed of multifamily dwellings served by rural
postal service shall have clustered roadside mailboxes as part of
appropriate street furniture. Individual freestanding mailboxes are
specifically prohibited.
(7) Businesses selling, distributing, cultivating, growing and/or
facilitating the sale and/or use of either recreational and/or
medicinal marijuana, including any ancillary or related
paraphernalia.
(8) Adult entertainment:
(9) Group quarters; room board houses.
(10) Mobile home parks or other trailer courts.
§ 250-41 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-42
10:684
§ 250-43. Performance standards.
All uses shall maintain a continuing conformance with the following safety
and environmental performance standards. Regardless of any other
provisions of this chapter, deviations from these standards shall establish
the otherwise permitted use to which they relate as not permitted.
Violations of these standards shall constitute a change in the use of the
property and shall be abated in order for legal occupancy of the premises
to continue. All uses must hold and comply with all applicable state and/or
federal licenses and permits.
(11) Transportation services and arrangements, limousine depots, taxi
services and similar uses.
(12) Flea markets.
(13) Second hand auto parts:
(14) Junkyards.
(15) Escort services.
(16) Tattooing and body piercing.
(17) Massage parlors.
(18) Auction services.
A. Noise standards.165
(1) The definitions contained in the Noise Control Regulations of the
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (N.J.A.C.
7:29-1.1 et seq.) are hereby incorporated by reference without
being set forth in full with regard to this section.
(2) No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit, nor shall any
application for development be approved which produces sound in
excess of the standards listed below when measured at any location
outside of the lot on which the use or source of sound is located:
(a) Continuous airborne sound which has a sound level in excess of
50 dBA.
(b) Continuous airborne sound which has an octave band soundpressure
level in decibels which exceeds the values listed
below in one or more octave bands:
165. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 300, Noise.
§ 250-42 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-43
10:685
Octave Band Center
Frequency
(Hz)
Octave Band Sound-Pressure
Level
(Db)
31.5 86
63 71
125 61
250 53
500 48
1,000 45
2,000 42
4,000 40
8,000 38
(c) Impulsive sound in air which has an impulsive sound level in
excess of 80 decibels.
(3) The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
(a) Agricultural uses;
(b) Bells, chimes or carillons while being used in conjunction with
religious services;
(c) Commercial motor vehicle operations;
(d) Emergency energy release devices;
(e) Emergency work to provide electricity, water, or other public
utilities when necessitated by public health or safety concerns;
(f) National Warning System (NAWAS) signals or devices used to
warn the community of attack or imminent public danger such
as flooding or explosion;
(g) Noise of aircraft flight operations;
(h) Public celebrations;
(i) Public roadways;
(j) Stationary emergency signaling devices;
(k) The unamplified human voice; and
(l) Use of explosive devices, regulated by the NJ Department of
Labor and Industry under the 1960 Explosive Act (N.J.S.A.
21:1A-1-27).
§ 250-43 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-43
10:686
B. Air pollution.166 No substance shall be emitted into the atmosphere in
quantities, which are injurious to human, plant or animal life or to
property, or which will interfere unreasonably with the comfortable
enjoyment of life and property anywhere in the Township. All provisions
of the New Jersey Air Pollution Control Code, as amended and as
augmented, and all of the following provisions stated, whichever shall
be more stringent, shall be complied with:
(1) Smoke. In any zone, no smoke, the shade or appearance of which is
darker than No. 1 on the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, shall be
emitted into the open air from any incinerator or fuel-burning
equipment; provided, however, that smoke emitted during the
cleaning of a fire box or the building of a new fire, the shade or
appearance of which is no darker than No. 2 on the Ringelmann
Smoke Chart, may be permitted for a period or periods aggregating
no more than three minutes in any 30 consecutive minutes.
(2) Solid particles.
(a) In any residential zone, no discharge of solid particles through
a stack, duct or vent shall be permitted that is greater than
50% of the allowable emission in pounds per hour established
by Chapters 7 and 8 of the New Jersey Air Pollution Control
Code.
(b) In any other zone, except industrial zones, the allowable
discharge shall be 75% of the allowable emission permitted by
the New Jersey Air Pollution Control Code.
(c) In the industrial zone, the allowable discharge shall be the
allowable emission permitted by the New Jersey Air Pollution
Control Code.
(d) No open burning shall be permitted in any zone.
(e) All incinerators shall be approved by the DEP.
(f) Any road, parking area, driveway, truck loading or unloading
station, or any other exterior area having a substantial
movement of vehicles or equipment shall be paved or
otherwise stabilized during construction sufficient to prevent
the generation of dust from the movement of such vehicles or
equipment.
(3) Odors. In all zones, no odorous material may be admitted into the
atmosphere in quantities sufficient to be detected without
instruments. Any process which may involve the creation or
emission of any odors shall be provided with a secondary safeguard
system, so that control will be maintained. Table 1 (Odor
Thresholds in Air) in Part 1 (Odor Thresholds for 53 Commercial
166. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 21, Air Pollution.
§ 250-43 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-43
10:687
Chemicals) of "Research on Chemical Odors," copyrighted October
1968, by the Manufacturing Chemists Association, Inc.,
Washington, D.C., shall be used as a guide in determining
quantities of offensive odors.
C. Liquid waste. No liquid waste shall be discharged into any watercourse,
storm drain or sewage collection and disposal system, nor into any
ground sump, any well or percolation area, except in accordance with
plans approved by the Municipal Engineer, and where required by the
DEP.
D. Solid waste.167 All uses in the municipality shall:
(1) Assume full responsibility for adequate and regular collection and
removal of all refuse, except in cases where the municipality
assumes the responsibility.
(2) Comply with all applicable provisions of the New Jersey Air
Pollution Control Code.
(3) Comply with all provisions of the New Jersey Sanitary Code,
Chapter 8, "Refuse Disposal," Public Health Council of the DEP.
(4) Permit no accumulation on the property of any solid waste, junk, or
other objectionable materials.
(5) Not engage in any sanitary landfill operation on the property,
except as may be permitted by other municipal codes and
ordinances.
E. Radiation. All use of materials, equipment or facilities, which are or
may be sources of radiation, shall comply with all controls, standards
and requirements of the US Atomic Energy Act of 1965, as amended,
and any codes, rules or regulations promulgated under such Act, as well
as the NJ Radiation Protection Law, N.J.S.A. 26:2D-1 et seq., as
amended, whichever is more stringent.
F. Fire and explosion hazards. All activities shall be carried on only in
buildings classified as fireproof by the building code of the Township
and as determined by the Fire District in which the property is located.
The operation shall be conducted in such a manner and with such
precautions against fire and explosion hazards as to produce no
explosion hazard as determined by the New Jersey Inspection Bureau of
Fire Prevention to a use on an adjacent property and must conform to
the rules and regulations of the most recently adopted edition of the
Fire Prevention Code of the National Board of Fire Underwriters and
the Fire Department.
G. Vibration. There shall be no vibration which shall be discernible to the
human sense of feeling beyond the boundaries of the lot on which the
167. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 429, Solid Waste.
§ 250-43 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-43
10:688
source is located. At no point on or beyond the boundary of any lot
shall the maximum ground transmitted steady state or impact vibration
caused by any use or activity (except those not directly under the
control of the property user) exceed a particle velocity of 0.10 inch per
second for impact vibrations. Particle velocity is to be determined by
the formula 6.28F(A), where F is the frequency of the vibration in cycles
per second and A is the maximum single amplitude displacement of the
vibration in inches. For the purpose of measuring vibrations, a threecomponent
measuring system shall be used. For the purpose of this
chapter, "steady state vibrations" are vibrations which are continuous,
or vibrations in discrete impulses more frequent than 100 per minute.
Discrete impulses which do not exceed 100 per minute shall be
considered impact vibrations.
H. Electromagnetic interference. There shall be no electromagnetic
interference that:
(1) Adversely affects, at any point, the operation of any equipment
other than that belonging to the creator of such interference; or
(2) Is not in conformance with the regulations of the Federal
Communications Commission.
I. Heat. Every use and activity shall be operated so that it does not raise
the ambient temperature more than 2° C. at or beyond the boundary of
any lot line.
J. Lighting and illumination.
(1) The illumination provided by artificial lighting on the property shall
not exceed 0.5 footcandle beyond any property line as measured on
the ground.
(2) Spotlights or other types of artificial lighting, that provide a
concentrated beam of light, shall be so directed that the beam of
light does not extend beyond any property lines.
(3) Spotlights or other types of artificial lighting used to illuminate
signs or building faces shall not emit beams of light that extend
beyond the vertical plane of the sign or building face that they
illuminate and shall not be located in such a manner as to cause the
beams of light to be reflected upon any adjoining property, public
street or vehicular circulation area.
(4) There shall be no direct or sky-reflected glare exceeding 1/2 of a
footcandle measured at the boundaries of the lot on which the
source is located. This regulation shall not apply to lights which are
used solely for the illumination of entrances or exits or driveways
leading to a parking lot.
§ 250-43 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-43
10:689
K. Outdoor storage and display. The following regulations shall apply to
the storage or display of materials when not within an enclosed
building:
(1) Solid wastes and recyclables from single- and two-family homes, if
stored outdoors, shall be placed in metal or plastic receptacles with
tight-fitting covers. Such receptacles shall not be stored or placed
within any front yard area prior to the time at which materials are
permitted to be placed at the curblines for collection. Such
receptacles may be stored in either rear or side yard areas, but if
stored within a side yard area, they shall be screened from view of
adjoining properties and street areas with planting or fencing.
(2) No nonresidential use shall store materials of any kind outdoors in
any district, except in connection with the construction of a
structure to be erected on the premises unless specifically
permitted elsewhere in this chapter.
(3) Outdoor storage or display of goods shall be restricted as follows:
(a) The permanent outdoor display of goods shall be limited to
display areas delineated on an approved site plan and shall be
limited to one sample good produced on premises and to sales
of motor vehicles, recreational vehicles or boats.
(b) Temporary sales and outdoor display of goods may be
permitted not more than 10 days each year, provided that:
[1] All sidewalk areas shall remain unobstructed for not less
than four feet of their width;
[2] All goods shall be placed at least five feet from any
driveway or street; and
[3] All driveways within 60 feet of any street or leading to any
fire zone shall remain unobstructed.
(c) Coin-operated vending machines shall be located within two
feet of a building.
(4) Temp[1o]rary sales of Christmas trees may be permitted beginning
the day after Thanksgiving in November through the month of
December as an accessory to commercially zoned uses and as an
on-site accessory to charitable service uses. Adequate off-street
stopping space or maneuvering space for vehicles of customers
shall be provided, and the temporary sales shall not interfere with
other uses on the site. One freestanding sign, not larger than 12
square feet in area and not exceeding eight feet in height, may be
erected at least 10 feet from any property line. Such signs shall be
removed not later than December 31.168
168. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 394, Sales, Holiday; Christmas Tree Sales.
§ 250-43 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-43
10:690
(5) Areas for the outdoor storage of vehicles other than passenger
automobiles and motorcycles may be established in residential
zones as follows:
(a) Said storage areas may be established as follows:
[1] Common storage facilities may be established for the use
of neighborhood residents as a principal use within any
zone;
[2] Individual storage areas may be established in side and
rear yards in all residential zones; and
[3] Individual storage areas may be established in a front yard
in R-5 residential zones where access to the side or rear
yard is obstructed by a building.
(b) Said storage in residential zones shall be limited as follows:
[1] Items shall be limited to not more than one recreational
vehicle, motor home, travel trailer, or camper, one small
boat and one commercial vehicle with not more than two
axles and not more than 5,000 pounds gross vehicle
weight for each household;
[2] Items shall be limited to a length not exceeding 28 feet, a
roofline height not exceeding 10 feet, and a width not
exceeding nine feet;
[3] Vehicles shall not be occupied and shall not be provided
with site utilities.
L. Off-street parking. All off-street parking shall be limited to designated
off-street parking spaces.
M. Historic sites and structures. The exterior design, arrangement and
materials used in connection with the use, development, or repair of an
historic site or structure shall be compatible with the design,
arrangement, materials and other historical, architectural, and
aesthetic factors giving rise to the site or structure's historical
significance, including without limitation the description of the details
of design for the period of architecture involved in the historic site or
structure and its surrounding neighborhood.
(1) Only exterior features of the historic structure or development on
historic sites shall be considered and not interior layout or
arrangements.
(2) Demolition of historic structures and structures built before 1900 is
prohibited, unless due to the condition of the structure or the
unavailability of an alternative and suitable site it is impractical to
move the structure to another site. The owner of the site shall use
its best efforts to locate an alternative and suitable site within the
§ 250-43 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-43
10:691
§ 250-44. Land use intensity.
The intensity of individual land uses shall be limited in the manner set
forth herein and shall constitute an aspect of the use itself, the deviation
from which shall require the granting of a variance pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d and § 250-9G(5) of this chapter.
Township to relocate the structure, including without limitation
investigating the availability of public open space and public use
lands and lands owned, leased or otherwise controlled by local
historical societies and civic groups.
N. Each residential development of 25 or more dwelling units shall have
two or more points of access. Nothing in this section shall preclude the
approving board from requiring a second point of access in
developments containing less than 25 residential units if the Township
Engineer determines that a second point of access is required in the
interest of health, safety and welfare of the public. [Added 4-23-2001
by Ord. No. 17-01; amended 12-17-2001 by Ord. No. 51-01]
A. Residential density. Residential land use intensity shall be limited
through compliance with standards regulating lot area, density, and
floor area.
(1) Minimum lot area.
(a) Except with respect to a lot or lots for detached single- or twofamily
dwellings which lot or lots are either an isolated
undersized lot or lots resulting from a minor subdivision, each
residential lot shall have the minimum area specified on the
Schedule of Development Intensity Limitations set forth in
Appendix D.169
(b) Regardless of the densities set forth in the Schedule of
Development Intensity Limitations, no residential lot shall be
created with a lot area of less than 80,000 square feet unless
public sewer and water are available. No residential lot smaller
than 80,000 square feet shall be developed, excepted where
public water and sewer are provided.
(c) The minimum lot area for duplexes (two-family) shall be
increased to 15,000 square feet and its minimum frontage to
150 feet in the R-7 Zone.
(2) Residential floor area.
(a) Residential development on any lot shall not exceed the
maximum floor area ratio specified on the Schedule of
Development Intensity Limitations set forth in Appendix D.
169. Editor's Note: Appendix D, Schedule of Development Intensity Limitations, is included at
the end of this chapter.
§ 250-43 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-44
10:692
(b) Every residential dwelling unit must contain at least the
number of square feet listed in the schedule set forth below on
the line entitled "Minimum Total Floor Area" for the particular
type of dwelling unit as indicated by the number of bedrooms.
Square footage is to be measured by interior dimensions of
usable rooms. Figures for room sizes are inclusive of closets.
Minimum Room Sizes
(square feet)
Type of Room
Type of Dwelling Unit
(by number of bedrooms)
0 1 2 3 4 5
Master bedroom 150 150 150 150 150
Bedroom 2 130 130 130 130
Bedroom 3 130 130 130
Bedroom 4 120 130
Bedroom 5 120
Living room 285 210 245 270 290 310
Kitchen 70 70 70 75 85
Bath, full 35 40 40 40 40 40
Bath, half 25
Bath, full 35 35
Utility storage 8 10 12 14 16 18
Minimum total
floor area 328 480 647 829 986 1,148
[1] Dining rooms or dining areas may be included in the
required living room space.
[2] Required utility storage space need not be within the
dwelling unit, provided it is within the same structure as
the dwelling unit.
[3] The presence of a number on the line of a particular type
of room indicates that a room of that type must be included
in that type of dwelling unit.
(c) The area of any room may be as much as 15% smaller than the
figure shown for that room, provided the aggregate area
requirement for the total number of rooms is complied with.
[1] Access to any bedroom shall not be through any other
bedroom.
§ 250-44 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-44
10:693
§ 250-45. General zone bulk requirements.
The purpose of these provisions is to establish the minimum development
requirements and restrictions within the Township's zoning districts.
Deviation from the standards of this section will only be permitted when a
variance is granted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c and § 250-9G(3) and (4)
of this chapter.
§ 250-46. Dimensional requirements.
Any building altered or constructed after the effective date of this chapter
shall comply with the minimum lot size [with respect to those lots not
otherwise subject to the provisions of § 250-44A(1)(a)], minimum yard
dimensions, maximum lot coverage, maximum height, minimum landscape
area ratio, and minimum gross floor area requirements and all other
requirements as enumerated on the Schedule of Area, Height and Yard
Requirements set forth in Appendix E.170
§ 250-47. Building spacing between residential structures of similar
types.
Except when more stringent standards are otherwise required by this
chapter, the minimum spacing between residential structures of similar
types, including without limitation townhouse dwellings, three-family
dwellings and multilevel dwellings, shall be as follows:
[2] The minimum room sizes set forth in the above schedule
do not apply to those units proposed for construction as
affordable housing as provided in this chapter. The
approving board may approve smaller minimum room
sizes as deemed appropriate for the particular type
housing units being proposed.
(3) Maximum number of dwellings. Residential development shall
conform to the maximum number of dwellings per gross acre
contained in the Schedule of Development Intensity Limitations set
forth in Appendix D.
B. Nonresidential floor area ratios. Nonresidential development on any lot
shall not exceed the maximum floor area ratio specified on the Schedule
of Development Intensity Limitations set forth in Appendix D.
A. End wall to end wall: 1/2 the height of highest wall (minimum 15 feet).
B. Any building face to street curb: height of highest wall (minimum 20
feet).
C. Any building face without garages or driveways to parking area: 1/2
height of highest wall (minimum 12 feet).
170. Editor's Note: Appendix E, Schedule of Area, Height and Yard Requirements, is included at
the end of this chapter.
§ 250-44 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-47
10:694
§ 250-48. Residential building facades.
§ 250-49. Application of yard regulations.
D. Any building face with garages or driveways: height of highest wall
(minimum 20 feet).
E. End wall to window wall: 1 1/2 height of highest wall (minimum 30
feet).
F. Window wall to window wall: three times height of highest wall
(minimum 75 feet).
A. Separate exterior front entrances shall be provided to townhouse
dwellings, duplexes, three-family dwellings and multilevel dwellings,
except in the case of three-story multilevel dwellings, which may have
interior access.
B. Buildings shall be designed to avoid long straight, unbroken lines. No
principal building when viewed from any elevation shall be greater than
175 feet in length. Buildings shall have no more than two dwelling units
in a line without setbacks or breaks in building elevations of at least six
feet. Attached single-family dwelling units and townhouses shall have
not less than four and no more than eight dwelling units in a continuous
building. No exterior wall segment shall exceed a length of 50 feet, and
adjacent wall segments shall be offset by either four feet or 45°.
C. Courtyards bounded on three or more sides by wings of the same
building shall have a minimum court width of two feet for each one foot
in height of the tallest building or building wing.
D. Garages and/or carports, when not attached to a principal building,
shall be located no closer than 25 feet to a facing wall of a building
containing windows, nor closer than 15 feet to a facing wall of a
principal building which does not contain windows.
A. Every part of a required minimum yard shall be open and unobstructed
from its lowest level to the sky, except for the ordinary projections
allowed by the State Uniform Construction Code, including, but not
limited to, sills, chimneys, flues, buttresses, ornamental features, and
eaves; provided, however, that none of the aforesaid projections shall
project into the minimum required yards more than 24 inches, unless
otherwise permitted by this chapter.
B. No yard or other open space provided for one building shall be
considered as providing a yard or open space for any other building.
C. For single-family detached dwellings, the front yard setbacks may be
reduced to the average setback of existing dwellings on the subject
block, provided that in no case shall the principal building setback be
less than 20 feet. [Amended 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-03]
§ 250-47 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-49
10:695
§ 250-50. Accessory buildings.
D. Where a portion of an existing single-family residence is in violation of
any setback or yard requirement by 7 1/2 feet or less, the remaining
portion of the residence may be extended up to the existing building
line.
E. Chimneys are specifically permitted to encroach into the minimum yard
setback by not more than two feet in depth or side and total side yard
requirements may be reduced in equal proportion to the reduction of
the required lot width for the zone in which it is located, provided that
the minimum of one side yard shall be no less than seven feet and the
combined side yards no less than 21 feet.
F. Aboveground and in-ground pools on single-family lots are specifically
permitted to encroach into the minimum required rear yard or side yard
accessory structure setback area, provided that a minimum distance of
six feet is provided between the pool wall and the affected property line.
[Added 4-11-2005 by Ord. No. 08-2005; amended 3-15-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-03]
A. An accessory building attached to the principal building shall comply in
all respects with the yard requirements of the principal building.
Detached accessory buildings shall be located to the rear of the front
building line of the principal building, and if located in a side yard area,
shall conform to the side yard requirements that would otherwise apply
to the principal building.
B. No accessory building or structure in conjunction with a residential
dwelling shall exceed 600 square feet in gross floor area. [Amended
7-24-2000 by Ord. No. 28-00]
C. For all accessory buildings 150 square feet, or less, in gross floor area,
except those buildings intended to house animals, the side yard and
rear yard requirements may be reduced to three feet.
D. No detached accessory building, in any residential zone, shall be less
than three feet from the principal building.
E. Wood decks shall be deemed to be an accessory structure in
conjunction with a residential unit whether attached or detached from
the house itself. The minimum side and rear yard setback for a wooden
deck in the R-5, R-6, R-7 and R-9 Zones shall be seven feet, providing
the height of the deck does not exceed two feet. For wood decks higher
than two feet, the side and rear yards shall be increased two feet for
each additional vertical foot or fractional part of a vertical foot above
the initial two-foot provisional height. For the purpose of this section,
the height of the deck shall be deemed to be the vertical distance
measured from the average elevation of the proposed finished grade
along the perimeter of the deck to the elevation of the floor of the deck.
Wood decks in the R-12, R-15, R-20, R-30, R-40, R-80 and R-120 Zones
§ 250-49 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-50
10:696
§ 250-51. Building height limitations. [Amended 10-25-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-31]
shall conform to the side and rear year requirements set forth for
accessory buildings. For the purpose of this section, wood platforms
which are less than or equal to one foot in height shall be considered to
be raised patios rather than decks, and shall be subject to all necessary
building permits, but not to the accessory yard requirements of wood
decks. [Added 7-24-2000 by Ord. No. 28-00]
A. No structure shall extend higher than the limit provided in each zone
created hereunder for building height.
B. No building or structure shall exceed the height set forth in Appendix
E,171 provided that the height limitations may be exceeded if:
(1) The front, rear and side yards are increased two feet for each foot
by which the building exceeds the height limitation for the zone;
and
(2) In no case shall any building exceed 125% of the footage limitation
otherwise applicable in the zone.
C. In all districts except the O-G Zone, television and radio antennas may
extend above the height limit by not more than 25 feet.
D. Chimneys, ventilators, skylights, water tanks, bulkheads, belfries,
cupolas, elevator penthouses, and similar features and necessary
mechanical appurtenances usually carried above the roof level may
exceed the height limitation by not more than 15 feet. Elevator
penthouses, water tanks, mechanical appurtenances and similar
features shall be fully screened or otherwise hidden from view from any
street, property line, or public area.
E. A parapet wall or cornice for ornament may extend above the height
limit by not more than five feet.
F. Public and quasi-public buildings, schools and houses of worship may
exceed the height limitations; provided that the front, rear, and side
yards shall be increased two feet for each foot by which such building
exceeds the height limitation for the zone, and further provided that in
no case shall any building, including church spires, belfries, cupolas,
penthouses, domes and the like, have a height which exceeds 50 feet.
G. No accessory building or structure, except residences or schools
accessory to a house of worship, shall exceed a height of 15 feet or be
taller than one story.
171. Editor's Note: Appendix E, Schedule of Area, Height and Yard Requirements, is included at
the end of this chapter.
§ 250-50 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-52
10:697
§ 250-52. Signs.
In all zoning districts, signs may be erected, altered, maintained, used and
removed only when in compliance with the provisions of this section.
A. Permitted signs in all zones. In all zoning districts the following signs
are permitted:
(1) Signs advertising produce or nursery products on roadside stands
in accordance with the special regulations hereinbelow set forth.
(2) Two freestanding signs or bulletin boards identifying churches,
clubs, lodges, hospitals, schools, libraries, museums, parks and
playgrounds and public utility installations on each public street
abutting same. Such signs shall not exceed 20 square feet in area
and six feet in height.
(3) One freestanding sign on each public street adjoining a permitted
golf course which advertises same.
(4) Temporary project signs.
(a) Temporary project signs not exceeding 15 feet in height or
width or 150 square feet in area, including border, trim,
cutouts, and extensions, but excluding supports. Signs may be
double-faced, back-to-back or V-type, and may be illuminated.
Not more than one sign will be allowed on any one street
frontage.
(b) Temporary project signs may be erected after final approval
has been granted by the approving board and shall be removed
within seven days after the final certificate of use and
occupancy has been issued.
B. Permitted signs in residential and apartment zones. The following signs
are authorized in conjunction with permitted and prior nonconforming
residential and apartment uses:
(1) Personal signs which are exempt from the requirements of
obtaining a sign permit under Article XI.
(2) Signs for a permitted home occupation, home business or home
professional office.
(3) All multifamily conditions which meet the requirements
hereinbelow set forth.
C. Permitted signs in office districts. The following signs are authorized in
conjunction with permitted and prior nonconforming office uses:
[Amended 6-14-2004 by Ord. No. 14-04]
(1) One facia sign placed or inscribed upon the front wall of a building
containing only the name of the building and/or the type of use
therein and the street address and not other advertising material.
§ 250-52 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-52
10:698
Such sign shall not exceed an area equal to 10% of the facade of
the building.
(2) Office buildings with a maximum of three occupants may have one
freestanding sign not to exceed the height of the principal building
in the complex or 18 feet, whichever is the lesser, and not to exceed
50 square feet in area and subject to the following criteria:
(a) Each occupant may be permitted a maximum of 10 square feet
of sign space.
(b) The masthead portion of the sign shall not exceed 20 square
feet.
(c) Company logotypes must fit within the allowed square footage
of sign space.
(3) Office buildings with a single occupant may use the signage
permitted.
(4) Office buildings with more than three up to a maximum of 10
occupants may have one freestanding sign not to exceed the height
of the principal building in the complex or 20 feet, whichever is the
lesser, and not to exceed 120 square feet in area and subject to the
following criteria:
(a) Each occupant shall have not less than 10 square feet nor more
than 15 square feet of sign space.
(b) The masthead portion of the sign shall not exceed 20 square
feet.
(c) Company logotypes must fit within the allowed square footage
of sign space.
(d) Masthead portion of sign may include time and temperature
displays.
(e) Masthead portion of sign may include the name of the building
and street address.
(5) If the building is located on a corner lot a second freestanding sign,
indirectly illuminated, may be erected, provided that the area of
the second sign does not exceed 1/2 of the area and 1/2 of the
height of the primary sign erected on the major street.
(6) At each entrance to the building, one directory sign attached to the
building and listing the occupants therein. Such sign shall not
exceed eight square feet in area.
D. Permitted signs in commercial zoning districts. The following signs are
authorized in conjunction with permitted and prior nonconforming
commercial uses:
§ 250-52 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-52
10:699
(1) One facia sign, which may be internally illuminated, placed or
inscribed upon the front wall of a building or on each storefront in
the case of a shopping center, containing only the name of the store
and/or the type of use therein and not other advertising material.
Such sign shall not exceed an area equal to 15% of the facade of the
storefront, except for end stores or corner stores, which may have
an additional facade sign on the end elevation which shall not
exceed an area equal to 15% of the secondary store front. All such
signs must be of the same area and dimension for similar stores,
but the content or color may vary. Such sign may incorporate a time
and temperature display. [Amended 10-25-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-28]
(2) Three or more stores: one freestanding sign, which may be
internally illuminated and which may state the name of the
shopping center or commercial activity, the street address,
occupants and not other advertising material. Such sign shall not
exceed a total area of 10 square feet for each store in the complex
or 125 square feet, whichever is less. However, if the building or
complex is located on a corner lot, a second freestanding sign,
which may be illuminated, may be erected, provided that the area
of the second sign does not exceed 1/2 of the area and 1/2 of the
height of the primary sign erected on the major street. Such sign
may incorporate a time and temperature display. [Amended
10-25-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-28]
(3) Two stores or less: one freestanding sign, which may be internally
illuminated, and which may state the name of the shopping center
and/or commercial activity, the street address, the name and
primary business of each of the occupants and no other advertising
material. Such sign shall not exceed 40 square feet, and shall not
exceed the height of the principal building in the complex or 18
feet, whichever is less. However, if the building or complex is
located on a corner lot, a second freestanding sign, which may be
illuminated, may be erected, provided that the area of the second
sign does not exceed 1/2 of the height of the primary sign erected
on the major street. Such sign may incorporate a time and
temperature display.
(4) One canopy sign. In the case of a shopping center, wherein
walkways are roofed over with a permanently installed rigid canopy
or other structural device, a sign may be hung vertically from the
underside of said canopy for each storefront in the center. Such
sign shall not be less than eight feet above the walkway and may
not exceed eight square feet.
(5) One sign in the valance of an awning containing only the name of
the store and no other advertising material. The area of such sign
shall not exceed eight square feet.
§ 250-52 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-52
10:700
(6) One freestanding directory sign for every 10,000 square feet of
gross floor area, which may state the name of the occupants of the
building or complex and other advertising material at the
discretion of the approving board. Such signs shall not exceed four
square feet in area and six feet in height.
(7) Freestanding signs within the parking areas to identify particular
areas or sections of said parking lot, provided that not more than
one such sign shall be permitted for each parking area and further
provided that such signs shall not exceed three square feet in area
on any one side nor exceed a height of 20 feet. In addition,
freestanding signs may be erected at each end of a parking aisle for
identification purposes, provided that such signs shall not exceed
one square foot in area nor exceed a height of four feet.
(8) A projecting wall sign which shall be no more than four square feet
and at least eight feet off the sidewalk with a maximum projection
of three feet. [Amended 10-25-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-28]
E. Permitted signs in industrial zoning districts. The following signs are
authorized in conjunction with permitted or prior nonconforming
industrial uses:
(1) One facia sign placed or inscribed upon the front wall of the
building containing only the name of the company or division and
the type of product manufactured or produced and not other
advertising material. Such sign shall not exceed an area equal to
5% of the facade of the building.
(2) One freestanding sign, which may state the name of the company
or division and the type of product manufactured or produced, the
street address and no other advertising material. Such sign shall
not exceed an area equal to 5% of the facade of the building.
(3) One freestanding sign, which may state the name of the company
or division and the type of product manufactured or produced, the
street address and no other advertising material. Such sign shall
not exceed an area of 24 square feet, and the height shall not
exceed 1/2 of the building height measured at its highest point on
the frontage street of the property.
F. Special regulations. The following types of signs shall meet the criteria
set forth below:
(1) Gas stations.
(a) One freestanding sign which may be internally illuminated and
not to exceed 18 feet in height or 60 square feet in area on any
one side. Rotating units are permitted. [Amended
10-25-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-28]
§ 250-52 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-52
10:701
(b) Two add-on signs pertaining to the products or services offered
by the gasoline service station may be displayed on the
freestanding sign. Each add-on sign shall not exceed four
square feet.
(c) One freestanding A-frame or add-on sign indicating prices,
goods or services, not illuminated and not to exceed six feet in
height or three feet in width.
(d) The use of all flags, windmills, banners and any flashing or
animated signs shall be prohibited. However, the use of
pennants may be utilized for the purpose of advertising the
opening of a new station, but shall be restricted to a thirty-day
period.
(e) All signs or parts thereof, the supporting structures or parts
thereof, shall be within the owner's property line and at no
time project into or over the public right-of-way.
(2) Sales and rental signs. Signs advertising the sale or rental of the
premises upon which they are located in all zoning districts in
accordance with the following schedule:
(a) The sign may be double-faced, and the maximum size shall be
in accordance with the following schedule:
[1] Single-family homes, regardless of the zoning district: one
sign per lot which shall not exceed six square feet in area
nor six feet in height.
[2] Commercial and industrial uses and offices regardless of
the zoning district:
[a] Lot area smaller than one acre: only one sign per lot,
not more than 32 square feet in area and not more
than 10 feet in height.
[b] Lot area larger than one acre: only one sign per lot,
not more than 64 square feet in area and not more
than 12 feet in height.
[3] Vacant land regardless of the zoning district, including
preconstruction signs of an approved project.
Lot Size
Number
of Signs
Height
(feet)
Maximum Size of
Each Sign
(square feet)
5 acres and
under
2 10 32
5 to 25 acres 5 12 64
§ 250-52 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-52
10:702
Lot Size
Number
of Signs
Height
(feet)
Maximum Size of
Each Sign
(square feet)
Over 25
acres
8 15 150
[4] Whenever the property is bordered by more than one
public street, an additional freestanding sign shall be
permitted on each major street.
(b) Such signs shall not be illuminated and shall be situated within
the property lines of the premises to which it relates.
(c) All sales and rental signs shall be of a freestanding design and
may not be erected upon or attached to any building.
(d) Such signs shall be removed immediately upon the signing of a
lease in the event that the property involved is the subject of a
lease or is of a rental nature and the closing date in the event
that the property involved is the subject of a sale. No
certificate of use and occupancy shall be issued until said sales
or rental signs are removed.
(3) Single-family and multifamily developments.
(a) At the main entrance to the development, one freestanding
sign, which may state the name of the development, the street
address, the presence or lack of units for sale, rental or lease
and no other advertising material. Such sign shall not exceed
20 feet in area and six feet in height.
(b) At each entrance, other than the main entrance, one
freestanding sign, which may state the name of the
development, the street address, the presence or lack of units
for sale, lease or rental and no other advertising material. Such
sign shall not exceed 12 square feet in area or four feet in
height.
(c) At the sales or rental office of the development, one
freestanding sign, which may be illuminated, advertising the
office. Such sign shall not exceed four square feet in area or
four feet in height.
(d) At four off-premises key intersections, one freestanding
temporary nonilluminated sign directing the public to the
development. Each sign shall not exceed four square feet in
area or six feet in height. The sign permit shall be issued for a
period of six months and shall be renewable for additional
periods of six months during the period of construction.
§ 250-52 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-52
10:703
(e) Nonilluminated directional signs identifying points of ingress
and egress, parking areas and similar locations in such
numbers as approved by the approval board. Such signs shall
not exceed four square feet in area or three feet in height.
(4) Roadside produce and nursery product stands.
(a) One nonilluminated freestanding sign which may state the
name of the business and the type of products sold therein and
no other advertising material. Such sign shall not exceed the
height of the building or six feet, whichever is greater.
(b) One nonilluminated facade sign placed or inscribed upon the
front wall of the building containing only name of the business
and the types of products sold therein and no other advertising
material. Such sign shall not exceed an area equal to 5% of the
facade of the building or 75 square feet, whichever is less.
(c) Three nonilluminated freestanding or facade signs may specify
the particular types of products sold therein. Such signs shall
not exceed two square feet in area and, if freestanding, shall
not exceed four feet in height.
G. General regulations and restrictions.
(1) Prohibited signs and advertising devices. The following signs are
specifically prohibited in all zoning districts of the Township:
(a) Animated display signs except where specifically permitted
herein.
(b) Signs that flash, blink, move, simulate motion, or have a
scrolling text dwell time of less than one minute. [Amended
10-25-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-28]
(c) Add-on signs which do not match or are dissimilar to primary
sign. [Amended 10-25-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-28]
(d) Neon tubing signs that are not plexiglass encased. [Amended
10-25-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-28]
(e) Signs using red, yellow/amber or green lights placed within
100 feet of any traffic signal or any intersection where sight
distance is inadequate.
(f) Projecting wall signs of any type not meeting the criteria of a
projecting wall sign as set forth in § 250-52D(8). [Amended
10-25-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-28]
(g) Roof-mounted signs.
(h) Signs using words such as "stop," "look," "danger," etc., which
are placed in such a manner or position as to constitute a
§ 250-52 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-52
10:704
traffic hazard or otherwise interfere with the free flow of
traffic.
(i) Painted wall signs.
(j) Billboards, except as allowed as a conditional use pursuant to
§ 250-41, Conditional uses, under Subsection AA, Billboards.
[Amended 10-25-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-28]
(k) Mobile signs, except as specifically permitted elsewhere
herein. [Amended 10-25-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-28]
(l) Signs with any lighting or control mechanism which may cause
radio or television interference.
(m) Any sign so erected, constructed or maintained as to obstruct
or be attached to any fire escape, window, door, or opening
used as a means of egress and ingress, or for fire-fighting
purposes, or placed so as to interfere with any opening
required for legal ventilation.
(n) Any sign which is of such form, character, or shape as to
confuse or dangerously distract the attention of the operator of
a motor vehicle or a pedestrian.
(o) Banners, spinners, flags, pennants or any moving object used
for advertising purposes whether containing a message or not.
This provision does not include flags or pennants attached
directly to permanent poles or to such items herein announcing
a “grand opening,” which may be displayed for no more than
30 consecutive days. [Amended 10-25-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-28]
(p) Any advertisement which uses a series of two or more signs or
units, placed in a line parallel to the highway, or in a similar
fashion along any road, and carrying a single advertising
message, part of which is contained on each sign.
(q) Signs which simulate the official signs of the State of New
Jersey, County of Middlesex or Township of Old Bridge, or any
railroad or public utility or similar agency concerned with the
protection of the public health or safety.
(r) Signs bearing texts of a laudatory nature or explaining services
or products furnished by any establishment or proprietor, it
being the purpose of this section to limit the use of all signs to
identification or directional purposes only. Identification signs
allow the principal name of the establishment or proprietor
and a brief description of the principal goods or services
offered.
§ 250-52 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-52
10:705
(s) Any sign which, applying contemporary community standards,
has a dominant theme or purpose which appeals to prurient
interests.
(t) No sign shall be erected, containing information in it which
states or implies that a property may be used for any purpose
not permitted under the provisions of this chapter in the zoning
district in which the property to which the sign relates is
located.
(u) Any sign or banner spanning a public street except those
advertising or drawing attention to a recognized charitable
fund-raising campaign or an official Township function.
(v) Foreign language signs. all foreign language signs, unless the
proprietor shall supply a signed, sworn affidavit to the Zoning
Officer verifying the English translation of the foreign
language sign. [Added 10-25-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-28]
(2) Prohibited location of signs.
(a) Signs, other than municipal, county or state, traffic or direction
signs, shall not be erected within the right-of-way of any street,
nor shall any sign be located so as to constitute a traffic
hazard.
(b) Signs shall not be painted on or affixed to water towers,
storage tanks, smokestacks, rooftops, trees, fences, utility
poles, rocks, curbs, walks, lamps, hydrants, benches or
bridges, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter.
(c) Signs are prohibited from sight triangle easements unless they
are clear from two feet to 10 feet above the pavement.
(3) Layout and arrangement of special elements. All space other than
typography or corporate logotype or identification marks will be
considered white space and should be designed to allow optimum
readability of the message. Space between lines of copy are also
considered to be important and will be considered in the same way.
(4) Construction of signs flat against buildings. Any sign attached flat
against the surface of a building shall be constructed of durable
material and attached securely to the building with nonrusting
metal hardware. When a sign is to be installed on a masonry
building, holes shall be drilled in the masonry and proper
nonrusting hardware of the expansion type shall be used. The use
of wood or fiber plugs is prohibited.
(5) Lot line setbacks. All freestanding signs shall be placed at least 10
feet from the street right-of-way or 20 feet from the pavement,
whichever is greater. Before a permit for a sign is granted, its
§ 250-52 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-52
10:706
§ 250-53. Fences and walls.
§ 250-54. Buffers.
location in relation to blocking visual access to existing signs shall
also be considered.
(6) Height limitations. All height limitations shall be measured from
ground level to the highest part of the sign or its supporting
structure, whichever is higher. In no event shall any part of any
sign exceed 18 feet in height.
A. All residential fences erected, with the exception of farm uses, shall
comply with the following height restrictions:
(1) A solid six-foot-high fence may be installed on an interior lot in the
rear and side yards and shall not extend beyond the front building
line of the house; provided that, when a house which exists on an
adjacent lot is less than 7 1/2 feet from the common lot line, a sixfoot
fence will not be permitted in the side yard.
(2) A solid six-foot-high fence may be installed on a corner lot in the
side and rear yard, to within five feet of the lot line; provided that
this fence shall not be permitted to obstruct the sight triangle at
the corner.
(3) A maximum four-foot-high open fence may be installed in the front
yard area.
B. All nonresidential fences shall comply with the following restrictions:
(1) Fences at nonresidential properties (including farm uses) shall be
open and not exceed 10 feet in height.
(2) The height of all fences shall be measured from grade.
A. No building or parking area may be established in any buffer.
B. The width of any buffer required herein may, in the discretion of the
approving board, be reduced to a minimum of 50 feet; provided that the
intensity of the landscaping within the buffer is increased to minimize
the visual impact of such reduction and promote the purposes of the
buffer as described in § 250-6.
C. Buffers shall be along streets as follows:
(1) Major arterial frontage. A buffer measured from the road right-ofway
of 125 feet wide with respect to residential lots and 75 feet
wide with respect to nonresidential lots shall be established along
the entire frontage of a tract abutting a major arterial.
(2) Minor arterial frontage. A buffer measured from the road right-ofway
of 100 feet wide with respect to residential lots and 50 feet
§ 250-52 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-54
10:707
wide with respect to nonresidential lots shall be established along
the entire frontage of a tract abutting a minor arterial.
(3) Light arterial frontage. A buffer measured from the road right-ofway
of 75 feet wide with respect to a residential lot and 50 feet
wide with respect to a nonresidential lot shall be established along
the entire frontage of a tract abutting a light arterial.
D. Buffers shall be established between differing land uses as follows:
(1) On any property developed for a use other than a single-family
detached dwelling or open space, a buffer 50 feet wide measured
from the property line shall be established along any adjoining
property which is either undeveloped and residentially zoned or
developed for single-family detached dwellings.
(2) On any property developed for a use other than residential, a buffer
50 feet wide shall be established along any adjoining residential
zone.
E. The required buffer for all open storage areas shall consist of a six-foothigh
solid screen on all sides. Evergreen trees shall also be planted at
fifteen-foot intervals along all adjoining properties to obscure views
from upper floors of nearby buildings. Linear rows of evergreen trees
shall be avoided.
F. All refuse storage areas shall be provided with a six-foot-high screen on
all sides. A roof or evergreen tree plantings shall be provided to obscure
view from upper stories of adjacent buildings.
G. All aboveground and rooftop utilitarian appurtenances shall be
provided with a screen equal to the height of the appurtenance.
H. Landscaping shall be provided on all areas not committed to buildings,
walks, parking areas, driveways or other accessory structures as
follows:
(1) All open areas shall be landscaped with plant material, except
where a specific function requires other materials.
(2) All sites shall preserve, plant or otherwise maintain deciduous and
evergreen trees sufficient to provide a tree canopy encompassing
an area not less than 10% of the site area, exclusive of buffer area.
Tree canopy area in buffer areas shall be maintained at not less
than 40% of the area of said buffers. In calculating the tree canopy
area, the canopy shall be deemed to extend to the dripline of trees
in existence on the date of occupancy.
(3) Buffers shall be landscaped to provide a visual screen and an
aesthetic setting consistent with the character of the surrounding
area.
§ 250-54 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-54
10:708
§ 250-55. Parking and loading requirements.
(a) In areas previously developed, a formal setting shall be
provided designed to relate to the built environment.
(b) In areas previously undeveloped, an informal setting
replicating the natural character associated with the soil
conditions shall be provided. Disturbance of grades and
existing vegetation shall be limited to specific corrective
measures, planting of trees and shrubs intended to accelerate
the natural succession pattern and to provide access and
visibility. Openings shall be limited to a cumulative distance of
not more than 300 linear feet.
A. Parking. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, whenever any
building or structure is erected or structurally altered, or any building
or structure is covered, off-street parking spaces shall be provided in
accordance with the Schedule of Required Parking Spaces, which is
attached hereto as Appendix F and hereby incorporated into this
chapter.172
(1) The parking space requirements for a use not specifically listed in
the Schedule of Required Parking Spaces shall be the same as for a
listed use of similar characteristics; provided that the approving
board may determine parking requirements for any use not listed
in the Schedule of Required Parking Spaces.
(2) Where fractional spaces result, the parking spaces required shall
be construed to be the next highest whole number.
(3) Up to 50% of parking spaces required for (a) theaters, public
auditoriums, bowling alleys, dance halls, and nightclubs, and up to
100% of the parking spaces required for a church sanctuary/
worship hall may be provided and used jointly by (b) banks, offices,
retail stores, repair shops, service establishments and similar uses
not normally open, used or operated during the same hours as
those listed in (a) and up to 100% of parking spaces required for
schools may be provided and used jointly by a church sanctuary/
worship hall not normally open, used or operated during the same
hours as the school; provided, however, that the multiple users of
such facilities enter into a written agreement, properly executed
and recorded, guaranteeing the perpetual availability and
maintenance of such facilities. [Amended 10-25-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-31]
(4) Where the required parking spaces are not located on the same lot
with the building or use served, or where such spaces are
collectively or jointly provided and used, the availability of such
172. Editor's Note: Appendix F, Schedule of Required Parking Spaces, is included at the end of
this chapter.
§ 250-54 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-55
10:709
§ 250-56. Airport hazard area regulations.
parking spaces shall be established by a recorded covenant or
agreement as parking spaces to be used in conjunction with the
principal use and shall be reserved as such through an
encumbrance on the title of the property to be designated as
required parking spaces, such encumbrance to be valid for the total
period of the use or uses for which the parking is needed are in
existence.
(5) Home business and home professional office uses shall comply with
both the applicable residential and nonresidential minimum
standards set forth in the Schedule of Required Parking Spaces.
(6) Each development shall provide for the number of accessible
parking spaces for the physically handicapped that is required
under N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.12 and shall comply with same in the manner
set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.13.
(7) In calculating the number of required off-street parking spaces
required hereunder, units or floor space occupied or proposed to be
occupied by a day-care center shall be excluded from the total
number of units or floor space upon which such calculation is
based.
(8) A patient dropoff area shall be provided for convalescent homes,
nursing homes, medical offices, clinics and the like. This may be a
curbside area or a parking space reserved for this purpose. [Added
3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-03]
B. Loading.
(1) Loading and unloading areas shall be provided according to the
Schedule of Minimum Loading Requirements which is set forth in
Appendix G which is incorporated herein by reference,173 and if not
included, loading and unloading areas for other uses shall be
provided in sufficient amount to permit the transfer of goods and
products in other than a public street or public parking area and
shall be adequately screened.
(2) The minimum number of spaces shown on said schedule shall
prevail for uses that have not attained the gross floor where the
first space is required.
(3) Loading spaces required under this section shall be provided as
area in addition to off-street parking spaces and shall not be
considered off-street parking spaces.
173. Editor's Note: Appendix G, Schedule of Minimum Loading Requirements, is included at
the end of this chapter.
§ 250-55 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-56
10:710
A. The Airport Hazard Area Zone is established in conformance with the
general requirements and provisions of the Air Safety and Zoning Act of
1983, P.L. 1983, c. 260 (N.J.S.A. 6:1-80 et seq.) and in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 16:62 (16 N.J.R. April 15, 1985, 17 N.J.R. 977-983, 17 N.J.R.
November 4, 1985 2673-2674) and N.J.A.C. 16:62 (21 N.J.R. 1378 May
15, 1989). The standards contained herein are the minimum standards.
B. The Airport Hazard Area Zone is delineated on the Zoning Map of the
Township of Old Bridge which is attached hereto as Appendix B.174
C. Development within the delineated Airport Hazard Area Zone is hereby
restricted and constrained as follows:
(1) No person shall establish an airport hazard which is constituted by
either:
(a) Any use of land or water, or both, which may create a
dangerous condition for persons or property in or about an
airport, or aircraft during landing or taking-off at an airport; or
(b) Any structure or tree which obstructs the airspace required for
the flight of aircraft in landing or taking-off at an airport.
(2) No person shall build, rebuild, create or cause to be built, rebuilt or
created any object or structure, or plant, or cause to be planted or
permit to grow a tree or vegetation, which will interfere with,
diminish, change or obstruct the airspace or landing and take-off
area available for the landing and take-off of aircraft at public use
airports.
D. Within the Airport Hazard Area Zone, the following standards are
hereby established:
(1) No person shall establish a vertical height obstruction which shall
include construction, reconstruction, creation or establishment of
any vertical structure or planting of a tree as per N.J.A.C. 16:62-4.2.
(2) Interstate highways are considered to be a seventeen-foot vertical
development; other public roads shall be considered to be a fifteenfoot
vertical development; private roads shall be considered to be a
ten-foot vertical development; and railroads shall be considered to
be a twenty-three-foot vertical development.
(3) No person shall establish any of the prohibited land uses
specifically enumerated in this section without the written approval
of the NJ Commissioner of Transportation. Prohibited land uses
may be allowed by the NJ Commissioner of Transportation on
airport property when they are determined to be necessary by the
Director of Aeronautics for air commerce purposes or for the
174. Editor's Note: Appendix B, Zoning Map, is on file in the Township Clerk's Office.
§ 250-56 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-56
10:711
operation of the airport and its vendors directly serving air
commerce needs, such as a flight school.
(a) Permitted land uses:
[1] Residential: single-family dwelling units which are
situated on a lot at least three acres in size and not located
in a clear zone (as same is defined at N.J.A.C. 16:62-3.5).
Residential zoning is permitted in the clear zone as long as
all dwellings are physically located outside of the clear
zone.
[2] Airpark (minimum lot size of at least three acres which are
not located in a clear zone).
[3] Open space.
[4] Agricultural.
[5] Transportation.
[6] Airports.
[7] Commercial (not located in a clear zone).
[8] Industrial (not located in a clear zone).
(b) Specifically prohibited land uses are as follows:
[1] Dwelling units, except for new one-family dwellings
situated on lots which are a minimum of three acres in
size, and dwelling units which exist on the effective date of
this chapter.
(c) Planned unit developments.
[1] Hospitals.
[2] Schools.
[3] Aboveground bulk tank storage of compressed flammable
or compressed toxic gases and liquids.
[4] Within the runway end subzones only, the aboveground
bulk tank storage of flammable or toxic gases and liquids.
[5] Uses that may attract massing birds, including landfills.
[6] Incineration facilities.
[7] Abovegrade major utility transmission lines and/or mains.
E. Creation or expansion of a prohibited land use or vertical height
obstruction within an airport hazard area shall require a permit as
follows:
§ 250-56 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-56
10:712
(1) An application for a project requiring creation or establishment of a
prohibited land use, or creation or establishment of a vertical
height obstruction shall first apply for approval from the Zoning
Board of Adjustment. The standards employed by the Zoning Board
of Adjustment in acting upon such application shall be those
standards governing the granting of relief under N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d and § 250-9G(5) of this chapter.
(2) If the Zoning Board of Adjustment approves the application, that
approval shall be conditioned on the applicant applying for and
receiving a permit from the New Jersey Commissioner of
Transportation in accordance with N.J.A.C. 16:62-6.1 et seq. The
resolution of the Zoning Board of Adjustment approving such
application shall contain a request that NJDOT approve the
issuance of a permit hereunder.
(3) Construction, development or creation of any prohibited land use
or vertical height obstruction shall not commence until a permit
has been issued by the New Jersey Commissioner of
Transportation.
F. A preexisting structure not in conformance with the standards of this
chapter shall be classified as nonconforming. For such preexisting
structure, a property owner may seek and the Zoning Board of
Adjustment may permit expansion of such a nonconforming structure
without having to obtain a permit from the New Jersey Commissioner of
Transportation under the provisions of this chapter and N.J.A.C.
16:62-9.1(b); provided, however, that:
(1) The expansion of nonresidential uses shall be limited to 10% of the
floor area in existence as of December 31, 1989;
(2) The expansion shall conform to the limits on floor area, coverage
and other zoning controls set forth in this chapter; and
(3) The expansion shall not exceed a vertical height of 25 feet.
G. No variance, subdivision or other relief from the standards
promulgated by or under N.J.A.C. 16:62-1.1 et seq. within an Airport
Hazard Area Zone may be granted by any Township agency to the
Township or any person, except upon the condition that the variance or
relief is contingent upon the issuance of a permit allowing the variance
or relief by the New Jersey Commissioner of Transportation.
H. The Township Clerk shall transmit, at time of adoption, amendment, or
when requested, a valid copy of this § 250-56, Airport hazard area
regulations, and other applicable sections of this chapter as may affect
the Airport Hazard Area Zone or the operation of the Old Bridge
Township Airport, and the Planning Board Secretary shall transmit, at
time of adoption, amendment, or when requested, a valid copy of the
Master Plan to the New Jersey Department of Transportation, Division
of Aeronautics, Air Safety and Hazardous Zoning Permits.
§ 250-56 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-57
10:713
§ 250-57. Telecommunications towers and antennas regulations.
[Added 3-27-2000 by Ord. No. 06-00]
A. Purpose.
(1) The purpose of this section is to establish general guidelines for the
placement of wireless communication towers and antennas to
accommodate the communication needs of residents and
businesses while protecting the public health, safety, and general
welfare of the community.
(2) The goals of this section are to:
(a) Protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse
impacts of the siting of towers and antennas.
(b) Facilitate the provision of wireless telecommunications
services to the residents and businesses of the Township.
(c) Require the location of towers in nonresidential areas.
(d) Minimize the total number of towers throughout the
community.
(e) Minimize adverse visual effects of towers through careful
design and siting standards.
(f) Require the joint use of new and existing tower sites (including
electric power towers) or predesignated tower properties as
sites for new towers or existing buildings or structures as a
primary option rather than construction of additional singleuse
towers.
(g) Require that such towers are properly constructed, maintained
and dismantled and that appropriate security is posted to
ensure same, and the safety of Township residents.
(3) In furtherance of these goals, Old Bridge Township shall give due
consideration to the Old Bridge Township Master Plan, Zoning
Map, existing land uses, inventory maps of existing towers and
structures, and environmentally sensitive areas in approving sites
for the location of towers and antennas.
B. Applicability.
(1) Existing structures. When planning to serve an area or to expand
services in an area, providers shall utilize existing towers and
structures prior to consideration of new sites, unless the Board
finds that it is not feasible to do so.175
175. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Land Development Codification (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. IV).
§ 250-57 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-57
10:714
(2) Preexisting towers and antennas. Preexisting towers or antennas
shall not be required to meet the requirements of this chapter,
provided that requirements of Subsections C(2) and C(3) are met
unless they are altered or additional equipment is added to same.
When new masts, antennas or other structures are added to a
preexisting height by more than 20 feet, the location and setback
requirements of this shall not apply.176
(3) New towers and antennas. New telecommunications antennas shall
be permitted on buildings three stories or more in height and
located in nonresidential zones, provided that the antenna does not
extend more than 10 feet above the roof.
C. General requirements.
(1) Collocation; additional users.
(a) Each applicant for a new telecommunication tower shall prove
that the telecommunications equipment planned for the
proposed tower cannot be accommodated on an existing or
approved tower or building or other structure (e.g., water
towers) within a five-mile search radius of the proposed tower.
(b) Any proposed commercial wireless telecommunication service
tower shall be designed, structurally, electrically, and in all
respects, to accommodate both the applicant's and comparable
antennas. Towers must be designed to allow for future
rearrangement of antennas upon the tower and to accept
antennas mounted at varying heights.
(2) State or federal requirements. All towers must meet or exceed
current standards and regulations of the FAA, FCC and other
agency of the state or federal government with the authority to
regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations
are changed, then the owners of the towers and antennas governed
by this chapter shall bring such towers and antennas into
compliance with such revised standards and regulations, unless not
mandated by the controlling state or federal agency, in which case
failure to bring towers and antennas into compliance with such
revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the
removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense.
(3) Safety standards/building codes. To ensure the structural integrity
of towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in
compliance with standards contained in applicable state or local
building codes and property maintenance codes and the applicable
standards for towers that are published by the Electronic
Industries Association, as amended. If upon inspection Old Bridge
Township concludes that a tower fails to comply with such codes
176. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Land Development Codification (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. IV).
§ 250-57 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-57
10:715
and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property,
then, upon notice being provided to the owner of the tower, the
owner shall have 30 days to bring such tower into compliance with
such standards. Failure to bring tower into compliance within said
30 days shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or
antenna at the owner's expense.
(4) Tower setbacks. New towers shall conform to each of the following
minimum setback requirements:
(a) Towers shall meet the setbacks of the underlying zoning
district.
(b) Towers located in nonresidential districts adjacent to
residential districts shall be set back from all residential lot
lines by a minimum distance equal to 1 1/2 times the height of
the tower, including all antennas and attachments, or a fivehundred-
foot minimum setback, whichever is more.
(c) Towers shall not be located between a principal structure and a
public street. An improved driveway shall be provided for
access to each tower site from the nearest open public street.
(d) A tower's setback may be reduced or its location in relation to
the public street varied, at the sole discretion of the Board, to
allow the integration of a tower into an existing or proposed
structure such as a church steeple, light standard, power line
support device, or similar structure.
(e) Towers shall meet all buffer and landscaping requirements of
the underlying zone district.
(f) Telecommunications towers or antennas shall not be located on
any dwelling.
(5) Lot size. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a
tower or antenna complies with district development regulations,
including but not limited to setback requirements, lot coverage
requirements and other such requirements, the dimensions of the
entire lot shall control, even though the antennas or towers may be
located on leased parcels within such lots.
(6) Landscaping. New towers and accessory buildings shall be
landscaped at the base in conformance with Township standards.
(7) Abandoned towers. All abandoned or unused towers and associated
facilities shall be removed by the applicant or its successors and
the tower and any impacted property returned to its original state,
within six months of the cessation of operations at the site, unless a
time extension is approved by the Board.
D. Additional submission requirements. Each submission and/or
application for an antenna and/or tower shall include:
§ 250-57 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-57
10:716
(1) Inventory of existing sites. For each application for an antenna and/
or tower, the applicant shall provide to the Board an inventory of all
its existing towers, antennas, sites approved for towers or
antennas, and plans for future antennas and towers that are within
Old Bridge Township and within five miles of the boarder thereof,
including specific information about the location, height and design
of each tower.
(2) Report. A report for a qualified and licensed engineer which
includes the following:
(a) Description of tower height and design, including cross-section
and elevation;
(b) Indicates the height above grade for all potential mounting
positions for collocated antennas and the minimum separation
distances between antennas;
(c) Description of the tower's capacity, including the number and
type of antennas that it can accommodate;
(d) Indicates what steps the applicant will take to avoid
interference with established public safety
telecommunications.
(3) Letter of intent. A letter of intent committing the tower owner or
lessee and its successors to allow the shared use of the tower if an
additional user agrees in writing to meet reasonable terms and
conditions for shared use, and that the tower owner or lessee
acknowledges and agrees that its successors and/or additional
users shall be bound and will conform to the requirements of this
chapter as applicable.
(4) Cessation of use. A copy of the relevant portions of a signed lease
which requires the applicant to remove the tower and associated
facilities upon cessation of operations at the site shall be submitted
at the time of application.
(5) Insurance. In the event a tower is sited on Township-owned
property, the lease between the Township and the tower owner
(and its successors) shall provide a certificate of insurance
providing coverage of at least $1,000,000 per occurrence,
including but not limited to premises and general liability naming
the Township of Old Bridge as an additional insured.
(6) Hold harmless. In the event a tower is sited on Township-owned
property, the lease between the Township and the tower owner and
its successors shall indemnify and hold harmless the Township of
Old Bridge, its officers, employees, agents and servants, from and
against any and all claims, demands, suits, actions, recoveries,
judgments, costs and expenses, including attorneys' fees, incurred
or suffered on account of property damage or loss and/or personal
§ 250-57 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-57
10:717
injury, including loss of life of any person, agency, corporation
or governmental entity which shall arise out of the course of or
in consequence to any acts or omissions of the Township of Old
Bridge, its employees, agents or servants in the performances of
the work or failure of the Township of Old Bridge, its employees,
agents or servants. This obligation shall not apply in the case of
gross negligence or willful malfeasance.
(7) Bond requirement. In the event a tower is sited on Township-owned
property, the applicant shall be required to post a performance and
maintenance bond in a sufficient amount to be determined by the
Board Engineer to ensure the proper construction and
maintenance of the tower.
(8) Site plan conformance. In addition to the foregoing all applications
shall meet the following site plan standards unless preempted by
controlling state or federal law.
E. Design requirements. Telecommunication towers shall be of a monopole
design unless the board determines that an alternative design would
better blend into the surrounding environment.
(1) Aesthetics. Applicants shall minimize the adverse visual impact and
the number of such facilities through proper design, siting,
screening, material color and finish for towers, antennas, and
accessory buildings. Wherever possible, competing providers shall
collocate antennas and related facilities. At locations where
collocation on an existing structure is impractical, the applicant
shall use camouflage structures, such as artificial trees, subject to
applicable FAA standards and design review by the Board. Where
the required height of the tower makes an artificial tree
impractical, other camouflage techniques shall be considered.
Artificial trees shall be designed to resemble a woody tree with a
single trunk and branches on its upper part. They shall be located
near existing tree masses to the extent practical.
(2) Accessory utility buildings. All utility buildings and structures
accessory to a tower shall be architecturally designed to blend in
with the surrounding environment and shall meet the minimum
setback requirements of the underlying zoning district. Groundmounted
equipment shall be screened from view by suitable
vegetation, except where a design of nonvegetative screening
better reflects and complements the architectural character of the
surrounding neighborhood. A landscape plan shall be submitted for
review of proposed screening.
(3) Security. All towers and accessory structures shall be required to
provide fencing, landscaping and/or such other barriers as the
board may require, such that the tower and accessory structures
are secured and inaccessible to private residents and children. For
purposes of this chapter, any and all towers shall be deemed an
§ 250-57 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-57
10:718
§ 250-58. Planned Retirement Community (PRC) District. [Added
4-12-2004 by Ord. No. 07-04]
attractive nuisance where adequate security is not provided as
requested herein pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:33-12.
(4) Lighting. Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by
the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the
lighting alternatives and design chosen must cause the least
disturbance to the surrounding views.
(5) Height. The antenna and any supporting structure shall not exceed
200 feet in height.
(6) Lot coverage. Not more than 10% of a lot may be devoted to
towers, antennas and accessory structures.
(7) Signs and advertising. The use of any portion of a tower for signs or
any form of advertising other than warning or equipment
information signs (only legible by persons maintaining the facility)
is prohibited.
A. Establishment. There is hereby permitted and created a Planned
Retirement Community (PRC) District as shown on the Official Zoning
Map of the Township of Old Bridge, County of Middlesex, State of New
Jersey. The Official Zoning Map of the Township of Old Bridge is hereby
amended to include the PRC District, and is incorporated herein by
reference.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
PLANNED RETIREMENT COMMUNITY — A residential community
provided for permanent residents aged 55 years or over in which
the residential property and the residential-related open space,
recreational facilities and property are all owned by a mutual nonprofit
corporation, or corporations, established pursuant to the laws of the
State of New Jersey and governed, as associates or other entities, all of
which shall have rules and regulations controlling the development.
C. Purpose. The purpose and intent of the PRC District is to promote the
planned development of an active adult community which shall offer
certain recreational facilities for its residents in accordance with the
general development plan approved by the Planning Board.
D. Permitted and required uses in a planned retirement community.
(1) No building, structure or land shall be used for and no building,
structure shall hereafter be erected, structurally altered, enlarged
or maintained except for the following planned retirement
community uses by the residents of the community, their guests
and other authorized users:
§ 250-57 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-58
10:719
(a) Detached dwellings, townhouse dwellings, or multi-level
dwellings for owner-occupancy.
(b) The following required recreational uses, at least one of each:
[1] Clubhouse. Each clubhouse shall provide at least 25
square feet of multipurpose space, not including indoor
swimming pools, for each dwelling unit. In addition to the
multipurpose space, such fully equipped facilities as game
rooms, arts and crafts rooms, fully equipped kitchen and
nurses station, office space and service facilities shall also
be provided in the clubhouse. In no case shall the
clubhouse building contain less than 4,000 square feet
total area in the aggregate. One off-street parking space
shall be provided for every eight dwelling units.
[2] Swimming pool. At least one swimming pool shall be
provided at a ratio of 20 square feet of water surface area
for each dwelling unit the pool will service. There shall
also be provided an improved sitting area, contiguous to
all sides of the pool, having an area two times the water
surface area of the pool.
[3] Shuffleboard, or bocce court.
[4] Tennis court.
(c) Accessory office space associated with the operation of the
homeowners' association only.
E. Development standards. No building permit shall be issued for
construction or other improvement in an active adult community except
in accordance with a general development plan for the overall site and
final site plan for each section that has been approved by the Planning
Board. The following development standards shall apply to a PRC:
(1) Minimum area. The minimum site area for a PRC shall be at least
55 acres contained in one parcel that is not bisected by existing
streets, roads, rights-of-way or railroads.
(2) Residential density. The total tract density of a PRC shall not be
more than 1.75 dwelling units for each gross acre of the tract.
(3) Lot coverage by buildings. Not more than 20% of the gross area of
the total tract shall be covered by all buildings.
(4) Landscaped open space. At least 60% of the total tract of a PRC
shall be landscaped open space, undeveloped conservation
easements, or green area, which shall not include paved streets
and parking areas.
(5) Building height. No detached dwelling or townhouse dwelling
buildings shall exceed a height of 2 1/2 stories, nor exceed 35 feet
§ 250-58 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-58
10:720
in height. No multi-level building shall exceed three stories, nor
exceed 35 feet in height. Multi-level building heights in excess of
the herein stated limits shall be further modified in accordance
with the provisions of § 250-51 of this chapter.
(6) Buffers. For areas of the tract developed as townhouse dwellings or
multi-level dwellings, there shall be a landscaped buffer 50 feet in
width from any road or tract boundary property line of the overall
tract of a PRC development. No buildings or structure other than
entrance gatehouses, fences, or freestanding walls shall be located
within said buffer area. The design and composition of any buffer
shall comply with § 250-54 of this chapter. Buffer requirements for
detached dwellings shall comply with § 250-54D(1) regarding
single-family detached dwellings.
(7) Accessory structures. Sheds, pools, or other accessory structures
shall not be permitted on detached residential dwelling lots.
(8) Building separation requirements. Section 250-47 of this chapter
shall be applicable to all townhouse dwelling and multi-level
buildings.
(9) Residential building facades. Section 250-48 of this chapter shall
be applicable to all townhouse and multi-level buildings.
(10) Minimum building setback to tract boundary. The minimum
setback to any perimeter tract boundary line shall be 60 feet for
townhouse dwellings and multi-level buildings.
(11)Off-street parking. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in
accordance with the following schedule for the type of land use
contained in a site development plan:
(a) Two spaces for each dwelling unit, one of which may be
enclosed in a garage.
(b) One space for every eight persons for whom seating is
provided in an auditorium, except that this number may be
reduced by the Planning Board insofar that combined use of
parking lots is available.
(c) One-half space per unit shall be provided for designated visitor
parking.
(d) All parking spaces shall be 10 feet wide and 20 feet in length.
[Amended 6-25-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-10]
(e) No parking shall be permitted in the residential buffer area.
(f) Lighting in the outdoor parking area shall be of such height as
to reflect light away from windows of the dwelling units or
adjacent properties in order to minimize the impact of such
lighting on the residents in the dwelling units.
§ 250-58 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-58
10:721
(12) Dimensional requirements.
(a) Detached residential dwellings:
[1] Minimum lot area: 5,000 square feet.
[2] Maximum floor area ratio: 0.50.
[3] Minimum landscape area ratio: 0.35.
[4] Minimum lot width: 50 feet.
[5] Minimum corner lot width: 60 feet.
[6] Minimum front yard: 20 feet.
[7] Minimum side yard: five feet.
[8] Minimum total two side yards: 12 feet.
[9] Minimum rear yard: 25 feet.
[10] Minimum noncritical area: 80%.
§ 250-58 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-58
10:722
ARTICLE VIIA
Inclusionary Housing Districts177
§ 250-58.1. Inclusionary Housing Zone 1 (IH1) District. [Added
10-14-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-21]
A. Establishment. There is hereby permitted and created an Inclusionary
Housing Zone 1 (IH1) District as shown on the Official Zoning Map of
the Township of Old Bridge, County of Middlesex, State of New Jersey.
The Official Zoning Map of the Township of Old Bridge is hereby
amended to include the IH1 District, and is incorporated herein by
reference. The IH1 District shall apply to Block 17000, Lots 5 (formerly
Lots 5 and 6.11) and 28.112, and any prior zoning is hereby changed
accordingly. The zoning in this section shall not be construed or
interpreted to affect the permitted uses, permitted accessory uses, bulk
requirements and/or any other requirements of any other zone in the
Township.
B. Purpose. The purpose of this zone is to permit an inclusionary
development on Block 17000, Lots 5 and 28.112, which contain
approximately 101 acres along Ferry Road. The inclusionary
development will consist of 252 multifamily apartments, of which 214
will be market-rate units and 38 will be affordable family rentals (15%
setaside). Fifteen percent of the affordable units will be very-lowincome
affordable units.
C. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A building on one lot, used and designed
as a residence for three or more households living independently of
each other and separated by either vertical, horizontal or both vertical
and horizontal construction.
DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE — A dwelling consisting of more than two
attached single-family residences, constructed in a continuous row, in
a development within which each residential unit is primarily a vertical
construction unit.
LOFT — Within the IH1 Zone, a loft or mezzanine that qualifies as a
mezzanine as set forth in New Jersey Building Code, Section 505.2,
shall be considered a half-story, except that the permitted overall
building height measured in feet shall not be violated when a loft or
mezzanine is to be provided. A loft or mezzanine is required to remain
open and shall not be enclosed in any manner. Doors shall not be
permitted to be installed to enclose any loft or mezzanine to create
a separate living space, nor shall any loft or mezzanine be used as a
bedroom.[Added 7-20-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-16]
177. Editor’s Note: The sections in this article were originally adopted as §§ 250-59, 250-60,
250-61, 260-62, and 250-63, but were renumbered to maintain the existing numbering
sequence of this chapter.
§ 250-58.1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-58.1
10:723
D. Permitted principal uses:
(1) Townhouses as defined in this section; and
(2) Multifamily dwellings as defined in this section.
E. Permitted accessory uses:
(1) Parking areas and lots as required by Chapter 250;
(2) Loading areas as required by Chapter 250;
(3) Signage as permitted by Chapter 250, except as otherwise
permitted in this section;
(4) Refuse and recycling facilities, buildings and/or enclosures as
regulated by Chapter 250;
(5) Maintenance buildings and/or storage sheds;
(6) Satellite antennas as regulated by Chapter 250 and/or federal law;
(7) Fences and walls as regulated by Chapter 250;
(8) Roadways, driveways and utilities as regulated by Chapter 250;
(9) Swimming pools, playgrounds and other recreational facilities
intended to be used by the occupants of the inclusionary housing
development in this zone and their guests;
(10) Clubhouse intended to be used by the occupants of the inclusionary
housing development in this zone and their guests;
(11) Leasing office;
(12) Model apartment of multifamily dwelling and/or townhouse
dwelling, which shall not be used for residential occupancy;
(13) Property management office; and
(14) Private garages, attached or detached, to be used by occupants of
the inclusionary housing development in this zone.
F. Bulk, area, yard and height requirements.
(1) Minimum lot area shall be 90 acres.
(2) Minimum lot width shall be 300 feet.
(3) Maximum gross residential density shall be 2.7 dwelling units per
acre, and the maximum amount of total dwelling units shall not
exceed 252 dwelling units.
(4) Minimum front, rear and side yards from the lot boundary line for
permitted principal and accessory uses shall be:
§ 250-58.1 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-58.1
10:724
(a) Fifty feet for any building from an adjoining residential zone;
(b) Twenty-five feet for any building, other than a garage, from an
adjoining nonresidential zone;
(c) Ten feet for any road or driveway; and
(d) Ten feet for any garage, parking lot, and attached balconies or
patios from an adjoining nonresidential zone.
(5) Maximum lot coverage shall be 25%.
(6) Minimum landscape buffer, which shall be provided in accordance
with this chapter, from any residentially zoned lot boundary line
shall be 50 feet, except as follows:
(a) Ten feet from roadway and driveways; and
(b) Ten feet from any nonresidentially zoned boundary line.
(7) Minimum landscape ratio shall be 0.50.
(8) Maximum height for principal structures shall be 3 1/2 stories or 55
feet.
(9) Maximum height for accessory structures shall be two stories or 32
feet.
(10) Maximum gross floor area of accessory buildings shall be 10,000
square feet.
(11) Minimum open space and recreation area shall be 70% of the lot
area.
(12) Minimum active recreation area, such as but not limited to a
clubhouse, pool and/or patio area, shall be a minimum of one-half
acre.
G. Building requirements.
(1) Maximum number of dwellings unit per building.
(a) Multifamily buildings shall not exceed 36 dwelling units.
(b) Townhouse buildings shall not exceed eight dwelling units.
(2) Maximum length of buildings.
(a) Multifamily buildings shall not exceed 225 feet in length.
(b) Townhouse buildings shall not exceed 200 feet in length.
(3) Minimum building facade articulation.
(a) Multifamily buildings shall provide an offset of two feet every
100 feet.
§ 250-58.1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-58.1
10:725
(b) Townhouse buildings shall provide an offset of two feet for
every four dwelling units.
(c) All multifamily and townhouse buildings should be designed
with architectural features that minimize the impact of any
long expanse of wall by employing techniques such as variation
in color, materials, articulation and roof lines.
(4) Minimum separation between buildings.
(a) Building window wall to building window wall.
[1] Multifamily buildings shall be separated by at least 30
feet.
[2] Townhouse buildings shall be separated by at least 25 feet.
(b) Building window wall for multifamily and townhouse buildings
to end wall or building corner for multifamily and townhouse
buildings shall be 20 feet.
(c) Building window wall for multifamily and townhouse buildings
to window or end wall of clubhouse shall be 25 feet.
(d) Building wall for multifamily and townhouse buildings to wall
of freestanding accessory buildings and structures shall be 20
feet.
(5) Minimum building setbacks from curb faces, parking spaces,
driveways and internal streets that are private shall be 10 feet.
H. Inclusionary housing requirements.
(1) Market-rate dwelling units shall total no more than 214.
(2) Affordable dwelling units, which are defined by state statute, shall
total 15% of the overall total dwelling units. The affordable
dwelling units shall be rental units.
(3) Fifteen percent of the total number of affordable dwelling units
shall be very-low-income affordable rental units.
(4) The affordable housing shall be provided, including, but not limited
to, market-rate and affordable housing phasing, bedroom
distribution, accessibility requirements and other requirements, in
accordance with Old Bridge Township ordinances and New Jersey
state statutes and regulations.
(5) Each affordable unit created in this zone shall remain subject to
affordability controls for a period of at least 50 years, until the
Township of Old Bridge takes action to release the unit from such
requirements. [Added 7-20-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-16]
§ 250-58.1 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-58.1
10:726
I. Signage. Signage for the inclusionary housing development in the IH1
Inclusionary Housing Zone 1 shall comply with the following
requirements:
(1) Section 250-52A and G, except for Subsection G(5).
(2) Decorative and/or supporting structures or walls supporting signs,
regardless of whether lit, shall not be included in the calculation of
sign area.
(3) One site identification sign shall be permitted for the inclusionary
housing development in the IH1 Inclusionary Housing Zone 1 on
the adjoining parcel of land identified as Block 17000, Lots 28.11,
28.12 and 28.111, in the H Hospital Zone at the intersection of the
inclusionary housing access road and Ferry Road.
(a) The sign shall be designed as a monument-type sign.
(b) Maximum sign area shall be 32 square feet. The sign may be
two-sided, with one side utilized for calculating sign area in
accordance with this chapter.
(c) Maximum sign height shall be eight feet.
(d) The sign shall be set back at least 10 feet from the right-of-way
line of Ferry Road.
(e) The sign may be externally or internally lit.
(4) All other signage for the inclusionary housing development shall
comply with § 250-52F(3), except that in addition to the
freestanding sign permitted under § 250-52F(3)(a), the
inclusionary housing development may include a second
freestanding sign, which shall be subject to the requirements of
Subsection I(3)(a) through (e) hereof, provided that this second
freestanding sign is located at least 200 feet from Ferry Road.
J. Parking requirements.
(1) Parking shall comply with the Residential Site Improvement
Standards.
(2) Parking for the lease office and property management office shall
be provided at a minimum rate of one parking space per 250 square
feet of gross floor area of building.
(3) Parking for the clubhouse shall be provided at a minimum rate of
one parking space per 750 square feet of gross floor area of
building.
(4) Parking for centralized refuse and recycling enclosures shall be
provided at a minimum rate of one parking space per 100 dwelling
units.
§ 250-58.1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-58.1
10:727
§ 250-58.2. Inclusionary Housing Zone 2 (IH2) District. [Added
10-14-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-23]
(5) The calculation of parking lot landscaping area provided to satisfy
§ 250-74C(2)(k) shall include landscaping area around the
perimeter of the parking lots.
A. Establishment. There is hereby permitted and created an Inclusionary
Housing Zone 2 (IH2) District as shown on the Official Zoning Map of
the Township of Old Bridge, County of Middlesex, State of New Jersey.
The Official Zoning Map of the Township of Old Bridge is hereby
amended to include the IH2 District, and is incorporated herein by
reference. The IH2 District shall apply to Block 1600, Lot 1, and the
prior zoning for this lot is hereby changed accordingly. The zoning in
this section shall not be construed or interpreted to affect the permitted
uses, permitted accessory uses, bulk requirements and/or any other
requirements of any other zone in the Township.
B. Purpose. The purpose of this zone is it to permit an inclusionary housing
development on Block 16000, Lot 1, which contains 6.7 acres along Old
Amboy Avenue, consisting of 150 multifamily apartments, of which 120
will be market-rate units and 30 will be affordable family rentals (20%
setaside). Fifteen percent of the affordable units will be very-lowincome
units, which units shall be considered part of the low-income
housing requirement. [Amended 7-20-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-16]
C. Permitted principal uses:
(1) Townhouses; and
(2) Multifamily dwellings.
D. Permitted accessory uses:
(1) Loading areas as required by Chapter 250;
(2) Signage as permitted by Chapter 250;
(3) Refuse and recycling enclosures as regulated by Chapter 250;
(4) Satellite antennas as regulated by Chapter 250;
(5) Fences and walls as regulated by Chapter 250;
(6) Swimming pools, playgrounds and other recreational facilities
intended to be used by the occupants of the inclusionary housing
development in this zone and their guests; and
(7) Equipment and maintenance sheds.
E. Bulk, area, yard and height requirements.
(1) Minimum lot area shall be 6 1/2 acres.
§ 250-58.1 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-58.2
10:728
(2) Minimum lot width shall be 700 feet.
(3) Maximum gross residential density shall be 22.4 dwelling units per
acre, and the maximum amount of total dwelling units shall not
exceed 150 dwelling units.
(4) Minimum front yard from the lot boundary line for permitted
principal and accessory uses shall be 75 feet, and minimum rear
and side yards from the lot boundary line for permitted principal
and accessory uses shall be 50 feet.
(5) Maximum lot coverage shall be 65%.
(6) Minimum landscape buffer, which shall be provided in accordance
with this chapter, from any lot boundary line shall be 15 feet.
(7) Minimum landscape ratio shall be 0.25.
(8) Maximum height for principal structures shall be three stories or
55 feet.
(9) Maximum height for accessory structures shall be one story or 20
feet.
(10) Maximum gross floor area of accessory buildings shall be 1,000
square feet.
F. Building requirements.
(1) Maximum number of dwellings unit per building.
(a) Multifamily buildings shall not exceed 150 dwelling units.
(b) Townhouse buildings shall not exceed eight dwelling units.
(2) Maximum length of buildings.
(a) Multifamily buildings shall not exceed 490 feet in length.
(b) Townhouse buildings shall not exceed 200 feet in length.
(3) Minimum building facade articulation.
(a) Multifamily buildings shall provide an offset of two feet every
100 feet.
(b) Townhouse buildings shall provide an offset of two feet for
every four dwelling units.
(c) All multifamily and townhouse buildings should be designed
with architectural features that minimize the impact of any
long expanse of wall by employing techniques such as variation
in color, materials, articulation and roof lines.
(4) Minimum separation between buildings.
§ 250-58.2 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-58.2
10:729
§ 250-58.3. Hospital Zone (H) District. [Added 10-14-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-22]
(a) Building window wall to building window wall:
[1] Multifamily buildings shall be separated by at least 30
feet.
[2] Townhouse buildings shall be separated by at least 25 feet.
(b) Building window wall for multifamily and townhouse buildings
to end wall or building corner for multifamily and townhouse
buildings shall be 20 feet.
(c) Building window wall for multifamily and townhouse buildings
to window or end wall of clubhouse shall be 25 feet.
(d) Building wall for multifamily and townhouse buildings to wall
of freestanding accessory buildings and structures shall be 20
feet.
(5) Minimum building setbacks from curb faces, parking spaces,
driveways and internal streets that are private shall be 10 feet,
except for covered drop-off areas to building, which covered dropoff
area shall not exceed 150 feet in length.
G. Inclusionary housing requirements.
(1) Market-rate dwelling units shall total no more than 120.
(2) Affordable dwelling units, which are defined by state statute, shall
total at least 30 dwelling units, which is 20% of the overall total
dwelling units consisting of 150. The affordable dwelling units shall
be rental units.
(3) Five very-low-income affordable rental dwelling units, which is 15%
of the 30 affordable dwelling units, shall be provided.
(4) The affordable housing shall be provided, including, but not limited
to, market-rate and affordable housing phasing, bedroom
distribution, accessibility requirements and other requirements, in
accordance with Old Bridge Township ordinances and New Jersey
state statutes and regulations.
(5) Each affordable unit created in this zone shall remain subject to
affordability controls for a period of at least 50 years, until the
Township of Old Bridge takes action to release the unit from such
requirements. [Added 7-20-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-16]
A. Establishment. There is hereby permitted and created a Hospital Zone
(H) District as shown on the Official Zoning Map of the Township of Old
Bridge, County of Middlesex, State of New Jersey. The Official Zoning
Map of the Township of Old Bridge is hereby amended to include the H
§ 250-58.2 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-58.3
10:730
District, and is incorporated herein by reference. The H District shall
apply to Block 17000, Lots 28.11, 28.12 and 28.111, and any prior
zoning for these lots is hereby changed accordingly. The zoning in this
section shall not be construed or interpreted to affect the permitted
uses, permitted accessory uses, bulk requirements and/or any other
requirements of any other zone in the Township. [Amended 7-20-2017
by Ord. No. 2017-16]
B. Purpose. The zone is adjacent to the IH1 Zone and is required for part
of the development of an inclusionary development on Block 17000,
Lots 5 and 28.112.
C. Permitted principal uses:
(1) Hospitals;
(2) Nursing, rest and convalescent homes;
(3) Sanitariums;
(4) Medical and dental offices;
(5) Extended care facilities;
(6) Diagnostic, treatment and rehabilitation facilities;
(7) Ambulatory surgery centers;
(8) Medical clinics; and
(9) Laboratories.
D. Permitted accessory uses:
(1) Parking lots as required by Chapter 250;
(2) Loading areas as required by Chapter 250;
(3) Signage as permitted by Chapter 250;
(4) Trash enclosures as regulated by Chapter 250;
(5) Satellite antennas as regulated by Chapter 250;
(6) Fences and walls as regulated by Chapter 250;
(7) Roadways, driveways and utilities as regulated by Chapter 250;
(8) Signage for adjacent inclusionary housing development in the IH1
Inclusionary Housing Zone 1 on Block 17000, Lots 5 and 28.112, as
permitted and regulated by Chapter 250, except as otherwise
permitted in this section; and
(9) Roadways, driveways, utilities and pedestrian access serving
adjacent inclusionary housing development in the IH1 Inclusionary
Housing Zone 1 on Block 17000, Lots 5 and 28.112, as permitted
§ 250-58.3 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-58.3
10:731
and regulated by Chapter 250 for all portions accessory to both
residential and nonresidential uses and the Residential Site
Improvement Standards for portions accessory solely to residential
uses;
(10) Fitness centers;
(11) Gift shops; and
(12) Cafeterias.
E. Bulk, area, yard and height requirements.
(1) Minimum lot area shall be 23 acres.
(2) Minimum lot width shall be 300 feet.
(3) Maximum floor area ratio shall be 0.35.
(4) Minimum front, rear and side yards for permitted principal and
accessory uses shall be 100 feet. However, with respect to any
roadways, driveways, utilities and pedestrian access serving
adjacent inclusionary housing development in the IH1 Zone, on
Block 1700, Lots 5 and 28.112, the minimum front, rear and side
yards for any such roadways, driveways, and pedestrian access
shall be five feet and there shall be no minimum setback for
utilities.
(5) Maximum lot coverage shall be 60%.
(6) Minimum landscape buffer, which shall be provided in accordance
with this chapter, from any property line shall be 50 feet, except the
minimum landscape buffer shall be five feet along the shared-use
driveway/roadway servicing the adjacent inclusionary housing
development in the IH1 Zone, on Block 1700, Lots 5 and 28.112.
(7) Minimum landscape ratio shall be 0.35.
(8) The height of principal structures may exceed the maximum height
requirements of this chapter; provided, however, that the front,
rear and side yard requirements set forth above shall be increased
by one foot for each foot by which the height of the structure
exceeds the maximum height which would be otherwise permitted
by this chapter; and further provided that in no case shall any
proposed structure exceed 50 feet in height.
(9) Maximum height for accessory structures shall be two stories or 30
feet.
F. Signage.
(1) Signage for permitted principal uses shall comply with § 250-52A,
C and G.
§ 250-58.3 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-58.3
10:732
§ 250-58.4. Mixed Use-Inclusionary Housing Zone (MU-IH) District.
[Added 10-14-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-20]
(2) Signage for adjacent inclusionary housing development in the IH1
Inclusionary Housing Zone 1 on Block 17000, Lots 5 and 28.112,
shall be permitted, provided the appropriate rights are obtained
from the property owner and comply with the following
requirements:
(a) Section 250-52A and G.
(b) In addition to signage permitted for permitted principal uses in
the H Hospital Zone, one site identification sign shall be
permitted for the adjacent inclusionary housing development
in the IH1 Inclusionary Housing Zone 1 on Block 17000, Lots 5
and 28.112, at the intersection of the inclusionary housing
access road and Ferry Road.
(c) The sign shall be designed as a monument-type sign.
(d) Maximum sign area shall be 32 square feet. The sign may be
two-sided, with one side utilized for calculating sign area in
accordance with this chapter. Decorative and/or supporting
structures or walls supporting signs, regardless of whether lit,
shall not be included in the calculation of sign area.
(e) Maximum sign height shall be eight feet.
(f) The sign shall be set back at least 10 feet from the right-of-way
line of Ferry Road.
(g) The sign may be externally or internally lit.
A. Establishment. There is hereby permitted and created a Mixed Use-
Inclusionary Housing Zone (MU-IH) District as shown on the Official
Zoning Map of the Township of Old Bridge, County of Middlesex, State
of New Jersey. The Official Zoning Map of the Township of Old Bridge is
hereby amended to include the MU-IH District, and is incorporated
herein by reference. The MU-IH District shall apply to Block 2150, Lot
4.11, and any prior zoning for this lot is hereby changed accordingly.
The zoning in this section shall not be construed or interpreted to affect
the permitted uses, permitted accessory uses, bulk requirements and/
or any other requirements of any other zone in the Township.
B. Purpose. The purpose of this zone is to permit an inclusionary
development with a mix of commercial and office uses on Block 2150,
Lot 4.11, which contains approximately 94 acres along Matawan Road.
The inclusionary development will consist of 529 multifamily
apartments, of which 423 will be market-rate units and 106 will be
affordable family rentals (20% setaside). Fifteen percent of the
affordable units will be very-low-income affordable units.
§ 250-58.3 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-58.4
10:733
C. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A building on one lot, used and designed
as a residence for three or more households living independently of
each other and separated by either vertical, horizontal or both vertical
and horizontal construction.
DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE — A dwelling consisting of more than two
attached single-family residences, constructed in a continuous row, in
a development within which each residential unit is primarily a vertical
construction unit.
D. Permitted principal uses:
(1) Townhouses as defined in this section;
(2) Multifamily dwellings as defined in this section; and
(3) Nonresidential uses permitted in the OG5 Office General 5 Zone.
E. Permitted accessory uses:
(1) Parking areas and lots as required by Chapter 250;
(2) Loading areas as required by Chapter 250;
(3) Signage as permitted by Chapter 250;
(4) Refuse and recycling enclosures as regulated by Chapter 250;
(5) Satellite antennas as regulated by Chapter 250;
(6) Fences and walls as regulated by Chapter 250;
(7) Roadways, driveways and utilities as regulated by Chapter 250;
(8) Swimming pools, playgrounds and other recreational facilities
intended to be used by the occupants of the inclusionary housing
development in this zone and their guests;
(9) Clubhouse intended to be used by the occupants of the inclusionary
housing development in this zone and their guests;
(10) Leasing office;
(11) Model apartment of multifamily dwelling and/or townhouse
dwelling, which shall not be used for residential occupancy;
(12) Property management office;
(13) Private garages, attached or detached, to be used by occupants of
the inclusionary housing development in this zone; and
(14) Public walking trails through open space areas.
F. Tract requirements.
§ 250-58.4 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-58.4
10:734
(1) Minimum tract area shall be 94 acres.
(2) Maximum gross residential density for tract shall be 5.6 dwelling
units per acre, and the maximum amount of total dwelling units
shall not exceed 529 dwelling units.
(3) Minimum amount of nonresidential gross floor area shall be
217,600 square feet.
G. Bulk, area, yard and height requirements.
(1) Residential uses.
(a) Minimum lot area shall be 10 acres.
(b) Minimum lot width shall be 200 feet.
(c) Minimum front, rear and side yards from the lot boundary line
for permitted principal and accessory uses shall be 50 feet.
(d) Maximum lot coverage shall be 35%.
(e) Minimum landscape buffer, which shall be provided in
accordance with this chapter, from any lot boundary line shall
be 50 feet.
(f) Minimum landscape ratio shall be 0.50.
(g) Maximum height for principal structures shall be four stories
or 60 feet.
(h) Maximum height for accessory structures shall be two stories
or 32 feet.
(i) Maximum gross floor area of accessory buildings shall be
10,000 square feet.
(j) Minimum open space and recreation area shall be 50% of the
lot area.
(2) Nonresidential uses. Nonresidential uses shall comply with OG5
Office General 5 Zone requirements.
H. Residential building requirements.
(1) Maximum number of dwellings unit per building.
(a) Multifamily buildings shall not exceed 56 dwelling units.
(b) Townhouse buildings shall not exceed eight dwelling units.
(2) Maximum length of buildings.
(a) Multifamily buildings shall not exceed 225 feet in length.
(b) Townhouse buildings shall not exceed 200 feet in length.
§ 250-58.4 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-58.4
10:735
(3) Minimum building facade articulation.
(a) Multifamily buildings shall provide an offset of two feet every
100 feet.
(b) Townhouse buildings shall provide an offset of two feet for
every four dwelling units.
(c) All multifamily and townhouse buildings should be designed
with architectural features that minimize the impact of any
long expanse of wall by employing techniques such as variation
in color, materials, articulation and roof lines.
(4) Minimum separation between buildings.
(a) Building window wall to building window wall.
[1] Multifamily buildings shall be separated by at least 30
feet.
[2] Townhouse buildings shall be separated by at least 25 feet.
(b) Building window wall for multifamily and townhouse buildings
to end wall or building corner for multifamily and townhouse
buildings shall be 20 feet.
(c) Building window wall for multifamily and townhouse buildings
to window or end wall of clubhouse shall be 25 feet.
(d) Building wall for multifamily and townhouse buildings to wall
of freestanding accessory buildings and structures shall be 20
feet.
(5) Minimum building setbacks from curb faces, parking spaces,
driveways and internal street that are private shall be 10 feet.
I. Nonresidential building requirements. Nonresidential building
requirements shall comply with OG5 Office General 5 Zone
requirements.
J. Inclusionary housing requirements. [Amended 7-20-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-16]
(1) Market-rate dwelling units shall total no more than 423.
(2) Affordable dwelling units, which are defined by state statute, shall
total at least 106 dwelling units, which is 20% of the overall total
dwelling units consisting of 529. The affordable dwelling units shall
be rental units.
(3) Fourteen very-low-income affordable rental dwelling units, which is
15% of the 106 affordable dwelling units, shall be provided.
(4) The affordable housing shall be provided, including, but not limited
to, market-rate and affordable housing phasing, bedroom
§ 250-58.4 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-58.4
10:736
distribution, accessibility requirements and other requirements, in
accordance with Old Bridge Township ordinances and New Jersey
state statutes and regulations.
(5) Each affordable unit created in this zone shall remain subject to
affordability controls for a period of at least 50 years, until the
Township of Old Bridge takes action to release the unit from such
requirements.
K. Residential and nonresidential construction phasing. [Amended
7-20-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-16]
Maximum Market-Rate Minimum Nonresidential
Dwelling Units Completed Gross Floor Area Completed
(square feet)
238 60,000
(1) The developer shall be permitted to receive building permits for
residential dwellings after receipt of the 238th certificate of
occupancy ("CO") for market-rate dwelling units, but shall not
receive further COs for additional market-rate units until it has
received a CO for 60,000 square feet of nonresidential space (shell
only, fit out when tenants identified). Upon receipt of a CO for the
initial 60,000 square feet of nonresidential space, the developer
shall be permitted to apply for COs for the remaining 185 marketrate
dwelling units, and there shall be no further restriction on the
completion of the market-rate residential units related to the
completion of nonresidential space.
(2) The developer will, however, be required to make and complete,
subject to the Township's and such other outside agency having
jurisdiction's inspection and approval, certain off-site road
improvements prior to receiving any CO beyond the 238th for
market-rate dwelling units. The off-site road improvements that
must be completed include:
(a) Installation of a new traffic signal at the northbound entrance
and exit ramps of the Garden State Parkway (GSP) at its
intersection with Matawan Road and the new entrance to the
development;
(b) Widening of existing GSP ramp from newly improved
intersection to the ramp terminals, including new through
lanes and left and right turn lanes at the intersection;
(c) Widening Matawan Road for approximately 1,000 feet from
existing bridge over the GSP to approximately 500 feet east of
the proposed new traffic signal, allowing for one through lane
in each direction and left turn lanes at the new intersection;
and
§ 250-58.4 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-58.4
10:737
§ 250-58.5. Route 9 Mixed Use-Inclusionary Housing Center Zone
(Route 9 MU-IH) District. [Added 11-21-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-25]
(d) Addition of a third lane on the bridge over the GSP.
(3) The developer shall also enter a binding agreement with the
Bridgepoint Homeowner's Association to memorialize the
dedication of the entrance roadway and the construction and
dedication of a thirty- to fifty-space parking area to the Bridgepoint
Homeowner's Association as negotiated between the developer and
the homeowner's association. The agreement may include such
other contingencies as may reasonably be negotiated between the
parties. A fully executed copy of said agreement shall be provided
to the Township before the Township shall release any COs for
market-rate residential units.
A. Establishment. There is hereby permitted and created a Route 9 Mixed
Use-Inclusionary Housing Center Zone (Route 9 MU-IH) District as
shown on the Official Zoning Map of the Township of Old Bridge,
County of Middlesex, State of New Jersey. The Official Zoning Map of
the Township of Old Bridge is hereby amended to include the Route 9
MU-IH District, and is incorporated herein by reference. The Route 9
MU-IH District shall apply to Block 5001, Lots 12.12 and 14, Block
6302, Lot 9, Block 6303, Lot 6, Block 6303, portions of Lots 3.11 and 7,
and Block 7000, a portion of Lot 1.13, and any prior zoning for these
lots and/or portions of lots is hereby changed accordingly. The zoning in
this section shall not be construed or interpreted to affect the permitted
use, permitted accessory uses, bulk and/or other requirements of any
other zone in the Township.
B. Purpose. The purpose of this zone is to permit an inclusionary
development with a mix of commercial, office and light industrial uses
on Block 5001, Lots 12.12 and 14, Block 6302, Lot 9, Block 6303, Lot 6,
Block 6303, portions of Lots 3.11 and 7 and Block 7000, a portion of Lot
1.13, which consist of approximately 342 acres along Route 9
southbound. The inclusionary development will consist of 2,148
dwelling units, of which 1,718 will be market-rate units and 430 will be
affordable rental units (20% setaside). Of the 430 affordable units, 299
will be affordable family rentals and 131 affordable age-restricted
rentals. Thirteen percent of the affordable units will be very-low-income
affordable units.
C. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
COMMERCIAL STREET — A street that provides access from an
adjoining highway to a commercial development within the Route 9
MU-IH Mixed Use-Inclusionary Housing Zoning District. A commercial
street shall provide on-site access to commercial development and
shall extend to side property lines to connect to future commercial
development on adjoining parcels of land in all nonresidential zoning
§ 250-58.4 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-58.5
10:738
districts. A commercial street shall have a width of at least 30 feet and
shall have concrete curbs and sidewalks and street trees in accordance
with the provisions of this section. The design of a commercial street
shall employ traffic calming techniques, such as curb bump-outs at
intersections and speed tables, where determined by the Township
Engineer.
CONVENIENCE STORE — A retail establishment of greater than 2,000
square feet and up to 5,000 square feet selling primarily food products,
household items, newspapers and magazines, candy, and beverages,
and freshly prepared foods such as sandwiches and salads for offpremises
consumption.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A building no more than five stories
and 65 feet in height, on one lot, used and designed as a residence
for three or more households living independently of each other and
separated by either vertical, horizontal or both vertical and horizontal
construction and may have structured parking that is part of the
principal multifamily building.
DWELLING, SENIOR ASSISTED-LIVING — A building of no more than
five stories and 65 feet in height, on one lot, used and designed as
a residence for the frail elderly that provides rooms, meals, personal
care and supervision of self-administered medication and may provide
other services such as recreational activities, financial services and
transportation. Assisted-living dwelling units shall be measured in
terms of beds. The building shall be deed restricted to permit only
senior citizens in accordance with federal regulations for age
restriction.
DWELLING, SENIOR INDEPENDENT-LIVING — A building of no more
than five stories and 65 feet in height, on one lot, used and designed
as a residence for three or more age-restricted households living
independently of each other and separated by either vertical, horizontal
or both vertical and horizontal construction. The building shall be deed
restricted to permit only senior citizens in accordance with federal
regulations for age restriction.
DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE — A dwelling consisting of more than two
attached single-family residences, constructed in a continuous row, in
a development within which each residential unit is primarily a vertical
construction unit.
MINI MART — A retail establishment of up to 2,000 square feet that is
located on the same lot and is accessory to a gasoline station.
D. Permitted principal uses.
(1) Residential uses shall be permitted in the following manner:
(a) Detached single-family dwellings that are permitted in the R-9
Medium High Density Residential Zone.
(b) Senior assisted-living dwellings as defined in this section.
§ 250-58.5 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-58.5
10:739
(c) Senior independent-living dwellings as defined in this section.
(d) Multifamily dwellings as defined in this section.
(e) Townhouse dwellings as defined in this section.
(2) Nonresidential uses shall be permitted in the following manner:
(a) Principal nonresidential uses that are permitted in the EDO3
Economic Development Opportunity 3 Zone shall be provided
in concentrated areas along Route 9 and the northeastern
corner of the tract of land.
(b) Shopping centers that are permitted in the C-R Regional
Commercial Shopping Zone shall be provided in the
southernmost portion of the tract of land along Route 9.
(c) Light industrial uses that are permitted in the SD Special
Development Zone shall be provided in the northern and
northwestern portions of the tract of land that abut the existing
SD Zone situated directly to the west.
(d) Municipal and governmental uses that are permitted in the C-R
Regional Commercial Shopping Zone and SD Special
Development Zones.
(e) Public transport centers, including structured and on-grade
parking facilities, bus stations and transfer centers for
commuters.
E. Permitted accessory uses:
(1) Parking areas and lots as required by Chapter 250;
(2) Loading areas as required by Chapter 250;
(3) Signage as permitted by Chapter 250 and this section;
(4) Refuse and recycling enclosures as regulated by Chapter 250;
(5) Satellite antennas as regulated by Chapter 250;
(6) Fences and walls as regulated by Chapter 250;
(7) Roadways, driveways and utilities as regulated by Chapter 250;
(8) Swimming pools, playgrounds and other recreational facilities
intended to be used by the occupants of the inclusionary housing
development in this zone and their guests;
(9) Clubhouse intended to be used by the occupants of the inclusionary
housing development in this zone and their guests and may include
administrative offices for the housing development it serves, and
may have a maximum height of three stories and 45 feet;
§ 250-58.5 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-58.5
10:740
(10) Leasing office;
(11) Model apartment of multifamily dwelling and/or townhouse
dwelling, which shall not be used for residential occupancy;
(12) Property management office; and
(13) Private garages, attached or detached, to be used by occupants of
the inclusionary housing development in this zone.
F. Conditionally permitted uses. The land uses that are conditionally
permitted in the Route 9 MU-IH Mixed Use-Inclusionary Housing Zone
[as established by the North American Industrial Classification System
(NAICS)] are set forth hereinbelow, except as otherwise indicated:
(1) All conditionally permitted uses in the EDO3 Economic
Development Opportunity 3 Zone shall be permitted, with the
following exceptions:
(a) Gasoline stations, including gasoline station with convenience
store or mini mart and convenience store serving gasoline,
shall have a minimum lot size of two acres. All other
conditional requirements shall be met.
(2) Hospitals and nursing homes as conditionally permitted in
§ 250-41F.
G. Tract requirements.
(1) Minimum tract area shall be 342 acres.
(2) Maximum gross residential density for tract shall be 6.3 dwelling
units per acre, and the maximum amount of total dwelling units
shall not exceed 2,148 dwelling units.
(3) Minimum amount of nonresidential gross floor area shall be
1,000,000 square feet.
(4) Minimum landscape buffer provided along the tract boundary shall
be 50 feet, except a landscape buffer of at least 10 feet shall be
required for nonresidential uses in this zone that adjoin residential
uses on neighboring properties.
(5) Maximum tract coverage shall be 50%.
(6) Minimum open space, recreation and landscape ratio, inclusive of
wetland areas and wetland buffers, shall be 40%.
H. Bulk, area, yard and height requirements.
(1) Residential uses.
(a) Detached single-family dwellings shall comply with the bulk,
area, yard and height requirements of the R-9 Medium High
Density Residential Zone.
§ 250-58.5 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-58.5
10:741
(b) Assisted-living dwellings and independent-living dwellings.
[1] Minimum lot area shall be 10 acres.
[2] Minimum lot width shall be 250 feet.
[3] Minimum front, rear and side yards from the lot boundary
line for permitted principal and accessory uses shall be 20
feet.
[4] Maximum lot coverage shall be 50%.
[5] Minimum landscape buffer, which shall be provided in
accordance with this chapter, from any lot boundary line
shall be 20 feet.
[6] Minimum landscape ratio shall be 0.30.
[7] Maximum height for principal structures shall be five
stories or 65 feet.
[8] Maximum height for accessory structures shall be three
stories or 45 feet.
[9] Maximum gross floor area of accessory buildings shall be
10,000 square feet.
[10] Minimum open space and recreation area shall be 25% of
the lot area.
(c) Multifamily dwellings.
[1] Minimum lot area shall be three acres.
[2] Minimum lot width shall be 100 feet.
[3] Minimum front, rear and side yards from the lot boundary
line for permitted principal and accessory uses shall be 25
feet.
[4] Maximum lot coverage shall be 50%.
[5] Minimum landscape buffer, which shall be provided in
accordance with this chapter, from any lot boundary line
shall be 20 feet.
[6] Minimum landscape ratio shall be 0.30.
[7] Maximum height for principal structures shall be five
stories or 65 feet.
[8] Maximum height for accessory structures shall be three
stories or 45 feet.
[9] Maximum gross floor area of accessory buildings shall be
10,000 square feet.
§ 250-58.5 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-58.5
10:742
[10] Minimum open space and recreation area shall be 25% of
the lot area.
(d) Townhouse dwellings.
[1] Minimum lot area shall be five acres for condominium
form of ownership and 1,500 square feet for individual lots
for fee simple ownership.
[2] Minimum lot width shall be 200 feet for condominium form
of ownership and 20 feet for individual lots for fee simple
ownership.
[3] Minimum front, rear and side yards from the lot boundary
line for permitted principal and accessory uses in the
condominium form of ownership shall be 50 feet, and for
individual lots for fee simple ownership shall be 25 feet for
front yard, 10 for end units to side yard, zero feet for
interior units for side yard and 20 feet for rear yard.
[4] Maximum lot coverage shall be 50% for condominium form
of ownership and no requirement for individual lots for fee
simple ownership.
[5] Minimum landscape buffer, which shall be provided in
accordance with this chapter, from any lot boundary line
shall be 50 feet. Individual lots for fee simple ownership
shall not have a landscape buffer requirement.
[6] Minimum landscape ratio shall be 0.04.
[7] Maximum height for principal structures shall be three
stories or 40 feet.
[8] Maximum height for accessory structures shall be 1-1/2
stories or 20 feet.
[9] Maximum gross floor area of accessory buildings shall be
2,000 square feet.
[10] Minimum open space and recreation area shall be 40% of
the lot area.
(2) Nonresidential uses.
(a) Principal nonresidential uses that are permitted in the EDO3
Economic Development Opportunity 3 Zone shall comply with
bulk, area, yard and height requirements of the EDO3 Zone.
(b) Shopping centers that are permitted in the C-R Regional
Commercial Shopping Zone shall comply with bulk, area, yard
and height requirements of the C-R Zone.
§ 250-58.5 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-58.5
10:743
(c) Light industrial uses that are permitted in the SD Special
Development Zone shall comply with bulk, area, yard and
height requirements of the SD Zone.
(d) Municipal and governmental uses that are permitted in the C-R
Regional Commercial Shopping Zone and SD Special
Development Zones.
[1] Minimum lot area shall be four acres.
[2] Minimum lot width shall be 200 feet.
[3] Minimum front, rear and side yards from the lot boundary
line for permitted principal and accessory uses shall be 25
feet.
[4] Maximum lot coverage shall be 80%.
[5] Minimum landscape buffer, which shall be provided in
accordance with this chapter, from any lot boundary line
shall be 15 feet.
[6] Minimum landscape ratio shall be 0.20.
[7] Maximum height for principal structures shall be three
stories or 40 feet.
[8] Maximum height for accessory structures shall be 1-1/2
stories or 20 feet.
(e) Public transport centers, including structured and on-grade
parking facilities, bus stations and transfer centers for
commuters.
[1] Minimum lot area shall be three acres.
[2] Minimum lot width shall be 100 feet.
[3] Minimum front, rear and side yards from the lot boundary
line for permitted principal and accessory uses shall be 25
feet.
[4] Maximum lot coverage shall be 75%.
[5] Minimum landscape buffer, which shall be provided in
accordance with this chapter, from any lot boundary line
shall be 15 feet.
[6] Minimum landscape ratio shall be 0.20.
[7] Maximum height for principal structures shall be five
stories or 65 feet.
[8] Maximum height for accessory structures shall be two
stories or 35 feet.
§ 250-58.5 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-58.5
10:744
[9] Minimum open space shall be 20% of the lot area.
I. Residential building requirements.
(1) Maximum number of dwellings unit per building.
(a) Senior assisted-living and independent-living buildings shall
not exceed 200 dwelling units.
(b) Multifamily buildings shall not exceed 480 dwelling units.
(c) Townhouse buildings shall not exceed eight dwelling units.
(2) Maximum length of buildings.
(a) The maximum length of assisted-living, independent-living and
multifamily buildings shall not exceed 150 feet without an
offset or facade articulation or feature, with consideration
given to the number of dwelling units in the building, the
height of the building and the building's scale and proportion
relative to adjacent buildings.
(b) Townhouse buildings shall not exceed 200 feet in length.
(3) Minimum building facade articulation.
(a) The minimum building facade articulation for assisted-living,
independent-living and multifamily buildings shall be designed
to maximize use of architectural features, window patterns,
and off-sets to minimize excessive long, blank walls, with
consideration given to the number of dwelling units in the
building, the height of the building and the building's scale and
proportion relative to adjacent buildings.
(b) Townhouse buildings shall provide an offset of two feet for
every four dwelling units.
(c) All multifamily and townhouse buildings should be designed
with architectural features that minimize the impact of any
long expanse of wall by employing techniques such as variation
in color, materials, articulation and roof lines.
(4) Minimum separation between buildings.
(a) Building window wall to building window wall.
[1] Assisted-living, independent-living and multifamily
buildings shall be separated by at least 30 feet.
[2] Townhouse buildings shall be separated by at least 25 feet.
(b) Building window wall for assisted-living, independent-living,
multifamily and townhouse buildings to end wall or building
corner for multifamily and townhouse buildings shall be 20
feet.
§ 250-58.5 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-58.5
10:745
(c) Building window wall for assisted-living, independent-living,
multifamily and townhouse buildings to window or end wall of
clubhouse shall be 25 feet.
(d) Building wall for assisted-living, independent-living,
multifamily and townhouse buildings to wall of freestanding
accessory buildings and structures shall be 20 feet.
(5) Minimum building setbacks from curb faces, parking spaces,
driveways and internal streets that are private shall be 10 feet.
J. Nonresidential building requirements.
(1) Principal nonresidential uses that are permitted in the EDO3
Economic Development Opportunity 3 Zone shall comply with
building requirements of the EDO3 Zone.
(2) Shopping centers that are permitted in the C-R Regional
Commercial Shopping Zone shall comply with building
requirements of the C-R Zone.
(3) Light industrial uses that are permitted in the SD Special
Development Zone shall comply with building requirements of the
SD Zone.
K. Inclusionary housing requirements.
(1) Market-rate dwelling units shall total no more than 1,718, of which
no more than 1,026 shall be market-rate family dwelling units and
at least 692 shall be age-restricted dwelling units.
(2) Affordable dwelling units, which are defined by state statute, shall
total at least 430 dwelling units, which is 20% of the overall total
dwelling units consisting of 2,148. The affordable dwelling units
shall consist of 299 family rental units and 131 age-restricted
rental units.
(3) Fifty-six very-low-income affordable rental dwelling units, which is
13% of the 430 affordable dwelling units, shall be provided.
Seventeen age-restricted affordable dwelling units shall be
provided for very-low-income households, of which nine shall be
provided among the age-restricted affordable multifamily dwelling
units, five shall be provided among the age-restricted affordable
independent-living dwelling units and three shall be provided
among the age-restricted affordable assisted-living dwelling units.
Thirty-nine affordable family dwelling units shall be provided to
very-low-income households.
(4) The affordable housing shall be provided, including, but not limited
to, market-rate and affordable housing phasing, bedroom
distribution, accessibility requirements and other requirements, in
accordance with Old Bridge Township ordinances and New Jersey
state statutes and regulations.
§ 250-58.5 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-58.5
10:746
(5) Each affordable unit created in this zone shall remain subject to
affordability controls for a period of at least 50 years, until the
Township of Old Bridge takes action to release the unit from such
requirements.
L. Residential and nonresidential construction phasing.
Maximum Market-Rate
Dwelling Units Completed
Minimum Nonresidential Gross
Floor Area Completed
(square feet)
320 No requirement
230/550 cumulative 100,000
450/1,000 cumulative 125,000/225,000 cumulative
450/1,450 cumulative 125,000/350,000 cumulative
278/1,718 cumulative 150,000/500,000 cumulative
After receipt of the 320th certificate of occupancy ("CO") for marketrate
dwelling units, the developer shall be permitted to receive
building permits for an additional 230 market-rate dwelling units, but
shall not receive COs for the additional 230 market-rate dwelling units
until it has received a CO for 100,000 square feet of nonresidential
space (shell only, fit out when tenants identified). Thereafter, the
developer shall be permitted to receive building permits for an
additional 450 market-rate dwelling units, but shall not receive COs
for the additional 450 market-rate dwellings until it has received a CO
for an additional 125,000 square feet of nonresidential space (shell
only, fit out when tenants identified). Thereafter, the developer shall
be permitted to receive building permits for an additional 450 marketrate
dwelling units, but shall not receive COs for the additional 450
market-rate dwellings until it has received a CO for an additional
125,000 square feet of nonresidential space (shell only, fit out when
tenants identified). Thereafter, the developer shall be permitted to
receive building permits for an additional 278 market-rate dwelling
units, but shall not receive COs for the additional 278 market-rate
dwellings until it has received a CO for an additional 150,000 square
feet of nonresidential space (shell only, fit out when tenants identified).
Upon receipt of COs for the cumulative 550,000 square feet of
nonresidential space, the developer shall be permitted to apply for COs
for the remaining 278 market-rate dwelling units, and there shall be
no further restriction on the completion of the market-rate residential
units related to the completion of nonresidential space.
M. Signage. Signage shall comply with § 250-52D of the Land Development
Ordinance, with the following exception:
(1) Freestanding signs located along Route 9 shall be the monument
type with a masonry base that is complemented with landscaping,
shall not exceed 30 feet in height, shall not exceed 300 square feet
§ 250-58.5 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-58.5
10:747
in area for each side of the sign that is limited to two sides on which
information is provided.
(2) Freestanding signs located along internal roads of the tract of land
to be developed shall be the monument type with a masonry base
that is complemented with landscaping, shall not exceed 12 feet in
height, shall not exceed 144 square feet in area for each side of the
sign that is limited to two sides on which information is provided,
except for shopping center signage along internal roads, which
signage shall not exceed 25 feet in height and shall not exceed 250
square feet in area for each side of the sign.
N. Design standards.
(1) Orientation and spacing of buildings.
(a) The longer of the front facades of commercial buildings shall
be oriented, as reasonably as possible, to be parallel to
adjoining highways, roads and commercial streets.
(b) The front facades of commercial buildings shall be aligned, as
reasonably as possible, to one another.
(c) Commercial buildings shall be oriented toward adjoining
public rights-of-way of highways and roads as reasonably as
possible.
(2) Site lighting. Site lighting shall comply with § 250-75 of the Land
Development Ordinance, with the following exceptions:
(a) All street lamps shall be of an antique style as depicted in the
illustration entitled, "Street Lamp Detail, No. TCD 19" of the
Town Centre District. Box-type and cobra-head-type shall be
prohibited.
(b) Pedestrian lighting shall have a maximum height of eight feet.
(3) Buffers and landscaping.
(a) Buffers shall comply with § 250-54 of the Land Development
Ordinance.
(b) Landscaping shall comply with § 250-74 of the Land
Development Ordinance.
(4) Street furniture.
(a) Benches, trash receptacles and planters shall be provided in
common sitting areas and, when provided, at bus stops.
(b) Bicycle parking spaces for bicycle racks shall be provided at
the following rates: minimum one space per 7,500 square feet
of gross floor area for nonresidential uses.
§ 250-58.5 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-58.5
10:748
(5) Sidewalk, street, parking and commercial building relationship.
(a) Sidewalks, which are at least five feet wide, shall be
integrated, connecting all parking areas throughout the site.
(b) Sidewalks, which are at least five feet wide, shall be provided
along both sides of all commercial streets and commercial
buildings.
(c) Sidewalks, which are at least six feet wide, shall be provided
along the frontage of the site along Route 9.
(d) Parking areas and commercial buildings shall be separated by
a minimum distance of 12 feet.
(e) Commercial streets shall extend to the side property line when
adjoining sites are zoned nonresidential so as to provide future
street connections. In the event there are no adjoining sites
zoned nonresidential, commercial streets may not be required
to be extended to the side property line unless the Planning
Board finds it advantageous to provide for a future street
connection on an adjoining site.
§ 250-58.5 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-58.5
10:749

ARTICLE VIII
Alternative Development Options
§ 250-59. Purpose.
The purpose of these provisions is to provide a range of flexibility within
which unique conditions relating to a lot or lots proposed for development
may be accommodated. The standards herein establish the limits of
discretionary action which may be taken by the approving board. These
standards are adopted pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-39b
and c, and no deviation from these standards may be granted pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70. Prior to the submissions of an application for
development which proposes the utilization of an alternative development
option set forth in this Article VIII, the developer is encouraged to take
advantage of the concept plan review procedure under Article IV.
§ 250-60. Optional development techniques generally.
As an alternative to conventional development the approving board may
authorize one of the three alternative development options set forth herein
in accordance with the standards herein established.
A. Density transfer option. The density transfer option provides for
reduced lot sizes in order to preserve a portion of the land in an open
undeveloped state. In contrast to a conventional subdivision, the
technique concentrates the allowable number of dwellings onto smaller
lots occupying a lesser portion of the tract; this technique leaves other
portions of the land undeveloped. With a conventional subdivision,
some portions of the tract may be undevelopable and this will reduce
the number of dwellings to less than that theoretically possible under
the allowable density. With the density transfer option, the allowable
density may still not be achieved but would be more achievable than
through a conventional subdivision. The density transfer option is
intended to be employed on small tracts which contain critical lands
and environmental constraints warranted and where development of
extensive active recreation areas is not desirable or practicable.
B. Cluster option. The cluster option expands on the concept of the density
transfer option by further reducing lot sizes to provide special
amenities. It is intended to be employed to create suitable areas for
organized outdoor recreation, a pedestrian path network linking all
parts of a development and a closed traffic circulation system. These
amenities are to be furnished in addition to protecting special
environmental features covered by the density transfer option. A
special density bonus available under the cluster option is intended to
encourage the development of housing for adult members of families
whose children have moved from their households, and who wish to
have a lifestyle which will offer them less maintenance to house and
grounds.
§ 250-59 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-60
10:751
§ 250-61. Density transfer option.
The approving board may authorize the use of reduced lot sizes for density
transfer in accordance with the Schedule of Alternative Development
Options attached hereto as Appendix H and made a part hereof178; provided
that where the proposed development meets the following qualifying
criteria:
§ 250-62. Cluster option.
The approving board may authorize the use of reduced lot sizes for cluster
development in accordance with the aforesaid Schedule of Alternative
C. Planned development option. The planned development option further
expands on the density transfer and cluster options by allowing
appropriate nonresidential uses to be incorporated into large scale
residential development. Planned developments shall be composed of
individual residential clusters each of which must individually satisfy
the requirements for the cluster option. A Class I Planned Development
may provide for convenience commercial facilities to be incorporated
into a neighborhood scale residential development. A Class II Planned
Development may provide for more extensive nonresidential
development to be incorporated into a larger community scale
residential development. Both classes may provide for public and quasipublic
land uses, but only a Class II Planned Development may provide
for a full range of neighborhood and community commercial facilities
along with industrial land uses.
A. The minimum tract size shall be five acres.
B. Allowable dwelling units may not be transferred between differing
zones.
C. The total number of lots created shall not exceed the allowable density
multiplied by the tract area.
D. Building lots shall conform to the conventional requirements for the
alternative standard as if developed in that zone and shall maintain
continuing compliance with said zone requirements.
E. All lands remaining outside of public streets, building lots and any other
parcels approved for special purposes shall be set aside as open space.
The boundaries of any open space parcel(s) shall be designed to
coincide with adjoining open space parcels, whether existing or
proposed, so as to extend and expand upon an overall open space
network for the Township. Inasmuch as is reasonably practicable,
developments shall be planned taking into account other existing,
planned or potential developments, so as to form residential clusters
conforming with the requirements of this chapter.
178. Editor's Note: Appendix H, Schedule of Alternative Development Options, is included at
the end of this chapter.
§ 250-60 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-62
10:752
Development Options where a development meets the following qualifying
criteria:
A. All qualifying criteria for the density transfer option shall be satisfied.
B. Each cluster shall:
(1) Be restricted to one type of land use or housing type in a
contiguous group of not less than 60 dwelling units;
(2) Be served by a street system which is designed to minimize through
traffic;
(3) Be served by a pedestrian circulation system which serves the
development; [Amended 3-27-1995 by Ord. No. 12-95]
(4) Be designed so that all residential lots shall adjoin an open space
parcel. Alternately, the Board may deem this item satisfied where,
in lieu of adjoining all lots, the open space is provided in such
quantity or location that it serves a greater public good, such as
adjoining other open space or parkland or serves to preserve
unique environmental or other features; and [Amended
3-27-1995 by Ord. No. 12-95]
(5) Be designed so that a minimum of 23% of the tract area shall be set
aside in developed or undeveloped open space parcels. Developed
open space parcels shall be designed to accommodate
pedestrianways of not less than 10 feet in width and recreation
sites of not less than five acres in area. [Amended 3-27-1995 by
Ord. No. 12-95]
(a) Developed open space is intended to provide sites for
recreational facilities. Developed open space may include, but
shall not be limited to, landscaped lawn areas, a golf course,
which may include ancillary features of groundwater recharge,
walkways, pedestrian bicycle paths, paved terraces and sitting
areas, and recreational facilities such as playfields,
playground, tot-lots, swimming pools, sports courts,
community center, and ancillary roadways and parking.
(b) Undeveloped open space is intended to preserve lands in a
natural state for groundwater recharge, aesthetic appeal,
recreation and conservation purposes. Undeveloped open
space may include wetlands, woodlands, wildlife preserves,
man-made and natural bodies of water, scenic areas, woodland
trails, hedgerows and treelines, natural wooded areas around
golf courses, and access roads and ancillary parking for
undeveloped open space sites. Development in undeveloped
open space shall be limited to the following: footpaths, jogging
trails, bridle paths, bicycle paths, nature walks, nature
preserves, bird sanctuaries, ecological study or alternative
energy areas, nurseries for trees, shrubs, and other plants to
§ 250-62 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-62
10:753
§ 250-63. Planned development.
The approving board may authorize a planned development consisting of
three or more residential clusters along with other nonresidential land uses
in accordance with the following standards:
be used in the development, access roads and ancillary parking
for undeveloped open space sites, and lighting, retaining walls
and other features necessary to protect the land or people who
will use the undeveloped open space.
(6) Have two or more points of access. [Added 4-23-2001 by Ord.
No. 17-01]
A. Criteria for planned developments. The approving board may authorize
the use of reduced lot sizes for planned development in accordance
with the aforesaid Schedule of Alternative Development Options179
where a development meets the following qualifying criteria:
(1) A planned development shall be a mixed use development and
contain at least three residential clusters, one or more of which
may conform to and take advantage of the density bonus provided
for in Subsection B, and each residential cluster within a planned
development shall individually conform to the requirements of the
cluster option. Anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding,
the granting of said density bonus shall only increase the permitted
density only in the cluster portion of the planned development
which conforms to the conditions permitting the application of such
bonus.
(2) Planned developments shall be of two classes, namely Class I PD
and Class II PD, and shall meet the size criteria set forth herein.
(a) A Class I PD shall be a planned residential development
designed for residential use with retail and service
conveniences. A site submitted for approval as a Class I PD
shall contain a contiguous area of not less than 100 acres.
(b) A Class II PD shall be a planned unit development designed for
residential and nonresidential employment generating uses. A
site submitted for approval as a Class II PD shall contain a
contiguous area of not less than 300 acres.
B. Allowable discretion. Flexibility in the planning and design of a planned
development is provided within a limited range of possibilities.
(1) Land use.
(a) A Class I PD shall:
179. Editor's Note: Appendix H, Schedule of Alternative Development Options, is included at
the end of this chapter.
§ 250-62 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-63
10:754
[1] Consist of at least three separate clusters;
[2] Contain at least two housing types;
[3] Contain at least two housing densities; and
[4] Contain a neighborhood commercial parcel of not less than
3% and not more than 10% of the tract area.
(b) A Class II PD shall:
[1] Contain general office, community commercial or special
development parcels of not less than 10% and not more
than 20% of the tract area;
[2] Contain public space parcels of not less than 3% of the
tract area;
[3] Consist of at least seven separate residential clusters;
[4] Contain at least five housing types;
[5] Contain at least three housing densities; and
[6] Contain neighborhood commercial parcels of not less than
3% and not more than 10% of the tract area.
(c) The nonresidential land uses in a Class I or Class II PD shall be
subject to the following additional restrictions:
[1] An applicant shall provide for public and quasi-public open
space and community facilities. Such public open space
may include:
[a] Public community service uses;
[b] Private community service uses.
[2] Public community service uses include, but are not limited
to, schools, libraries, fire stations, first aid and rescue
squad stations, municipal offices or quasi-governmental
offices, public recreational amenities, parks, play areas or
other similar facilities.
[3] Private community service uses are uses of a nature
similar to public community service uses, but which shall
be offered directly to the prospective users. Upon the
written acceptance of such lands by the private community
service user, the approving board shall formally approve
the inclusion of such uses for credit as public space.
(2) Density.
§ 250-63 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-63
10:755
(a) In order to encourage a variety of residential densities, the
total number of residential units shall be developed according
to the following schedule:
Class I PD Class II PD
Minimum Maximum Minimum Maximum
Low density/
LD
30% 70% 15% 45%
Low medium
density/
LMD
30% 70% 20% 35%
Medium
density/
MD
N.A. N.A. 25% 35%
Medium high
density/
MHD
N.A. N.A. 10% 20%
(b) Gross residential parcel densities within a PD shall correlate
with residential land use parcel categories as herein specified.
In the event of conflict, the average parcel density requirement
of this subsection shall govern.
[1] Low density/LD.
[a] Density range: one to four dwelling units per acre.
[b] Average parcel density: three dwelling units per acre.
[c] Permitted housing types:
[i] Single-family detached dwellings.
[ii] Patio home dwellings.
[2] Low medium density/LMD.
[a] Density range: one to nine dwelling units per acre.
[b] Average parcel density: six dwelling units per acre.
[c] Permitted housing types:
[i] Single-family detached dwellings.
[ii] Patio home dwellings.
[iii] Duplex.
[iv] Townhouse dwellings.
§ 250-63 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-63
10:756
[3] Medium density/MD.
[a] Density range: one to 15 dwelling units per acre.
[b] Average parcel density: 10 dwelling units per acre.
[c] Permitted housing types:
[i] Patio home dwellings.
[ii] Duplex.
[iii] Townhouse dwellings.
[iv] Multifamily dwellings.
[4] Medium high density/MHD.
[a] Density range: 15 to 25 dwelling units per acre.
[b] Average parcel density: 20 dwelling units per acre.
[c] Permitted housing types:
[i] Townhouse dwellings.
[ii] Multifamily dwellings.
(c) Density averaging may be used in distributing gross residential
parcel densities from one land use parcel to another within the
same overall land use category (i.e., LD, LMD, MD, MHD);
provided that the average density and maximum number of
dwelling units permitted in the given land use category is not
exceeded within each section embraced by the preliminary
plan submission. The approving authority shall approve all
applications for density averaging during the preliminary
approval process.
(d) A mixture of residential housing types within each of the
density categories shall be provided by the applicant and
approved by the approving board so that no single housing
type dominates.
C. Planning requirements. Planned developments shall be subject to the
following standards which shall supplement other provisions of this
chapter:
(1) Land use. The land use proposals for any planned development
shall be consistent with the policies articulated in the Master Plan
as relates to land use, community facilities and housing.
(2) Circulation. The circulation proposals for any planned development
shall be consistent with the policies articulated in the circulation
element of the Master Plan.
§ 250-63 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-63
10:757
(3) Utilities and services. The utilities proposals for any planned
development shall be consistent with the policies articulated in the
Master Plan as relates to stormwater management, utilities, local
services and fiscal impact on the county, municipality and special
districts, including the local school district.
(4) Open space. The open space proposals for any planned
development shall be consistent with the policies articulated in the
Master Plan as relates to open space and environmental features.
(5) Staging. The staging proposals for any planned development shall
ensure that each stage shall encompass a balanced mix of
residential and nonresidential land uses in proportion to the mix for
the entire development and that each stage shall encompass
completion of all streets, utilities and services necessary for the
section whether located within or outside the section. The
Township encourages completion of approved stages that are
substantially self-functioning and self-sustaining with respect to
traffic circulation, access, utilities, off-street parking and loading,
open space and other PD requirements before development
proceeds for new stages.
(a) In addition to the foregoing, residential housing units and
acres of nonresidential uses that may be developed in a Class I
or Class II PD shall be timed at intermediate points following
the staging performance schedule outlined below. The staging
performance schedule shall be established for the entire
development at the time of approval of the general
development plan timing schedule, if any, or otherwise at the
time of preliminary approval. At each subsequent approval
stage, the approving board shall review each application for
conformance with the staging performance schedule and may
establish bench marks within intermediate points.
(b) The staging performance schedule shall relate maximum
percentage of dwelling units (expressed as the maximum
number of construction permits issued) to the minimum
percent of acres of nonresidential uses that must be improved
with public water and sewer facilities, and minimum assessed
valuation of building space under construction devoted to
nonresidential uses, set forth in the following schedule:
Maximum
Dwelling Units
Minimum
Commercial and
Office Industrial
Acreage
(deed restricted and
served by water
sewer)
Minimum Ratables as
Percent of Total
Assessed Valuation of
Commercial Office
Industrial Defined at
GDP
10% 10% 0%
§ 250-63 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-63
10:758
25% 25% 10%
40% 40% 25%
60% 60% 45%
85% 85% 65%
(c) Affordable housing units approved pursuant to Article IX shall
not be counted as residential housing units and shall be
excluded from the staging performance scheduling
requirement.
(d) Construction permits may be withheld for noncompliance with
the staging performance schedule set forth herein.
§ 250-63 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-63
10:759

ARTICLE IX
Affordable Housing
§ 250-64. Intent. [Amended 12-14-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-21]
This section of the Old Bridge Township Code sets forth regulations
regarding the low- and moderate-income housing units in the Old Bridge
Township consistent with the provisions known as the "Substantive Rules
of the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing," N.J.A.C. 5:97 et seq.;
the Uniform Housing Affordability Controls, N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.; and
the Township's constitutional obligation to provide a fair share of affordable
housing for low- and moderate-income households. These regulations are
also intended to provide assurances that low- and moderate-income units
(the "affordable units") are created with controls on affordability over time
and that low- and moderate-income people occupy these units. These
regulations shall apply except where inconsistent with applicable law.
§ 250-65. Affordable housing regulations. [Amended 6-25-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-10; 12-14-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-21; 10-14-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-24]
A. Definitions. The following terms when used in this section shall have
the meanings given in this Subsection:
ACT — The Fair Housing Act of 1985, P.L. 1985, c. 222 (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-301 et seq.).
ADAPTABLE — Constructed in compliance with the technical design
standards of the Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — The entity designated by the Township
to administer affordable units in accordance with this section, N.J.A.C.
5:93, and UHAC (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26).
AFFIRMATIVE MARKETING — A regional marketing strategy designed
to attract buyers and/or renters of affordable units pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.15.
AFFORDABILITY AVERAGE — The average percentage of median
income at which new restricted units in an affordable housing
development are affordable to low- and moderate-income households.
AFFORDABLE — A sales price or rent level that is within the means of a
low- or moderate-income household as defined within N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.4,
and, in the case of an ownership unit, the sales price for the unit
conforms to the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.6, as may be
amended and supplemented, and, in the case of a rental unit, the rent
for the unit conforms to the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.12,
as may be amended and supplemented.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development included
in or approved pursuant to the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan
or otherwise intended to address the Township's fair share obligation,
and includes, but is not limited to, an inclusionary development, a
§ 250-64 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-65
10:761
municipal construction project or a one-hundred-percent affordable
housing development.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROGRAM(S) — Any mechanism in a
municipal Fair Share Plan prepared or implemented to address a
municipality's fair share obligation.
AFFORDABLE UNIT — A housing unit proposed or created pursuant to
the Act and approved for crediting by the Court and/or funded through
an affordable housing trust fund.
AGE-RESTRICTED UNIT — A housing unit designed to meet the needs
of, and exclusively for, the residents of an age-restricted segment of the
population such that:
AGENCY — The New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency
established by P.L. 1983, c. 530 (N.J.S.A. 55:14K-1 et seq.).
ALTERNATIVE LIVING ARRANGEMENT — A structure in which
households live in distinct bedrooms, yet share kitchen and plumbing
facilities, central heat and common areas. Alternative living
arrangements include, but are not limited to: transitional facilities for
the homeless; Class A, B, C, D and E boardinghomes as regulated by
the State of New Jersey Department of Community Affairs; residential
health care facilities as regulated by the New Jersey Department of
Health; group homes for the developmentally disabled and mentally ill
as licensed and/or regulated by the New Jersey Department of Human
Services; and congregate living arrangements.
ASSISTED-LIVING RESIDENCE — A facility that is licensed by the New
Jersey Department of Health and Senior Services to provide apartmentstyle
housing and congregate dining and to assure that assisted-living
services are available when needed for four or more adult persons
unrelated to the proprietor and that offers units containing, at a
minimum, one unfurnished room, a private bathroom, a kitchenette and
a lockable door on the unit entrance.
CERTIFIED HOUSEHOLD — A household that has been certified by an
Administrative Agent as a low-income household or moderate-income
household.
COAH — The Council on Affordable Housing, as established by the New
Jersey Fair Housing Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.).
All the residents of the development wherein the unit is situated
are 62 years of age or older; or
(1)
At least 80% of the units are occupied by one person who is 55
years of age or older; or
(2)
The development has been designated by the Secretary of the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development as "housing for
older persons" as defined in Section 807(b)(2) of the Fair Housing
Act, 42 U.S.C. § 3607.
(3)
§ 250-65 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-65
10:762
DCA — The State of New Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
DEFICIENT HOUSING UNIT — A housing unit with health and safety
code violations that requires the repair or replacement of a major
system. A major system includes weatherization, roofing, plumbing
(including wells), heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing (including
septic systems), lead paint abatement and/or load-bearing structural
systems.
DEVELOPER — Any person, partnership, association, company or
corporation that is the legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or
any land included in a proposed development, including the holder of an
option to contract to purchase, or other person having an enforceable
proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more
parcels, the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural
alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any use or change in the use of
any building or other structure, or of any mining, excavation or landfill,
and any use or change in the use of any building or other structure, or
land or extension of use of land, for which permission may be required
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
INCLUSIONARY DEVELOPMENT — A development containing both
affordable units and market-rate units. This term includes, but is not
limited to: new construction, the conversion of a nonresidential
structure to residential use and the creation of new affordable units
through the gut rehabilitation or reconstruction of a vacant residential
structure.
LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross annual
household income equal to 50% or less of the median household
income.
LOW-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a lowincome
household.
MAJOR SYSTEM — The primary structural, mechanical, plumbing,
electrical, fire protection, or occupant service components of a
building, which include, but are not limited to, weatherization, roofing,
plumbing (including wells), heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing
(including septic systems), lead paint abatement and load-bearing
structural systems.
MARKET-RATE UNITS — Housing not restricted to low- and moderateincome
households that may sell or rent at any price.
MEDIAN INCOME — The median income by household size for the
applicable housing region, as adopted annually by COAH or a successor
entity approved by the Court.
MODERATE-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross
annual household income in excess of 50% but less than 80% of the
median household income.
§ 250-65 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-65
10:763
MODERATE-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a
moderate-income household.
NON-EXEMPT SALE — Any sale or transfer of ownership other than
the transfer of ownership between husband and wife; the transfer of
ownership between former spouses ordered as a result of a judicial
decree of divorce or judicial separation, but not including sales to third
parties; the transfer of ownership between family members as a result
of inheritance; the transfer of ownership through an executor's deed to
a Class A beneficiary and the transfer of ownership by court order.
RANDOM SELECTION PROCESS — A process by which currently
income-eligible households are selected for placement in affordable
housing units such that no preference is given to one applicant over
another except for purposes of matching household income and size
with an appropriately priced and sized affordable unit (e.g., by lottery).
REGIONAL ASSET LIMIT — The maximum housing value in each
housing region affordable to a four-person household with an income at
80% of the regional median as defined by duly adopted regional income
limits published annually by COAH or a successor entity.
REHABILITATION — The repair, renovation, alteration or
reconstruction of any building or structure, pursuant to the
Rehabilitation Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-6.
RENT — The gross monthly cost of a rental unit to the tenant, including
the rent paid to the landlord, as well as an allowance for tenant-paid
utilities computed in accordance with allowances published by DCA
for its Section 8 program. In assisted-living residences, rent does not
include charges for food and services.
RESTRICTED UNIT — A dwelling unit, whether a rental unit or an
ownership unit, that is subject to the affordability controls of N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.1, as amended and supplemented, but does not include a
market-rate unit financed under UHORP or MONI.
UHAC — The Uniform Housing Affordability Controls set forth in
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26 et seq.
VERY-LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross
annual household income equal to 30% or less of the median household
income by household size for the applicable housing region.[Amended
7-20-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-16]
VERY-LOW-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a
very-low-income household.
WEATHERIZATION — Building insulation (for attic, exterior walls and
crawl space), siding to improve energy efficiency, replacement storm
windows, replacement storm doors, replacement windows and
replacement doors, and is considered a major system for purposes of a
rehabilitation program.
B. Applicability. [Amended 7-20-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-16]
§ 250-65 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-65
10:764
(1) The provisions of this section shall apply to all affordable housing
developments and affordable housing units that currently exist and
that are proposed to be created within the Township of Old Bridge
pursuant to the Township's most recently adopted Housing
Element and Fair Share Plan.
(2) In addition, any property in the Township of Old Bridge that is
currently zoned for nonresidential uses and that is subsequently
rezoned for residential purposes or receives a zoning change or a
use variance to permit residential development, or receives a
zoning change or a density variance to permit higher density
residential development, and provided such residential
development provides a sufficient compensatory benefit in terms of
the density of development permitted, shall provide an affordable
housing setaside of 15% if the affordable units will be for rent and
20% if the affordable units will be for sale. The determination of a
"sufficient compensatory benefit" shall be made by the reviewing
authority based upon prevailing legislation and/or case law.
(3) Any affordable housing development in the Township of Old Bridge
comprised entirely of affordable housing units, i.e. 100%
affordable, shall be subject to UHAC in regard to bedroom and
income distributions as well as the Fair Housing Act with respect to
the 13% very-low-income requirement, even if the affordable
housing development is funded with low-income housing tax credit
financing.
(4) The following sections shall apply to all developments that contain
low- and moderate-income housing units, including any currently
unanticipated future developments that will provide low- and
moderate-income housing units.
C. Monitoring and reporting. [Added 7-20-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-16]
(1) On the first anniversary of the entry of the order granting Old
Bridge a Final Judgment of Compliance and Repose, and every
anniversary thereafter through the end of the repose period, the
Township shall provide annual reporting of its Affordable Housing
Trust Fund activity to the New Jersey Department of Community
Affairs, Council on Affordable Housing or Local Government
Services, or other entity designated by the State of New Jersey,
with copies provided to the Fair Share Housing Center and the
Intervenors in IMO Application of the Township of Old Bridge,
Docket No.: MID-L-3997-15, and posted on the municipal website,
using forms developed for this purpose by the New Jersey
Department of Community Affairs, Council on Affordable Housing
or Local Government Services. The reporting shall include an
accounting of all Affordable Housing Trust Fund activity, including
the source and amount of funds collected and the amount of and
purpose for which any funds have been expended.
§ 250-65 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-65
10:765
(2) On the first anniversary of the entry of the order granting Old
Bridge a Final Judgment of Compliance and Repose, and every
anniversary thereafter through the end of the repose period, the
Township shall provide annual reporting of the status of all
affordable housing activity within the municipality through posting
on the municipal website with copies provided to the Fair Share
Housing Center and the Intervenors in IMO Application of the
Township of Old Bridge, Docket No.: MID-L-3997-15, using forms
previously developed for this purpose by the Council on Affordable
Housing or any other forms endorsed by the Court-appointed
Special Master and Fair Share Housing Center.
(3) For the midpoint realistic opportunity review due on July 1, 2020,
as required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-313, the Township shall
post on its municipal website, with copies provided to the Fair
Share Housing Center and the Intervenors in IMO Application of
the Township of Old Bridge, Docket No.: MID-L-3997-15, a status
report as to its implementation of its Plan and an analysis of
whether any unbuilt sites or unfulfilled mechanisms continue to
present a realistic opportunity. Such posting shall invite any
interested party to submit comments to the municipality, with
copies provided to the Fair Share Housing Center and the
Intervenors in IMO Application of the Township of Old Bridge,
Docket No.: MID-L-3997-15, regarding whether any sites no longer
present a realistic opportunity and should be replaced. Any
interested party may by motion request a hearing before the Court
regarding these issues.
(4) For the review of very-low-income housing requirements required
by N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.1, within 30 days of the third anniversary of
the entry of the order granting Old Bridge a Final Judgment of
Compliance and Repose, and every third year thereafter, the
Township will post on its municipal website, with copies provided to
the Fair Share Housing Center and the Intervenors in IMO
Application of the Township of Old Bridge, Docket No.: MIDL-
3997-15, a status report as to its satisfaction of its very-lowincome
requirements, including the family very-low-income
requirements referenced herein. Such posting shall invite any
interested party to submit comments to the municipality, with
copies provided to the Fair Share Housing Center and the
Intervenors in IMO Application of the Township of Old Bridge,
Docket No.: MID-L-3997-15, on the issue of whether the
municipality has complied with its very-low-income housing
obligation.
D. Alternative living arrangements.
(1) The administration of an alternative living arrangement shall be in
compliance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.8 and UHAC, with the following
exceptions:
§ 250-65 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-65
10:766
(a) Affirmative marketing (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15); provided,
however, that the units or bedrooms may be affirmatively
marketed by the provider in accordance with an alternative
plan approved by the Court;
(b) Affordability average and bedroom distribution (N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.3).
(2) With the exception of units established with capital funding
through a twenty-year operating contract with the Department of
Human Services, Division of Developmental Disabilities, alternative
living arrangements shall have at least thirty-year controls on
affordability in accordance with UHAC, unless an alternative
commitment is approved by the Court.
(3) The service provider for the alternative living arrangement shall
act as the Administrative Agent for the purposes of administering
the affirmative marketing and affordability requirements for the
alternative living arrangement.
E. Phasing schedule for inclusionary zoning. In inclusionary developments
the following schedule shall be followed:
Maximum Percentage of
Market-Rate Units Completed
Minimum Percentage of Lowand
Moderate-Income Units
Completed
25 0%
25+1 10%
50 50%
75 75%
90 100%
F. New construction.
(1) Low/Moderate split and bedroom distribution of affordable housing
units.
(a) The fair share obligation shall be divided equally between lowand
moderate-income units, except that where there is an odd
number of affordable housing units, the extra unit shall be a
low-income unit. At least 13% of all restricted rental units shall
be very-low-income units (affordable to a household earning
30% or less of the regional median income by household size,
unless a higher percentage than 13% is specified for a
particular zone). The very-low-income units shall be counted as
part of the required number of low-income units within the
development. [Amended 7-20-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-16]
(b) In each affordable development, at least 50% of the restricted
units within each bedroom distribution shall be low-income
§ 250-65 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-65
10:767
units or very-low-income units. [Amended 7-20-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-16]
(c) Affordable developments that are not age-restricted shall be
structured in conjunction with realistic market demands such
that:
[1] The combined number of efficiency and one-bedroom units
shall be no greater than 20% of the total low- and
moderate-income units;
[2] At least 30% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be
two-bedroom units;
[3] At least 20% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be
three-bedroom units; and
[4] The remaining units may be allocated among two- and
three-bedroom units at the discretion of the developer.
(d) Affordable developments that are age-restricted shall be
structured such that the number of bedrooms shall equal the
number of age-restricted low- and moderate-income units
within the inclusionary development. This standard may be
met by having all one-bedroom units or by having a twobedroom
unit for each efficiency unit.
(2) Accessibility requirements.
(a) The first floor of all restricted townhouse dwelling units and all
restricted units in all other multistory buildings shall be
subject to the technical design standards of the Barrier Free
Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7, and the following.
(b) All restricted townhouse dwelling units and all restricted units
in other multistory buildings in which a restricted dwelling unit
is attached to at least one other dwelling unit shall have the
following features:
[1] An adaptable toilet and bathing facility on the first floor;
and
[2] An adaptable kitchen on the first floor; and
[3] An interior accessible route of travel on the first floor; and
[4] An adaptable room that can be used as a bedroom, with a
door or the casing for the installation of a door on the first
floor; and
[5] If not all of the foregoing requirements in F(2)(b)[1]
through [4] can be satisfied, then an interior accessible
route of travel must be provided between stories within an
individual unit, but if all of the terms of F(2)(b)[1] through
§ 250-65 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-65
10:768
[4] above have been satisfied, then an interior accessible
route of travel shall not be required between stories within
an individual unit; and
[6] An accessible entranceway as set forth at P.L. 2005, c. 350
(N.J.S.A. 52:27D-311a et seq.) and the Barrier Free
Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7, or evidence that the Township of
Old Bridge has collected funds from the developer
sufficient to make 10% of the adaptable entrances in the
development accessible:
[a] Where a unit has been constructed with an adaptable
entrance, upon the request of a disabled person who is
purchasing or will reside in the dwelling unit, an
accessible entrance shall be installed.
[b] To this end, the builder of restricted units shall deposit
funds within the Township of Old Bridge's Affordable
Housing Trust Fund sufficient to install accessible
entrances in 10% of the affordable units that have
been constructed with adaptable entrances.
[c] The funds deposited under Subsection F(2)(b)[6][b]
above shall be used by the Township of Old Bridge for
the sole purpose of making the adaptable entrance of
an affordable unit accessible when requested to do so
by a person with a disability who occupies or intends
to occupy the unit and requires an accessible
entrance.
[d] The developer of the restricted units shall submit a
design plan and cost estimate to the Construction
Official of the Township of Old Bridge for the
conversion of adaptable to accessible entrances.
[e] Once the Construction Official has determined that
the design plan to convert the unit entrances from
adaptable to accessible meets the requirements of the
Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7, and that the
cost estimate of such conversion is reasonable,
payment shall be made to the Township's Affordable
Housing Trust Fund in care of the Township Treasurer,
who shall ensure that the funds are deposited into the
Affordable Housing Trust Fund and appropriately
earmarked.
[7] Full compliance with the foregoing provisions shall not be
required where an entity can demonstrate that it is "site
impracticable" to meet the requirements. Determinations
of site impracticability shall be in compliance with the
Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.
§ 250-65 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-65
10:769
(3) Design.
(a) In inclusionary developments, to the extent possible, low- and
moderate-income units shall be integrated with the market
units.
(b) In inclusionary developments, low- and moderate-income units
shall have access to all of the same common elements and
facilities as the market units.
(4) Maximum rents and sales prices.
(a) In establishing rents and sales prices of affordable housing
units, the Administrative Agent shall follow the procedures set
forth in UHAC, utilizing the regional income limits established
by COAH or a successor entity.
(b) The maximum rent for restricted rental units within each
affordable development shall be affordable to households
earning no more than 60% of median income, and the average
rent for restricted rental units shall be affordable to
households earning no more than 52% of median income.
(c) The developers and/or municipal sponsors of restricted rental
units shall establish at least one rent for each bedroom type for
both low-income and moderate-income units, provided that at
least 13% of all low- and moderate-income rental units shall be
affordable to very-low-income households, earning 30% or less
of the regional median income by household size, unless a
higher percentage than 13% is specified for a particular zone.
[Amended 7-20-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-16]
(d) The maximum sales price of restricted ownership units within
each affordable development shall be affordable to households
earning no more than 70% of median income, and each
affordable development must achieve an affordability average
of 55% for restricted ownership units; in achieving this
affordability average, moderate-income ownership units must
be available for at least three different sales prices for each
bedroom type, and low-income ownership units must be
available for at least two different sales prices for each
bedroom type.
(e) In determining the initial sales prices and rent levels for
compliance with the affordability average requirements for
restricted units other than assisted-living facilities and agerestricted
developments, the following standards shall be used:
[1] A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household;
[2] A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one-and-onehalf-
person household;
§ 250-65 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-65
10:770
[3] A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a three-person
household;
[4] A three-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a four-and-onehalf-
person household; and
[5] A four-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a six-person
household.
(f) In determining the initial sales prices and rents for compliance
with the affordability average requirements for restricted units
in assisted-living facilities and age-restricted developments,
the following standards shall be used:
[1] A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household;
[2] A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one-and-onehalf-
person household; and
[3] A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a two-person
household or to two one-person households.
(g) The initial purchase price for all restricted ownership units
shall be calculated so that the monthly carrying cost of the
unit, including principal and interest (based on a mortgage
loan equal to 95% of the purchase price and the Federal
Reserve H.15 rate of interest), taxes, homeowner and private
mortgage insurance and condominium or homeowner's
association fees do not exceed 28% of the eligible monthly
income of the appropriate size household as determined under
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as may be amended and supplemented;
provided, however, that the price shall be subject to the
affordability average requirement of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3, as may
be amended and supplemented.
(h) The initial rent for a restricted rental unit shall be calculated so
as not to exceed 30% of the eligible monthly income of the
appropriate size household, including an allowance for tenantpaid
utilities, as determined under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as may
be amended and supplemented; provided, however, that the
rent shall be subject to the affordability average requirement
of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3, as may be amended and supplemented.
(i) The price of owner-occupied low- and moderate-income units
may increase annually based on the percentage increase in the
regional median income limit for each housing region. In no
event shall the maximum resale price established by the
Administrative Agent be lower than the last recorded purchase
price.
(j) The rent of low- and moderate-income units may be increased
annually based on the permitted percentage increase in the
§ 250-65 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-65
10:771
Housing Consumer Price Index for the United States. This
increase shall not exceed 9% in any one year. Rents for units
constructed pursuant to low-income housing tax credit
regulations shall be indexed pursuant to the regulations
governing low-income housing tax credits.
G. Utilities.
(1) Affordable units shall utilize the same type of heating source as
market units within an inclusionary development.
(2) Tenant-paid utilities included in the utility allowance shall be set
forth in the lease and shall be consistent with the utility allowance
approved by DCA for its Section 8 program.
H. Occupancy standards. In referring certified households to specific
restricted units, the Administrative Agent shall, to the extent feasible
and without causing an undue delay in the occupancy of a unit, strive
to:
(1) Provide an occupant for each bedroom;
(2) Provide children of different sexes with separate bedrooms;
(3) Provide separate bedrooms for parents and children; and
(4) Prevent more than two persons from occupying a single bedroom.
I. Control periods for restricted ownership units and enforcement
mechanisms.
(1) Control periods for restricted ownership units shall be in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5, as may be amended and
supplemented, and each restricted ownership unit shall remain
subject to the requirements of this section for a period of at least 30
years, unless a period of 50 years is specified for the particular
zone, until the Township of Old Bridge takes action to release the
unit from such requirements; prior to such action, a restricted
ownership unit must remain subject to the requirements of N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented. [Amended
7-20-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-16]
(2) The affordability control period for a restricted ownership unit shall
commence on the date the initial certified household takes title to
the unit.
(3) Prior to the issuance of the initial certificate of occupancy for a
restricted ownership unit and upon each successive sale during the
period of restricted ownership, the Administrative Agent shall
determine the restricted price for the unit and shall also determine
the nonrestricted, fair market value of the unit based on either an
appraisal or the unit's equalized assessed value without the
restrictions in place.
§ 250-65 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-65
10:772
(4) At the time of the initial sale of the unit, the initial purchaser shall
execute and deliver to the Administrative Agent a recapture note
obligating the purchaser (as well as the purchaser's heirs,
successors and assigns) to repay, upon the first nonexempt sale
after the unit's release from the restrictions set forth in this
section, an amount equal to the difference between the unit's
nonrestricted fair market value and its restricted price, and the
recapture note shall be secured by a recapture lien evidenced by a
duly recorded mortgage on the unit.
(5) The affordability controls set forth in this section shall remain in
effect despite the entry and enforcement of any judgment of
foreclosure with respect to restricted ownership units.
(6) A restricted ownership unit shall be required to obtain a continuing
certificate of occupancy or a certified statement from the
Construction Official stating that the unit meets all Code standards
upon the first transfer of title following the removal of the
restrictions provided under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5(a), as may be
amended and supplemented.
J. Price restrictions for restricted ownership units, homeowner's
association fees and resale prices. Price restrictions for restricted
ownership units shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may
be amended and supplemented, including:
(1) The initial purchase price for a restricted ownership unit shall be
approved by the Administrative Agent.
(2) The Administrative Agent shall approve all resale prices, in writing
and in advance of the resale, to assure compliance with the
foregoing standards.
(3) The master deeds of inclusionary developments shall provide no
distinction between the condominium or homeowner's association
fees and special assessments paid by low- and moderate-income
purchasers and those paid by market purchasers.
(4) The owners of restricted ownership units may apply to the
Administrative Agent to increase the maximum sales price for the
unit on the basis of anticipated capital improvements. Eligible
capital improvements shall be those that render the unit suitable
for a larger household or the addition of a bathroom. See
Subsection M.
K. Buyer income eligibility.
(1) Buyer income eligibility for restricted ownership units shall be in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and
supplemented, such that low-income ownership units shall be
reserved for households with a gross household income less than or
equal to 50% of median income and moderate-income ownership
§ 250-65 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-65
10:773
units shall be reserved for households with a gross household
income less than 80% of median income.
(2) Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, the Administrative Agent
may, upon approval by the Township Council, and subject to the
Court's approval, permit moderate-income purchasers to buy lowincome
units in housing markets if the Administrative Agent
determines that there is an insufficient number of eligible lowincome
purchasers to permit prompt occupancy of the units. All
such low-income units to be sold to moderate-income households
shall retain the required pricing and pricing restrictions for lowincome
units.
(3) A certified household that purchases a restricted ownership unit
must occupy it as the certified household's principal residence and
shall not lease the unit; provided, however, that the Administrative
Agent may permit the owner of a restricted ownership unit, upon
application and a showing of hardship, to lease the restricted unit
to another certified household for a period not to exceed one year.
(4) The Administrative Agent shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted ownership unit when the household is a low-income
household or a moderate-income household, as applicable to the
unit, and the estimated monthly housing cost for the particular unit
(including principal, interest, taxes, homeowner and private
mortgage insurance and condominium or homeowner's association
fees, as applicable) does not exceed 33% of the household's eligible
monthly income.
L. Limitations on indebtedness secured by ownership unit; subordination.
(1) Prior to incurring any indebtedness to be secured by a restricted
ownership unit, the owner shall apply to the Administrative Agent
for a determination in writing that the proposed indebtedness
complies with the provisions of this section, and the Administrative
Agent shall issue such determination prior to the owner incurring
such indebtedness.
(2) With the exception of first purchase money mortgages, neither an
owner nor a lender shall at any time cause or permit the total
indebtedness secured by a restricted ownership unit to exceed 95%
of the maximum allowable resale price of the unit, as such price is
determined by the Administrative Agent in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.6(b).
M. Capital improvements to ownership units.
(1) The owners of restricted ownership units may apply to the
Administrative Agent to increase the maximum sales price for the
unit on the basis of capital improvements made since the purchase
of the unit. Eligible capital improvements shall be those that render
the unit suitable for a larger household or that add an additional
§ 250-65 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-65
10:774
bathroom. In no event shall the maximum sales price of an
improved housing unit exceed the limits of affordability for the
larger household.
(2) Upon the resale of a restricted ownership unit, all items of property
that are permanently affixed to the unit or were included when the
unit was initially restricted (for example, refrigerator, range,
washer, dryer, dishwasher, wall-to-wall carpeting) shall be included
in the maximum allowable resale price. Other items may be sold to
the purchaser at a reasonable price that has been approved by the
Administrative Agent at the time of the signing of the agreement to
purchase. The purchase of central air conditioning installed
subsequent to the initial sale of the unit and not included in the
base price may be made a condition of the unit resale, provided the
price, which shall be subject to ten-year, straight-line depreciation,
has been approved by the Administrative Agent. Unless otherwise
approved by the Administrative Agent, the purchase of any
property other than central air conditioning shall not be made a
condition of the unit resale. The owner and the purchaser must
personally certify at the time of closing that no unapproved transfer
of funds for the purpose of selling and receiving property has taken
place at the time of or as a condition of resale.
N. Control periods for restricted rental units.
(1) Control periods for restricted rental units shall be in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.11, as may be amended and supplemented,
and each restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the
requirements of this section for a period of at least 30 years, unless
a period of 50 years is specified for the particular zone, until the
Township of Old Bridge takes action to release the unit from such
requirements. Prior to such action, a restricted rental unit must
remain subject to the requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be
amended and supplemented. [Amended 7-20-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-16]
(2) Deeds of all real property that include restricted rental units shall
contain deed restriction language. The deed restriction shall have
priority over all mortgages on the property, and the deed
restriction shall be filed by the developer or seller with the records
office of the County of Middlesex. A copy of the filed document shall
be provided to the Administrative Agent within 30 days of the
receipt of a certificate of occupancy.
(3) A restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the affordability
controls of this section despite the occurrence of any of the
following events:
(a) Sublease or assignment of the lease of the unit;
§ 250-65 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-65
10:775
(b) Sale or other voluntary transfer of the ownership of the unit;
or
(c) The entry and enforcement of any judgment of foreclosure on
the property containing the unit.
O. Rent restrictions for rental units; leases.
(1) A written lease shall be required for all restricted rental units and
tenants shall be responsible for security deposits and the full
amount of the rent as stated on the lease. A copy of the current
lease for each restricted rental unit shall be provided to the
Administrative Agent.
(2) No additional fees or charges shall be added to the approved rent
(except, in the case of units in an assisted-living residence, to cover
the customary charges for food and services) without the express
written approval of the Administrative Agent.
(3) Application fees (including the charge for any credit check) shall
not exceed 5% of the monthly rent of the applicable restricted unit
and shall be payable to the Administrative Agent to be applied to
the costs of administering the controls applicable to the unit as set
forth in this section.
(4) No rent control ordinance or other pricing restriction shall be
applicable to either the market units or the affordable units in any
development in which at least 15% of the total number of dwelling
units are restricted rental units in compliance with this section.
P. Tenant income eligibility.
(1) Tenant income eligibility shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.13, as may be amended and supplemented, and shall be
determined as follows:
(a) Very-low-income rental units shall be reserved for households
with a gross household income less than or equal to 30% of
median income.
(b) Low-income rental units shall be reserved for households with
a gross household income less than or equal to 50% of median
income.
(c) Moderate-income rental units shall be reserved for households
with a gross household income less than 80% of median
income.
(2) The Administrative Agent shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted rental unit when the household is a very-low-income
household, low-income household or a moderate-income
household, as applicable to the unit, and the rent proposed for the
unit does not exceed 35% (40% for age-restricted units) of the
§ 250-65 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-65
10:776
household's eligible monthly income as determined pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.16, as may be amended and supplemented;
provided, however, that this limit may be exceeded if one or more
of the following circumstances exist:
(a) The household currently pays more than 35% (40% for
households eligible for age-restricted units) of its gross
household income for rent, and the proposed rent will reduce
its housing costs;
(b) The household has consistently paid more than 35% (40% for
households eligible for age-restricted units) of eligible monthly
income for rent in the past and has proven its ability to pay;
(c) The household is currently in substandard or overcrowded
living conditions;
(d) The household documents the existence of assets with which
the household proposes to supplement the rent payments; or
(e) The household documents reliable anticipated third-party
assistance from an outside source such as a family member in a
form acceptable to the Administrative Agent and the owner of
the unit.
(3) The applicant shall file documentation sufficient to establish the
existence of the circumstances in Subsection A(1) through (2)(e)
above with the Administrative Agent, who shall counsel the
household on budgeting.
Q. Municipal Housing Liaison.
(1) The Township of Old Bridge shall appoint a specific municipal
employee to serve as a Municipal Housing Liaison responsible for
administering the affordable housing program, including
affordability controls, the Affirmative Marketing Plan, monitoring
and reporting, and, where applicable, supervising any contracted
Administrative Agent. The Township of Old Bridge shall adopt an
ordinance creating the position of Municipal Housing Liaison. The
Township of Old Bridge shall adopt a resolution appointing a
Municipal Housing Liaison. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be
appointed by the governing body and may be a full- or part-time
municipal employee. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be duly
qualified through a training program sponsored by Affordable
Housing Professionals of New Jersey before assuming the duties of
Municipal Housing Liaison.
(2) The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for oversight
and administration of the affordable housing program for the
Township of Old Bridge, including the following responsibilities,
which may not be contracted out to the Administrative Agent:
§ 250-65 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-65
10:777
(a) Serving as the Township of Old Bridge's primary point of
contact for all inquiries from the state, affordable housing
providers, Administrative Agents and interested households;
(b) Monitoring the status of all restricted units in the Township of
Old Bridge's Fair Share Plan;
(c) Compiling, verifying and submitting annual monitoring reports
as may be required by the Court;
(d) Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and
Administrative Agents, as needed; and
(e) Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring and affirmative marketing at
least annually and more often as needed.
(3) The Township of Old Bridge shall designate one or more
Administrative Agent(s) to administer newly constructed affordable
units in accordance with UHAC. An Operating Manual for each
affordable housing program shall be provided by the Administrative
Agent(s) to be adopted by resolution of the governing body and
subject to approval of the Court. The Operating Manual(s) shall be
available for public inspection in the office of the Township Clerk,
in the office of the Municipal Housing Liaison, and in the office(s) of
the Administrative Agent(s). The Municipal Housing Liaison shall
supervise the contracting Administrative Agent(s).
R. Administrative Agent. The Administrative Agent shall be an
independent entity serving under contract to and reporting to the
municipality. The fees of the Administrative Agent shall be paid by the
owners of the affordable units for which the services of the
Administrative Agent are required. The Administrative Agent shall
perform the duties and responsibilities of an Administrative Agent as
set forth in UHAC, including those set forth in Sections 5:80-26.14, 16
and 18 thereof, which includes:
(1) Affirmative marketing:
(a) Conducting an outreach process to affirmatively market
affordable housing units in accordance with the Affirmative
Marketing Plan of the Township of Old Bridge and the
provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15; and
(b) Providing counseling or contracting to provide counseling
services to low- and moderate-income applicants on subjects
such as budgeting, credit issues, mortgage qualification, rental
lease requirements, and landlord/tenant law.
(2) Household certification:
(a) Soliciting, scheduling, conducting and following up on
interviews with interested households;
§ 250-65 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-65
10:778
(b) Conducting interviews and obtaining sufficient documentation
of gross income and assets upon which to base a determination
of income eligibility for a low- or moderate-income unit;
(c) Providing written notification to each applicant as to the
determination of eligibility or non-eligibility;
(d) Requiring that all certified applicants for restricted units
execute a certificate substantially in the form, as applicable, of
either the ownership or rental certificates set forth in
Appendices J and K of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.;
(e) Creating and maintaining a referral list of eligible applicant
households living in the housing region and eligible applicant
households with members working in the housing region
where the units are located; and
(f) Employing a random selection process as provided in the
Affirmative Marketing Plan of the Township of Old Bridge when
referring households for certification to affordable units.
(3) Affordability controls:
(a) Furnishing to attorneys or closing agents forms of deed
restrictions and mortgages for recording at the time of
conveyance of title of each restricted unit;
(b) Creating and maintaining a file on each restricted unit for its
control period, including the recorded deed with restrictions,
recorded mortgage and note, as appropriate;
(c) Ensuring that the removal of the deed restrictions and
cancellation of the mortgage note are effectuated and properly
filed with the Middlesex County Register of Deeds or
Middlesex County Clerk's office after the termination of the
affordability controls for each restricted unit;
(d) Communicating with lenders regarding foreclosures; and
(e) Ensuring the issuance of continuing certificates of occupancy
or certifications pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.10.
(4) Resales and rerentals:
(a) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information between owners and the
Administrative Agent regarding the availability of restricted
units for resale or rerental; and
(b) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information to low- and moderate-income
households regarding the availability of restricted units for
resale or rerental.
§ 250-65 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-65
10:779
(5) Processing requests from unit owners:
(a) Reviewing and approving requests for determination from
owners of restricted units who wish to take out home equity
loans or refinance during the term of their ownership that the
amount of indebtedness to be incurred will not violate the
terms of this section;
(b) Reviewing and approving requests to increase sales prices
from owners of restricted units who wish to make capital
improvements to the units that would affect the selling price,
such authorizations to be limited to those improvements
resulting in additional bedrooms or bathrooms and the
depreciated cost of central air-conditioning systems;
(c) Notifying the municipality of an owner's intent to sell a
restricted unit; and
(d) Making determinations on requests by owners of restricted
units for hardship waivers.
(6) Enforcement:
(a) Securing annually from the municipality a list of all affordable
housing units for which tax bills are mailed to absentee
owners, and notifying all such owners that they must either
move back to their unit or sell it;
(b) Securing from all developers and sponsors of restricted units,
at the earliest point of contact in the processing of the project
or development, written acknowledgement of the requirement
that no restricted unit can be offered, or in any other way
committed, to any person, other than a household duly
certified to the unit by the Administrative Agent;
(c) The posting annually in all rental properties, including twofamily
homes, of a notice as to the maximum permitted rent
together with the telephone number of the Administrative
Agent where complaints of excess rent or other charges can be
made;
(d) Sending annual mailings to all owners of affordable dwelling
units, reminding them of the notices and requirements outlined
in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.18(d)4;
(e) Establishing a program for diverting unlawful rent payments to
the municipality's Affordable Housing Trust Fund; and
(f) Creating and publishing a written operating manual for each
affordable housing program administered by the
Administrative Agent, to be approved by the Township Council
and the Court, setting forth procedures for administering the
affordability controls.
§ 250-65 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-65
10:780
(7) Additional responsibilities:
(a) The Administrative Agent shall have the authority to take all
actions necessary and appropriate to carry out its
responsibilities hereunder.
(b) The Administrative Agent shall prepare monitoring reports for
submission to the Municipal Housing Liaison in time to meet
any monitoring requirements and deadlines imposed by the
Court.
(c) The Administrative Agent shall attend continuing education
sessions on affordability controls, compliance monitoring, and
affirmative marketing at least annually and more often as
needed.
S. Affirmative marketing requirements.
(1) The Township of Old Bridge shall adopt by resolution an Affirmative
Marketing Plan, subject to approval of the Court, that is compliant
with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15, as may be amended and supplemented.
(2) The Affirmative Marketing Plan is a regional marketing strategy
designed to attract buyers and/or renters of all majority and
minority groups, regardless of race, creed, color, national origin,
ancestry, marital or familial status, gender, affectional or sexual
orientation, disability, age or number of children, to housing units
which are being marketed by a developer, sponsor or owner of
affordable housing. The Affirmative Marketing Plan is intended to
target those potentially eligible persons who are least likely to
apply for affordable units in that region. It is a continuing program
that directs marketing activities toward Housing Region 3 and is
required to be followed throughout the period of restriction.
(3) The Affirmative Marketing Plan shall provide a regional preference
for all households that live and/or work in Housing Region 3,
comprised of Middlesex, Somerset and Hunterdon Counties.
(4) The municipality has the ultimate responsibility for adopting the
Affirmative Marketing Plan and for the proper administration of the
Affirmative Marketing Program, including initial sales and rentals
and resales and rerentals. The Administrative Agent designated by
the Township of Old Bridge shall implement the Affirmative
Marketing Plan to assure the affirmative marketing of all affordable
units.
(5) In implementing the Affirmative Marketing Plan, the
Administrative Agent shall provide a list of counseling services to
low- and moderate-income applicants on subjects such as
budgeting, credit issues, mortgage qualification, rental lease
requirements, and landlord/tenant law.
§ 250-65 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-65
10:781
(6) The Affirmative Marketing Plan shall describe the media to be used
in advertising and publicizing the availability of housing. In
implementing the Affirmative Marketing Plan, the Administrative
Agent shall consider the use of language translations where
appropriate.
(7) The affirmative marketing process for available affordable units
shall begin at least four months (120 days) prior to the expected
date of occupancy.
(8) Applications for affordable housing shall be available in several
locations, including, at a minimum, the County Administration
Building and/or the County Library for each county within the
housing region; the municipal administration building and the
municipal library in the municipality in which the units are located;
and the developer's rental office. Applications shall be mailed to
prospective applicants upon request.
(9) The costs of advertising and affirmative marketing of the affordable
units shall be the responsibility of the developer, sponsor or owner.
T. Enforcement of affordable housing regulations.
(1) Upon the occurrence of a breach of any of the regulations
governing the affordable unit by an owner, developer or tenant, the
municipality shall have all remedies provided at law or equity,
including but not limited to foreclosure, tenant eviction, a
requirement for household recertification, acceleration of all sums
due under a mortgage, recuperation of any funds from a sale in
violation of the regulations, injunctive relief to prevent further
violation of the regulations, entry on the premises, and specific
performance.
(2) After providing written notice of a violation to an owner, developer
or tenant of a low- or moderate-income unit and advising the owner,
developer or tenant of the penalties for such violations, the
municipality may take the following action(s) against the owner,
developer or tenant for any violation that remains uncured for a
period of 60 days after service of the written notice:
(a) The municipality may file a court action pursuant to N.J.S.A.
2A:58-11 alleging a violation or violations of the regulations
governing the affordable housing unit. If the owner, developer
or tenant is adjudged by the Court to have violated any
provision of the regulations governing affordable housing
units, the owner, developer or tenant shall be subject to one or
more of the following penalties, at the discretion of the Court:
[1] A fine of not more than $500 per day or imprisonment for a
period not to exceed 90 days, or both, provided that each
and every day that the violation continues or exists shall be
§ 250-65 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-65
10:782
considered a separate and specific violation of these
provisions and not a continuation of the initial offense;
[2] In the case of an owner who has rented a low- or moderateincome
unit in violation of the regulations governing
affordable housing units, payment into the Township of Old
Bridge Affordable Housing Trust Fund of the gross amount
of rent illegally collected;
[3] In the case of an owner who has rented a low- or moderateincome
unit in violation of the regulations governing
affordable housing units, payment of an innocent tenant's
reasonable relocation costs, as determined by the Court.
(b) The municipality may file a court action in the Superior Court
seeking a judgment that would result in the termination of the
owner's equity or other interest in the unit, in the nature of a
mortgage foreclosure. Any such judgment shall be enforceable
as if the same were a judgment of default of the first purchase
money mortgage and shall constitute a lien against the low- or
moderate-income unit.
[1] The judgment shall be enforceable, at the option of the
municipality, by means of an execution sale by the Sheriff,
at which time the low- and moderate-income unit of the
violating owner shall be sold at a sale price which is not
less than the amount necessary to fully satisfy and pay off
any first purchase money mortgage and prior liens and the
costs of the enforcement proceedings incurred by the
municipality, including attorney's fees. The violating owner
shall have his right to possession terminated as well as his
title conveyed pursuant to the Sheriff's sale.
[2] The proceeds of the Sheriff's sale shall first be applied to
satisfy the first purchase money mortgage lien and any
prior liens upon the low- and moderate-income unit. The
excess, if any, shall be applied to reimburse the
municipality for any and all costs and expenses incurred in
connection with either the court action resulting in the
judgment of violation or the Sheriff's sale. In the event that
the proceeds from the Sheriff's sale are insufficient to
reimburse the municipality in full as aforesaid, the
violating owner shall be personally responsible for the full
extent of such deficiency, in addition to any and all costs
incurred by the municipality in connection with collecting
such deficiency. In the event that a surplus remains after
satisfying all of the above, such surplus, if any, shall be
placed in escrow by the municipality for the owner and
shall be held in such escrow for a maximum period of two
years or until such earlier time as the owner shall make a
claim with the municipality for such. Failure of the owner
§ 250-65 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-65
10:783
to claim such balance within the two-year period shall
automatically result in a forfeiture of such balance to the
municipality. Any interest accrued or earned on such
balance while being held in escrow shall belong to and
shall be paid to the municipality, whether such balance
shall be paid to the owner or forfeited to the municipality.
[3] Foreclosure by the municipality due to violation of the
regulations governing affordable housing units shall not
extinguish the restrictions of the regulations governing
affordable housing units as the same apply to the low- and
moderate-income unit. Title shall be conveyed to the
purchaser at the Sheriff's sale, subject to the restrictions
and provisions of the regulations governing the affordable
housing unit. The owner determined to be in violation of
the provisions of this plan and from whom title and
possession were taken by means of the Sheriff's sale shall
not be entitled to any right of redemption.
[4] If there are no bidders at the Sheriff's sale, or if
insufficient amounts are bid to satisfy the first purchase
money mortgage and any prior liens, the municipality may
acquire title to the low- and moderate-income unit by
satisfying the first purchase money mortgage and any
prior liens and crediting the violating owner with an
amount equal to the difference between the first purchase
money mortgage and any prior liens and costs of the
enforcement proceedings, including legal fees and the
maximum resale price for which the low- and moderateincome
unit could have been sold under the terms of the
regulations governing affordable housing units. This
excess shall be treated in the same manner as the excess
which would have been realized from an actual sale as
previously described.
[5] Failure of the low- and moderate-income unit to be either
sold at the Sheriff's sale or acquired by the municipality
shall obligate the owner to accept an offer to purchase
from any qualified purchaser which may be referred to the
owner by the municipality, with such offer to purchase
being equal to the maximum resale price of the low- and
moderate-income unit as permitted by the regulations
governing affordable housing units.
[6] The owner shall remain fully obligated, responsible and
liable for complying with the terms and restrictions of
governing affordable housing units until such time as title
is conveyed from the owner.
§ 250-65 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-65
10:784
§ 250-66. Development fees. [Amended 2-21-1995 by Ord. No. 4-95;
4-14-1997 by Ord. No. 5-97; 3-27-2000 by Ord. No. 07-00; 10-6-2008
by Ord. No. 2008-24; 1-5-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-01; 4-6-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-06]
U. Appeals. Appeals from all decisions of an Administrative Agent
appointed pursuant to this section shall be filed in writing with a court
of competent jurisdiction.
A. Purpose. [Amended 7-20-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-16]
NOTE: On July 7, 2015, the Township of Old Bridge filed a Complaint
for a Declaratory Judgment with the Superior Court in Middlesex
County seeking a Judgment of Compliance as to the constitutionality of
its Third Round Housing Element and Fair Share Plan. In light of this,
all references to the jurisdiction of the Council on Affordable Housing,
Council or COAH shall henceforth be interpreted as referring to the
jurisdiction of the Superior Court, and all references to the third round
Substantive Certification shall be interpreted as to the Court's third
round final Judgment of Compliance and Repose.
(1) In Holmdel Builder's Association v. Holmdel Township, 121 N.J. 550
1990, the New Jersey Supreme Court determined that mandatory
development fees are authorized by the Fair Housing Act of 1985
(the Act), N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq., and the State Constitution,
subject to the Council on Affordable Housing's (COAH's) adoption
of rules.
(2) Pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46, Section 8 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.2) and
the Statewide Nonresidential Development Fee Act (N.J.S.A.
40:55D through 40:55D-8.7),180 COAH is authorized to adopt and
promulgate regulations necessary for the establishment,
implementation, review, monitoring and enforcement of municipal
affordable housing trust funds and corresponding spending plans.
Municipalities that are under the jurisdiction of the Council or
court of competent jurisdiction and have a COAH-approved
spending plan may retain fees collected from nonresidential
development.
(3) This section establishes standards for the collection, maintenance,
and expenditure of development fees pursuant to COAH's
regulations and in accordance P.L. 2008, c. 46, Sections 8 and 32 to
38. Fees collected pursuant to this section shall be used for the sole
purpose of providing low- and moderate-income housing. This
section shall be interpreted within the framework of COAH's rules
on development fees, codified at N.J.A.C 5:97-8.
B. Basic requirements.
180. Editor's Note: Pursuant to the New Jersey Economic Stimulus Act of 2009, the
Nonresidential Development Fee Act, which was signed into law on 7-17-2008, was
suspended. For applicable development fees, consult the Township offices.
§ 250-65 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-66
10:785
(1) This section shall not be effective until approved by COAH pursuant
to N.J.A.C. 5:96-5.1.
(2) The Township of Old Bridge shall not spend development fees until
COAH has approved a plan for spending such fees in conformance
with N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.10 and 5:96-5.3.
C. Definitions. The following terms, as used in this section, shall have the
following meanings:
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development included
in the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and includes, but is
not limited to, an inclusionary development, a municipal construction
project or a one-hundred-percent affordable development.
COAH or THE COUNCIL — The New Jersey Council on Affordable
Housing established under the Act which has primary jurisdiction for
the administration of housing obligations in accordance with sound
regional planning consideration in the state.
DEVELOPMENT FEE — Money paid by a developer for the
improvement of property as permitted in N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.3.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of
any land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having
an enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — The assessed value of a property
divided by the current average ratio of assessed to true value for
the municipality in which the property is situated, as determined in
accordance with Sections 1, 5, and 6 of P.L. 1973, c. 123 (N.J.S.A.
54:1-35a through 54:1-35c).
GREEN BUILDING STRATEGIES — Those strategies that minimize the
impact of development on the environment, and enhance the health,
safety and well-being of residents by producing durable, lowmaintenance,
resource-efficient housing with making optimum use of
existing infrastructure and community services.
D. Residential development fees.
(1) Imposed fees.
(a) Within the Township of Old Bridge district(s), residential
developers, except for developers of the types of development
specifically exempted below, shall pay a fee of 1.5% of the
equalized assessed value for residential development, provided
that no increased density is permitted.
(b) When an increase in residential density pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d(5) (known as a "d" variance) has been permitted,
developers may be required to pay a development fee of 6% of
the equalized assessed value for each additional unit that may
§ 250-66 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-66
10:786
be realized. However, if the zoning on a site has changed
during the two-year period preceding the filing of such a
variance application, the base density for the purposes of
calculating the bonus development fee shall be the highest
density permitted by right during the two-year period
preceding the filing of the variance application. Example: If an
approval allows four units to be constructed on a site that was
zoned for two units, the fees could equal 1.5% of the equalized
assessed value on the first two units; and the specified higher
percentage up to 6% of the equalized assessed value for the
two additional units, provided that zoning on the site has not
changed during the two-year period preceding the filing of
such a variance application.
(2) Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for
residential development.
(a) Affordable housing developments and developments where the
developer has made a payment in lieu of on-site construction of
affordable units shall be exempt from development fees.
(b) Developments that have received preliminary or final site plan
approval prior to the adoption of a municipal development fee
ordinance shall be exempt from development fees, unless the
developer seeks a substantial change in the approval. Where a
site plan approval does not apply, a zoning and/or building
permit shall be synonymous with preliminary or final site plan
approval for this purpose. The fee percentage shall be vested
on the date that the building permit is issued.
(c) Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an
existing structure undergoes a change to a more intense use, is
demolished and replaced, or is expanded, if the expansion is
not otherwise exempt from the development fee requirement.
The development fee shall be calculated on the increase in the
equalized assessed value of the improved structure.
(d) Developers of residential structures demolished and replaced
as a result of a natural disaster shall be exempt from paying a
development fee.
E. Nonresidential development fees.
(1) Imposed fees.
(a) Within all zoning districts, nonresidential developers, except
for developers of the types of development specifically
exempted, shall pay a fee equal to 2.5% of the equalized
assessed value of the land and improvements, for all new
nonresidential construction on an unimproved lot or lots.
§ 250-66 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-66
10:787
(b) Nonresidential developers, except for developers of the types
of development specifically exempted, shall also pay a fee
equal to 2.5% of the increase in equalized assessed value
resulting from any additions to existing structures to be used
for nonresidential purposes.
(c) Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an
existing structure is demolished and replaced. The
development fee of 2.5% shall be calculated on the difference
between the equalized assessed value of the preexisting land
and improvement and the equalized assessed value of the
newly improved structure, i.e., land and improvement, at the
time the final certificate of occupancy is issued. If the
calculation required under this section results in a negative
number, the nonresidential development fee shall be zero.
(2) Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemption for
nonresidential development.
(a) The nonresidential portion of a mixed-use inclusionary or
market rate development shall be subject to the development
fee of 2.5%, unless otherwise exempted below.
(b) The fee of 2.5% shall not apply to an increase in equalized
assessed value resulting from alterations, change in use within
existing footprint, reconstruction, renovations and repairs.
(c) Nonresidential developments shall be exempt from the
payment of nonresidential development fees in accordance
with the exemptions required pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46, as
specified in Form N-RDF, "State of New Jersey Nonresidential
Development Certification/Exemption" form. Any exemption
claimed by a developer shall be substantiated by that
developer.
(d) A developer of a nonresidential development exempted from
the nonresidential development fee pursuant to P.L. 2008, c.
46, shall be subject to it at such time the basis for the
exemption no longer applies, and shall make the payment of
the nonresidential development fee, in that event, within three
years after that event or after the issuance of the final
certificate of occupancy of the nonresidential development,
whichever is later.
(e) If a property which was exempted from the collection of a
nonresidential development fee thereafter ceases to be exempt
from property taxation, the owner of the property shall remit
the fees required pursuant to this section within 45 days of the
termination of the property tax exemption. Unpaid
nonresidential development fees under these circumstances
may be enforceable by the Township of Old Bridge as a lien
against the real property of the owner.
§ 250-66 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-66
10:788
F. Collection procedures.
(1) Upon the granting of a preliminary, final or other applicable
approval for a development, the applicable approving authority
shall direct its staff to notify the construction official responsible
for the issuance of a building permit.
(2) For nonresidential developments only, the developer shall also be
provided with a copy of Form N-RDF, "State of New Jersey Non-
Residential Development Certification/Exemption," to be
completed as per the instructions provided. The developer of a
nonresidential development shall complete Form N-RDF as per the
instructions provided. The construction official shall verify the
information submitted by the nonresidential developer as per the
instructions provided in Form N-RDF. The Tax Assessor shall verify
exemptions and prepare estimated and final assessments as per the
instructions provided in Form N-RDF.
(3) The construction official responsible for the issuance of a building
permit shall notify the local Tax Assessor of the issuance of the first
building permit for a development which is subject to a
development fee.
(4) Within 90 days of receipt of that notice, the Municipal Tax Assessor,
based on the plans filed, shall provide an estimate of the equalized
assessed value of the development.
(5) The construction official responsible for the issuance of a final
certificate of occupancy notifies the local Assessor of any and all
requests for the scheduling of a final inspection on property which
is subject to a development fee.
(6) Within 10 business days of a request for the scheduling of a final
inspection, the Municipal Assessor shall confirm or modify the
previously estimated equalized assessed value of the improvements
of the development; calculate the development fee; and thereafter
notify the developer of the amount of the fee.
(7) Should the Township of Old Bridge fail to determine or notify the
developer of the amount of the development fee within 10 business
days of the request for final inspection, the developer may estimate
the amount due and pay that estimated amount consistent with the
dispute process set forth in Subsection b of Section 37 of P.L. 2008,
c. 46 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.6).
(8) Fifty percent of the development fee shall be collected at the time
of issuance of the building permit. The remaining portion shall be
collected at the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. The
developer shall be responsible for paying the difference between
the fee calculated at building permit and that determined at
issuance of the certificate of occupancy.
§ 250-66 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-66
10:789
(9) Appeal of development fees.
(a) A developer may challenge residential development fees
imposed by filing a challenge with the County Board of
Taxation. Pending a review and determination by the Board,
collected fees shall be placed in an interest-bearing escrow
account by the Township of Old Bridge. Appeals from a
determination of the Board may be made to the Tax Court in
accordance with the provisions of the State Tax Uniform
Procedure Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1 et seq., within 90 days after
the date of such determination. Interest earned on amounts
escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing party.
(b) A developer may challenge nonresidential development fees
imposed by filing a challenge with the Director of the Division
of Taxation. Pending a review and determination by the
Director, which shall be made within 45 days of receipt of the
challenge, collected fees shall be placed in an interest-bearing
escrow account by the Township of Old Bridge. Appeals from a
determination of the Director may be made to the Tax Court in
accordance with the provisions of the State Tax Uniform
Procedure Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1 et seq., within 90 days after
the date of such determination. Interest earned on amounts
escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing party.
G. Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
(1) There is hereby created a separate, interest-bearing housing trust
fund to be maintained by the Chief Financial Officer for the purpose
of depositing development fees collected from residential and
nonresidential developers and proceeds from the sale of units with
extinguished controls.
(2) The following additional funds shall be deposited in the Affordable
Housing Trust Fund and shall at all times be identifiable by source
and amount:
(a) Payments in lieu of on-site construction of affordable units;
(b) Developer-contributed funds to make 10% of the adaptable
entrances in a townhouse or other multistory attached
development accessible;
(c) Rental income from municipally operated units;
(d) Repayments from affordable housing program loans;
(e) Recapture funds;
(f) Proceeds from the sale of affordable units; and
(g) Any other funds collected in connection with the Township of
Old Bridge's affordable housing program.
§ 250-66 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-66
10:790
(3) Within seven days from the opening of the trust fund account, the
Township of Old Bridge shall provide COAH with written
authorization, in the form of a three-party escrow agreement
between the municipality, Amboy National Bank, and COAH, to
permit COAH to direct the disbursement of the funds as provided
for in N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.13(b).
(4) All interest accrued in the housing trust fund shall only be used on
eligible affordable housing activities approved by COAH.
H. Use of funds.
(1) The expenditure of all funds shall conform to a spending plan
approved by COAH. Funds deposited in the housing trust fund may
be used for any activity approved by COAH to address the Township
of Old Bridge's fair share obligation and may be set up as a grant or
revolving loan program. Such activities include, but are not limited
to, preservation or purchase of housing for the purpose of
maintaining or implementing affordability controls, rehabilitation,
new construction of affordable housing units and related costs,
accessory apartment, market to affordable, or regional housing
partnership programs, conversion of existing nonresidential
buildings to create new affordable units, green building strategies
designed to be cost saving and in accordance with accepted
national or state standards, purchase of land for affordable
housing, improvement of land to be used for affordable housing,
extensions or improvements of roads and infrastructure to
affordable housing sites, financial assistance designed to increase
affordability, administration necessary for implementation of the
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, or any other activity as
permitted pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.7 through 5:97-8.9 and
specified in the approved spending plan.
(2) Funds shall not be expended to reimburse the Township of Old
Bridge for past housing activities.
(3) At least 30% of all development fees collected and interest earned
shall be used to provide affordability assistance to low- and
moderate-income households in affordable units included in the
municipal Fair Share Plan. One-third of the affordability assistance
portion of development fees collected shall be used to provide
affordability assistance to those households earning 30% or less of
median income by region.
(a) Affordability assistance programs may include down payment
assistance, security deposit assistance, low-interest loans,
rental assistance, assistance with homeowners' association or
condominium fees and special assessments, and assistance
with emergency repairs.
(b) Affordability assistance to households earning 30% or less of
median income may include buying down the cost of low- or
§ 250-66 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-66
10:791
moderate-income units in the municipal Fair Share Plan to
make them affordable to households earning 30% or less of
median income.
(c) Payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site and
funds from the sale of units with extinguished controls shall be
exempt from the affordability assistance requirements.
(4) The Township of Old Bridge may contract with a private or public
entity to administer any part of its Housing Element and Fair Share
Plan, including the requirement for affordability assistance, in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:96-18.
(5) No more than 20% of all revenues collected from development fees
may be expended on administration, including, but not limited to,
salaries and benefits for municipal employees or consultant fees
necessary to develop or implement a new construction program, a
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and/or an affirmative
marketing program. In the case of a rehabilitation program, no
more than 20% of the revenues collected from development fees
shall be expended for such administrative expenses. Administrative
funds may be used for income qualification of households,
monitoring the turnover of sale and rental units, and compliance
with COAH's monitoring requirements. Legal or other fees related
to litigation opposing affordable housing sites or objecting to the
Council's regulations and/or action are not eligible uses of the
Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
I. Monitoring. The Township of Old Bridge shall complete and return to
COAH all monitoring forms included in monitoring requirements
related to the collection of development fees from residential and
nonresidential developers, payments in lieu of constructing affordable
units on site, funds from the sale of units with extinguished controls,
barrier-free escrow funds, rental income, repayments from affordable
housing program loans, and any other funds collected in connection
with the Township of Old Bridge's housing program, as well as to the
expenditure of revenues and implementation of the plan certified by
COAH. All monitoring reports shall be completed on forms designed by
COAH.
J. Ongoing collection of fees.
(1) The ability for the Township of Old Bridge to impose, collect and
expend development fees shall expire with its substantive
certification unless the Township of Old Bridge has filed an adopted
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan with COAH, has petitioned
for substantive certification, and has received COAH's approval of
its development fee ordinance. If the Township of Old Bridge fails
to renew its ability to impose and collect development fees prior to
the expiration of substantive certification, it may be subject to
forfeiture of any or all funds remaining within its municipal trust
§ 250-66 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-66
10:792
§ 250-67. (Reserved)181
§ 250-68. Municipal Housing Liaison.182 [Added 3-1-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-06]
fund. Any funds so forfeited shall be deposited into the New Jersey
Affordable Housing Trust Fund established pursuant to Section
20 of P.L. 1985, c. 222 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-320). The Township of
Old Bridge shall not impose a residential development fee on a
development that receives preliminary or final site plan approval
after the expiration of its substantive certification or judgment
of compliance, nor shall the Township of Old Bridge retroactively
impose a development fee on such a development. The Township of
Old Bridge shall not expend development fees after the expiration
of its substantive certification or judgment of compliance.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to create the administrative
mechanisms needed for the execution of the Township of Old Bridge's
responsibility to assist in the provision of affordable housing pursuant
to the Fair Housing Act of 1985.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — The entity responsible for administering
the affordability controls of some or all units in the affordable housing
program for the Township of Old Bridge to ensure that the restricted
units under administration are affirmatively marketed and sold or
rented, as applicable, only to low- and moderate-income households.
MUNICIPAL HOUSING LIAISON — The employee charged by the
governing body with the responsibility for oversight and administration
of the affordable housing program for the Township of Old Bridge.
C. Establishment of position; responsibilities; compensation; powers and
duties.
(1) Establishment of position of Municipal Housing Liaison. There is
hereby established the position of Municipal Housing Liaison for
the Township of Old Bridge.
(2) Subject to the approval of the Council on Affordable Housing
(COAH), the Municipal Housing Liaison shall be appointed by the
governing body and may be a full- or part-time municipal employee.
(3) The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for oversight
and administration of the affordable housing program for the
Township of Old Bridge, including the following responsibilities
181. Editor's Note: Former § 250-67, Phasing, was repealed 12-14-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-21.
182. Editor's Note: Former § 250-68, Special design standards, was repealed 12-14-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-21.
§ 250-66 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-68
10:793
which may not be contracted out, exclusive of Subsection C(3)(f),
which may be contracted out:
(a) Serving as the Township of Old Bridge's primary point for all
inquiries from the state, affordable housing providers,
administrative agents, and interested households.
(b) Monitoring the status of all restricted units in the Township of
Old Bridge's Fair Share Plan.
(c) Compiling, verifying, and submitting annual reports as
required by COAH;
(d) Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and
administrative agents as applicable;
(e) Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring, and affirmative marketing as
offered or approved by COAH;
(f) If applicable, serving as the administrative agent for some or
all of the restricted units in the Township of Old Bridge as
described in Subsection C(6) below.
(4) Subject to approval by COAH, the Township of Old Bridge may
contract with or authorize a consultant, authority, government or
any agency charged by the governing body, which entity shall have
the responsibility of administering the affordable housing program
of the Township of Old Bridge, except for those responsibilities
which may not be contracted out pursuant to Subsection C(3)
above. If the Township of Old Bridge contracts with another entity
to administer all or any part of the affordable housing program,
including the affordability controls and Affirmative Marketing Plan,
the Municipal Housing Liaison shall supervise the contracting
Administrative Agent.
(5) Compensation. Compensation shall be fixed by the governing body
at the time of the appointment of the Municipal Housing Liaison.
(6) Administrative powers and duties assigned to the Municipal
Housing Liaison which may be delegated to an approved
administrative agent as part of a contract.
(a) Affirmative marketing.
[1] Conducting an outreach process to insure affirmative
marketing of affordable housing units in accordance with
the Affirmative Marketing Plan of the Township of Old
Bridge and the provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15; and
[2] Providing counseling or contracting to provide counseling
services to low- and moderate-income applicants on
subjects such as budgeting, credit issues, mortgage
§ 250-68 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-68
10:794
qualification, rental lease requirements, and landlord/
tenant law.
(b) Household certification.
[1] Soliciting, scheduling, conducting and following up on
interviews with interested households;
[2] Conducting interviews and obtaining sufficient
documentation of gross income and assets upon which to
base a determination of income eligibility for a low- or
moderate-income unit;
[3] Providing written notification to each applicant as to the
determination of eligibility or noneligibility;
[4] Requiring that all certified applicants for restricted units
execute a certificate substantially in the form, as
applicable, of either the ownership or rental certificates
set forth in Appendixes J and K of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et
seq.;
[5] Creating and maintaining a referral list of eligible
applicant households living in the housing region and
eligible applicant households with members working in the
housing region where the units are located; and
[6] Employing the random selection process as provided in the
Affirmative Marketing Plan of the Township of Old Bridge
when referring households for certification to affordable
units.
(c) Affordability controls.
[1] Furnishing to attorneys or closing agents forms of deed
restrictions and mortgages for recording at the time of
conveyance of title of each restricted unit;
[2] Creating and maintaining a file on each restricted unit for
its control period, including the recorded deed with
restrictions, recorded mortgage and note, as appropriate;
[3] Ensuring that the removal of the deed restrictions and
cancellation of the mortgage note are effectuated and
properly filed with the appropriate county's register of
deeds or county clerk's office after the termination of the
affordability controls for each restricted unit;
[4] Communicating with lenders regarding foreclosures; and
[5] Ensuring the issuance of continuing certificates of
occupancy or certifications pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.10.
§ 250-68 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-68
10:795
(d) Resale and rental.
[1] Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information between owners and the
administrative agent regarding the availability of
restricted units for resale or rental; and
[2] Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information to low- and moderate-income
households regarding the availability of restricted units for
resale or rerental.
(e) Processing request from unit owners.
[1] Reviewing and approving requests from owners of
restricted units who wish to take out home equity loans or
refinance during the term of their ownership;
[2] Reviewing and approving requests to increase sales prices
from owners of restricted units who wish to make capital
improvements to the units that would affect the selling
price, such authorizations to be limited to those
improvements resulting in additional bedrooms or
bathrooms and the cost of central air-conditioning
systems; and
[3] Processing requests and making determinations on
requests by owners of restricted units for hardship
waivers.
(f) Enforcement.
[1] Securing annually lists of all affordable housing units for
which tax bills are mailed to absentee owners and
notifying all such owners that they must either move back
to their unit or sell it;
[2] Securing from all developers and sponsors of restricted
units, at the earliest point of contact in the processing of
the project or development, written acknowledgment of
the requirement that no restricted unit can be offered, or
in any other way committed, to any person, other than a
household duly certified to the unit by the administrative
agent;
[3] The posting annually in all rental properties, including
two-family homes, of a notice as to the maximum
permitted rent, together with the telephone number of the
administrative agent where complaints of excess rent can
be made;
§ 250-68 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-68
10:796
§ 250-69. (Reserved)183
[4] Sending annual mailings to all owners of affordable
dwelling units, reminding them of the notices and
requirements outlined in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.18(d)4;
[5] Establishing a program for diverting unlawful rent
payments to the municipality's affordable housing trust
fund or other appropriate municipal fund approved by the
DCA;
[6] Creating and publishing a written operating manual, as
approved by COAH, setting forth procedures for
administering such affordability controls; and
[7] Providing annual reports to COAH as required.
(g) The administrative agent shall have authority to take all
actions necessary and appropriate to carry out its
responsibilities hereunder.
183. Editor's Note: Former § 250-69, Other regulations, was repealed 12-14-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-21.
§ 250-68 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-69
10:797

ARTICLE X
Design Standards
§ 250-70. Purpose.
The purpose of these provisions is to provide minimal standards and
restrictions for the design of new structures and improvements in
conjunction with review and approval of subdivision plats and site plans.
The necessity of adhering to these standards may only be waived pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-51.
§ 250-71. General design review.
All subdivision, site plans and planned developments shall comply with
the requirements established herein and the construction specifications. In
reviewing the aforementioned types of land development, the approving
board shall consider the following general requirements which are more
specifically set forth in this chapter:
A. Pedestrian and vehicular traffic movement within and adjacent to the
site with particular emphasis on the provision and layout of parking
area, off-street loading and unloading, movement of people, goods and
vehicles from access roads within the site, between buildings and
between buildings and vehicles.
B. The approving board shall ensure that all parking spaces are usable and
safely and conveniently arranged. Access to the site from adjacent
roads shall be designed so as to interfere minimally with traffic flow on
these roads and to permit vehicles a rapid and safe ingress and egress
to the site.
C. The design layout of buildings and parking areas shall be reviewed so
as to provide an aesthetically pleasing design and efficient
arrangement. Particular attention shall be given to safety and fire
protection, impact on surrounding development and contiguous and
adjacent buildings and lands.
D. Adequate lighting shall be provided to ensure safe movement of
persons and vehicles and for security purposes. Lighting standards
shall be a type approved by the approving board. Lights shall be
arranged so as to minimize glare and reflection on adjacent properties.
E. Buffering shall be located around the perimeter of the site to minimize
headlights of vehicles, noise, light from structures, the movement of
people, and vehicles, and to shield activities from adjacent properties
when necessary. Buffering may consist of fencing, evergreens, shrubs,
bushes, deciduous trees or combinations thereof to achieve the stated
objectives.
F. Landscaping shall be provided as part of the overall site plan or
subdivision design and integrated into building arrangements,
topography, parking and buffering requirements. Landscaping may
§ 250-70 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-71
10:799
§ 250-72. Circulation system.
include trees, bushes, other ground cover, perennials, annuals, plants,
sculpture, and other works of art.
G. Signs shall be designed so as to be aesthetically pleasing, harmonious
with other signs on the site, and located so as to achieve their purpose
without constituting hazards to vehicles and pedestrians.
H. Storm drainage, sanitary waste disposal, water supply and garbage
disposal shall be reviewed and considered. Particular emphasis shall be
given to the adequacy of existing systems, in view of the development
proposed, and the need for improvements, both on-site and off-site, to
adequately carry runoff and sewage, and to maintain an adequate
supply of water at sufficient pressure and quality.
I. Garbage disposal shall be reviewed to ensure frequent collection,
vermin and rodent protection, and aesthetic considerations. All systems
shall meet Township specifications as to installation and construction.
J. Environmental elements relating to soil erosion, preservation of trees,
protection of watercourses and resources, noise, topography, soil and
animal life, air quality, floodplains, wetlands, preservation of trees and
vegetation, coastal zones and groundwater resources shall be reviewed
and the design of the plan shall minimize any adverse impact on these
elements.
A. Streets.
(1) General.
(a) Streets, drives, parking and service areas shall provide safe
and convenient access for users to buildings and structures
and for service and emergency vehicles. Streets shall neither
be so laid out as to encourage outside traffic to traverse the
development on minor streets, nor occupy more land than is
required to provide access, nor create unnecessary
fragmentation of the development into smaller blocks. In
general, block size shall be the maximum consistent with use
and shape of the site and the convenience and safety of the
occupants.
(b) The proposed street system shall conform to the standards set
forth in the Schedule of Required Street Dimensions contained
in Appendix I184 which is incorporated herein by reference and
the proposals and conditions shown in the Master Plan.
(2) Hierarchy. In any major subdivision it shall be the duty of the
approving board to classify proposed streets according to their
184. Editor's Note: Appendix I, Schedule of Required Street Dimensions, is included at the end
of this chapter.
§ 250-71 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-72
10:800
types. In making a determination as to the classification of a
particular street, the board shall take into consideration the
provisions of the Master Plan and the existing and proposed
conditions within the subdivision.
(a) Arterial roadways. This class of roadway is primarily intended
to form an interconnected system serving lengthy trips and
linking major traffic generators. The first and most important
function of arterial roadways is to carry traffic and provision of
access to adjoining property is relegated to a secondary
function and is minimized. With traffic volumes exceeding
10,000 trips per day, noise levels will normally exceed 65
decibels and with truck traffic can increase to 80 decibels or
more; any residential units should therefore be set back at
least 100 feet. Arterial roadways shall be assigned to one of the
following three subclasses based on the volume of traffic they
are intended to carry and shall satisfy the following standards
in addition to those otherwise set forth in this chapter:
[1] Major arterials. This class of arterial roadway is intended
to carry 25,000 to 40,000 trips per day. Traffic turning
onto and off these road can reduce capacity and access
points should be restricted as much as possible.
[2] Minor arterials. This class of arterial roadway is intended
to carry 15,000 to 25,000 trips per day.
[3] Light arterials. This class of arterial roadway is intended to
carry 10,000 to 15,000 trips per day.
(b) Collector roadways. Collector roadways differ from arterials in
that they should not form an interconnected system. They
should simply carry traffic to the arterials and should not form
linkages and interconnections which would accommodate
through-traffic which is unrelated to the uses which adjoin
them. This class of street is intended to siphon traffic from
local streets before their capacity is exceeded and the two
functions of traffic movement and property access are of equal
importance. Traffic on collector roadways should be given
priority over local streets and not interrupted by sharp turns or
stop signs. On-street parking is undesirable and should be
avoided where possible. This class of collector roadway is
intended to carry up to 10,000 trips per day.
(c) Local roadways. Local roadways differ from other roadways in
that they are not intended to carry any through-traffic
whatsoever. The intended function of this class of roadway is to
provide direct access to adjoining properties; traffic capacity is
of only secondary importance.
(3) Alignment.
§ 250-72 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-72
10:801
(a) General.
[1] Roads shall be related appropriately to the topography.
Local roads shall be curved wherever possible to avoid
conformity of lot appearance. All streets shall be arranged
so as many of the building sites as possible are at, or
above, the grade of the streets. Grades of streets shall
conform as closely as possible to the original topography. A
combination of steep grades and curves shall be avoided.
Specific standards are contained in the design standards
of these regulations.
[2] All streets shall be properly integrated with the existing
and proposed system of thoroughfares and dedicated
rights-of-way established in the Master Plan. All
thoroughfares shall be properly related to special traffic
generators such as industries, business districts, schools,
churches, and shopping centers; to population densities;
and to the pattern of existing and proposed land uses.
[3] Local roadways shall be laid out to conform as closely as
possible to the topography, to discourage use by through
traffic, to permit efficient drainage and utility systems, and
to require the minimum number of streets necessary to
provide convenient and safe access to property.
[4] The rigid rectangular gridiron street pattern is
discouraged and the use of curvilinear streets, culs-de-sac,
or U-shaped streets shall be encouraged where such use
will result in a more desirable layout.
[5] In business and industrial developments, the streets and
other accessways shall be planned in connection with the
grouping of buildings, location of rail facilities, and the
provisions of alleys, truck loading and maneuvering areas,
and walks and parking areas so as to minimize conflict of
movement between the various types of traffic, including
pedestrian traffic.
(b) Access limitations.
[1] In the case of subdivisions or site plans abutting major or
minor arterials, one of the following shall be required in
the discretion of the approving board:
[a] A marginal access road shall be provided along the
arterial and shall be separated from it by a raised
divider strip at least eight feet in width;
[b] The frontage shall be reversed so that the lots
contiguous to such arterials will front on an internal
§ 250-72 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-72
10:802
street, with a planted buffer strip at least 50 feet in
width, provided along the arterial road; or
[c] Such other means of separating through and local
traffic and of providing a suitable buffer shall be
provided, as the approving board may determine to be
appropriate.
[2] Vehicular access into and out of a planned development
shall be provided in accordance with the following
schedule:
[a] Class I PD: At least one major arterial and one minor
arterial, or two minor arterials.
[b] Class II PD: At least two major arterials.
[3] All planned developments shall have two points of access
which are ready for use at such time certificates of
occupancy are issued for the planned development. A
temporary access point may be constructed to meet the
requirements of this section until such time as a
permanent access point can be constructed. Access points
shall be designed to encourage smooth traffic flow with
controlled turning movements and minimum hazards to
vehicular or pedestrian traffic. Merging, turnout lanes and
traffic dividers shall be provided where existing or
anticipated heavy flows indicate they are needed.
[Amended 4-23-2001 by Ord. No. 17-01]
[4] In no case shall streets within a planned development
connect to streets outside the development in such a way
as to encourage use of minor streets for through traffic.
[5] Within a planned development, vehicular access to local
roadways from off-street parking and service areas may be
directly to the local roadway; provided that the parking
stalls are offset from the cartway by a minimum of 13 feet.
Vehicular access to other streets from off-street parking
and service areas shall be combined, located and
controlled so as to channel traffic from and to those areas
conveniently, safely, and in a manner which minimizes
marginal traffic friction and promotes free traffic flow.
(c) Extensions.
[1] Proposed streets shall be extended to the boundary lines of
the tract to be subdivided, unless prevented by topography
or other physical conditions, or unless in the opinion of the
approving board such extension is not necessary or
desirable for the coordination of the layout of the
§ 250-72 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-72
10:803
subdivision with the existing layout or the most
advantageous future development on adjacent tracks.
[2] The arrangement of streets shall provide for the
continuation of principal streets between adjacent
properties when such continuation is necessary for
convenient movement of traffic, effective fire protection,
efficient provision of utilities, and where such continuation
is in accordance with the Master Plan. If the adjacent
property is undeveloped and the street must be a dead-end
street, the right-of-way shall, except where reserved, be
extended to the property line.
[3] A temporary cul-de-sac turnaround, and/or a T- or L-shape
turnaround shall be provided on all dead-end streets, with
the notation on the subdivision plat that land outside the
normal street right-of-way shall revert to the abettors
whenever the street is continued. The approving board
may limit the length of dead-end streets in accordance
with the design standards of these regulations.
[4] Where a street does not extend to the boundary of the
subdivision and its continuation is not required by the
approving board for access to adjoining property, its
terminus shall not be nearer to such boundary than 50
feet. However, the approving board may require the
reservation of an appropriate easement to accommodate
drainage facilities, pedestrian traffic, or utilities. A cul-desac
turnaround shall be provided at the end of a
permanent dead-end street in accordance with the
construction standards and specifications. For greater
convenience to traffic and more effective police and fire
protection, permanent dead-end streets shall, in general,
be limited in length at the discretion of the approving
board.
(d) Street grade and intersections.
[1] No more than two streets shall cross the same point.
Street intersections shall be at right angles wherever
possible, and intersections of less than 60°, measured at
the center line of streets, shall not be permitted.
[2] Two streets which do not cross at the same points shall be
offset (center line intersection) by at least 150 feet.
[3] The approach of any collector roadway to any intersection
of another collector roadway or arterial roadway shall
follow a straight line course within 100 feet of the
intersection.
(e) Blocks and lots.
§ 250-72 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-72
10:804
[1] Blocks shall have sufficient width to provide for two tiers
of lots of appropriate depths. Exceptions to this prescribed
block width shall be permitted in blocks adjacent to major
roadways, railroads, or waterways.
[2] The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be such as
are appropriate for the locality and the type of
development contemplated, but block lengths in
residential areas shall not exceed 1,200 feet nor be less
than 400 feet in length.
[3] Looped streets shall be preferred to stub or cul-de-sac
streets and no dead-end street shall exceed a length of 700
feet, unless turnaround areas are provided at a rate of one
for each 600 linear feet.
[4] The approving board may require the reservation of an
easement through the block to accommodate utilities,
drainage facilities, or pedestrian traffic.
(f) Sight triangles.
[1] Easements for sight at roadway intersections, in the shape
of triangles and in a form approved by the approving board
attorney, shall be dedicated to cover the area bounded by
the right-of-way lines and a straight line connecting "sight
points" on the street center lines which sight easement
dimensions shall be determined in accordance with the
Transportation and Traffic Engineering Handbook (Latest
Edition). Within these sight easements, planting shall be
restricted to low-spreading varieties of plants and shrubs
of not more than 18 inches in height at maturity or trees
with the lowest branches 10 feet above the ground or
higher.
[2] Proper sight distance should be provided at the
intersections of ingress and egress of nonresidential
driveways, or driveways which serve parking lots or
residential groups of four or more dwelling units, by
establishing sight triangles in accordance with the current
Township standard specifications. Within these sight
triangles, plantings should be restricted to low spreading
varieties of plants and shrubs of not more than 18 inches
in height at maturity.
(4) Profile.
(a) Right-of-way.
[1] The right-of-way of a roadway shall be measured from lot
line to lot line and shall be sufficiently wide to contain the
§ 250-72 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-72
10:805
cartway, curbs, shoulders, sidewalks, graded areas,
utilities and shade trees.
[2] The right-of-way width of a new street that is a
continuation of an existing street shall in no case be
continued at a width less than the existing street.
(b) Cartway width.
[1] In order to provide for streets of suitable location, width,
and improvement to accommodate prospective traffic and
afford satisfactory access to police, firefighting, snow
removal, sanitation, and road maintenance equipment, and
to coordinate roads so as to compose a convenient system
and avoid undue hardships to adjoining properties, the
design standards for roads, set out in the aforesaid
Schedule of Required Street Dimensions,185 are hereby
required. In utilizing said schedule, road classification
shall be as determined by the approving board based upon
the standards hereinbefore set forth.
[2] Where a nonresidential collector roadway or a collector
roadway serving more than 100 dwelling units intersects
with another collector roadway or arterial roadway, both
the right-of-way and the pavement shall be widened by 24
feet for a distance of 200 feet back from the intersection of
the center lines of both roadways.
(c) Pavement. Street pavement thickness shall vary by street
hierarchy, subgrade properties and pavement type as set forth
in the construction specifications.
(d) Shoulders, curbs and gutters.
[1] Curbing shall be required for drainage purposes, safety,
and delineation and protection of pavement edge.
[2] Curbs shall be constructed according to the specifications
set forth in the construction specifications.
[3] Curbing shall be designed to provide a ramp for bicycle
and/or wheelchairs.
[4] Curbing shall be provided along both sides of all
subdivision streets and adjacent to the edge of all aisles,
drives, and off-street parking areas.
[5] Shoulders and/or drainage swales shall be required
instead of curbs when:
185. Editor's Note: Appendix I, Schedule of Required Street Dimensions, is included at the end
of this chapter.
§ 250-72 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-72
10:806
[a] Shoulders are required by CAFRA;
[b] Soil and/or topography make the use of shoulders and/
or drainage swales preferable; or
[c] It is in the best interest of the community to preserve
its character by using shoulders and/or drainage
swales instead of curbs.
[6] Shoulder requirements shall vary according to street
hierarchy and intensity of development.
[7] Curb construction. Any project approved for development
by the Township Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, after the effective date of this Subsection
A(4)(d)[7], shall comply with the following curb
construction requirements: [Added 6-23-2003 by Ord.
No. 25-03]
[a] All curbs, where required, shall be granite curb, also
known as "Belgian block" on all designated local
residential streets in the Township of Old Bridge.
[b] Construction of granite or Belgian block curbing shall
conform to and be in accordance with the current
specifications of the Residential Site Improvement
Standards, N.J.A.C. 5:21-4.17, and as may be modified
from time to time.
(e) Shade trees areas.
[1] All developments shall be provided with street trees
planted at the following intervals:
[a] Large trees (maturity height of 40 feet or greater):
average of 50 feet with a maximum spacing no greater
than 70 feet.
[b] Small to medium trees: average of 40 feet with
maximum spacing no greater than 50 feet.
[2] Shade trees shall generally be located within an area
outside the right-of-way on both sides of and parallel to the
street. The trees shall be planted so as not to interfere with
utilities, roadways, sidewalks, sight easements, or
streetlights.
[3] Shade tree areas shall be planted with grass, ground
cover, or treated with other suitable cover material.
[4] Shade trees may be clustered to provide for a better
aesthetic environment, provided the total number of trees
§ 250-72 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-72
10:807
is not less than would have been provided in Subsection
A(4)(e)[1][a] and [b] above.
(f) Access.
[1] Only one point of ingress and egress may be allowed on
each tract, except where the tract has a road frontage of at
least 200 feet.
[2] No driveway shall be located closer than 50 feet from the
sidelines of the intersection of two streets.
[3] No more than two driveways of not less than 20 feet or
more than 30 feet in width for means of ingress and egress
for any parking area shall be permitted for each 300 feet of
frontage upon a public street. No driveway shall be located
closer than 100 feet from the intersection of two streets,
and acceleration and deceleration lanes shall be provided.
The angle of any intersection shall not be less than 60°. A
circular driveway may be permitted on a residential lot
providing the lot has at least 100 feet of street frontage.
[Amended 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-03]
[4] Access to residential units shall be from local roadways
where possible. Where access is from a collector or
arterial roadway, on-site turnarounds or other means shall
be provided to allow for head-on access.
[5] Whenever an emergency access is provided, said access
shall be of hard durable material and shall be not less than
20 feet in width. [Added 3-15-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-03]
(5) Signs.
(a) Design and placement of traffic signs shall follow the
requirements specified in the Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices for Streets and Highways (Latest Edition),
published by the US Department of Transportation and
adopted by the DOT.
(b) At least two street name signs shall be placed at each four-way
street intersection and one at each T-intersection. Signs shall
be installed under light standards and free of visual
obstruction. The design of street name signs should be of a
style appropriate to the community, of a uniform size and color,
and erected in accordance with local traffic safety standards.
Site information signs shall follow a design theme related and
complementary to other elements of the overall site design.
(6) Names.
§ 250-72 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-72
10:808
(a) Street names and development names shall not duplicate or
nearly duplicate the names of existing streets or developments
in the Township or surrounding communities.
(b) The continuation of an existing street shall have the same
name.
B. Sidewalks and bikeways.
(1) Pedestrian and cyclist ways within a PD and cluster development.
(a) Designated walkways shall form a logical, safe and convenient
system for pedestrian access to all dwelling units, project
facilities and principal off-site pedestrian destinations. Where
appropriate, pedestrian pathways and bikeways may replace
sidewalks.
(b) Walking distance in the open between dwelling units and
parking spaces, delivery areas and trash and garbage storage
areas intended for use of occupants shall be minimized.
(c) Walkways to be used by substantial numbers of children as
play areas or routes to school or other destinations shall be so
located and safeguarded as to minimize contacts with
automotive traffic. If substantial bicycle traffic is anticipated,
bicycle paths shall be incorporated in the circulation system.
(d) Major roadway crossings shall be held to a minimum on the
walkways, and shall be located, designed and appropriately
marked for safety. Walkways may be combined with other
easements and used by emergency or service vehicles, but
shall not be used by other automotive traffic.
(e) Routes for pedestrians and cyclists entering or leaving the PD
or cluster development shall be arranged to provide safe and
convenient access. Pedestrian crossings at edges of the PD
shall be safely located, marked and controlled, and fences on
other barriers may be used to restrict crossings where there is
substantial exposure of pedestrians to automotive traffic at PD
access points. Bicycle and/or bridle paths, if provided, shall be
coordinated with the pedestrian walkway system so that
bicycle, equestrian, and street crossings are combined
wherever feasible.
(2) Bikeways.
(a) Separate bicycle paths shall be required when such paths have
been specified as part of the Master Plan.
(b) Bicycle lanes, where required, shall be placed in the outside
lane of a roadway, adjacent to the curb or shoulder. When onstreet
parking is permitted, the bicycle lane shall be between
the parking lane and the outer lane of moving vehicles. Lanes
§ 250-72 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-72
10:809
shall be delineated with markings, preferably striping. Raised
reflectors or curbs shall not be used.
(c) Bikeways shall be constructed according to the specifications
set forth in the construction specifications.
(3) Sidewalks.
(a) Sidewalks shall be constructed along streets whether public or
private in accordance with the Schedule of Required Sidewalks
set forth in Appendix J hereof and incorporated herein by
reference.186
(b) Sidewalks in conventional developments shall be placed in the
right-of-way, parallel to the street. In commercial and more
intensely developed residential areas, sidewalks may abut the
curb.
(c) In planned developments, sidewalks may be located away from
the road system to link dwelling units with other dwelling
units, the street, and on-site activity centers such as parking
areas and recreational areas. They may also be required
parallel to the street for safety and other reasons.
(d) Pedestrianway easements at least 10 feet wide may be
required by the approving board through the center of blocks
more than 600 feet long to provide circulation or access to
schools, playgrounds, shopping, or other community facilities.
(e) Sidewalk width shall be four feet, except that:
[1] Wider widths may be required in the discretion of the
approving board near pedestrian generators and
employment centers; and
[2] Where sidewalks abut the curb and cars overhang the
sidewalk, widths shall be six feet.
(f) Sidewalks and graded areas shall be constructed according to
the specifications set forth in the construction specifications.
(g) One-family dwellings less than 500 feet distant from an
existing sidewalk on the same side of the street shall be
required to have a sidewalk constructed along the entire street
frontage prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
(h) The approving board may require easements of a suitable
width to facilitate pedestrian access from public or private
streets, to schools, parks, playgrounds, or other nearby streets.
186. Editor's Note: Appendix J, Schedule of Required Sidewalks, is included at the end of this
chapter.
§ 250-72 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-72
10:810
§ 250-73. Buildings.
Such easements shall be indicated on the final plan of the
subdivision or site plan.
A. General. In all developments, the following building design standards
shall apply:
(1) All buildings shall be located with proper consideration of their
orientation and relationship to other buildings, both existing and
proposed, in terms of light, air and usable open space, access to
public right-of-way and off-street parking; height and bulk;
drainage and existing topography; trees and vegetation; and other
natural features and land forms.
(2) Groups of related buildings shall be designed to present a
harmonious appearance in terms of architectural style and exterior
materials.
(3) Buildings shall be designed to be attractive from all vantage points,
including without limitation fences, storage areas and rear
entrances.
(4) Accessory buildings should be architecturally treated in the same
manner as principal buildings.
(5) All exterior storage areas and service yards, loading docks and
ramps, electrical and mechanical equipment and enclosures,
storage tanks and the like shall be screened from the public view,
within and from the outside of the development, by a fence, wall or
mature landscape materials, compatible with the exterior design of
building within the development.
(6) Colors, materials and finishes shall be coordinated in all exterior
elevations of buildings to achieve continuity of expression. All roof
and wall projections such as gutter, flues, louvers, utility boxes,
vents, grills, downspouts, exposed flashing, overhead doors shall be
painted or installed with an anodized or acrylic finish, in a color to
match adjacent surfaces.
(7) All openings in the wall of a building such as windows and doors
should relate to each other on each elevation, vertically and
horizontally, in a clearly defined order; and should take into
account orientation to the sun for sun-shading and consideration of
the efficiencies of heat loss and gain through such openings.
(8) Buildings and parking areas should be designed to relate to
existing grade conditions. Exposed basement walls are not
acceptable as an architectural treatment. All exposed basement
walls must be treated to relate properly to the design of the
building.
§ 250-72 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-73
10:811
(9) Appurtenances such as, but not limited to, tanks, condenser units
and other equipment shall be fully screened from view.
(10) Building design and site arrangements shall allow for public
pedestrian access and sidewalks within the area, unless sidewalks
and pedestrian circulation are provided for within the adjoining
right-of-way of the public street. Where the required front yard
setback for the zone is greater, the zone regulations shall take
precedence.
B. Residential development design. The Township encourages innovative
and efficient design of planned developments. In such a design, the
Township recommends that natural features, such as lakes, rocks,
outcrops, streams, topsoil, trees, shrubs and understory, shall be
preserved and incorporated into the landscaping and site design of the
PD to the maximum extent feasible. In PDs, the following building
design standards shall apply:
(1) Attention in site design and layout shall be given to enhancement of
views, vistas, panoramas and local points.
(2) Architectural design and building construction shall be consistent,
complementary and harmonious. Approval of designs and exterior
changes and additions may be recommended by an Architectural
Review Committee to the approving board. The Architectural
Review Committee shall pay particular attention to facade
treatments, materials, color scheme, neighborhood or "village"
character, fencing and landscaping, accessory structures, signage
and street furnishings.
(3) Site planning in the PD shall provide protection of the development
from potentially adverse surrounding environmental constraints,
and protection of surrounding areas from potentially adverse
environmental constraints within the development.
C. Open space and recreation design standards. All proposed playground
areas in a development shall conform to the following minimum
standards:
(1) Playground equipment shall be set back a minimum of six feet from
the edge of the designated playground area; provided, however,
that said setback shall be 10 feet with respect to slides, swings and
other equipment utilizing moving parts.
(2) The playground equipment shall be constructed on a surface of no
less than six inches in depth and composed of a suitable material
approved by the approving board; provided, however, that, in the
case of playground equipment which incorporates decks or other
components having a height of six feet or more, such depth shall be
increased to a minimum of 10 inches. For purposes of this section,
"suitable material" shall include wood fiber, fine sand,
manufactured resilient rubber padding, or fine wood chips. Such
§ 250-73 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-73
10:812
material shall not include pea gravel, grass, fill dirt, topsoil, course
sand, or large course wood chips.
(3) Except as otherwise set forth above, all recreation facilities shall
conform to the standards set forth in Chapter 17, or such successor
chapter, of Architectural Graphic Standards (Latest Edition),
published by the American Institute of Architects.
D. Nonresidential development design. For commercial and industrial
developments, the following building design standards shall apply:
(1) Exterior materials shall include appropriate texture and trim to
prevent large undifferentiated facades of the same material.
(2) All roof planes or caps meeting the exterior facade shall have
overhangs or appropriate cornice and trim details.
(3) All major entrances to buildings shall be properly identified with
architectural elements such as recessed entranceways, projected
overhangs, and porticos.
(4) Flat roof canopies on metal pipe columns shall not be used on
commercial buildings.
(5) Window and door openings shall include appropriate trim and
either recesses or overhangs to promote a harmonious variety of
light and shade on the facade of the building.
(6) Buildings and structures used for functional purposes, such as
warehouses, indoor sports facilities and manufacturing facilities,
shall include appropriate landscaping adjacent to facades in the
public view.
E. Fences.187
(1) The following materials are prohibited for use as fencing materials
on any lot:
(a) Barbed wire.
(b) Sharp pointed materials of any type to form the top of the
fence.
(c) Canvas.
(d) Cloth.
(e) Electrically charged fences.
(f) Temporary fences, such as but not limited to snow fences,
expandable fences and collapsible fences upon a lot with a
187. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 164, Fences.
§ 250-73 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-73
10:813
§ 250-74. Landscaping.
dwelling or structure on it; provided temporary fences shall be
permitted to protect any hazardous condition or excavation.
(2) Notwithstanding the foregoing, barbed wire and electrically
charged fences shall be permitted in conjunction with farm uses.
Where such barbed wire or electrically charged fences are located
within 100 feet of any residential property, permanent signs
identifying the type of fence shall be posted every 100 feet.
(3) All fences shall be constructed with the face or finished side facing
adjacent properties.
(4) Living fences shall be maintained in a neatly trimmed condition and
shall not extend into adjacent properties. Living fences along roads
and at road intersections must also be maintained in accordance
with Chapter 435, Article II, Obstructions Along Roads and at
Intersections, of the Code of the Township of Old Bridge.
(5) Fences shall be constructed in a manner so as not to restrict the
flow of natural drainage nor cause surface water to be blocked or
dammed to create ponding.
(6) Fences around swimming pools shall meet the requirements as
established in the Swimming Pool Safety Devices Section of the
New Jersey State Uniform Construction Code (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119
et seq.).
(7) Fences proposed at any new construction project shall be included
as part of the site plan proposal presented for consideration before
the approving board.
A. Purpose. The purpose of these provisions is to provide proper
guidelines and specifications for landscaping of all development.
"Landscaping" shall be defined as the means of improving the aesthetic
value of a project or project sites through the use of grass, ground
covers, plantings, shrubs and trees in a coherent manner consistent
with good design practices. It is specifically intended to accomplish the
following purposes:
(1) To improve the aesthetics of a building site by the blending
together of various unrelated elements into a harmonious whole;
(2) To reduce air and sound pollution; regulate solar radiation and
wind control; to provide flood control;
(3) To influence the type and speed of pedestrian and vehicular traffic
flow;
(4) To reduce visual discomfort by screening out glare and reflection;
§ 250-73 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-74
10:814
(5) To stabilize soils by preventing soil erosion and otherwise restore a
building site to a balanced environment wherever a project causes
excessive removal of existing vegetation.
B. Site protection.
(1) Topsoil.
(a) Topsoil moved during the course of construction shall be
redistributed on the site on all regraded surfaces. At least four
inches of even cover shall be added to all disturbed areas of the
development and shall be stabilized by seeding or planting.
(b) All slopes and minor drainage swales over 10%, and all major
drainage swales shall be sodded or stabilized by other means
acceptable to the approving board upon recommendation of
the Township Engineer. Before construction of the
development has begun, selected samples of the existing
topsoil at various locations of the site shall be taken as directed
by the Municipal Engineer and shall be sent to Rutgers
University for analysis and classification. During the course of
construction as lots are finished as to grading, seeding, etc.,
selected samples shall again be taken as directed by the
Municipal Engineer and sent to Rutgers University for
analysis, classification and comparison with the original
sample of the general area to determine whether topsoil has
been properly preserved and redistributed.
(2) Slopes.
(a) Landscaping of the area of all cuts and fills and/or terraces
shall be sufficient to prevent erosion, and all roadway slopes
steeper than one foot vertically to three feet horizontally shall
be planted with ground covers appropriate for the purpose and
soil conditions, water availability, and environment.
(b) Changes of grade levels may be achieved by any combination
of the following methods, and the minimum standards shall be
in accordance with the construction specifications:
[1] Raised flower beds constructed with timber, railroad ties,
brick, brick veneer, pre-cast stone, rock, stone or similar
materials.
[a] Pre-cast planters, as well as planters constructed onsite,
shall have properly designed drainage or
weeping holes and shall incorporate proper footings
where required.
[2] Terracing. Terracing shall be designed to prevent soil
erosion.188
§ 250-74 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-74
10:815
[a] Turf - by grade levels of soil with turf providing grade
differential;
[b] Raised terrace of flagstone, brick, pre-cast stone, precast
concrete, cobblestone or installed concrete slab;
[c] Wood decking over footing; and
[d] Below-grade terracing with low retaining walls.
[3] Retaining walls, with properly installed weeping and
drainage holes, on proper footings, with approved
anchorage and supports. Materials may be of, but not
limited to, timber, railroad ties, brick, cinder block, brick
veneer, rock, stone, pre-cast concrete with veneered
surfaces or any similar materials approved by the
Municipal Engineer.
[4] Other techniques.
[a] Rock gardens, reflecting pools, artificially cycled
fountains, waterfalls, formal and/or informal sunken
gardens.
[b] Landscaped swales and depressed walkways of tan
bark, wood chips, pine needles, pebbles or sand.
[c] Incorporation of berms, mounding of soil on-site,
either natural or man-made, may be used to achieve
changes of grade, provided it is properly landscaped
with turf or ground cover.
[d] Ravine slopes, drainage and swale slopes, steep
stream banks properly landscaped with permanent
ground cover, or drywall rock or similar material or
rock gardening so as to prevent soil erosion and
promote plant growth. These may be terraced or slope
graded.
(3) Stream corridors.
(a) The objective of landscaping of stream valleys and other water
features is to protect adjacent, upstream and downstream,
private and public lands from direct and substantial increased
flood damage from:
[1] Increased flood heights and velocities due to obstructions
in waterways;
[2] Increased siltation caused by erosion;
188. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Land Development Codification (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. IV).
§ 250-74 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-74
10:816
[3] Increased runoff; or
[4] Incompatible land uses adjacent to brooks or springs,
streams, creeks or estuaries of both tidal and fresh water.
(b) Specific requirements.
[1] Subject to contradictory regulations promulgated by the
DEP, all streams, estuaries, creeks, brooks, tributaries and
floodplains (hereinafter referred to as "streams") shall
comply with the following regulations:
[a] All streams shall be properly de-snagged of all
extraneous debris, dead and decaying vegetation.
[b] All banks shall be protected from erosion caused by
runoff and flooding or wind damage. Protection
against erosion may be achieved by, but not limited to,
the use of permanent ground cover, vegetation,
drywall construction or any approved combination of
the same. The encouragement of plants, ferns and
shading vegetation is desired.
[c] A conservation area of a minimum of 50 feet in depth
from the center line of said stream shall be clear of all
extraneous debris, and dead and decaying vegetation.
This area may incorporate appropriate approved
selective thinning, the result of which will encourage
the healthy woodland growth of existing trees and
shrubs which enhances the degree of recharge. No
removal of trees, shrubs, etc., on the list of New Jersey
Protected Trees will be permitted. Landscaping of this
buffer zone is permitted in keeping with a natural
setting. The type and amount of vegetation cover shall
encourage the stabilization of the soil and prevent
erosion and increased runoff.
(c) Structures adjacent to watercourses.
[1] No structure shall be built within 50 feet from the top of
the bank of any watercourse, as determined by the
Municipal Engineer.
(4) Woodlands and trees.
(a) Protection of existing plantings.
[1] A maximum effort shall be made to save specimens of
plantings which are unique due to their relative size or
rarity. Trees with a diameter of 14 inches or greater
measured at a height of three feet from the ground level
shall be inventoried and marked and described on the
building plan. The following species of trees shall be
§ 250-74 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-74
10:817
identified and marked on the building plan if they exceed
three inches or greater in diameter measured three feet
from ground level: all specimen trees listed in the Manual
of Woody Landscape Plants, Michael A. Dirr, Stipes
Publishing Company, Current Edition. Applicant shall
identify a tree protection area in the building plan which
shall include all areas on the lot except the proposed
building footprint, and 10 feet extending in all directions
from the proposed building footprint, and the driveway
plus three feet from the edge of the driveway. All specified
tree and shrubs meeting the above criteria within the tree
protection area shall not be removed unless specifically
approved by the approving board or as otherwise provided
herein. An applicant for subdivision approval shall identify
a tentative building footprint for each lot, and if the
building footprint is moved by more than 10 feet within
the building envelope after final approval is granted, an
amended tree protection area for the lot shall be reviewed
and approved by the Director of the Department of
Community Development or his designee. [Amended
7-24-2000 by Ord. No. 29-00]
[2] No material or temporary soil deposits shall be placed
within four feet of shrubs or 10 feet of trees designated to
be retained on the subdivision plat or site plan.
[3] Protective barriers or tree wells shall be installed around
each tree, plant and/or group of trees or plants that are to
remain on the site during and after construction. The
barrier shall be installed before any tree removal permit or
construction permit is issued. Barriers shall not be
supported by the plants they are protecting, but shall be
self-supporting. They shall be a minimum of four feet high
and constructed of a durable material that will last until
construction is completed. Snow fences and silt fences are
examples of acceptable barriers.
[4] The grade of land located within six feet of a tree shall not
be raised or lowered more than six inches unless
compensated by welling or retaining methods herein
described.
[a] Tree wells are to be constructed around each tree or
group of trees before any grades are increased. Wells
are to be constructed of uncemented stone, block or
any other suitable material. This well should be a
minimum of three feet in diameter for four inches or
less caliper tree with the wall located 18 inches from
the trunk with the construction starting on existing
grade so as not to disturb roots with foundation
construction. For trees of more than four inches
§ 250-74 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-74
10:818
caliper, there should be added one foot to the diameter
of the well for each inch caliper over four inches as
measured 12 inches above natural ground level.
[b] Retaining walls are to be constructed around each
tree or group of trees immediately after the grade is
lowered. This retaining wall is to be constructed of
railroad ties, or any other suitable material subject to
the approval of the Municipal Engineer.
[5] Any cleaning within six feet of tree trunks must be done by
hand. No equipment is to be placed over this area and no
building materials are to be attached against the tree or
within the area of the aforesaid barrier.
[6] No tree is to support any scaffolding, signs, temporary
utility or any other device. Topsoil is to be stockpiled in an
area at least eight feet from any tree designated to remain.
(b) Removal of debris.
[1] All stumps and other tree parts, litter, brush, weeds,
excess or scrap building materials, or other debris shall be
removed from the site and disposed of in accordance with
the law. No tree stumps, portions of tree trunks or limbs
shall be buried anywhere in the development. All dead or
dying trees, standing or fallen, shall be removed from the
site. If trees and limbs are reduced to chips, they may,
subject to approval of the Municipal Engineer, be used as
mulch in landscaped areas.
(c) Existing vegetation.
[1] In all residential developments, the developer shall be
required to preserve as much of the existing vegetation as
possible. The preservation of existing healthy trees along
roadways may reduce the requirements for the planting of
additional street trees, otherwise set forth herein.
C. Planting.
(1) General.
(a) In residential developments, besides the screening and street
trees required, additional plantings or landscaping elements
shall be required throughout the subdivision or site plan where
necessary for climate control, privacy, or for aesthetic reasons,
in accordance with a planting plan approved by the approving
board.
(b) In nonresidential developments, all areas of the site not
occupied by a building and required improvements shall be
landscaped by the planting of grass or other ground cover,
§ 250-74 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-74
10:819
shrubs, and trees, or the preservation of existing ground cover,
shrubs, and trees, in accordance with a planting plan approved
by the approving board.
(c) At a minimum, the equivalent of at least two shrubs and one
shade or ornamental tree of two-and-one-half-inch caliper or
greater shall be provided for each 1,500 square feet of area of
a residential development not covered by buildings or
improvements and for each 1,000 square feet of nonresidential
development. Existing healthy specimen trees may be included
in satisfying these requirements. These plantings shall be in
addition to any other landscaping requirements, including
landscaping of off-street parking areas and buffer areas.189
(d) The periphery of all buildings and the yard areas, not covered
by parking and not subject to other special landscaping
requirements contained herein, shall be suitably landscaped.
Such landscaping shall employ low-maintenance, hardy
shrubs, hedges, ground covers and trees as well as gravel,
mulches, decorative concrete and brick.
(e) On slopes, the landscape plan shall recommend plantings that
prevent erosion.
(f) Along major roads, the plantings should buffer the adjoining
uses from noise and lights.
(g) On north slopes, the plantings should be sufficient to serve as a
wind screen; and to the south, the landscaping should be
sufficient to provide shade from the hot summer sun.
(h) The overall landscaping plan should "break up" long buildings
and screen off parking, service and utility areas. The plan
should provide for a variety of different species to protect
against disease attacking all of the plantings. A variety should
be selected with consideration for various seasons and of
different colors, textures, shapes, blossoms and foliage.
(i) The landscape plan should be particularly sensitive to local soil
conditions, lack of or overabundance of water, topography and
climatological factors.
(2) Parking areas.
(a) All parking lots of 20 or more spaces for both residential and
nonresidential developments shall conform to the landscaping
design standards set forth herein.
(b) All parking lot landscaping shall be of such quality as to
improve and enhance the site and its surrounding areas.
189. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Land Development Codification (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. IV).
§ 250-74 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-74
10:820
Appropriate places for landscaping include the raised
walkways or sidewalk areas, at the end of bays, and in specific
planting islands established throughout the lots. In narrow
islands, low-spreading and low-maintenance plants, such as
English ivy, creeping juniper, myrtle or pachysandra, shall be
utilized. Where more space is available, yews, juniper or
forsythia shall be utilized.
(c) The primary landscaping materials used in parking lots shall
be trees which provide shade or are capable or providing shade
at maturity. Shrubbery, hedges and other planting material
may be used to complement the tree landscaping, but shall not
be the sole contribution to the landscaping. Effective use of
earth berms and existing topography is also encouraged as a
component of the landscape plan.
(d) The landscaping and planting areas shall be reasonably
dispersed throughout the parking lots. Trees should be a
mixture of flowering, decorative, evergreen and deciduous.
Trees in parking areas should be clumped at critical corners or
areas to break up the mass of cars apparent to the eye. They
should also be located with care so as not to obstruct the vision
of the driver.
(e) The interior dimensions of any planting area or planting
median shall be sufficient to protect the landscaping materials
planted therein and to insure proper growth.
(f) In those instances where plant material exists on a parking lot
site prior to its development, such landscape material may be
used in the discretion of the approving board.
(g) Peripheral landscaping shall be required along any side of a
parking lot that abuts adjoining property that is not a right-ofway.
(h) A landscaping strip at least five feet in width shall be located
between the parking area and the abutting property lines.
[1] One tree for every 50 linear feet of lot line shall be planted
in the landscaping strip.
[2] In addition to the required trees, a wall, hedge or other
durable landscape barrier shall be planted or installed.
The height of any such hedge shall be no less than three
feet and no more than seven feet. The height of any wall or
other durable landscape barrier shall be no less than five
feet and no more than seven feet.
[3] One shrub or vine for each 10 feet of nonliving durable
barrier shall be planted between the parking lot and the
barrier, and the barrier and the abutting property line.
§ 250-74 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-74
10:821
(i) Street landscaping shall be required along any side of a
parking lot that abuts the right-of-way of any street, road or
highway.
(j) A landscaping strip at least 10 feet in depth shall be located
between the abutting right-of-way and the parking lot.
[1] One tree shall be planted for each 40 linear feet of the
landscaping strip.
[2] A hedge, wall or other durable landscape barrier of at least
2 1/2 feet in height shall extend the entire length of the
landscaping strip. The first 25 feet on both sides of any
accessory driveway pavement is excluded from this
requirement.
[3] One shrub or vine for each 10 feet of nonliving durable
barrier shall be planted between the barrier and the street
and between the barrier and the parking lot.
(k) Except as otherwise set forth in this chapter, not less than 20%
of the gross parking area of any parking lot shall be
landscaped. Such required landscaping shall be in addition to
the landscaping required by Subsection C(2)(g), (h), (i) and (j)
above.
[1] Shade trees shall be planted 70 feet on center as part of
the landscape requirement in all parking lots.
(3) Plant selection.
(a) All plants shall be nursery grown and of a species suitable for
US Department of Agriculture Hardiness Zone 6. Dead and
dying materials shall be replaced by the developer during the
two growing seasons following planting and the estimated
costs of such replacement shall be included in the estimate
prepared for any maintenance guarantees which the developer
is required to post under this chapter.
(b) Plant selection shall also conform to a list of plant materials
recommended for planting in the Township on file in the
Department of Community Development.
(c) Plant material used should not be of the exotic variety
requiring substantial maintenance or material highly subject to
pollution, salt damage along highways and current insect
disease manifestations.
(4) Specifications.
(a) The following sizes of trees and shrubs are the permitted
minimums:
§ 250-74 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-74
10:822
[1] Street trees: two to 2 1/2 inches DBH.
[2] Screening plants: four to five feet tall.
(b) All plant materials must conform to the horticulture standards
as set forth by the American Association of Nurserymen.
(c) Planting holes must be a minimum of 12 inches larger in
diameter and six inches deeper than the soil ball or root mass,
excluding ground covers, and backfilled with a planting
mixture incorporating a minimum of 25% organic matter by
volume.
(d) Each tree planted in residential areas must be tagged with a
durable label bearing the following information:
[1] Genus, species, variety and plant patent number, if a
patented tree;
[2] Cultural requirements, including watering and
fertilization.
(e) Trees shall be staked in the following manner:
[1] Two stakes shall be driven a minimum of two feet into
undisturbed soil outside the planting hole.
[2] Stakes when driven must be 1/2 to 2/3 the height of the
tree measured from ground level.
[3] Stakes shall be two inches' diameter minimum at the thick
end.
[4] Stakes shall be placed in line with prevailing winds.
[5] Stakes shall be attached to the tree with twelve-gauge
galvanized wire covered with rubber or plastic hose.
Where wire is likely to come in contact with the tree trunk,
an alternate material to be used may be any of the
commercially available materials designed for staking
trees; provided it is approved by the Municipal Engineer.
[6] The loop in contact with the tree shall be loose enough to
permit growth and prevent girdling for two years, but shall
be tightly bound to the stake to prevent slipping.
(f) Wrapping. Each tree shall be wrapped with an expandable
paper or cloth treated to last at least one year.
[1] The wrap shall extend from the ground level up the trunk
to the first branches.
§ 250-74 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-74
10:823
§ 250-75. Lighting.
[2] In order to prevent sun scald, the wrap shall be attached
or fastened at each end with a material that will permit
tree growth without girdling.
(g) Saucer. A ring of packed soil shall be placed around the
finished planting hold of each tree.
[1] The saucer shall be a minimum of six inches higher than
the finished grade.
[2] Saucers placed on slopes shall be level at the top and
perpendicular to the tree trunk.
(h) Trees and shrubs must be planted only when the soil is frost
free and friable.
(i) All planting beds must be covered, and the type of covering to
be used must be noted on the landscape plan.
[1] Where mulches are used, a layer of black, four-mil
polyethlyne or its equivalent must be used to reduce weed
growth. Minimum required depth of placement is four
inches.
[2] An approved chemical pre-emergence, nonselective
herbicide may be used in lieu of the polyethlyne. The
chemical to be used must be specified on the landscape
plan and used according to directions.
[3] Ground covers are required in place of grass in small
restricted areas such as tree and shrub planters.
(j) All planted beds surrounded by grass must be edged by a
physical edging, in accordance with Township standard
specifications, flush with the soil to permit mowing.
(k) Sod is to be used in place of seeding for more rapid
establishment and effect, except for areas exceeding one acre.
In any area exceeding one acre, at least one acre must be
sodded.
(l) Ground cover areas and steep banks greater than 15% must be
planted with an approved ground cover and an approved
mulch.
(m) If wood chips are to be used as a mulch, they must follow
Township standard specifications.
(n) All seed mixtures and sod types must meet the approval of the
Municipal Engineer.
§ 250-74 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-75
10:824
A. Adequate lighting shall be provided if off-street parking spaces are to
be used at night. The lighting shall be arranged and installed to
minimize glare on property in a residential district.
(1) Lighting should be located along streets, in parking areas, at
intersections and where various types of circulation systems
merge, intersect, or split. Pathways, sidewalks and trails should be
lit using low or mushroom-type standards. Stairways and sloping or
rising paths require illumination, as do building entrances and
exits. Lighting should also be provided where buildings are set
back or offset.
B. All direct glare is prohibited. The maximum amount of light permitted is
that produced by lights on standards not to exceed the maximum height
allowed in the zone and shielded to restrict the maximum apex angle of
the cone of illumination to 135°.
C. Standards upon which lights are placed should be spaced at a distance
approximately equal to four times the height. The maximum height
should be in scale with the surroundings and should not exceed the
maximum building height permitted.
D. Spotlights, if used, should not be located on buildings and faced
outward. Spotlights should be put on standards pointing toward the
structures.
E. The standards and style of light should be consistent with the type and
style of the architecture of the buildings. The mounting height shall be
not more than 18 feet and arranged to give a fairly uniform lighting
pattern of at least one footcandle throughout the lot. [Amended
3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-03]
F. Intersecting, converging and diverging roadway areas at grade require
higher illumination than that recommended. The illumination in these
areas should be at least equal to the sum of the illumination values
provided on the roadways which form the intersection.
G. The lowest footcandle value at any point on the pavement should not be
less than 1/3 the average value. The only exception to the requirement
applies to residential roadways, where the lowest footcandle value at
any point may be as low as 1/6 the average value.
H. The maximum intensity of illumination permitted on roadways and
walkways is as set forth in Appendix K which is hereby incorporated
herein.190
I. If the approving board includes as a condition of approval the
installation of streetlighting on a dedicated public street connected to a
public utility, then upon notification in writing by the developer to the
190. Editor's Note: Appendix K, Schedule of Maximum Intensity of Illumination, is included at
the end of this chapter.
§ 250-75 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-75
10:825
§ 250-76. Outdoor storage for refuse and recyclables.191
board and Township Council that the streetlighting on a dedicated
public street has been installed and accepted for service by the public
utility and that certificates of occupancy have been issued for at least
50% of the dwelling units and 50% of the floor area of the
nonresidential uses on the dedicated public street or portion thereof,
the Township shall, within 30 days following receipt of the notification,
make appropriate arrangements with the public utility for, and assume
the payment of, the costs of the streetlighting on the dedicated public
street on a continuing basis. Compliance by the Township with the
provisions of this section shall not be deemed to constitute acceptance
of the street by the municipality.
J. Streetlighting. [Added 3-25-1996 by Ord. No. 6-96]
(1) Streetlighting standards of a type and number approved by the
approving authority shall be installed at street intersections and
elsewhere if deemed necessary by the approving authority.
(2) The developer shall arrange for the provision of streetlights, at his
expense, under the requirements for "contribution fixtures" as
established by the Board by Public Utilities Commissioners Tariff
No. 6 Electric Part No. 3, effective 4-25-1983. The developer shall
also provide for the installation of underground service for
streetlighting at his cost.
A. Each major application for residential development shall include
provisions for the collection, disposition, and recycling of recyclable
materials.
(1) Each single-family unit or unit within a two-family dwelling should
provide at least 12 square feet of floor area conveniently arranged
and located as a holding area for a four-week accumulation of
materials. Such an area may be within a laundry room, basement or
garage.
(2) Each multifamily dwelling unit or accessory dwelling unit must
provide at least three square feet of area conveniently arranged
and located to hold a one-week accumulation of recyclable
materials. Each multifamily complex must also provide bins in a
convenient location or locations in a common area as dropoffs for
storing recyclables until collection occurs. The holding area shall
provide for truck access and loading and shall be suitably screened
from view and set back from property lines.
B. Each application for a nonresidential use which utilizes 1,000 square
feet or more of land shall include provisions for the collection,
disposition and recycling of recyclable materials. Each application shall
191. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 429, Solid Waste.
§ 250-75 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-76
10:826
§ 250-77. Off-street parking and loading.
quantify the amount of recyclable material it will generate as part of
its weekly operation, including newspapers, white high-grade paper,
glass, aluminum, cardboard, tin and bimetal cans. The application shall
provide a storage area sized to contain a one-week accumulation of
recyclable material. The storage area shall be designed for truck access
for pickup of materials and be suitably screened from view if located
outside a building.
A. Off-street parking.
(1) Dimensional standards.
(a) Each off-street parking space shall consist of a rectangular
area with dimensions in accordance with the following
standards:
Stall
Angle
(degrees) Stall Width
Curb
Length Per
Car Stall Depth
Driveway
Width
0° 10 feet 0
inches
23 feet 0
inches
10 feet 0
inches
12 feet 0
inches
45° 10 feet 0
inches
14 feet 2
inches
20 feet 6
inches
13 feet 0
inches
60° 10 feet 0
inches
11 feet 6
inches
20 feet 6
inches
18 feet 0
inches
90° 10 feet 0
inches
10 feet 0
inches
20 feet 0
inches
24 feet 0
inches
(b) Notwithstanding the aforesaid dimensional standards, parking
spaces, ramps, etc., shall be provided for the physically
handicapped, in accordance with the New Jersey Barrier-Free
Design regulations (N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.1 et seq.) and this chapter.
(c) Back-up areas with a minimum depth of 10 feet shall be
provided in all parking lots where there are dead-end aisles.
(d) Planting beds shall have a minimum width of five feet.
(e) Wherever planted material is likely to interfere with vehicular
parking, island width shall be increased by two feet and that
area covered with mulch.
(f) Single island parking length shall be a minimum of 19 feet,
double island parking length shall be a minimum of 38 feet to
protect the vehicles parked in each parking row.
(g) Curb return radii adjacent to traffic flow shall be a minimum of
five feet.
§ 250-76 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-77
10:827
(2) Layout.
(a) Off-street parking spaces, together with appropriate access
thereto, shall be provided on the same lot as the building it is
intended to serve. Parking facilities may be located in any yard
space except where specifically prohibited but shall not be
closer than five feet from any side yard or rear yard property
line.
(b) Off-street parking spaces shall be separated from walkways,
sidewalks, streets, or alleys by a wall, fence or curbing or other
approved protective device, or by distance so that vehicles
cannot protrude over publicly owned areas.
(c) Each parking space shall consist of a suitably graded, drained
and unobstructed rectangular area in the plane of which no
straight line shall have a grade in excess of 6% or less than 1%.
(d) Parking areas shall be surfaced with bituminous pavement or
concrete pavement, the design of which shall be approved by
the Municipal Engineer and clearly marked by painted lines or
curb or other means to indicate individual parking spaces.
These provisions shall not apply to the construction of singlefamily
detached dwellings as defined herein.
(e) All planting islands shall be enclosed by poured concrete
curbing, Belgian block or railroad ties meeting Township
engineering standards.
(f) Islands shall be located at both ends of each parking row.
Intermediate islands shall be installed within each parking row
whenever there are more than 20 parking spaces in the row
and subsequently shall be constructed whenever more than 10
parking spaces are intervening in the parking row. Islands
constructed to channelize traffic flow within the parking lot
shall also be landscaped.
B. Loading.
(1) Dimensional standards.
(a) Loading spaces shall have a minimum 15 feet of vertical
clearance and shall be designed in accordance with the
following schedule:
Loading Space
Combined Apron and Aisle
Length
Length
(feet)
Width
(feet)
90°
(feet)
60°
(feet)
60 10 72 66
60 12 63 57
§ 250-77 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-77
10:828
§ 250-78. Stormwater management. [Amended 5-13-1996 by Ord.
No. 20-96; 8-11-1997 by Ord. No. 31-97; 12-13-1999 by Ord. No.
36-99; 10-23-2006 by Ord. No. 46-2006]
Loading Space
Combined Apron and Aisle
Length
Length
(feet)
Width
(feet)
90°
(feet)
60°
(feet)
60 14 60 54
(2) Layout.
(a) Loading and unloading spaces shall be provided directly from a
street that will not interfere with public convenience and that
will permit orderly and safe movement of truck vehicles.
A. Scope and purpose.
(1) Policy statement. Flood control, groundwater recharge, and
pollutant reduction through nonstructural or low-impact
techniques shall be explored before relying on structural best
management practices (BMPs). Structural BMPs should be
integrated with nonstructural stormwater management strategies
and proper maintenance plans. Nonstructural strategies include
both environmentally sensitive site design and source controls that
prevent pollutants from being placed on the site or from being
exposed to stormwater. Source control plans should be developed
based upon physical site conditions and the origin, nature, and the
anticipated quantity or amount of potential pollutants. Multiple
stormwater management BMPs may be necessary to achieve the
established performance standards for water quality, quantity, and
groundwater recharge.
(2) Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to establish minimum
stormwater management requirements and controls for
development projects within the Township of Old Bridge.
(3) Applicability.
(a) This section shall be applicable to all site plans and
subdivisions for the following major developments that require
preliminary or final site plan or subdivision review:
[1] Nonresidential major developments; and
[2] Aspects of residential major developments that are not
preempted by the Residential Site Improvement Standards
at N.J.A.C. 5:21.
(b) This section shall also be applicable to all major developments
undertaken by Old Bridge Township.
§ 250-77 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-78
10:829
(c) Nonmajor developments shall comply with § 250-78E.
(4) Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements.
Development approvals issued for subdivisions and site plans
pursuant to this section are to be considered an integral part of
development approvals under the subdivision and site plan review
process and do not relieve the applicant of the responsibility to
secure required permits or approvals for activities regulated by any
other applicable code, rule, act, or ordinance. In their
interpretation and application, the provisions of this section shall
be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the
public health, safety, and general welfare. This section is not
intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other
ordinances, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law
except that, where any provision of this section imposes
restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance,
rule or regulation, or other provision of law, the more restrictive
provisions or higher standards shall control.
B. Definitions. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in
this section shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they
have in common usage and to give this section it's most reasonable
application. The definitions below are the same as or based on the
corresponding definitions in the stormwater management rules at
N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.2.
CAFRA CENTERS, CORES OR NODES — Those areas within
boundaries accepted by the Department pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:8E-5B.
CAFRA PLANNING MAP — The geographic depiction of the boundaries
for Coastal Planning Areas, CAFRA Centers, CAFRA Cores and CAFRA
Nodes pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:7E-5B.3.
COMPACTION — The increase in soil bulk density.
CORE — A pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic uses
serving the surrounding municipality, generally including housing and
access to public transportation.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — An agency designated by the County
Board of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater
management plans and implementing ordinance(s). The county review
agency may either be:
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.
(1) A county planning agency; or
A county water resource association created under N.J.S.A
58:16A-55.5, if the ordinance or resolution delegates authority to
approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove municipal
stormwater management plans and implementing ordinances.
(2)
§ 250-78 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-78
10:830
DESIGNATED CENTER — A State Development and Redevelopment
Plan Center as designated by the State Planning Commission such as
urban, regional, town, village, or hamlet.
DESIGN ENGINEER — A person professionally qualified and duly
licensed in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may
include, but not necessarily be limited to, development of project
requirements, creation and development of project design and
preparation of drawings and specifications.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more
parcels, the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural
alteration, relocation or enlargement of any building or structure, any
mining excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of
any building or other structure, or land or extension of use of land,
by any person, for which permission is required under the Municipal
Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. In the case of development
of agricultural lands, "development" means any activity that requires
a state permit; any activity reviewed by the County Agricultural Board
(CAB) and the State Agricultural Development Committee (SADC), and
municipal review of any activity not exempted by the Right to Farm Act,
N.J.S.A 4:1C-1 et seq.
DRAINAGE AREA — A geographic area within which stormwater,
sediments, or dissolved materials drain to a particular receiving water
body or to a particular point along a receiving water body.
EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD — A neighborhood designated by
the Urban Coordinating Council in consultation and conjunction with
the New Jersey Redevelopment Authority pursuant to N.J.S.A 55:19-69.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREAS — An area or feature which is
of significant environmental value, including but not limited to stream
corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitats of endangered or
threatened species; large areas of contiguous open space or upland
forest; steep slopes; and wellhead protection and groundwater
recharge areas. Habitats of endangered or threatened species are
identified using the Department's Landscape Project as approved by the
Department's Endangered and Nongame Species Program.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments
by water, wind, ice or gravity.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer
of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
INFILTRATION — The process by which water seeps into the soil from
precipitation.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Any development that provides for
ultimately disturbing one or more acres of land or increasing
impervious coverage by more than 1/4 acre. "Disturbance" for the
purpose of this section is the placement of impervious surface or
§ 250-78 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-78
10:831
exposure and/or movement of soil or bedrock or clearing, cutting, or
removing of vegetation.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Old Bridge.
NODE — An area designated by the State Planning Commission
concentrating facilities and activities which are not organized in a
compact form.
NUTRIENT — A chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or
phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the development of
organisms.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, Old Bridge Township, or political subdivision of this state
subject to municipal jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land Use
Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue,
filter backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge,
munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes,
radioactive substance [except those regulated under the Atomic Energy
Act of 1954, as amended (42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.)], thermal waste,
wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial,
municipal, agricultural, and construction waste or runoff, or other
residue discharged directly or indirectly to the land, groundwaters
or surface waters of the state, or to a domestic treatment works.
"Pollutant" includes both hazardous and nonhazardous pollutants.
RECHARGE — The amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates
into the ground and is not evapotranspired.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension,
is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air,
water or gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE — The lot or lots upon which a major development is to occur or
has occurred.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin.
STATE DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN
METROPOLITAN PLANNING AREA (PA1) — An area delineated on the
State Plan Policy Map and adopted by the State Planning Commission
that is intended to be the focus for much of the state's future
redevelopment and revitalization efforts.
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — The geographic application of the State
Development and Redevelopment Plan's goals and statewide policies,
and the official map of these goals and policies.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain
and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the
subsurface, or is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or
drainage facilities, or conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 250-78 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-78
10:832
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — An excavation or
embankment and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A
stormwater management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a
detention basin or infiltration basin), retain water in a permanent pool
(a retention basin), or be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most
constructed stormwater wetlands).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Any structural or
nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program, or other
method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated
pollutants, or to induce or control the infiltration or groundwater
recharge of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal nonstormwater
discharges into stormwater conveyances.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Water flow on the surface of the ground or
in storm sewers resulting from precipitation.
TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — A flood hazard area which may be
influenced by stormwater runoff from inland areas, but which is
primarily caused by the Atlantic Ocean.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs,
streams, wetlands, and bodies of surface or groundwater, whether
natural or artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or
subject to its jurisdiction.
WETLANDS or WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient
to support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a
prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions, commonly known as “hydrophytic vegetation.”
C. Design and performance standards for stormwater management
measures.
(1) Stormwater management measures for major development shall be
developed to meet the erosion control, groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
standards in § 250-78D. To the maximum extent practicable, these
standards shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater
management strategies into the design. If these strategies alone
are not sufficient to meet these standards, structural stormwater
management measures necessary to meet these standards shall be
incorporated into the design.
(2) The standards in this section apply only to new major development
and are intended to minimize the impact of stormwater runoff on
water quality and water quantity in receiving water bodies and
maintain groundwater recharge. The standards do not apply to new
major development to the extent that alternative design and
performance standards are applicable under a regional stormwater
management plan or water quality management plan adopted in
accordance with Department rules.
§ 250-78 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-78
10:833
D. Stormwater management requirements for major development.
(1) The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
a major development in accordance with § 250-78L.
(2) Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse impacts of
concentrated flow on habitats for threatened and endangered
species as documented in the Department's Landscape Project or
Natural Heritage Database established under N.J.S.A.
13:1B-15.147 through 13:1B-15.150, particularly Helonias bullata
(swamp pink) and/or Clemmys muhlenbergi (bog turtle).
(3) The following linear development projects are exempt from the
groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and
stormwater runoff quality requirements of § 250-78D(6) and (7):
(a) The construction of an underground utility line, provided that
the disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion;
(b) The construction of an aboveground utility line, provided that
the existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent
practicable; and
(c) The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a
sidewalk or trail with a maximum width of 14 feet, provided
that the access is made of permeable material.
(4) A waiver from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
requirements of § 250-78D(6) and (7) may be obtained for the
enlargement of an existing public roadway or railroad, or the
construction or enlargement of a public pedestrian access,
provided that the following conditions are met:
(a) The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the
project that cannot be accomplished by any other means;
(b) The applicant demonstrates, through an alternatives analysis,
that through the use of nonstructural and structural
stormwater management strategies and measures, the option
selected complies with the requirements of § 250-78D(6) and
(7) to the maximum extent practicable;
(c) The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the
requirements of § 250-78D(6) and (7), existing structures
currently in use, such as homes and buildings, would need to
be condemned; and
(d) The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other
rights to areas, including the potential to obtain through
condemnation lands not falling under Subsection D(4)(c) above
within the upstream drainage area of the receiving stream,
§ 250-78 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-78
10:834
that would provide additional opportunities to mitigate the
requirements of § 250-78D(6) and (7) that were not achievable
on site.
(5) Nonstructural stormwater management strategies.
(a) To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in
§ 250-78D(6) and (7) shall be met by incorporating
nonstructural stormwater management strategies set forth at
Subsection D(5) into the design. The applicant shall identify
the nonstructural measures incorporated into the design of the
project. If the applicant contends that it is not feasible for
engineering, environmental, or safety reasons to incorporate
any nonstructural stormwater management measures
identified in Subsection D(5)(b) below into the design of a
particular project, the applicant shall identify the strategy
considered and provide a basis for the contention.
(b) Nonstructural stormwater management strategies
incorporated into site design shall:
[1] Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss;
[2] Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect
the flow of runoff over impervious surfaces;
[3] Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation;
[4] Minimize the decrease in the time of concentration from
preconstruction to postconstruction. "Time of
concentration" is defined as the time it takes for runoff to
travel from the hydraulically most distant point of the
watershed to the point of interest within a watershed;
[5] Minimize land disturbance including clearing and grading;
[6] Minimize soil compaction;
[7] Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages
retention and planting of native vegetation and minimizes
the use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides;
[8] Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas;
[9] Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the
use or exposure of pollutants at the site in order to prevent
or minimize the release of those pollutants into
stormwater runoff. Such source controls include, but are
not limited to:
§ 250-78 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-78
10:835
[a] Site design features that help to prevent accumulation
of trash and debris in drainage systems, including
features that satisfy Subsection D(5)(c) below;
[b] Site design features that help to prevent discharge of
trash and debris from drainage systems;
[c] Site design features that help to prevent and/or
contain spills or other harmful accumulations of
pollutants at industrial or commercial developments;
and
[d] When establishing vegetation after land disturbance,
applying fertilizer in accordance with the
requirements established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and
implementing rules.
(c) Site design features identified under Subsection D(5)(b)[9][b]
above shall comply with the following standard to control
passage of solid and floatable materials through storm drain
inlets. For purposes of this subsection, "solid and floatable
materials" means sediment, debris, trash, and other floating,
suspended, or settleable solids. For exemptions to this
standard see Subsection D(5)(c)[3] below.
[1] Design engineers shall use either of the following grates
whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground
surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a
storm drain or surface water body under that grate:
[a] The New Jersey Department of Transportation
(NJDOT) bicycle safe grate, which is described in
Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT Bicycle Compatible
Roadways and Bikeways Planning and Design
Guidelines (April 1996); or
[b] A different grate, if each individual clear space in that
grate has an area of no more than seven square
inches, or is no greater than 0.5 inch across the
smallest dimension.
[c] Examples of grates subject to this standard include
grates in grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curbopening
portion) of combination inlets, grates on
storm sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates,
and grates of spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples
of ground surfaces include surfaces of roads
(including bridges), driveways, parking areas,
bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open
channels, and stormwater basin floors.
§ 250-78 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-78
10:836
[2] Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the
clear space in that curb opening (or each individual clear
space, if the curb opening has two or more clear spaces)
shall have an area of no more than seven square inches, or
be no greater than two inches across the smallest
dimension;
[3] This standard does not apply:
[a] Where the review agency determines that this
standard would cause inadequate hydraulic
performance that could not practicably be overcome
by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that
meet these standards;
[b] Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in Subsection D(7)(a) are conveyed through
any device (e.g., end of pipe netting facility,
manufactured treatment device, or a catch basin
hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent
delivery of all solid and floatable materials that could
not pass through one of the following:
[i] A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2
inches wide (this option does not apply for outfall
netting facilities); or
[ii] A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch.
[4] Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the bars, to
the elevation of the water quality design storm as specified
in Subsection D(7)(a); or
[5] Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey
Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that
action to meet this standard is an undertaking that
constitutes an encroachment or will damage or destroy the
New Jersey Register-listed historic property.
(d) Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater
management measure to meet the performance standards in
§ 250-78D(6) and (7) shall be dedicated to a government
agency, subjected to a conservation restriction filed with the
appropriate County Clerk's office, or subject to an approved
equivalent restriction that ensures that measure or an
equivalent stormwater management measure approved by the
reviewing agency is maintained in perpetuity.
(e) Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management
strategies is available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best
§ 250-78 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-78
10:837
Management Practices (BMP) Manual. The BMP Manual may
be obtained from the address identified in Subsection I or
found on the website at www.njstormwater.org.
(6) Erosion control, groundwater recharge and runoff quantity
standards.
(a) This subsection contains minimum design and performance
standards to control erosion, encourage and control infiltration
and groundwater recharge, and control stormwater runoff
quantity impacts of major development.
[1] The minimum design and performance standards for
erosion control are those established under the Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.,
and implementing rules.
[2] The minimum design and performance standards for
groundwater recharge are as follows:
[a] The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and
factors for stormwater runoff and groundwater
recharge calculations at Subsection F, either:
[i] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the site and its stormwater
management measures maintain 100% of the
average annual preconstruction groundwater
recharge volume for the site; or
[ii] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the increase of stormwater runoff
volume from preconstruction to postconstruction
for the two-year storm is infiltrated.
[b] This groundwater recharge requirement does not
apply to projects within the urban redevelopment
area, or to projects subject to Subsection D(6)(a)[2][c]
below.
[c] The following types of stormwater shall not be
recharged:
[i] Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading.
High pollutant loading areas are areas in
industrial and commercial developments where
solvents and/or petroleum products are loaded/
unloaded, stored, or applied; areas where
pesticides are loaded/unloaded or stored; areas
where hazardous materials are expected to be
present in greater than reportable quantities, as
defined by the United States Environmental
§ 250-78 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-78
10:838
Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR 302.4; areas
where recharge would be inconsistent with
Department-approved remedial action work plan
or landfill closure plan; and areas with high risks
for spills of toxic materials, such as gas stations
and vehicle maintenance facilities; and
[ii] Industrial stormwater exposed to source material.
"Source material" means any material(s) or
machinery, located at an industrial facility, that is
directly or indirectly related to process,
manufacturing or other industrial activities which
could be a source of pollutants in any industrial
stormwater discharge to groundwater. Source
materials include, but are not limited to, raw
materials; intermediate products; final products;
waste materials; by-products; industrial
machinery and fuels, and lubricants, solvents, and
detergents that are related to process,
manufacturing, or other industrial activities that
are exposed to stormwater.
[d] The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact
on the groundwater table and design the site so as to
avoid adverse hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse
hydraulic impacts include, but are not limited to,
exacerbating a naturally or seasonally high water
table so as to cause surficial ponding, flooding of
basements, or interference with the proper operation
of subsurface sewage disposal systems and other
subsurface structures in the vicinity or down gradient
of the groundwater recharge area.
[3] In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the
design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors
for stormwater runoff calculations at Subsection F,
complete one of the following:
[a] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that for stormwater leaving the site,
postconstruction runoff hydrographs for the two-, ten-,
and one-hundred-year storm events do not exceed, at
any point in time, the preconstruction runoff
hydrographs for the same storm events;
[b] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that there is no increase, as compared to the
preconstruction condition, in the peak runoff rates of
stormwater leaving the site for the two-, ten-, and onehundred-
year storm events and that the increased
volume or change in timing of stormwater runoff will
§ 250-78 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-78
10:839
not increase flood damage at or downstream of the
site. This analysis shall include the analysis of impacts
of existing land uses and projected land uses assuming
full development under existing zoning and land use
ordinances in the drainage area;
[c] Design stormwater management measures so that the
postconstruction peak runoff rates for the two-, tenand
one-hundred-year storm events are 50%, 75% and
80%, respectively, of the preconstruction peak runoff
rates. The percentages apply only to the
postconstruction stormwater runoff that is
attributable to the portion of the site on which the
proposed development or project is to be constructed.
The percentages shall not be applied to
postconstruction stormwater runoff into tidal flood
hazard areas if the increased volume of stormwater
runoff will not increase flood damages below the point
of discharge; or
[d] In tidal flood hazard areas, stormwater runoff quantity
analysis in accordance with Subsection D(6)(a)[3][a],
[b] and [c] above shall only be applied if the increased
volume of stormwater runoff could increase flood
damages below the point of discharge.
(b) Any application for a new agricultural development that meets
the definition of major development at Subsection B shall be
submitted to the appropriate Soil Conservation District for
review and approval in accordance with the requirements of
this section and any applicable Soil Conservation District
guidelines for stormwater runoff quantity and erosion control.
For the purposes of this section, "agricultural development"
means land uses normally associated with the production of
food, fiber and livestock for sale. Such uses do not include the
development of land for the processing or sale of food and the
manufacturing of agriculturally related products.
(7) Stormwater runoff quality standards.
(a) Stormwater management measures shall be designed to
reduce the postconstruction load of total suspended solids
(TSS) in stormwater runoff by 80% of the anticipated load from
the developed site, expressed as an annual average.
Stormwater management measures shall only be required for
water quality control if an additional 1/4 acre of impervious
surface is being proposed on a development site. The
requirement to reduce TSS does not apply to any stormwater
runoff in a discharge regulated under a numeric effluent
limitation for TSS imposed under the New Jersey Pollution
Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules, N.J.A.C. 7:14A,
§ 250-78 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-78
10:840
or in a discharge specifically exempt under a NJPDES permit
from this requirement. The water quality design storm is 1.25
inches of rainfall in two hours. Water quality calculations shall
take into account the distribution of rain from the water quality
design storm, as reflected in Table 1. The calculation of the
volume of runoff may take into account the implementation
of nonstructural and structural stormwater management
measures.
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative Rainfall
(inches
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
0 0.0000 65 0.8917
5 0.0083 70 0.9917
10 0.0166 75 1.0500
15 0.0250 80 1.0840
20 0.0500 85 1.1170
25 0.0750 90 1.1500
30 0.1000 95 1.1750
35 0.1330 100 1.2000
40 0.1660 105 1.2250
45 0.2000 110 1.2334
50 0.2583 115 1.2417
55 0.3583 120 1.2500
60 0.6250
(b) For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below
presents the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs
designed in accordance with the New Jersey Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be
obtained from the address identified in Subsection I, or found
on the Department's website at www.njstormwater.org. The
BMP Manual and other sources of technical guidance are listed
in Subsection I. TSS reduction shall be calculated based on the
removal rates for the BMPs in Table 2 below. Alternative
removal rates and methods of calculating removal rates may be
used if the design engineer provides documentation
demonstrating the capability of these alternative rates and
methods to the review agency. A copy of any approved
alternative rate or method of calculating the removal rate shall
be provided to the Department at the following address:
Division of Watershed Management, New Jersey Department of
§ 250-78 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-78
10:841
Environmental Protection, P.O. Box 418 Trenton, New Jersey
08625-0418.
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management
Practice TSS Percent Removal Rate
Bioretention systems 90
Constructed stormwater
wetland
90
Extended detention basin 40 to 60
Infiltration structure 80
Manufactured treatment
device
See Subsection G(3)
Sand filter 80
Vegetative filter strip 60 to 80
Wet pond 50 to 90
(c) If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the
required eighty-percentTSS reduction for a site, the applicant
shall utilize the following formula to calculate TSS reduction:
R = A + B – (AXB)/100
Where:
R = Total TSS percent load removal from
application of both BMPs
A = The TSS percent removal rate applicable to
the first BMP
B = The TSS percent removal rate applicable to
the second BMP
(d) If there is more than one on-site drainage area, the eightypercent
TSS removal rate shall apply to each drainage area,
unless the runoff from the subareas converge on site, in which
case the removal rate can be demonstrated through a
calculation using a weighted average.
(e) Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to
reduce, to the maximum extent feasible, the postconstruction
nutrient load of the anticipated load from the developed site in
stormwater runoff generated from the water quality design
storm. In achieving reduction of nutrients to the maximum
extent feasible, the design of the site shall include
nonstructural strategies and structural measures that optimize
nutrient removal while still achieving the performance
standards in § 250-78D(6) and (7).
§ 250-78 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-78
10:842
(f) Additional information and examples are contained in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, which
may be obtained from the address identified in Subsection I.
(g) In accordance with the definition of "FW1" at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4,
stormwater management measures shall be designed to
prevent any increase in stormwater runoff to waters classified
as FW1.
(h) Special water resource protection areas shall be established
along all waters designated Category One at N.J.A.C. 7:9B, and
perennial or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream
of the Category One waters as shown on the USGS Quadrangle
Maps or in the County Soil Surveys, within the associated
HUC14 drainage area. These areas shall be established for the
protection of water quality, aesthetic value, exceptional
ecological significance, exceptional recreational significance,
exceptional water supply significance, and exceptional
fisheries significance of those established Category One
waters. These areas shall be designated and protected as
follows:
[1] The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water
resource protection area in accordance with one of the
following:
[a] A three-hundred-foot special water resource
protection area shall be provided on each side of the
waterway, measured perpendicular to the waterway
from the top of the bank outwards or from the center
line of the waterway where the bank is not defined,
consisting of existing vegetation or vegetation allowed
to follow natural succession.
[b] Encroachment within the designated special water
resource protection area under Subsection
D(7)(h)[1][a] above shall only be allowed where
previous development or disturbance has occurred
(for example, active agricultural use, parking area or
maintained lawn area). The encroachment shall only
be allowed where the applicant demonstrates that the
functional value and overall condition of the special
water resource protection area will be maintained to
the maximum extent practicable. In no case shall the
remaining special water resource protection area be
reduced to less than 150 feet as measured
perpendicular to the top-of-bank of the waterway or
center line of the waterway where the bank is
undefined. All encroachments proposed under this
subsection shall be subject to review and approval by
the Department.
§ 250-78 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-78
10:843
[2] All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow
through the special water resource protection area and
shall comply with the standard for off-site stability in the
"Standards For Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New
Jersey," established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.
[3] If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through
the special water resource protection area cannot comply
with the standard for off-site stability in the "Standards for
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey,"
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., then the stabilization
measures in accordance with the requirements of the
above standards may be placed within the special water
resource protection area, provided that:
[a] Stabilization measures shall not be placed within 150
feet of the Category One waterway;
[b] Stormwater associated with discharges allowed by
this section shall achieve a ninety-five-percent TSS
postconstruction removal rate;
[c] Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no impact
on the receiving waterway;
[d] The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource
protection area will be maintained to the maximum
extent practicable;
[e] A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with
the appropriate Department staff and Soil
Conservation District staff to identify necessary
stabilization measures; and
[f] All encroachments proposed under this section shall
be subject to review and approval by the Department.
[4] A stream corridor protection plan may be developed by a
regional stormwater management planning committee as
an element of a regional stormwater management plan, or
by a municipality through an adopted municipal
stormwater management plan. If a stream corridor
protection plan for a waterway subject to Subsection
D(7)(h) has been approved by the Department of
Environmental Protection, then the provisions of the plan
shall be the applicable special water resource protection
area requirements for that waterway. A stream corridor
protection plan for a waterway subject to Subsection
§ 250-78 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-78
10:844
D(7)(h) shall maintain or enhance the current functional
value and overall condition of the special water resource
protection area as defined in Subsection D(7)(h)[1][a]
above. In no case shall a stream corridor protection plan
allow the reduction of the special water resource
protection area to less than 150 feet as measured
perpendicular to the waterway subject to this subsection.
[5] Subsection D(7)(h) does not apply to the construction of
one individual single-family dwelling that is not part of a
larger development on a lot receiving preliminary or final
subdivision approval on or before February 2, 2004,
provided that the construction begins on or before
February 2, 2009.
E. Stormwater management requirements for nonmajor developments.
Developments which are not considered a major development, as
defined in Subsection B, shall address the following:
(1) Runoff to remain in watershed. Runoff within a site shall ultimately
leave the site in the same watershed in which it originated and shall
be released in such a manner so as to not overload existing
drainage systems, create flooding, create a need for additional
drainage facilities on other public or private lands, or increase
predevelopment erosion of adjacent lands.
(2) Rate of runoff. The peak rate of runoff from a site during and after
development shall not exceed the predevelopment peak rate of
runoff. Development upstream of known areas of problem flooding
of properties shall be required to further reduce the peak rate of
runoff below the predevelopment rate.
(3) Minimize volume increase. The increase in volume of runoff from a
site, during and after development, from the predevelopment total
of volume of runoff shall be minimized. Runoff control measures
shall be used to retard or reduce runoff and increase recharge.
Natural and artificial recharge areas and systems should be
employed whenever practical to minimize the volume of surface
water runoff. These include, but are not limited to, infiltration pits,
dry wells, infiltration trenches, and the extensive use of sheet flow
through vegetated areas. The use of runoff control/recharge
devices should be considered in all known areas of aquifer or
groundwater recharge as determined by United States Geological
Survey studies and USDA HYDRO Soil Groups A and B as shown on
Middlesex County soil survey mapping. The use of such measures
will not eliminate or reduce, even partially, the need for other
requirements of this section.
(4) To the maximum extent practical, all projects shall be designed to
incorporate nonstructural stormwater management strategies as
identified in Subsection D(5).
§ 250-78 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-78
10:845
F. Calculation of stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge.
(1) Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the
following:
(a) The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the
following methods:
[1] The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service
(NRCS) methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation
and Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described in the
NRCS National Engineering Handbook Section 4 —
Hydrology and Technical Release 55 — Urban Hydrology
for Small Watersheds; or
[2] The Rational Method for peak flow and the Modified
Rational Method for hydrograph computations. This
method may not be used for drainage areas that exceed 10
acres.
(b) For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and
groundwater recharge, there is a presumption that the
preconstruction condition of a site or portion thereof is a
wooded land use with good hydrologic condition. The term
"runoff coefficient" applies to both the NRCS methodology at
Subsection F(1)(a)[1] and the Rational and Modified Rational
Methods at Subsection F(1)(a)[2] A runoff coefficient or a
groundwater recharge land cover for an existing condition may
be used on all or a portion of the site if the design engineer
verifies that the hydrologic condition has existed on the site or
portion of the site for at least five years without interruption
prior to the time of application. If more than one land cover has
existed on the site during the five years immediately prior to
the time of application, the land cover with the lowest runoff
potential shall be used for the computations. In addition, there
is the presumption that the site is in good hydrologic condition
(if the land use type is pasture, lawn, or park), with good cover
(if the land use type is woods), or with good hydrologic
condition and conservation treatment (if the land use type is
cultivation).
(c) In computing preconstruction stormwater runoff, the design
engineer shall account for all significant land features and
structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows,
or culverts, that may reduce preconstruction stormwater
runoff rates and volumes.
(d) In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the
design engineer shall consider the relative stormwater runoff
rates and/or volumes of pervious and impervious surfaces
separately to accurately compute the rates and volume of
stormwater runoff from the site. To calculate runoff from
§ 250-78 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-78
10:846
unconnected impervious cover, urban impervious area
modifications as described in the NRCS Technical Release 55
— Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds and other methods
may be employed.
(e) If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater
management measure is below the flood hazard design flood
elevation as defined at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the design engineer shall
take into account the effects of tailwater in the design of
structural stormwater management measures.
(2) Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with the
following: The New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32, A
Method for Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in New
Jersey, incorporated herein by reference as amended and
supplemented. Information regarding the methodology is available
from the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices
Manual at http://www.state.nj.us/dep/njgs/; or at New Jersey
Geological Survey, 29 Arctic Parkway, P.O. Box 427, Trenton, New
Jersey 08625-0427; (609) 984-6587.
G. Standards for structural stormwater management measures.
(1) Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as
follows:
(a) Structural stormwater management measures shall be
designed to take into account the existing site conditions,
including, for example, environmentally critical areas;
wetlands; flood-prone areas; slopes; depth to seasonal high
water table; soil type, permeability and texture; drainage area
and drainage patterns; and the presence of solution-prone
carbonate rocks (limestone).
(b) Structural stormwater management measures shall be
designed to minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and
repairs, and ensure proper functioning. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet structure as appropriate,
and shall have parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the
bars to the elevation of the water quality design storm. For
elevations higher than the water quality design storm, the
parallel bars at the outlet structure shall be spaced no greater
than 1/3 the width of the diameter of the orifice or 1/3 the
width of the weir, with a minimum spacing between bars of one
inch and a maximum spacing between bars of six inches. In
addition, the design of trash racks must comply with the
requirements of Subsection J(2).
(c) Structural stormwater management measures shall be
designed, constructed, and installed to be strong, durable, and
corrosion-resistant. Measures that are consistent with the
relevant portions of the Residential Site Improvement
§ 250-78 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-78
10:847
Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3, 5:21-7.4, and 5:21-7.5 shall be
deemed to meet this requirement.
(d) At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management
basin, the orifice size shall be a minimum of 2 1/2 inches in
diameter.
(e) Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the
minimum safety standards for stormwater management basins
at Subsection J.
(2) Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the
New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Other
stormwater management measures may be utilized, provided the
design engineer demonstrates that the proposed measure and its
design will accomplish the required water quantity, groundwater
recharge and water quality design and performance standards
established by Subsection D of this section.
(3) Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the
requirements of Subsection D of this section, provided the pollutant
removal rates are verified by the New Jersey Corporation for
Advanced Technology and certified by the Department.
H. Stormwater management; system strategy.
(1) A system emphasizing a natural as opposed to an engineered
drainage strategy shall be encouraged. This shall include, but not
be limited to, the use of vegetative swales in lieu of storm sewer
inlets and piping.
(2) The applicability of a natural approach depends on such factors as
site storage capacity, open-channel hydraulic capacity, and
maintenance needs and resources.
(3) Hydraulic capacity for open-channel or closed-conduit flow shall be
determined by the Manning Equation, or charts/nomographs based
on the Manning Equation:
Q = (1.486 AR^ 2/3 S^ 1/2)/n
Where:
n = Manning's roughness coefficient
A = Cross-sectional area of flow in square feet
R = Hydraulic radius in feet (R = A/P, where P is equal
to the Wetted Perimeter)
S = Slope of conduit in feet per foot
(4) Velocities in open channels at design flow shall not be less than 0.5
foot per second and not greater than that velocity which will begin
to cause erosion or scouring of the channel. In no case shall the
§ 250-78 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-78
10:848
longitudinal slope of an open channel be less than 1%. The
following are the maximum allowable velocities for various soils:
Soil Texture
Allowable Velocity
(feet per second)
Sand and sandy loam
(noncollodial)
2.5
Silt loam (also high lime clay) 3.0
Sandy clay loam 3.5
Clay loam 4.0
Clay, fine gravel, graded loam
to gravel
5.0
Cobbles 5.5
Shale 6.0
(5) Velocities in closed conduits at design flow shall be at least two feet
per second but not more than the velocity which will cause erosion
damage to the conduit. For reinforced concrete pipe, the maximum
velocity shall not exceed 10 feet per second.
(6) Pipe size shall be dictated by design runoff and hydraulic capacity.
(7) In general, no pipe size in the storm drainage system shall be less
than 15 inches in diameter. A twelve-inch diameter pipe will be
permitted as a cross-drain to a single inlet.
(8) Materials used in the construction of storm sewers shall be
reinforced concrete, ductile iron, or high density polyethylene pipe.
In normal circumstances, reinforced concrete pipe is preferred.
Use of other types shall be justified by the designer and approved
by the Township Engineer. Specifications referred to, such as ASA,
ASTM, AWWA, etc., should be the latest revision.
(a) Reinforced concrete pipe:
[1] Circular reinforced concrete pipe and fittings shall meet
the requirements of ASTM C-76.
[2] Elliptical reinforced concrete pipe shall meet the
requirements of ASTM C-507.
[3] Joint design and joint material for circular pipe shall
conform to ASTM C-443.
[4] Joints for elliptical pipe shall be bell-and-spigot or tongueand-
groove sealed with butyl, rubber tape, or external
sealing bands conforming to ASTM C-877.
§ 250-78 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-78
10:849
[5] All pipe shall be Class III unless a stronger pipe (i.e.,
higher class) is indicated to be necessary.
[6] The minimum depth of cover over the concrete pipe shall
be as designated by the American Concrete Pipe
Association.
(b) Ductile iron pipe shall be centrifugally cast in metal or sandlined
molds to ANSI A21.51-1976 (AWWA C151-76). The joints
shall conform to AWWA C111. Pipe shall be furnished with
flanges where connections to flange fittings are required. Pipe
should be Class 50 (minimum). The outside of the pipe should
be coated with a uniform thickness of hot applied coal tar
coating and the inside lined with cement in accordance with
AWWA C104. Ductile iron pipe shall be installed with Class C,
Ordinary Bedding.
(c) High density polyethylene pipe may used at the discretion of
the Township Engineer. Same shall not be used in areas of a
shallow seasonal high water table.
(9) Pipe bedding shall be provided as specified in "Design and
Construction of Sanitary and Storm Sewers," ASCE Manuals and
Reports on Engineering Practice No. 37, prepared by a Joint
Committee of the Society of Civil Engineers and the Water Pollution
Control Federation, New York, 1969.
(10) Where storm pipes will be located within the seasonal high water
table, they shall be constructed using reinforced concrete piping
with watertight "o"-ring gaskets, or approved equal as determined
by the Township Engineer.
(11) Inlet spacing shall be designed to limit gutter flow width to six feet
but shall not be more than 400 feet.
(12) Manhole spacing shall be increased with pipe size.
Pipe Size
(inches)
Manhole Spacing
(feet)
15 or less 500
18 to 36 600
42 to 60 700
60+ 700+
(13) All manholes or inlets shall be precast concrete or concrete block
coated with two coats of portland cement mortar.
(14) If precast manhole barrels and cones are used, they shall conform
to ASTM Specification C-473 with round rubber gaskets joints,
conforming to ASTM Specification C-923. Maximum absorption
§ 250-78 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-78
10:850
shall be 8% in accordance with ASTM Specification C-478, Method
A.
(15) If precast manholes are utilized, the top riser section shall
terminate less than one foot below the finished grade and the
manhole cover shall be flush with the finished grade.
(16) Manhole frames and covers shall be of American-made cast iron
conforming to ASTM Specification A-48 Class 30 and be suitable for
H-20 loading capacity. All manhole covers in rights-of-way or in
remote areas shall be provided with a locking device. The letters
"Year 20___" and the words "OLD BRIDGE STORM SEWER" shall
be cast integrally in the cover.
(17) All discharge pipes shall terminate with a precast or cast-in-place
concrete headwall with or without wingwalls as conditions require.
In normal circumstances, a cast-in-place concrete headwall is
preferred. Use of other types shall be justified by the designer and
approved by the Township Engineer.
(18) Headwalls and endwalls shall extend a minimum of 25 feet from all
roadways unless there is an existing natural barrier (trees, shrubs,
berms) or a guardrail installed. When such conditions exist, the
headwall or endwall may be placed at the right-of-way line or at a
minimum distance of 10 feet from the edge of the roadway,
whichever is greater.
(19) The stormwater system strategy and design, for all commercial or
residential projects, shall meet the requirements of Residential Site
Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.2, 5:21-7.3, and 5:21-7.4,
unless otherwise more restrictive requirements are set forth in this
section.
I. Sources for technical guidance.
(1) Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be
found in the documents listed at Subsection I(1)(a) and (b) below,
which are available from Maps and Publications, New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection, 428 East State Street,
P.O. Box 420, Trenton, New Jersey 08625; telephone (609)
777-1038.
(a) Guidelines for stormwater management measures are
contained in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual, as amended. Information is provided on
stormwater management measures such as bioretention
systems, constructed stormwater wetlands, dry wells,
extended detention basins, infiltration structures,
manufactured treatment devices, pervious paving, sand filters,
vegetative filter strips, and wet ponds.
§ 250-78 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-78
10:851
(b) The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual, as
amended.
(2) Additional technical guidance for stormwater management
measures can be obtained from the following:
(a) The "Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New
Jersey" promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee
and incorporated into N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of these standards
may be obtained by contacting the State Soil Conservation
Committee or any of the Soil Conservation Districts listed in
N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4. The location, address, and telephone
number of each Soil Conservation District may be obtained
from the State Soil Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330,
Trenton, New Jersey 08625; (609) 292-5540;
(b) The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service, 732-932-9306;
and
(c) The Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4.
The location, address, and telephone number of each Soil
Conservation District may be obtained from the State Soil
Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey
08625; (609) 292-5540.
J. Safety standards for stormwater management basins.
(1) This subsection sets forth requirements to protect public safety
through the proper design and operation of stormwater
management basins. This subsection applies to any new
stormwater management basin.
(2) Requirements for trash racks, overflow grates and escape
provisions.
(a) A trash rack is a device designed to catch trash and debris and
prevent the clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet from the stormwater
management basin to ensure proper functioning of the basin
outlets in accordance with the following:
[1] The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater
than six-inch spacing between the bars.
[2] The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely
affect the hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or
structure.
[3] The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is
not to exceed 2.5 feet per second under the full range of
stage and discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the
basis of the net area of opening through the rack.
§ 250-78 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-78
10:852
[4] The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion-resistant, and shall be
designed to withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300
pounds per square foot.
(b) An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the
overflow structure. If an outlet structure has an overflow grate,
such grate shall meet the following requirements:
[1] The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure
but removable for emergencies and maintenance.
[2] The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two
inches across the smallest dimension.
[3] The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion-resistant, and shall be
designed to withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300
pounds per square foot.
(c) For purposes the purposes of this subsection, "escape
provisions" means the permanent installation of ladders, steps,
rungs, or other features that provide easily accessible means of
egress from stormwater management basins. Stormwater
management basins shall include escape provisions as follows:
[1] If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure,
escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the
structure. With the prior approval of the reviewing agency
identified in Subsection J(3), a freestanding outlet
structure may be exempted from this requirement.
[2] Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
stormwater management basins having a permanent pool
of water deeper than 2 1/2 feet. Such safety ledges shall be
comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four feet to six
feet in width. One step shall be located approximately 2 1/
2 feet below the permanent water surface, and the second
step shall be located one foot to 1 1/2 feet above the
permanent water surface.
[3] In new stormwater management basins, other than small
stormwater management basins as defined in Subsection
L(4), the maximum interior slope for an earthen dam,
embankment, or berm shall not be steeper than three
horizontal to one vertical.
(3) Variance or exemption from safety standards.
(a) A variance or exemption from the safety standards for
stormwater management basins may be granted only upon a
written finding by the appropriate reviewing agency
§ 250-78 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-78
10:853
(municipality, county or Department) that the variance or
exemption will not constitute a threat to public safety.
(b) Illustration of safety ledges in a new stormwater management
basin.
K. Requirements for a site development stormwater plan.
(1) Submission of site development stormwater plan.
(a) Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a
development subject to this section, the applicant shall submit
all of the required components of the checklist for the site
development stormwater plan at Subsection K(3) below as part
of the submission of the applicant's application for subdivision
or site plan approval.
(b) The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the
standards set forth in this section.
(c) The applicant shall submit five copies of the materials listed in
the checklist for site development stormwater plans in
accordance with Subsection K(3) of this section.
(2) Site development stormwater plan approval. The applicant's site
development project shall be reviewed as a part of the subdivision
or site plan review process by the municipal board or official from
whom municipal approval is sought. That municipal board or
official shall consult the engineer retained by the Planning and/or
Zoning Board (as appropriate) to determine if all of the checklist
requirements have been satisfied and to determine if the project
meets the standards set forth in this section.
(3) Checklist requirements. The following information shall be
required:
(a) Topographic base map. The reviewing engineer may require
upstream tributary drainage system information as necessary.
It is recommended that the topographic base map of the site be
submitted which extends a minimum of 200 feet beyond the
limits of the proposed development, at a scale of one inch
equals 100 feet or greater, showing two-foot contour intervals.
The map as appropriate may indicate the following: existing
§ 250-78 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-78
10:854
surface water drainage, shorelines, steep slopes, soils, erodible
soils, perennial or intermittent streams that drain into or
upstream of the Category One waters, wetlands and
floodplains along with their appropriate buffer strips,
marshlands and other wetlands, pervious or vegetative
surfaces, existing man-made structures, roads, bearing and
distances of property lines, and significant natural and manmade
features not otherwise shown.
(b) Environmental site analysis: a written and graphic description
of the natural and man-made features of the site and its
environs. This description should include a discussion of soil
conditions, slopes, wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the
site. Particular attention should be given to unique, unusual, or
environmentally sensitive features and to those that provide
particular opportunities or constraints for development.
(c) Project description and site plan(s): a map (or maps) at the
scale of the topographical base map indicating the location of
existing and proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities,
structural facilities for stormwater management and sediment
control, and other permanent structures. The map(s) shall also
clearly show areas where alterations occur in the natural
terrain and cover, including lawns and other landscaping, and
seasonal high groundwater elevations. A written description of
the site plan and justification of proposed changes in natural
conditions may also be provided.
(d) Land use planning and source control plan. This plan shall
provide a demonstration of how the goals and standards of
Subsections C through G are being met. The focus of this plan
shall be to describe how the site is being developed to meet the
objective of controlling groundwater recharge, stormwater
quality and stormwater quantity problems at the source by
land management and source controls whenever possible.
(e) Stormwater management facilities map. The following
information, illustrated on a map of the same scale as the
topographic base map, shall be included:
[1] Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface
contours, land area to be occupied by the stormwater
management facilities and the type of vegetation thereon,
and details of the proposed plan to control and dispose of
stormwater.
[2] Details of all stormwater management facility designs,
during and after construction, including discharge
provisions, discharge capacity for each outlet at different
levels of detention and emergency spillway provisions with
maximum discharge capacity of each spillway.
§ 250-78 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-78
10:855
(f) Calculations.
[1] Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design
calculations for the predevelopment and postdevelopment
conditions for the design storms specified in Subsection D
of this section.
[2] When the proposed stormwater management control
measures (e.g., infiltration basins) depend on the
hydrologic properties of soils, then a soils report shall be
submitted. The soils report shall be based on on-site
boring logs or soil pit profiles. The number and location of
required soil borings or soil pits shall be determined based
on what is needed to determine the suitability and
distribution of soils present at the location of the control
measure.
(g) Maintenance and repair plan. The design and planning of the
stormwater management facility shall meet the maintenance
requirements of Subsection L.
(h) Waiver from submission requirements. The municipal official
or board reviewing an application under this section may, in
consultation with the municipal engineer, waive submission of
any of the requirements in Subsections K(3)(a) through (f) of
this section when it can be demonstrated that the information
requested is impossible to obtain or it would create a hardship
on the applicant to obtain and its absence will not materially
affect the review process.
L. Maintenance and repair.
(1) Applicability. Projects subject to review as in Subsection A(3) of this
section shall comply with the requirements of Subsections L(2) and
(3).
(2) General maintenance.
(a) The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the
design of a major development.
(b) The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventative
maintenance tasks and schedules; cost estimates, including
estimated cost of sediment, debris, or trash removal; and the
name, address, and telephone number of the person or persons
responsible for preventative and corrective maintenance
(including replacement). Maintenance guidelines for
stormwater management measures are available in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. If the
maintenance plan identifies a person other than the developer
(for example, a public agency or homeowners' association) as
§ 250-78 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-78
10:856
having the responsibility for maintenance, the plan shall
include documentation of such person's agreement to assume
this responsibility, or of the developer's obligation to dedicate
a stormwater management facility to such person under an
applicable ordinance or regulation.
(c) If the person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection L(2)(b) above is not a public agency, the
maintenance plan and any future revisions based on
Subsection L(2)(f) below shall be recorded upon the deed of
record for each property on which the maintenance described
in the maintenance plan must be undertaken.
(d) Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to
maintain the function of the stormwater management measure,
including repairs or replacement to the structure; removal of
sediment, debris, or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow
and ice removal; fence repair or replacement; restoration of
vegetation; and repair or replacement of nonvegetated linings.
(e) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection L(2)(b) above shall maintain a detailed log of all
preventative and corrective maintenance for the structural
stormwater management measures incorporated into the
design of the development, including a record of all inspections
and copies of all maintenance-related work orders.
(f) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection L(2)(b) above shall evaluate the effectiveness of the
maintenance plan at least once per year and adjust the plan
and the deed as needed.
(g) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection L(2)(b) above shall retain and make available, upon
request by any public entity with administrative, health,
environmental, or safety authority over the site, the
maintenance plan and the documentation required by
Subsection L(2)(e) and (f) above.
(h) In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes
a danger to public safety or public health, or if it is in need of
maintenance or repair, the municipality shall so notify the
responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the
responsible person shall have 10 days to effect maintenance
and repair of the facility in a manner that is approved by the
municipal engineer or his designee. The municipality, in its
discretion, may extend the time allowed for effecting
maintenance and repair for good cause. If the responsible
person fails or refuses to perform such maintenance and
repair, the municipality or county may immediately proceed to
do so and shall bill the cost thereof to the responsible person.
§ 250-78 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-78
10:857
(3) Nothing in this section shall preclude the municipality in which the
major development is located from requiring the posting of a
performance or maintenance guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.
(4) Stormwater management facility maintenance responsibilities. The
following shall apply to allocate responsibility for stormwater
management facilities:
(a) A stormwater management facility required for a commercial
or industrial development. Whenever a detention basin is
required for a commercial or industrial development, the basin
shall be a part of an individual lot owned and maintained by the
property owner. No responsibility, maintenance or otherwise,
shall be transferred to the Township.
(b) Stormwater management facility required for a rental
multifamily (e.g., apartments) development. Whenever a
detention basin is required for a development approval for a
rented multifamily building (e.g., apartments), the detention
basin shall be a part of the development and provisions for
long-term maintenance of the basin shall be established. No
responsibilities, maintenance or otherwise, shall be
transferred to the Township.
(c) Stormwater management facility required for the development
of a for-sale, multifamily (e.g., condos, townhouses, etc.)
development. Whenever a detention basin is required for a
developmental approval for a multifamily building which will
be sold to individual owners, the detention basin shall be part
of a common open space owned by a homeowners' association.
No responsibilities, maintenance or otherwise, shall be
transferred to the Township.
(d) Single-family detached dwellings requiring a small stormwater
management facility. Whenever a stormwater management
facility is required in connection with developmental approvals
for single-family detached dwellings, the long-term
maintenance of the stormwater management facility shall be
the responsibility of the developer. At the developer's sole
option, the Township shall accept responsibility for
maintenance if the following conditions are met:
[1] Maintenance of small stormwater management facilities to
remain lot owner's responsibility:
[a] A "small stormwater management facility" is hereby
defined as water quality basins, improved channels
and swales which are entirely situated and contained
on a single building lot. Stormwater management
facilities which are primarily intended to manage
stormwater generated by a single residential dwelling
§ 250-78 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-78
10:858
shall be situated and contained on such lot. Such
facilities shall be designed in accordance with
ordinances of the Township of Old Bridge, the
developmental approvals and accepted engineering
standards of design and practice. No such facility shall
be constructed with a slope of greater than one to five,
nor shall any such facility exceed a depth of one foot.
[b] A small stormwater management facility as defined
above shall not be maintained by the Township of Old
Bridge. Maintenance of small stormwater
management facilities, as defined above, shall be the
responsibility of the owner of the single residential lot
upon which the facilities were constructed. The
aforesaid obligation of maintenance shall be required
by the approving board to be memorialized and
recorded as a deed restriction on the lot involved. No
such facility shall be modified or eliminated following
issuance of the initial certificate of occupancy unless
the Township of Old Bridge permits such modification
or elimination by adoption of an ordinance.
[2] Medium-size stormwater management facilities.
[a] "Medium-size stormwater management facilities" are
defined as those facilities situated and contained on a
separate lot and that meet the following additional
criteria:
[b] The lot is five acres or less in area;
[c] The lot is not a residential building lot; and
[d] The lot is not also utilized for open space or
recreation.
[e] Such facilities shall be designed in accordance
§ 250-78. Any basin shall be set back on the lot a
minimum of 25 feet as measured from the lot line to
the right-of-way line to the one-hundred-year flood line
elevation. All stormwater management facilities shall
have either direct access from or an access easement
to a public road. Such facilities shall have a durable
load-bearing access driveway which shall be sufficient
in design, in the sole judgment of the Township
Engineer, to accommodate maintenance vehicles
commonly utilized for maintenance of swales,
channels, drainage pipes and drainage facilities.
[f] The Township of Old Bridge shall, upon request by the
developer during the approval process of the
residential developmental application, accept the
§ 250-78 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-78
10:859
responsibility of maintenance of any medium-size
stormwater management facilities so long as the
approving board accepts such maintenance
responsibility on behalf of the Township of Old Bridge
and the funding (by escrow) of initial maintenance
cost is posted with the Department of Finance of the
Township of Old Bridge as hereinafter set forth and
required.
[3] Large-project stormwater management facilities.
[a] "Large-project stormwater management facilities" are
defined as those facilities situated and contained on
one or more separate lots which meet the following
additional criteria:
[i] At least one lot containing stormwater
management facilities at the project is larger than
five acres;
[ii] One or more lots is a multipurpose stormwater
control-recreational facility over five acres in size.
[b] Such facilities shall be designed in accordance
§ 250-78. Any basin shall be set back on the lot a
minimum of 25 feet as measured from the lot line to
the right-of-way line to the one-hundred-year flood line
elevation. All stormwater management facilities shall
have either direct access from or an access easement
to a public road. Such facilities shall have a durable
load-bearing access driveway which shall be sufficient
in design, in the sole judgement of the Township
Engineer, to accommodate maintenance vehicles
commonly utilized for maintenance of swales,
channels, drainage pipes and drainage basins.
[c] The Township of Old Bridge shall, upon request by the
developer during the approval process of the
residential developmental application, accept the
responsibility of maintenance of any large project
stormwater management facilities so long as the
approving board accepts such maintenance
responsibility on behalf of the Township of Old Bridge
and the funding (by escrow) of initial maintenance
cost is posted with the Department of Finance of the
Township of Old Bridge as hereinafter set forth.
(5) Posting of escrow for initial maintenance; recorded developer's
agreement. In the event the developer requests and the approving
board agrees that a development of single-family detached
dwellings may dedicate and the Township shall accept medium-size
§ 250-78 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-78
10:860
or large-project stormwater management facilities, the Township's
acceptance shall be expressly conditioned upon the following:
(a) The Township and the developer shall enter a developer's
agreement in recordable form which shall clearly set forth the
developer's obligation to post initial maintenance fees to
escrow, an obligation which shall run with the land.
(b) The developer shall as an express condition of Township
acceptance of the stormwater management facilities provide
postmaintenance fees with the Director of Finance of the
Township of Old Bridge as follows:
[1] The amount of escrow contribution shall be based upon a
contribution fee determined by the Township Engineer.
The fee shall be based on the cost to adequately maintain
the stormwater management facility over a twenty-year
period. The fee estimate shall consider short-term and
long-term periodic maintenance requirements. The
Township Engineer shall consider the recommendations of
the maintenance plan as required by Subsection J when
determining the required contribution fee.
[2] The developer shall pay the maintenance contribution fee
amount before the signing of the approved subdivision
plats or site plan by the Township Engineer.
(c) The aforesaid maintenance fee shall be set aside and reserved
in an escrow fund dedicated solely to the maintenance of
stormwater management facilities. Such funds shall not be
used for maintenance of any lands or improvements other than
stormwater management facilities.
(d) Nothing herein shall reduce or eliminate the developer's
obligation to adequately construct all stormwater management
facilities. Adequate performance guarantees shall be posted to
assure the good and workmanlike installation of such
stormwater maintenance facilities pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53. The Township Engineer shall not accept any
stormwater management facilities unless and until the
developer's engineers shall have submitted to the Township
Engineer as-built drawings certifying that the said facilities
were constructed in accordance with the approved plans.
(e) During a period of maintenance immediately following the
release of performance guarantees, it shall continue to be the
developer's obligation, together with the surety, to adequately
maintain the stormwater management facilities. Only after the
expiration of maintenance guarantees shall the escrowed funds
be utilized for maintenance of stormwater management
facilities.
§ 250-78 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-78
10:861
M. Dedication of easements. The approving board may require easements
along drainage ways, natural watercourses, steep slopes and other
unique botanical, historical, geological and paleontological areas
located therein or adjacent to a proposed development. The easement
shall be indicated on the plan and shall be marked on the land by iron
pipes at angle points and or property corners at sufficient locations to
enable the easements to be surveyed. In such cases, the approving
board shall consult with the Township Planner, Township Engineer, and
the Environmental Commission in determining the required shape and
size of the easement. The easement shall be in a form approved by the
approving board's attorney and shall include provisions assuring the
following:
(1) Preservation of the channel and floodplain of the watercourse,
including the right to clean, de-snag and all such work necessary to
maintain the shape, slope and water flow of the watercourse.
(2) Prohibition of any removal of trees and other cleaning and grading
not directly related to the preservation of the channel of a
watercourse.
(3) Grant of a right to the Township to install and maintain any
drainage facilities necessary for the health and safety of the public.
(4) Right-of-entry to the Township to install and maintain any drainage
facilities therein.
N. Sump pumps and underdrains to be connected to stormwater sewer
system.
(1) All sump pumps or other forced pump systems which are installed
below grade of any structure for the purpose of removing water
which has infiltrated such structure shall be directly connected into
the stormwater system.
(2) All drainage collection systems which are installed below the
surface of lands in any development (commonly referred to as
"underdrains") shall be directly connected into the storm sewer
system.
(3) It shall be unlawful to disconnect any sump pump or underdrain
which is connected to the storm sewer system. It shall be unlawful
to connect any sump pump or underdrain to any sanitary sewer line
or main. Any person violating this subsection shall be subject to the
penalty set forth in § 250-100, Violations and penalties, of this
chapter. Any person who continues to violate this subsection after
receiving notice to terminate such violation shall be guilty of
continuing violations. Each day such violation continues after
notice to cease shall constitute a separate violation. [Amended
6-25-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-10]
§ 250-78 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-78
10:862
(4) The requirements of this subsection shall be a mandatory condition
of all development approvals granted by the Planning Board or
Township Board of Adjustment. The said requirements shall also be
applicable and enforceable with respect to any previously approved
development or portion thereof which has not yet been
constructed.
(5) The Township Engineer may, upon his or her own initiative or upon
request, waive the requirements of this subsection. Such waiver
shall be based upon good engineering practice and a determination
of hydrologic or soil conditions that proves that such a waiver is in
the public interest.
O. Water facilities.
(1) General requirements.
(a) Necessary action shall be taken by the applicant to extend or
create a water supply district for the purpose of providing a
water supply system capable of providing water for domestic
use and fire protection.
(b) Where a public water main is accessible, the developer shall
install adequate water facilities (including fire hydrants)
subject to the specifications of the state and local authorities.
All water mains shall be at least eight inches in diameter,
except lines for domestic service only which may be six inches.
All waterlines are to be looped wherever practical to provide
for continuous flow.
(c) Water main extensions shall be approved by the Municipal
Utilities Authority of the Township.
(d) To facilitate the above, the tentative location of all fire hydrants
and waterlines shall be shown on the preliminary and final
plan.
(2) Individual well and central water systems.
(a) At the discretion of the approving board, if a public water
system is not available, individual wells may be used or a
central water system provided in such a manner that an
adequate supply of potable water will be available to the
development. Water samples shall be submitted to the Health
Department for its approval, and individual wells and central
water systems shall be approved by the appropriate health and
permitting authorities. Copies of all approvals shall be
submitted to the approving board.
(b) Appropriate grants shall be given to the fire district having
jurisdiction over the property to utilize the individual wells and
§ 250-78 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-78
10:863
central water system for fire-fighting purposes and protection
of the general health and welfare of the public.
(c) If the approving board requires that a connection to a public
water main be eventually provided as a condition to approval of
an individual well or central water system, the applicant shall
make arrangements for future water service at the time the
plan receives final approval. Performance bonds or cash bonds
shall be required to insure compliance with this provision.
(3) Fire hydrants.
(a) Fire hydrants shall be required for all development projects.
Fire hydrants shall be located no more than 500 feet apart and
within 250 feet of any structure, and their location shall be
approved by the Township Fire Marshall. To eliminate future
street openings, all underground utilities for fire hydrants,
together with the fire hydrants themselves, and all other
supply improvements shall be installed before any final paving
of a street shown on the development plan.
(b) Where more than one hydrant connects a waterline, the
waterline shall be a minimum of eight inches in diameter up to
the next-to-last hydrant. The last section of waterline to the last
hydrant may be six inches. In the event that the waterline may
be extended in the future, then the waterline shall be eight
inches in diameter to its terminus.
P. Sewerage facilities.
(1) General requirements. The applicant shall install sanitary sewer
facilities in a manner prescribed by the Township Municipal
Utilities Authority construction standards and specifications. All
plans shall be designed in accordance with the rules, regulations
and standards of said Authority Engineer, the Township Health
Department, and other appropriate agencies. Plans shall be
approved by the above agencies.
(2) High-density residential and nonresidential districts. Sanitary
sewerage facilities shall connect with public sanitary sewerage
systems. Sewers shall be installed to serve each lot and to grades
and sizes required by approving officials and agencies.
(3) Low- and medium-density residential districts. Sanitary sewerage
systems shall be constructed where a public sanitary sewerage
system is reasonably accessible. The applicant shall connect with
same and provide sewers accessible to each lot in the subdivision.
(4) Individual disposal system requirements. If public facilities are not
available and individual disposal systems are proposed, percolation
tests and test holes shall be made as directed by the Township
Health Officer. The individual disposal system, including the size of
§ 250-78 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-78
10:864
§ 250-79. Sign specifications.
the septic tanks and size of the tile fields or other secondary
treatment device, shall also be approved by the Health Officer.
(5) Alternate sewerage treatment facilities. An applicant may consider
the use of domestic sewerage for spray irrigation, where
appropriate, to conserve use of potable water and recharge the
aquifer especially in open space areas and on golf courses subject
to the approval of the DEP.
Q. Utilities; location. All utility facilities, except major transmission lines,
including, but not limited to, gas, electric power, telephone and CATV
cables, shall be located underground throughout the development.
Wherever existing utility facilities are located above ground, except
where existing on public roads and rights-of way, they shall be removed
and placed underground. All utility facilities existing and proposed
throughout the subdivision shall be shown on the preliminary plan and
final plan.
R. Easements. Easements for water and sewer lines and other utilities
shall be provided and be of the size and form required by the respective
utility or authority.
S. Penalties. Any person who erects, constructs, alters, repairs, converts,
maintains, or uses any building, structure or land in violation of this
section shall be guilty of maintaining a nuisance and upon conviction
thereof before any court of competent jurisdiction shall be fined no less
than $100 nor more than $500 and costs. Each day that such nuisance
is maintained shall constitute a separate offense.
T. Effective date. This section shall take effect immediately upon the
approval by the county review agency, or 60 days from the receipt of the
ordinance by the county review agency if the county review agency
should fail to act.
U. Severability. If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph,
subdivision, or clause of this section shall be judged invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, such order of judgment shall not affect or
invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph,
subdivision, or clause of this section.
A. Material specifications.
(1) This section provides minimum standards of quality and
performance for the basic materials used in the construction of
signs.
(2) Design and construction. Only materials permitted in the State of
New Jersey Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23 et seq.) and
the conditions set forth in that code shall be used in the
manufacture and installation of signs. The latest subcodes
§ 250-78 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-79
10:865
approved by the State of New Jersey shall apply. [Amended
6-25-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-10]
(3) Aluminum.
(a) Structural. Structural requirements and allowable stresses
shall conform to the requirements of the Uniform Construction
Code.
(b) Finishes. Anodized finishes shall conform to the "Aluminum
Association Standards for Anodically Coated Aluminum
Applications."
(4) Plastic.
(a) Approved plastic materials. Approved plastic materials shall be
those meeting the requirements of the New Jersey State
Uniform Construction Code. [Amended 6-25-2007 by Ord.
No. 2007-10]
(b) Design and construction.
[1] Plastic materials. The mechanical and thermal properties
of plastics vary between manufacturers as well as types of
plastics. This fact must be considered when designing sign
faces. Manufacturer's recommendations will be utilized
when available and applicable.
[2] Wind load requirements. The sign face shall be designed to
withstand the wind pressure specified in the New Jersey
State Uniform Construction Code.192
[3] Flat sign face. Flat sign faces shall be designed to limit
deflection of the face from damaging internal lighting
components or disengagement under positive wind loads,
and from disengagement or suckout under negative wind
loads without creating stress build-up in the face which
will cause fracture or crazing of the plastic. The design
must also insure against buckling and sagging of the face
under the weight of the face and the design temperatures
and otherwise provide for a visually acceptable
appearance of the sign face.
[4] Formed sign faces. Formed faces shall be designed in
accordance with the same criteria specified for flat sign
faces. In addition, the plastic manufacturer's
recommendations for minimum inside edge and corner
radii must be followed.
192. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Land Development Codification (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. IV).
§ 250-79 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-79
10:866
[5] Design and construction. The general design and
construction of fabricated plastic faces should be in
accordance with the plastic manufacturer's
recommendation.
[6] Qualification. If, in the opinion of the Township
Construction Code Official, the sign design does not meet
the above standards, a certified record of a physical test of
the sign face under design conditions must be submitted
by the sign manufacturer to the Township Engineer for
approval.193
[7] Structural steel. Structural steel used in the construction
of on-premises electrical signs must meet the
requirements of the New Jersey State Uniform
Construction Code. Exposed steel shall conform to A.I.S.C.
Specifications for Architecturally Exposed Steel.194
[8] Miscellaneous. All exposed metal, unless galvanized or
noncorroding, shall be painted.
B. Installation specifications.
(1) Wind loads. Signs and sign structures shall be designed and
constructed to resist wind forces as specified in the Uniform
Construction Code.
(2) Seismic loads. Signs and sign structures shall be designed and
constructed to resist seismic forces as specified in the Uniform
Construction Code.
(3) Combined loads. Wind and seismic loads need not be combined in
the design of signs or sign structures; only that loading producing
the larger stresses need be used. Vertical design loads, except roof
live loads, shall be assumed to be acting simultaneously with the
wind or seismic loads.
(4) Allowable stresses. The design of wood, concrete, steel or
aluminum members shall conform to the requirements of the
Uniform Construction Code. Loads, both vertical and horizontal,
exerted on the soil shall not produce stresses exceeding those
specified in the Uniform Construction Code. The working stresses
of wire rope and its fastenings shall not exceed 25% of the ultimate
strength of the rope fasteners. Working stresses for wind or seismic
loads combined with dead loads may be increased as specified in
the Uniform Construction Code.
193. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Land Development Codification (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. IV).
194. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Land Development Codification (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. IV).
§ 250-79 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-79
10:867
(5) General. Signs and sign structures shall be designed and
constructed to resist wind and seismic forces as specified in this
section. All bracing systems shall be designed and constructed to
transfer lateral forces to the foundations. For signs on buildings,
the dead and lateral loads shall be transmitted through the
structural frame of the building to the ground in such a manner as
not to over-stress any of the elements thereof. The overturning
moment produced from lateral forces shall, in no case, exceed 2/3
of the dead-load resisting moment. Uplift due to overturning shall
be adequately resisted by proper anchorage to the ground or to the
structural frame of the building. The weight of earth superimposed
over footings may be used in determining the dead-load resisting
moment. Such earth shall be carefully placed and thoroughly
compacted.
(6) Anchorage. Members supporting unbraced signs shall be so
proportioned that the bearing loads imposed on the soil in either
direction, horizontal or vertical, shall not exceed the sale values.
Braced ground signs shall be anchored to resist the specified wind
or seismic load acting in any direction. Anchors and supports shall
be designed for safe bearing loads on the soil and for an effective
resistance pullout amounting to a force 25% greater than the
required resistance to overturning. Anchors and supports shall
penetrate to a depth below ground greater than that of the frost
line. Portable ground signs supported by frames or posts rigidly
attached to the base will be adequate to resist the wind. Masonry,
concrete, or steel shall be safely and securely fastened thereto by
means of metal anchors, bolts or approved expansion screws of
sufficient size and anchorage to support safely the loads applied.
No wooden blocks or plugs or anchors with wood used in
connection with screws or nails shall be considered proper
anchorage except in the case of signs attached to wood framing. No
anchor or support of any sign shall be connected to, or supported
by, an unbraced parapet wall unless such wall is designed for
seismic zones in the Uniform Construction Code.
(7) Supports. The supports for all signs and sign structures shall be
placed in or upon private property and shall be securely built,
constructed, and erected in conformance with the requirements of
this chapter. All signs shall be of such a design that all framework
for the lateral support of the sign shall be contained within the
sign's body or within the structures of the building to which it is
attached in such a manner as not to be visible to any person.
Exposed guy wires, chains or other connections should not be made
as a permanent support of the sign. Where necessary, the
projecting cantilever system shall be used to support signs, and the
A-frame system should not be used. No sign nor any guy, stay or
attachment thereto shall be erected, placed or maintained by any
person on rocks, fences or trees, nor in such a manner as to
§ 250-79 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-79
10:868
§ 250-80. Open space.
interfere with any electric light, power, telephone or telegraph
wires, or the support thereof.
(8) Electrical. All wiring shall be contained in rigid conduit or enclosed
in poles or raceways. In no case should the wiring be exposed to the
view of the public. All electrical components, connections and
installations shall conform to the New Jersey Uniform Construction
Code, Electrical Subcode.
(9) Clearance from high voltage power lines shall be located not less
than six feet horizontally or 12 feet vertically from overhead
electrical conductors which are energized in excess of 750 volts.
The terms "overhead conductors" as used in this section means any
electrical conductor, either bare or insulated, installed above the
ground, except such conductors as are enclosed in iron pipe or
other material covering of equal strength.
(10) Clearance from fire escapes, exits or standpipes. No sign or sign
structure shall be erected in such a manner that any portion of its
surface or supports will interfere in any way with the free use of
any fire escape, exit or standpipe.
(11) Obstruction of openings. No sign shall obstruct any openings to
such an extent that light or ventilation is reduced to a point below
that which meets accepted safety standards. Signs erected within
five feet of an exterior wall in which there are openings shall be
constructed of noncombustible material or approved plastics.
A. The Township, by appropriate action of the governing body, may at any
time, and from time to time, accept the dedication of land or any
interest therein for public use and maintenance.
B. The developer utilizing an alternative development option, pursuant to
Article VIII of this chapter, shall provide for an organization for the
ownership and maintenance of any open space, including streets, for
the benefit of owners or residents of the development, if said open
space is not dedicated to and accepted by the Township. Such
organization shall not be dissolved and shall not dispose of any open
space, by sale or otherwise, except to an organization conceived and
established to own and maintain the open space for the benefit of such
development, and thereafter such organization shall not be dissolved or
dispose of any of its open space without first offering to dedicate the
same to the Township.
C. In the event that such organization shall fail to maintain the open space
in reasonable order and condition, the administrative officer may serve
written notice upon such organization or upon the owners of the
development setting forth the manner in which the organization has
failed to maintain the open space in reasonable condition, and said
§ 250-79 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-80
10:869
§ 250-81. Town Centre Design Zone standards. [Amended 7-9-2001
by Ord. No. 36-01]
In addition to the design standards otherwise set forth in this Article X, the
design standards provided in the document entitled "Town Centre District
notice shall include a demand that such deficiencies of maintenance be
cured within 35 days thereof, and shall state the date and place of a
hearing thereon which shall be held within 15 days of the notice. At
such hearing, the administrative officer may modify the terms of the
original notice as to deficiencies and may give a reasonable extension
of time not to exceed 65 days within which they shall be cured. If the
said deficiencies set forth in the original notice or in the modification
thereof shall not be cured within 35 days or any permitted extension
thereof, the Township, in order to preserve the open space and maintain
the same for a period of one year, may enter upon and maintain such
land. Said entry and maintenance shall not vest in the public any rights
to use the open space except when the same is voluntarily dedicated
to public by the owner thereof. Before the expiration of said year, the
administrative officer shall, upon his initiative or upon the request of
the organization theretofore responsible for the maintenance of the
open space, call a public hearing upon 15 days' written notice to such
organization and to the owners of the development, to be held by
the administrative officer, at which hearing such organization and the
owners of the development shall show cause why such maintenance
by the Township shall not, at the election of the Township, continue
for a succeeding year. If the administrative officer shall determine
that such organization is ready and able to maintain said open space
in reasonable condition, the Township shall cease to maintain such
open space at the end of said year. If the administrative officer shall
determine such organization is not ready and able to maintain said open
space in a reasonable condition, the Township may, in its discretion,
continue to maintain said open space during the next succeeding year,
subject to a similar hearing and determination, in each year thereafter.
The decision of the administrative officer in any such case shall
constitute a final administrative decision subject to judicial review.
D. The cost of such maintenance by the Township shall be assessed pro
rata against the properties within the development that have a right of
enjoyment of said open space in accordance with their assessed value at
the time of imposition of the lien and shall become a lien on said
properties to be added to and be a part of the taxes to be levied and
assessed thereon, and enforced and collected with interest by the same
officers and in the same manner as other taxes.
E. The appropriate documentation necessary to establish the open space
organization hereinabove referred to shall contain the provisions set
forth herein and shall be subject to the review and approval of the
approving board attorney prior to filing or recording with the
appropriate county or state agency.
§ 250-80 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-81
10:870
Zoning and Design Standards" as revised June 21, 2001, are hereby
incorporated into this chapter and shall be adhered to for all development
in the Town Centre Design Zone. Where the standards contained therein
conflict with the standards otherwise set forth in this article, the standards
therein shall govern.
§ 250-82. Critical and sensitive areas.
The purpose of this section is to provide for the reasonable control of
construction in areas containing critical or sensitive environmental
features, where improper construction would result in a negative or
irreversible impact on the environment. Development control shall be by
means of special construction standards intended to promote the health,
safety and general welfare of the public by minimizing adverse
environmental impact.
A. Critical area requirements. Lands in which any development will have
an adverse impact on the environment that cannot be mitigated shall be
deemed critical and shall be identified by the following characteristics:
(1) Property in or on tidal or coastal waters.
(2) Tidal and coastal wetlands.
(3) Freshwater wetlands.
(4) Steep slopes greater than or equal to 30%. Slopes with a
continuous vertical drop of less than four feet shall not be deemed
critical for the purpose of this section.
(5) Surface waters and floodways as delineated on the Flood Boundary
and Floodway Maps of the Township of Old Bridge prepared by
FEMA. Waterways with less than 50 acres of contributory drainage
area to the downstream most point of the project site shall not be
deemed to have a critical floodway.
B. Construction limitations in critical areas.
(1) Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no building or
structure shall be erected, constructed or enlarged above or below
ground level, nor shall any soil or vegetation be disturbed within a
critical area except as permitted in this section.
(2) No building or structure shall be erected, constructed or enlarged
above or below ground level within 50 feet of the top of a critical
steep slope as defined above. The Board may reduce the required
distance based upon a finding by the Municipal Engineer that
design adequately provides for the safety of the structure as well as
the preservation of the slope.
(3) A land disturbance permit shall be required prior to soil or
vegetative disturbance on, or within 50 feet of, the top of a critical
slope.
§ 250-81 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-82
10:871
C. Permitted construction in critical areas. The following may be
permitted by the Board in critical areas:
(1) Dams, culverts, bridges or other drainage structures for the control
of floodwaters, providing all approvals of applicable agencies are
obtained, and that the Board finds that the facilities are designed in
such manner so as not to result in unnecessary disturbance and the
destruction of the natural character of the area.
(2) Natural open spaces, woodland preserves, wildlife sanctuaries, and
arboretums.
(3) Utility mains, sewage pumping or metering stations and electrical
transmission lines and appurtenances.
(4) Game farms and hunting preserves.
(5) Reforestation in accordance with recognized conservation
practices and applicable agency approvals.
(6) Recreation uses, such as parks, picnic groves, golf courses and
hunting clubs.
(7) Marine recreation uses, such as marinas, swimming, boating,
canoeing, and fishing.
(8) Accessory uses customarily incidental to any of the above, but
excluding buildings, on-site sewage disposal or treatment facilities.
D. Considerations for development in critical areas. In considering
construction in critical areas the Board may require the following:
(1) A complete site plan showing the location, construction layout and
details, phasing, and method of construction.
(2) An environmental impact statement explaining the need for the
facility and the short- and long-range impacts on the environment.
(3) The proposed method of construction and any alternate methods
customary for the facility proposed.
E. Sensitive area requirements. Sensitive areas are lands wherein
additional caution is needed for development to take place, in order to
protect against substantial detriment to the environment. Development
control shall be by means of special performance standards intended to
promote the health, safety and general welfare of the public by
minimizing adverse environmental impact.
(1) Sensitive areas shall be identified by the following characteristics:
(a) Steep slopes: where the gradient is greater than or equal to
15%, but less than 30%. Slopes with a continuous vertical drop
of less than five feet shall not be deemed sensitive for the
purpose of this section.
§ 250-82 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-82
10:872
(b) Transition areas: pursuant to the New Jersey Freshwater
Wetlands Protection Act (N.J.S.A. 13:9B-1 et seq.).
(c) Special flood hazard areas: as designated (Zones A and B) on
the current Flood Insurance Rate Maps of the Township of Old
Bridge.
(d) Stream encroachment areas but excluding the floodway of a
stream or waterway as delineated or approved by NJDEP.
(e) Nondelineated streams and waterways with less than 50 acres
of contributory drainage area.
(f) Shallow water table, where the depth to the seasonal high
water table is less than four feet below the surface of the
ground.
(g) Aquifer outcrop areas, as indicated in the Natural Resource
Inventory of the Township of Old Bridge.
(2) Construction limitations in sensitive areas.
(a) Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no
building or structure shall be erected, constructed or enlarged
above or below ground level, nor shall any soil or vegetation be
disturbed within a sensitive area except as permitted in this
section.
(b) No building or structure shall be erected, constructed or
enlarged above or below ground level within 35 feet of the top
of a sensitive steep slope as defined above. The Board may
reduce the required distance based upon a finding by the
Municipal Engineer that the design adequately provides for the
safety of the structure as well as the preservation of the slope.
(c) Structures may be permitted in aquifer outcrop and shallow
water tables, providing they comply with the requirements
listed below.
(3) Requirements for construction in sensitive areas. The following
requirements shall supplement all other applicable standards of
this chapter and those of any agency having jurisdiction:
(a) Steep slopes
[1] The removal of trees and the disturbance of soil shall be
prohibited except in accordance with a plan approved by
the Municipal Engineer and all applicable agencies.
[2] Disturbed areas shall be fine graded (if necessary) and
stabilized immediately following construction.
[3] The flow of stormwater runoff above or upon the slope
shall be disbursed, conveyed or otherwise controlled in a
§ 250-82 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-82
10:873
manner which will avert the concentration of surface
flows.
[4] Driveways shall be prohibited on steeps slopes unless it is
demonstrated to the satisfaction of the board that no
feasible alternative exists, in which case the driveway shall
be graded to a maximum of 10%.
(b) Transition areas. Construction may be permitted in New Jersey
freshwater transition areas to the extent allowed by, and in
accordance with, the standards of NJDEP.
(c) Special flood hazard areas. Construction may be permitted in
areas of special flood hazard in accordance with the rules and
regulations of Chapter 198, Flood Damage Prevention, of the
Code of the Township of Old Bridge.
(d) Stream encroachment areas. Construction may be permitted in
stream encroachment areas to the extent allowed by and in
accordance with the standards of NJDEP.
(e) Nondelineated streams. Construction shall not be permitted to
alter, disrupt, or otherwise impede the flow of water in a
nondelineated waterway except in accordance with a plan
approved by the Municipal Engineer, applicable municipal
board, and any agency having jurisdiction.
(f) Shallow water table.
[1] Basements and cellars shall be prohibited in lands
containing a shallow water table unless it is demonstrated
to the satisfaction of the Municipal Engineer and board
that it will not significantly affect the water table or result
in seepage through or excessive pressure on the
foundation wall.
[2] Stormwater detention/retention facilities shall be
designed so as not to significantly affect nor be affected by
the shallow water table. Detention basin beds shall be at
least two feet above the seasonal high water table.
[3] Filling to accommodate a septic system above the water
table in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:9A-1.1 et seq.
(amendments to P.L. 1954, Chapter 199), may be
permitted only where it is demonstrated that the grading
will not adversely affect runoff from the site or otherwise
negatively impact properties.
[4] Underdrain systems may be required to intercept and
convey water away from streets, parking areas and
structures.
(g) Aquifer outcrop area.
§ 250-82 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-82
10:874
[1] Construction shall be prohibited unless it is demonstrated
to the satisfaction of the Municipal Engineer and board
that it will not have significant short-term adverse effects
nor any permanent or long-term negative impacts on the
aquifer.
[2] An aquifer recharge analysis and implementation plan
demonstrating that the volume of infiltration for
groundwater recharge will be maintained or exceeded in
the post development state must be approved by the
Board.
[3] Infiltration structures, recharge swales and basin beds
shall not be less than two feet above the seasonal high
water table for filtration purposes.
[4] Building foundations shall not be closer than 15 feet as
measured on a horizontal plane to an infiltration system.
[5] Water supply wells shall be separated by a minimum of 100
feet from infiltration structures or systems.
[6] The proximity of infiltration systems to septic systems
shall be as recommended by the Board of Health.
[7] Stormwater infiltration systems shall not be constructed
until disturbed areas contributing runoff to the system
have been stabilized.
§ 250-82 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-82
10:875

ARTICLE XI
Enforcement
§ 250-83. Site plan approval required.
No building or structure shall be erected, relocated, enlarged or externally
altered, or reconstructed; nor shall the use of any building or structure be
changed or any land cleared or altered; nor shall the use of any land be
changed, except to a permitted home occupation, any watercourse diverted,
or its channel or floodplain, dredged or filled; nor shall any parking area,
accessory or otherwise, be constructed, installed or enlarged; nor shall any
construction permit, certificate of occupancy for a change of use, or other
required permit be issued with respect to any such structure, land, parking
area or other development, except after and in accordance with the final
approval of a site plan granted pursuant to this chapter. Anything herein
to the contrary notwithstanding, individual lot applications for detached
one-dwelling-unit or two-dwelling-unit buildings permitted as of right under
applicable zoning regulations, and structures and uses incidental thereto,
are exempted from the site plan review and approval requirements
hereunder.
§ 250-84. Subdivision approval required.
§ 250-85. Zoning permit required for undertaking development;
general conditions of all approvals. [Amended 11-2-1992 by Ord.
No. 42-92]
A. No land may be subdivided, except after and in accordance with the
final approval of a subdivision plat granted pursuant to this chapter.
B. The only exemptions from the requirements of this § 250-84 are those
divisions of land specifically excluded in § 250-6 of this chapter from the
definition of "subdivision."
A. A zoning permit shall be obtained from the Zoning Officer upon
application of the developer prior to the undertaking of any
development, and such undertaking shall be in accordance with such
permit and may continue only so long as the permit is valid and
subsisting. Any construction permit otherwise required by law to
commence construction of a building or structure or any certificate of
occupancy required by this chapter shall not be issued by the Township
Construction Official prior to the issuance of a valid and effective
zoning permit.
B. As a general condition of all approvals, including but not limited to
subdivision approvals, variances, conditional uses and zoning permits,
the appropriate board, body or official shall require the following items
relating to the health and safety of the residents and general public be
installed prior to any occupancy of a structure within a residential or
nonresidential section:
§ 250-83 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-85
10:877
§ 250-86. Certificate of occupancy required for use or occupancy of
development.
Prior to the commencement of a use after the erection, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, or conversion of a building or structure, or the
occupancy of a new or existing structure, a certificate of occupancy must
be signed and issued by the Construction Official acknowledging that the
use, building or structure complies with the provisions of this chapter and
all applicable construction codes and regulations.
§ 250-87. Conditional permits and certificates.
The issuance of any zoning permit or certificate of occupancy may, in the
discretion of the Zoning Officer or the Construction Official, as the case may
be, be conditioned upon the express approval of appropriate state, county
or municipal agencies having jurisdiction over one or more portions of the
development.
§ 250-88. Temporary certificates of occupancy.
(1) All sight easements shall be cleared of obstruction to view.
(2) New roadway(s) shall be complete to at least the stabilized base
course or pavement, including all curbs, drainage inlets and utility
structures. All protruding structures in the base course shall be
ramped to provide vehicle safety.
(3) All utility mainlines for the section shall be in place and operating.
(4) All required traffic control signs, devices and pavement markings
shall be in place.
(5) All required streetlights shall be operating.
(6) All required fire hydrants shall be operational.
(7) Acceleration/deceleration lanes, if required, shall be in place.
A. A temporary certificate of occupancy for a period not to exceed 30 days
may be issued upon separate application to the Construction Official in
cases in which the Construction Official determines that:
(1) The development is substantially completed;
(2) The developer is proceeding with dispatch toward final completion;
(3) It is likely that the development will be finally completed within the
period of the temporary certificate;
(4) Denial of the certificate would result in undue hardship to the
developer or the prospective occupants; and
§ 250-85 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-88
10:878
§ 250-89. Compliance with approved general development plans.
§ 250-90. Regulation and permitting of signs.
(5) The temporary use of the development will not adversely affect the
public health, safety or welfare.
B. Each temporary certificate of occupancy shall be conditioned upon the
developer applying for and receiving a permanent certificate of
occupancy within the temporary time period. Prior to the issuance of a
temporary certificate of occupancy, the developer shall enter into an
agreement with the Township, in a form to be approved by the Township
Attorney, whereby said developer shall agree to complete said
development as required by the Construction Official and shall post
sufficient security to insure the completion of the development in order
to receive a permanent certificate of occupancy.
C. The developer shall also provide, when applicable, a temporary
certificate of occupancy guarantee for installation of all public
improvements, required by ordinance or resolution of approval of a
municipal agency, which have not yet been completed as provided for in
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53(1)(c) and § 250-106 of this chapter. [Added
4-9-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-10]
A. Upon the completion of each section of a development as which is the
subject of an approved general development plan, the developer shall
notify the administrative officer, by certified mail, as evidence that the
developer is fulfilling its obligations under the approval plan. For the
purpose of this section, "completion" of any section of the development
shall mean that the developer has acquired a certificate of occupancy
for every residential unit or every nonresidential structure, as set forth
in the approved general development plan and pursuant to Section 15
of P.L. 1975, c. 217 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-133).
B. If the Township does not receive such notification at the completion of
any section of the development, the Township shall notify the developer,
by certified mail, in order to determine whether or not the terms of the
approved plan are being complied with.
C. If a developer does not complete any section of the development within
eight months of the date provided for in the approved plan, or if at any
time the Township has cause to believe that the developer is not
fulfilling his obligations pursuant to the approved plan, the Township
shall notify the developer, by certified mail, and the developer shall
have 10 days within which to give evidence that he is fulfilling his
obligations pursuant to the approved plan. The Township thereafter
shall conduct a hearing to determine whether or not the developer is in
violation of the approved plan. If, after such a hearing, the Township
finds good cause to terminate the approval, it shall provide written
notice of same to the developer, and the approval shall be terminated 30
days thereafter.
§ 250-88 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-90
10:879
A. General. All signs may be erected, altered, maintained, used and
removed only when in compliance with the provisions of this section
and § 250-52 of this chapter.
B. Enforcement. The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the
Construction Official and/or the Zoning Officer. [Amended
10-25-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-28]
C. Exempt signs in all zones. The following signs are authorized in any
zoning district without a permit as long as they conform to the
standards contained herein and in § 250-52:
(1) Sales and rental signs.
(2) One nonilluminated sign indicating the name and/or address of the
occupant of a dwelling unit; provided that the sign shall be no
larger than one square foot in area.
(3) Window stickers denoting organizational affiliations, credit card
availability, burglar system, pet restrictions, hours of operation,
etc.
(4) Signs indicating the private nature of a road, driveway or premises
may be erected and maintained; provided that the area of such sign
does not exceed 72 square inches and shall not exceed three feet in
height.
(5) Signs prohibiting or otherwise controlling fishing, hunting, etc.,
upon particular premises may be erected and maintained; provided
that the area of any such sign shall not exceed two square feet.
(6) Special signs serving the public convenience such as "notary
public," "public rest rooms," "public telephone" or words of similar
import. The area of each sign shall not exceed 72 square inches.
(7) Nonilluminated traffic control directional signs identifying parking
areas, loading zones, entrances, exits and similar locations. The
signs shall not exceed two square feet in area, and three feet in
height.
(8) Temporary signs for advertising public functions or fund-raising
events for charitable or religious organizations for a period of 30
days prior to and during the event, but shall be removed within five
days after the event. The sign shall be nonilluminated, not larger
than 12 square feet in area, not exceeding six feet in height and
may be erected flat against the building or freestanding.
(9) Temporary nonilluminated political signs which are removed within
14 days after an election; provided that: [Amended 10-25-2010
by Ord. No. 2010-28]
(a) They shall not be erected within the public right-of-way or on a
utility or directional sign pole. Such signs shall contain the
§ 250-90 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-90
10:880
name and address of the sponsor, individual or organization;
and
(b) All such political signs shall be removed by the person,
organization sponsoring an event, campaign chair or campaign
treasurer who posted said sign, within 14 days after the event
or election which is the subject of said sign. Any such person or
organization failing to remove said sign in accordance with this
chapter shall be considered in violation of this chapter. Any
sign remaining posted after 14 days shall be deemed to be a
public nuisance and shall be subject to removal by the Zoning
Officer, who, along with the Construction Official and/or his
designee, shall impose a penalty of $5 per sign against the
sponsor, individual or organization.
(10) Historical tables, cornerstones, memorial plaques and emblems
which do not exceed six square feet in area and which are installed
by government agencies, civic or religious organizations.
(11) Temporary signs which are in the nature of traditional holiday or
seasonal greetings or decorating not advertising a specific product,
service or establishment which are not up for more than 45 days.
(12) Flags or emblems of a religious, educational, civic or governmental
organization.
(13) Signs posted by governmental agencies or pursuant to
governmental statute, order or regulation.
(14) Signs which are an integral part of permitted vending machines,
including gasoline pumps, and milk machines, provided they do not
exceed two square feet in area.
(15) Temporary window posters when posted inside commercial
establishments, provided they do not occupy more than 20% of the
total area of said window.
(16) Temporary promotional or special sales signs when erected in
conjunction with a commercial establishment, provided that they
do not exceed 16 square feet and they are restricted to not more
than four nonsuccessive seven-day periods within a calendar year,
except for “grand opening” promotions, which may be up to 30
consecutive days. [Amended 10-25-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-28]
(17) Temporary overhead banners spanning a street or roadway
advertising public functions or fund-raising events for charitable or
religious organizations for a period of 30 days prior to and during
the event. Said banners shall be removed within five days after the
event or at anytime it is damaged or becomes a hazard.
(18) Temporary construction signs located on the lot on which said
construction is taking place; provided the sign is removed within
§ 250-90 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-90
10:881
seven days after the completion of the construction work. The total
area of all such signs shall not exceed 24 square feet, nor shall any
sign be greater than six feet in height, or illuminated except for
construction safety lights placed in hazardous areas.
D. Required permits. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to construct and install any sign within the Township that is
not constructed and installed pursuant to the Uniform Construction
Code, N.J.A.C. 5:23 et seq., and the Township Land Development
Ordinance. Any sign permit application must be accompanied by the
prior approval of the Zoning Officer or appropriate board or boards of
the Township. No building permit shall issue without prior compliance
with the sign requirements set forth in this chapter. [Amended
10-25-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-28]
(1) Applications for permits shall be made on forms provided by the
Construction Official and shall include the following:
(a) Name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
(b) Name of person, firm, corporation or association erecting the
sign if new construction.
(c) Name of owner or property on which sign is located and
written consent of owner if other than applicant.
(d) The dimensions of the sign and, where applicable, the
dimensions of the wall surface of the building to which it is to
be attached.
(e) Message, color, type, style, lighting, structural, anchorage and
material specifications.
(f) The dimensions of the sign's supporting members.
(g) The maximum and minimum height of the sign.
(h) The proposed location of the sign in relation to the face of the
building, in front of which or above which it is to be erected.
(i) The proposed location of the sign in relation to the boundaries
of the lot upon which it is to be situated.
(j) Where the sign is to be attached to an existing building, a
current photograph of the face of the building to which the sign
is to be attached.
(k) Other such information as the Construction Official shall
require to show full compliance with this chapter and all other
ordinances of the Township.
(2) Procedure for issuance of permits.
§ 250-90 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-90
10:882
(a) It shall be the duty of the Construction Official, upon the filing
of any application for a permit to erect a sign, accompanied by
the required fee, to examine such plans, specifications and
other data, submitted to him with the application, and if
necessary, the building or premises upon which the applicant
proposes to erect the sign or other advertising structures.
(b) Applications for signs permitted herein under the provisions of
Subsection C shall be filed in duplicate with the Construction
Official. If the proposed sign is in compliance with all the
requirements of this chapter and other laws and ordinances of
the Township, the Construction Official shall, within 10 days,
issue a permit for the erection of the proposed sign. If the sign
authorized under such permit has not been completed within
six months from the date of the issuance of such permit, the
permit shall become null and void but may be renewed within
10 days from the expiration thereof for good cause upon
payment of an additional fee of $5.
(c) Upon the issuance of a sign permit, the Township shall issue
metal identification plates containing the sign permit number
which shall be attached to the sign. On freestanding signs the
plate shall be attached to the supporting structure not less
than four nor more than six feet above ground level. On all
other signs, the plates shall be attached to the front of the sign
in the lower right-hand corner. Failure to attach, removal,
transferring, covering, painting over or mutilation of the plate
shall constitute a violation of this chapter.195
(3) Expirations. All permits issued hereunder shall expire in the
following year on the last of the month preceding the date of its
issuance, but shall be renewed upon application and payment of
the renewal fee unless the provisions hereof or other applicable
Township ordinances have been or are being violated. Permits may
be revoked by the Construction Official upon a hearing given after
due notice, for failure to comply continuously with the provisions
hereof and all other applicable Township ordinances and
regulations.
E. Sign maintenance. [Amended 10-25-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-28]
(1) Notwithstanding any provisions contained herein, every sign must
be kept clean, neatly painted, and free from all hazards, such as,
but not limited to, faulty wiring, loose fastenings, and must be
maintained at all times in such safe conditions so as not to be
detrimental to the public health or safety.
195. Editor's Note: Original Sec. 11-8D3, Procedure for issuance of permits, which previously
followed this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Land Development
Codification (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV).
§ 250-90 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-90
10:883
§ 250-91. Land disturbance.
(2) In the event the sign becomes unsafe, the Construction Official
shall take appropriate action pursuant to the Uniform Construction
Code. [Amended 10-25-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-28]
(3) If the Construction Official shall find that any sign regulated by this
chapter is unsafe, insecure, or a menace to the public, he shall give
written notice to the named owner of the land upon which the sign
is erected who shall remove or repair said sign within 30 days from
the date of said notice. If the sign is not removed or repaired, the
Construction Official shall revoke the permit issued for the sign and
shall assess all cost against the land or building on which the sign
was located.
(4) The Construction Official may cause any sign which is a source of
immediate peril to persons or property to be removed summarily
and without notice.
F. Discontinuance of use. Signs advertising a use no longer in existence or
a product no longer available shall be removed within 60 days.
G. Maintenance specifications.
(1) All signs and displays shall be maintained in good order and repair.
In the event that the Construction Official determines that any sign
now or hereafter erected is in a state of disrepair, has become
dilapidated or constitutes a safety hazard, the sign owner and
property owner shall be given written notice to correct the
conditions within 20 days from the date of the mailing of the notice.
Failure to correct the condition or file an appeal within the time
provided shall constitute a violation of this section.
(2) The area surrounding ground signs shall be kept neat, clean and
landscaped. The owner of the property upon which the sign is
located shall be responsible for maintaining the condition of the
area.
(3) The following maintenance schedule for illuminated signs shall be
conformed to:
(a) Clean signs yearly. The first cleaning should take place in the
year following the year of installation.
(b) Inspect the signs yearly. The inspection should be performed
during the annual cleaning.
(c) Repaint or touch up, as required, all parts which are
constructed of materials customarily field painted yearly. The
painting should be performed during the annual cleaning.
(d) Replace all fluorescent lamps during the third cleaning of the
sign.
§ 250-90 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-91
10:884
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is:
(1) To reduce the danger from stormwater runoff, to retard nonpoint
pollution from sedimentation, to prevent a decrease in the fertility
of the soil, to conserve and protect land, water, air, and other
environmental resources of the Township.
(2) To provide for the protection, preservation, proper maintenance
and use of trees and woodlands located in the Township in order to
minimize disturbance to them and to prevent damage from erosion
and siltation, a loss of wildlife and vegetation, and the destruction
of the natural habitat.
(3) To protect the woodlands (including trees and other forms of
vegetation) for their economic support of local property values
when allowed to remain uncleared and/or unharvested and for their
natural beauty, wilderness character or geological, ecological or
historical significance.
(4) To protect critical and sensitive areas.
B. Activities requiring permits.
(1) General: private lands.
(a) No clearing, grading, soil removal, excavating, landfill,
stripping or the filling or alteration of any natural or man-made
drainageways or other land disturbance area of more than
5,000 square feet of surface area of land or in a critical or
sensitive area regardless of the surface area, or the filling of
any natural or man-made drainageways regardless of the
surface area or the destruction, cutting or removal or
destruction of any trees or shrubs as defined in § 250-6 shall be
undertaken in the Township until a land disturbance permit
has been issued by the Director of the Department of
Community Development, or his designee, unless the activity is
exempt from the requirements of this section as provided in
Subsection B(4), or unless the Director of the Department of
Community Development, or his designee, has granted a
waiver pursuant to the provisions of Subsection D.
(b) Successive incidences of land disturbance of less than 5,000
square feet at any one time which result in an accumulative
land disturbance area of greater than 5,000 square feet within
any two-year period is expressly prohibited and constitutes a
violation under this section, unless a land disturbance permit
with respect to each incident has been issued.
(2) General: public highways. No person, firm or corporation shall
plant any tree or shrub or cause harm to be done to any tree or
shrub upon a public highway or within a right-of-way, within the
Township, unless a land disturbance permit has been issued by the
§ 250-91 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-91
10:885
Director of the Department of Community Development, or his
designee.
(3) Issuance before construction permit. Where an application is made
in connection with the construction of a building or other structure,
no construction permit shall be issued until the land disturbance
permit application has been acted upon.
(4) Exemptions. A land disturbance permit is required for clearing in
all nonresidential zones without exception. The following activities
are specifically exempt from the requirement to obtain a land
disturbance permit: [Amended 7-24-2000 by Ord. No. 29-00]
(a) Agricultural use of lands when operated in accordance with a
farm conservation plan approved by the SCD.
(b) Lots of one acre or less upon which a residence is already
situated and not located within a major subdivision or a
planned development currently under development or the
construction of no more than one single-family dwelling unit
which is not constructed as a part of a larger development,
except where the proposed disturbance is within 100 feet of a
stream or drainage channel. Clearing of not more than 1/2 acre
on lots greater than one acre upon which a residence is already
situated or the construction of not more than one single-family
dwelling unit which is not constructed as part of a larger
development, except where the proposed disturbance is with
100 feet of a stream or drainage channel.
(c) Removal of any tree growing on land actually being used for
growing agricultural crops or on land suitable for agricultural
purposes and being used for agricultural production and which
would be incorporated into the farm for such agricultural
production when cleared. "Suitable land" is defined as Land
Classes 1, 2 and 3 on the Soils Maps of the United States
Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Survey.
(d) Any tree grown on property actually being used as a nursery,
garden center, Christmas tree plantation, or orchard.
[1] The removal or trimming of dead, diseased, or damaged
trees or other woody vegetation, provided that the damage
resulted from a nonhuman cause and provided further that
the removal or trimming is accomplished through the use
of standard forestry practices and techniques.
(e) Any tree growing on land actually being used for a sanitary
landfill operation or for surface mining under a permit or
otherwise as permitted under the general ordinances of the
Township.
§ 250-91 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-91
10:886
[1] Any tree growing in a public right-of-way as shown on an
approved final site plan or subdivision map.
(f) Any tree cut or removed in accordance with a management
plan developed by the New Jersey Department of Agriculture
and filed with the Department of Community Development.
C. Requirements for approved activity.
(1) Any person proposing to conduct a land disturbance activity not
exempt under Subsection B(4) shall, prior to any activity as
described herein, obtain a valid land disturbance permit.
(2) Such permit shall not be issued unless the applicant satisfies the
issuing authority that the following protection standards will be
maintained:
(a) The limit of clearing for all streets and structures shall be kept
to a minimum and shall be clearly shown on the plans.
(b) There will be no removal of existing live trees which form part
of a planted greenbelt or buffer strip.
(c) There will be no removal of trees which are unique by virtue of
history, unusual size or the like.
(d) There will be no removal of trees near utility substations,
transmission towers, warehouses, junkyards, other similar
uses or structures, unless public health, safety or general
welfare requirements require removal.
(e) No living tree having a trunk diameter greater than 12 inches
DBH within 100 feet of any stream carrying water on an
average of six months of the year shall be removed except
when necessary to accommodate detention basins or other
storm drainage facilities, and/or roads and other utility
crossings approved by the approving board, in consultation
with the Township Engineer.
(f) Any tree whose removal will damage other trees which are to
remain must be removed by hand. The resulting stumps must
be carefully removed to minimize damage to roots and trunks
of other trees. Stump removal by chemicals is not permitted.
(g) No burning or burying of trees within the Township is
permitted.
(h) All dead trees must be promptly removed from the site so as
not to create potential rat harborages.
(3) The Director of the Department of Community Development, or his
designee, shall not grant the application unless one or more of the
following conditions exist:
§ 250-91 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-91
10:887
(a) The trees sought to be removed are located within 20 feet of all
building foundations and the width of the driveway area, plus
five feet on each side of the excavated driveway. (Material from
foundations must be stockpiled only in the driveway and
adjacent cleared area.)
(b) The trees sought to be removed are located on an area that will
be used for sidewalk, roadway, drainage right-of-way, utility
easement, parking areas, planted areas and sight triangle
easements.
(c) The cut or fill of land required for the proper development of
the premises is such that it would be injurious or dangerous to
the trees sought to be removed.
(d) The trees sought to be removed are diseased or dead or that
are likely to endanger the public or an adjoining property
owner.
(e) Any other reasons which the Director of the Department of
Community Development, having in mind the intent of this
section, deems to be adequate.
D. Application procedure.
(1) Every applicant shall, prior to any activity described herein, submit
to the Township Department of Community Development an
application for a land disturbance permit which shall include four
copies of soil erosion and sedimentation control plans, containing
the following information:
(a) The name and address of the applicant. The name and address
of the owner of the property on which land is sought to be
disturbed or from which the tree(s) are sought to be removed.
(b) Location on the property of any tree(s) or structures to be
removed, indicated on a survey prepared by a New Jersey State
licensed land surveyor.
(c) The survey shall indicate, specifically by an assigned number,
all tree(s) to be removed which have a trunk diameter of eight
inches DBH or greater.
(d) The survey shall indicate a limit of disturbance line.
(e) Any other information which may reasonably be required to
enable the application to be properly evaluated.
(2) Prior to applying for a land disturbance permit, the applicant's soil
erosion and sedimentation control plan must have been certified as
approved by the SCD. A copy of such certification shall be filed with
the application for a land disturbance permit.
§ 250-91 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-91
10:888
(3) If the land disturbance permit is sought in connection with a
development requiring any other approval from an approving
board pursuant to this chapter, the application for the land
disturbance permit must be accompanied by a certified copy of the
resolution of final approval issued by such approving board. No
land disturbance permit shall be issued hereunder until such final
approval has been granted by such approving board.
(4) An applicant shall file a building plan which identifies a tree
protection area prepared according to the standards of
§ 250-74B(4)(a) which has been approved by the Director of the
Department of Community Development or his designee before a
land disturbance permit shall be issued. [Amended 7-24-2000 by
Ord. No. 29-00]
(5) If an applicant discloses that trees are to be removed or destroyed
on the premises in a tree protection area, the Director of
Community Development or his designee may inspect the trees in
the tree protection area, the drainage and other physical conditions
and/or consult with the Environmental Commission, Township
Engineer and Township Planner regarding such application.
[Amended 7-24-2000 by Ord. No. 29-00]
(6) After review of an application, an application shall be granted or
denied. If not, final action is taken with respect to the application
within 30 days after the receipt of an application containing all of
the information required hereunder, the application shall be
deemed to have been approved. [Amended 7-24-2000 by Ord.
No. 29-00]
(7) If an application is denied, the applicant may appeal the decision to
the approving board, or to the Zoning Board of Adjustment if the
application is not in connection with a development requiring any
other approval pursuant to this chapter, by filing a written notice of
appeal with the Director of the Department of Community
Development, within 10 days after receiving notice of the denial of
the application. Such Board shall hold a hearing of the matter
within 30 days after the notice of appeal has been filed and may
modify, affirm or reverse the decision.
E. Waiver of plans or requirements. The Director of the Department of
Community Development or his designee may waive any or all of the
requirements herein for any tree removal activity upon written finding
that there is no apparent danger to the environment and related natural
resources.
F. Performance.
(1) The applicant shall be required to have the approved plans upon
which the issued land disturbance permit is based on site during
§ 250-91 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-91
10:889
§ 250-92. Historic sites or structures.
construction, including without limitation the period of land
disturbance.
(2) A stop construction order is authorized if an action is not being
executed in accordance with such approved plans.
(3) The Director of the Department of Community Development, or his
designee, in its discretion, may require reforestation and the
replacement of any and all trees that have been removed in
violation of the requirements herein and/or in the approved land
disturbance permit.
(4) No further construction permits or certificates of use and
occupancy shall be issued unless the terms and conditions of the
approved land disturbance permit, including the application
materials and plans thereunder, are being complied with.
G. Violations and penalties. [Added 7-24-2000 by Ord. No. 29-00]
(1) The penalty set forth in § 250-100, Violations and penalties, shall
apply for violations of § 250-91. Within 30 days after a violation of
this section occurs which results in the unauthorized removal of
trees and shrubs, a compensatory tree replacement plan with
specific planting schedules shall be submitted for approval to the
Director of the Department of Community Development. A
performance guarantee shall be posted to insure the
implementation of the plan within two years.196
(2) Failure to submit a timely compensatory tree replacement plan is a
violation of this section. Each day such plan is not submitted after
the expiration of the 30 days permitted under this section shall
constitute an additional separate and distinct offense.
A. No demolition, destruction, alteration, or repair of historic sites or
structures shall be undertaken in the Township until a demolition
permit has been issued by the Director of the Department of
Community Development, or his designee.
B. No demolition permit for the demolition, destruction, alteration, or
repair of historic sites or structures shall be issued unless the person
requesting such permit satisfies the issuing authority that the
standards set forth in § 250-43M with respect to the preservation of
such site or structures have been complied with or sufficient
guarantees are in place to assure such compliance.
196. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Land Development Codification (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. IV).
§ 250-91 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-93
10:890
§ 250-93. Permits required under other regulations unaffected.
The approvals, permits, certificates and authorizations required by this
article shall be in addition to, and not in place of, those required with
respect to a development under any law, ordinance or regulation other than
this chapter.
§ 250-94. Notice of violation.
Upon finding a violation of this chapter, the Zoning Officer shall issue
a notice of violation setting forth the section or sections of this chapter
being violated and the amount of time within which said violations must be
corrected. The amount of time given for correcting the violation shall be
within the reasonable discretion of the Zoning Officer. The notice shall be
issued to those individuals responsible for causing said violations and to the
owner of the property if said owner is not a responsible person. The owner
shall be jointly and severally liable for all penalties imposed pursuant to this
chapter.
§ 250-95. Selling land before subdivision approval; violations and
penalties; actions.
§ 250-96. Certificate as to approval of subdivision.
A. If, before final subdivision approval has been granted, any person
transfers or sells or agrees to transfer or sell as owner or agent, except
pursuant to an agreement expressly conditioned on final subdivision
approval, any land which forms a part of a subdivision for which
approval is required by this chapter, such person shall be subject to a
penalty not to exceed $1,000, and each lot disposition so made may be
deemed a separate violation.
B. In addition to the foregoing the Township, when authorized by
resolution of the governing body, shall institute and maintain a civil
action for injunctive relief and to set aside and invalidate any
conveyance made pursuant to such a contract of sale if a certificate of
compliance has not been issued in accordance with § 250-96. Any such
action must be brought within two years after the date of the recording
of the instrument of transfer, sale or conveyance of such land, or within
six years if unrecorded.
A. The prospective purchaser, prospective mortgagee, or any other person
interested in any land which forms part of a subdivision may apply in
writing to the administrative officer for the issuance of a certificate
certifying whether such subdivision has been approved by the
appropriate municipal agency pursuant to this chapter. Such
application shall contain a diagram showing the location and
dimensions of the land to be covered by the certificate and the name of
the owner thereof.
§ 250-93 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-96
10:891
§ 250-97. Rights of owner of land covered by certificate or on
failure to issue certificate.
§ 250-98. Injunctive relief.
In case any development is undertaken, occupied or used in violation of
this chapter or any rule, regulation or order made under the authority of
this chapter, or in case such violation is threatened, the Zoning Officer, in
his own official behalf, or on behalf of the municipality or any municipal
agency or interested party, in addition to other remedies, may institute any
appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such violation, or to restrain,
correct or abate such violation or to prevent any illegal act, conduct,
B. The administrative officer shall make and issue such certificate within
15 days after receipt of such written application and the fees therefor.
Such officer shall keep a duplicate copy of each certificate,
consecutively numbered, including a statement of the fee charged, in a
binder as a permanent record.
C. Each such certificate shall be designated a "certificate as to approval of
subdivision of land" and shall certify:
(1) That there exists in the municipality a duly established Planning
Board, and whether there is an ordinance controlling subdivision of
land adopted under the authority of the MLUL;
(2) That the subdivision, as it relates to the land shown in the
application, has been approved by the appropriate municipal
agency, and if so, stating the date of such approval and any
extensions and terms thereof, and that the subdivision of which the
lands are a part is a validly existing subdivision; and
(3) That such subdivision, if the same has not been approved, is
statutorily exempt from the requirement of approval as provided
herein.
A. Any person who shall acquire for a valuable consideration an interest in
the lands covered by a certificate described in § 250-96 hereof in
reliance upon the information therein contained shall hold such interest
free of any right, remedy or action, which could be prosecuted or
maintained by the municipality pursuant to § 250-95.
B. If the administrative officer fails to issue any such certificate within 15
days after receipt of an application and the fees therefor, any person
acquiring an interest in the lands described in such application shall
hold such interest free of any right, remedy or action, which could be
prosecuted or maintained by the municipality pursuant to § 250-94.
C. Any such application addressed to the Township Clerk shall be deemed
to be addressed to the administrative officer, and the Township shall be
bound thereby to the same extent as though the same was addressed to
the administrative officer.
§ 250-96 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-98
10:892
business, occupancy or use, in or about the premises that are the subject
of the development; provided that no such action or proceeding shall be
instituted by the Zoning Officer in any court, other than the Municipal
Court, except in case of emergency, unless the governing body shall first
have authorized such by resolution.
§ 250-99. Right of entry.
The Zoning Officer, or his representative, shall have the right to enter any
premises at any reasonable time for the purpose of making inspections in
the course of his duties, or as permitted by law, to investigate violations of
this chapter.
§ 250-100. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-25-2007 by Ord.
No. 2007-10]
§ 250-101. Records.
The Zoning Officer shall maintain in his office a record of all zoning permits,
all actions, proceedings or complaints taken, instituted or filed by him.
§ 250-102. Monitoring of prior developments.
The Zoning Officer shall monitor and enforce the required implementation
of subdivisions, site plans and zoning variances approved under laws or
ordinances in effect prior to the adoption of this chapter and superseded
hereby, and for such purpose the Zoning Officer shall have all of the powers
and duties prescribed in this article.
A. Except as otherwise provided in § 250-94, any person who received a
notice of violation pursuant to § 250-93, and fails to correct the
violations cited within the time period set forth therein shall be subject
to a fine not exceeding $2,000, to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 90 days, or community service for not more than 90 days, or
any combination thereof; and in the case of continuing violations, each
day that such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
Any complaint to impose such penalty may be filed in Municipal Court
on behalf of the municipality, by the Zoning Officer, any municipal
police officer or any interested party.
B. If the Township chooses to impose a fine in an amount greater than
$1,250 upon an owner for violations of housing or zoning codes, the
Township shall provide a thirty-day period in which the owner shall be
afforded the opportunity to cure or abate the condition and shall also be
afforded an opportunity for a hearing before a court of competent
jurisdiction for an independent determination concerning the violation.
Subsequent to the expiration of the thirty-day period, a fine greater
than $1,250 may be imposed if a court has not determined otherwise or,
upon reinspection of the property, it is determined that the abatement
has not been substantially completed.
§ 250-98 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-103
10:893
§ 250-103. Recording of easements. [Added 1-27-1994 by Ord. No.
5-94]
Whenever the Planning Board of the Township of Old Bridge or the Zoning
Board of Adjustment of the Township of Old Bridge imposes a condition
of approval upon a developer which requires the developer to convey a
conservation easement, such easement shall be both depicted on the
approved plan and conveyed in deed form. The form of conveyance made
shall be approved by the Board Attorney and the Township Attorney before
recordation. Upon approval of the form of such conveyance and
simultaneous with the forwarding of such deed to the County Recording
Office, copies of such conveyance shall be forwarded to the Township
Clerk, the Township Zoning Officer, the Construction Code Official, the
administrative officer of the respective board.
§ 250-103 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-103
10:894
ARTICLE XII
Fees, Professional Review Escrows, Guarantees and Off-Tract
Improvements
§ 250-104. Fees. [Amended 9-28-1998 by Ord. No. 75-98; 7-24-2000
by Ord. No. 29-00; 4-23-2001 by Ord. No. 18-01; 3-11-2002 by Ord.
No. 06-02; 6-27-2006 by Ord. No. 29-2006; 7-16-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-15; 7-14-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-18; 10-6-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-32]
A. Generally. Every application for development, application for a land
disturbance permit or application for a sign permit shall be
accompanied by a check made payable to the Township for the
application fees set forth below. Such fees are required to cover the cost
of administering and processing the review procedures. An applicant
seeking more than one type of approval in an application for
development shall pay an aggregate fee equal to the total of all fees or
each separate approval requested. Separate fees shall be payable for
use variances and bulk variances.
B. Subdivisions.
(1) Residential.
(a) Minor subdivision: $850.
(b) Major subdivision.
[1] Preliminary approval: $850 plus $75 per lot.
[2] Final approval: $850 plus $40 per lot.
(2) Nonresidential.
(a) Minor subdivision: $850.
(b) Major subdivision.
[1] Preliminary approval: $850 plus $175 per acre or portion
thereof.
[2] Final approval: $850 plus $90 per acre or portion thereof.
C. Site plans.
(1) Residential.
(a) Minor site plan: $850.
(b) Major site plan.
[1] Preliminary approval: $850 plus $75 per dwelling unit.
[2] Final approval: $850 plus $40 per dwelling unit.
§ 250-104 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-104
10:895
(2) Nonresidential.
(a) Minor site plan: $850.
(b) Major site plan.
[1] Preliminary approval: $850 plus $175 per acre and $.10
per square foot of gross floor area.
[2] Final approval: $850 plus $90 per acre and $0.05 per
square foot of gross floor area.
[3] Waiver of site plan. Application fee: $150.
D. General development plan.
(1) Residential: $850 plus $45 per dwelling unit.
(2) Nonresidential: $850 plus $0.06 per square foot of gross floor area.
(3) Amended residential: $850 plus $20 per dwelling unit.
(4) Amended nonresidential: $850 plus $0.03 per square foot of
nonresidential gross floor area.
E. Variances.
(1) Appeals (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70a): $150.
(2) Interpretation (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70b): $150.
(3) Bulk (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c).
(a) Fee for one setback violation: $225.
(b) Fee for multiple setback violations: $325.
(4) Use (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d): $465.
(5) Permit (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 and/or 40:55D-36): $150
F. Conditional use permits: see site plan fees (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67).
G. Appeals to governing body: $365.
H. Certificate of approval, exempt subdivision: $50; $25 for recertification.
I. Land disturbance permit: $50 plus $10 for each 10 acres in excess of
the first 10 acres.
J. Sign permit: $22 per sign plus annual renewal fee of $22 per sign.
K. Notice of decision: $30 (other than applicant).
L. Concept plan: $500 plus $30 per lot or $55 per acre, whichever is
greater.
§ 250-104 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-104
10:896
M. Extension of time of approval (per extension request): $100.
N. Photocopying charges.
(1) Public records.
(a) First page to 10th page: $0.75 per page.
(b) Eleventh page to 20th page: $0.50 per page.
(c) All pages over 20 pages: $0.25 per page.
(2) The above rates shall apply unless otherwise set by state law.
(3) If the Director of the Department of Community Development or his
designee finds that there is no risk of damage or mutilation of such
records and that it would not be incompatible with the economic
and efficient operation of the office and the transaction of public
business therein, he may permit any citizen who is seeking to copy
more than 100 pages of records to use his own photographic
process, approved by the Director of the Department of Community
Development or his designee, upon the payment of a reasonable
fee, considering the equipment and time involved, to be fixed by the
Director of the Department of Community Development or his
designee of not less than $10 nor more than $50 per day.
O. Waiver of fees.
(1) The Township Council may waive the fees of any not-for-profit first
aid squad or fire company holding tax-exempt status under the
Federal Internal Revenue Code of 1954 [26 U.S.C. § 501(c) or (d)]
upon application of said organization confirming its tax-exempt
status and upon showing that:
(a) The first aid squad or fire company operates exclusively or
primarily within the boundaries of the Township of Old Bridge;
and
(b) The action applied for will directly benefit the residents of the
Township as a whole.
(2) The Township Council may waive the fees of any governmental or
quasi-governmental entity which operates within the municipal
boundaries of the Township of Old Bridge, including, but not
limited to, the Old Bridge Township Housing Authority and the Old
Bridge Township Municipal Utilities Authority.
P. Zoning permit fees.
(1) New home.
(a) For tract homes from major subdivision: $100.
(b) For individual lot or minor subdivision lot: $200.
§ 250-104 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-104
10:897
§ 250-105. Professional review fees and escrows. [Amended
11-2-1992 by Ord. No. 42-92; 9-11-1995 by Ord. No. 47-95;
9-26-1995 by Ord. No. 59-95]
(2) Existing home.
(a) Additional level: $50.
(b) Additional footprint: $50.
(c) Dormers: $50.
(d) Porch: $50.
(e) Garage conversion to living space: $50.
(3) Garage, carport, pole barn or shed greater than 100 square feet.
(a) Attached: $50.
(b) Detached: $50.
(4) Shed less than 100 square feet: $55.
(5) Fence: $30.
(6) Gazebo: $50.
(7) Deck: $50.
(8) Pools and spas.
(a) In-ground pool: $150.
(b) Aboveground pool: $50.
(c) Hot tub/spa: $30.
(9) Commercial use change: $100.
(10) Commercial building: $150.
(11) Sign: $75.
(12) Zoning verification letter: $150 per hour.
(13) Retaining walls: $100.
(14) Billboard: $500. [Added 11-22-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-32]
A. Payments to professionals for services rendered. In addition to the fees
set forth in § 250-104, inclusive, an applicant shall be responsible for
reimbursing the Township for:
(1) All expenses of professional personnel rendered to the municipality
or approving authority for review of applications for development,
review and preparation of documents, inspection of improvements
§ 250-104 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-105
10:898
or other purposes under the Municipal Land Use Law, including
without limitations:
(a) Charges for reviews by professional personnel of applications
and accompanying documents;
(b) Issuance of reports by professional personnel to the approving
board setting forth recommendations resulting from the review
of any documents submitted by applicant;
(c) Charges for any telephone conference or meeting requested or
initiated by applicant, his attorney or any of his experts;
(d) Review of documents submitted by applicant not required by
ordinance and issuance of reports relating thereto;
(e) Review or preparation of easements, developer's agreements,
deeds, or the like;
(f) Preparation for and attendance at meetings related to any
application;
(g) Preparation of summaries of preapplication and/or concept
plan review meetings;
(h) The preparation of resolutions of memorialization, including,
without limitation, resolutions pertaining to an application for
general development plan approval pursuant to § 250-16A of
this chapter and an application concerning which the
resolution must contain a summary of more that two experts
testifying on behalf of the applicant in order for the resolution
to contain adequate findings of fact and conclusions based
thereon pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10g.
(i) The costs of expert advice and/or testimony obtained by the
approving board for the purpose of eliciting testimony on the
same subject matter of applicant's experts.
(2) Fees or charges to be paid for review of applications for
development, review and preparation of documents, inspection of
improvements, or other purposes under the New Jersey Municipal
Land Use Law shall be based upon a schedule adopted by the
Township Council by resolution.
(3) In addition to the aforesaid fees and charges, developers shall also
pay such professionals or consultants for actual out-of-pocket
expenses incurred, including normal and typical expenses incurred
in processing applications and inspecting improvements.
(4) The municipality or approving authority shall not bill the applicant,
or charge any escrow account or deposit for any municipal clerical
or administrative functions, overhead expenses, meeting room
charges, or any other municipal costs and expenses except as
§ 250-105 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-105
10:899
provided for in this chapter, nor shall a municipal professional add
any such charges to his bill.
(5) The Township Council shall adopt a separate ordinance, at least
annually, and from time to time, establishing the hourly base salary
for any municipal professional employed by the Township of Old
Bridge who reviews application, prepares or reviews documents,
inspects improvements, or for other similar purposes under the
New Jersey Municipal Land Use Law. Such hourly base salary shall
be set as a calculation based upon a forty-hour workweek (or in
certain cases, a thirty-five-hour workweek, wherein an employee
works less than 40 hours), even though the municipal employee is a
managerial employee and/or an overtime exempt employee and/or
is compensated on a set annual salary basis.
(6) Charges for professionals who are employees of the municipality
may not exceed 200% of the sum of the products resulting from
multiplying (1) the hourly base salary (established by ordinance, as
aforesaid) by (2) the number of hours spent by the professional in
reviewing the application for development or inspecting the
developer's improvements, as the case may be.
(7) Fees charged by consulting professionals, including those normally
utilized by the municipality or approving authority, shall be at the
same rate charged as all other work of the same nature by the
professional when fees are not reimbursed or otherwise imposed
on applicants or developers.
(8) All professional charges for review of an application for
development, review and preparation of documents or inspection of
improvements shall be reasonable and necessary, given the status
and progress of the application or construction.
(9) Review fees shall be charged only in connection with an application
for development presently pending before the approving authority,
or upon review of compliance with conditions of approval, or
review of requests for modification or amendment made by the
applicant.
(10) A professional shall not review items which are subject to approval
by any state governmental agency and not under municipal
jurisdiction, except to the extent consultation with a state agency is
necessary due to the effect of state approvals in the subdivision or
site plan.
(11) Inspection fees shall be charged only for actual work shown on a
subdivision or site plan or required by an approving resolution.
Professionals inspecting improvements under construction shall
charge only for inspections that are reasonably necessary to check
the progress and quality of the work, and such inspections shall be
reasonably based on the approved development plans and
documents.
§ 250-105 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-105
10:900
(a) Notwithstanding any of the above, the amount of inspection
fees collected for inspection of the installation of public
improvements, before dedication to the Township, shall be
determined as provided for in § 250-106K of this chapter and
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53 et seq. [Added 4-9-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-10]
(12) If the municipality retains a different professional or consultant in
the place of the professional originally responsible for
development, application review, or inspection of improvements,
the municipality or approving authority shall be responsible for all
time and expenses of the new professional to become familiar with
the application or the project, and the municipality or approving
authority shall not bill the applicant or charge the deposit or the
escrow account for any such services.
B. Escrow deposits for review of development applications.
(1) Any applicant for development shall post the following initial sums
to be held in escrow: [Amended 3-11-2002 by Ord. No. 06-02;
3-12-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-05]
Type of Development
Application Professional Review Escrow Fee
Minor subdivision $500 per lot
Major subdivision:
Preliminary:
1 to 50 lots $2,500 (1st lot) + $100 each
additional lot up to 50
51 to 250 lots + $75 each additional lot over 50
up to 250 lots
Over 250 lots For all additional lots above 250,
$50 per lot
Final:
1 to 50 lots $1,250 (1st lot) + $50 each
additional lot
51 to 250 lots + $37.50 each additional lot over
50
Over 250 lots + $25 each additional lot over 250
Minor site plan $1,000
Major site plan
Residential — preliminary $2,500 (1st unit) + plus $100 each
additional unit
Residential — final $2,500 (1st unit) + $50 each
additional unit
§ 250-105 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-105
10:901
Type of Development
Application Professional Review Escrow Fee
Nonresidential —
preliminary
Less than 1,001 square
feet
$3,500
1,002 — 5,001 square
feet
$4,000
5,002 — 10,001 square
feet
$5,000
More than 10,001
square feet
$7,500
Nonresidential — final $3,000
General development plan as
per N.J.S.A. 40:55D-45.1
Less than 100 acres $5,000
100 acres to 1,000 acres $7,500
1,001 acres and greater $10,000
Application to revise or
amend General
Development Plan
$5,000
Planning permits (pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 and
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-35)
$1,500
Appeal (as set forth in
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-39a, Appeal
from Administrative Official
or Agency)
$1,500
Interpretation (pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70b)
$1,000
Conceptual review before
Planning Board:
Proposed small-scale
development (less than 10
acres)
$1,500
Proposed large-scale
development (more than
10 acres)
$3,000
Yard and bulk variances
(pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70c)
§ 250-105 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-105
10:902
Type of Development
Application Professional Review Escrow Fee
Lot variance (application
involving only one lot
occupied or to be occupied
by only one single-family
dwelling)
$500
Application by single- or
two-family homeowner of
single lot or bulk variance
(homeowner application
involving remodeling,
deck, pool, or expansion of
existing home)
$250
Use variance
D variance for floor
area ratio, height and/
or density for a single
building
$750
All other variances
sought under N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d
$2,000
Resubmission of plans
(required for all
applications)
30% of original escrow fees
Informal technical review -
preapplication:
Unless waived by
administrative officer,
escrow fees will be posted as
follows:
Proposed small scale
development (less than 10
acres)
$1,500
Proposed large scale
development (more than
10 acres)
$3,000
§ 250-105 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-105
10:903
Type of Development
Application Professional Review Escrow Fee
Special meeting fee. If the
applicant requests a special
meeting to be scheduled for
consideration of an
application and the board
grants such request, the
following additional amount
shall be deposited to escrow
as a condition for holding the
said meeting:
For each special meeting
to be deposited within 24
hours of the granting of
the request
$1,500
(2) An application shall be deemed incomplete if the initial sums to be
deposited in escrow are not posted.
(3) A developer requesting either a preapplication meeting or concept
plan review prior to submitting an application for development
shall submit with such request a fee, in addition to that required by
§ 250-104, in the amount of 30% of the escrow deposit required by
this chapter; provided, however, that the combined fee charged
under this subsection for a preapplication meeting and a concept
plan review in connection with a particular development shall not
exceed such 30%. Such fee shall be held in escrow for the uses and
purpose described in this § 250-105. The developer shall receive a
credit in the amount paid under this § 250-105. The developer shall
receive a credit in the amount paid under this subsection against
the fee charged for application review escrows at the time of filing
its application for development.
(4) No subdivisions plats or deeds, or site plan, shall be signed nor
shall any zoning permits, building permits, certificates of
occupancy or any other types of permits be issued with respect to
any approved application for development until:
(a) All bills for reimbursable services have been received by the
municipality from professional personnel rendering the
services in connection with such application;
(b) Payment of such bills has been approved by the governing
body; and
(c) The applicant has reimbursed the municipality for the excess
of such bills over the escrow amount otherwise herein provided
for.
§ 250-105 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-105
10:904
(5) In the event the approving board or body shall determine that the
amount remaining as an escrow deposit is insufficient to pay for the
reasonably anticipated fees and charges of professionals with
respect to a pending application or development, the board shall
require, by notice to the applicant and resolution, additional
amount to be posted. Said additional amount shall be paid by the
applicant prior to advancing to the next step in the approval
procedure. The term "next step" shall include in its definition
continuance of hearings before the approving board.
C. Deposits for inspection fees. Any developer shall post deposits for
reasonably anticipated fees to be paid to the Township Engineer for
inspection of improvement as follows:
(1) Unless the reasonably anticipated fees for inspections equal or
exceed $10,000, the developer shall post all reasonably anticipated
fees for inspection of improvements. Such sums shall be posted as a
condition precedent to the signing of any plans or the issuance of
any permit.
(2) In the event the reasonably anticipated fees are $10,000 or greater,
fees may, at the option of the developer, be paid in four
installments. The initial amount deposited by a developer shall be
25% of the reasonably anticipated fees. When the balance on
deposit drops to 10% of the reasonably anticipated fees because
the amount deposited by the developer has been reduced by the
amount paid to the Municipal Engineer for inspection, the
developer shall make additional deposits of 25% of the reasonably
anticipated fees. The Municipal Engineer shall not perform any
inspection if sufficient funds to pay for those inspections are not on
deposit. In the event an inspection must be made to protect health
or safety for which insufficient sums are on deposit, the Engineer
shall render such inspections and charge such work against future
replenishment of the escrow fund or against the developer directly.
D. Financial control and accounting for charges against escrow deposits.
(1) Each payment charged to the deposit for review of applications,
review and preparation of documents and inspection of
improvements shall be pursuant to a voucher from the professional,
which voucher shall identify the personnel performing the service,
and for each date the services performed, the hours spent to 1/3
hour increments, the hourly rate and the expenses incurred.
(2) All professionals shall submit vouchers to the Chief Financial
Officer of the municipality on a monthly basis in accordance with
schedules and procedures established by the Chief Financial
Officer of the municipality. The professional shall send an
informational copy of all vouchers or statements submitted to the
Chief Financial Officer of the municipality simultaneously to the
applicant.
§ 250-105 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-105
10:905
(3) If the services are provided by a municipal employee, the municipal
employee shall prepare and submit to the Chief Financial Officer of
the municipality a statement containing the same information as
required on a voucher, on a monthly basis.
(4) The Chief Financial Officer of the municipality shall prepare and
send to the applicant a statement which shall include an accounting
of funds listing all deposits, interest earnings, disbursements, and
the cumulative balance of the escrow account.
(5) This information shall be provided on a quarterly basis, if monthly
charges are $1,000 or less, or on a monthly basis, if monthly
charges exceed $1,000.
(6) If an escrow account or deposit contains insufficient funds to
enable the municipality or approving authority to perform required
application reviews or improvement inspections, the Chief
Financial Officer of the municipality shall provide the applicant
with a notice of the insufficient escrow or deposit balance.
(7) In order for work to continue on the development or the
application, the applicant shall within a reasonable time period
post a deposit to the account in an amount to be agreed upon by the
municipality or approving authority and the applicant. In the
interim, any required health and safety inspections shall be made
and charged back against the replenishment of funds.
E. Close-out procedures for escrow deposits.
(1) The following close-out procedure shall apply to all deposits and
escrow accounts established under the provisions of P.L. 1975, c.
291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.) and shall commence after the
approving authority has granted final approval and signed the
subdivision plat or site plan, in the case of application review
escrows and deposits, or after the improvements have been
approved as provided in Section 41 of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53), in the case of improvement inspection escrows and
deposits.
(2) The applicant shall send written notice by certified mail to the
Chief Financial Officer of the municipality and the approving
authority, and to the relevant municipal professional, that the
application or the improvements, as the case may be, are
completed.
(3) After receipt of such notice, the professional shall render a final bill
to the Chief Financial Officer of the municipality within 30 days,
and shall send a copy simultaneously to the applicant.
(4) The Chief Financial Officer of the municipality shall render a
written final accounting to the applicant on the uses to which the
deposit was put within 45 days of receipt of the final bill.
§ 250-105 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-105
10:906
(5) Any balances remaining in the deposit or escrow account, including
interest in accordance with Section 1 of P.L. 1985, c. 315 (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.1), shall be refunded to the developer along with the
final accounting.
F. Disputes and appeals.
(1) An applicant shall notify in writing the governing body with copies
to the Chief Financial Officer, the approving authority and the
professional whenever the applicant disputes the charges made by
a professional for service rendered to the municipality in reviewing
applications for development, review and preparation of
documents, inspection of improvements, or other charges made
pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et
seq.).
(2) The governing body, or its designee, shall within a reasonable time
period attempt to mediate any disputed charges.
(3) If the matter is not resolved to the satisfaction of the applicant, the
applicant may appeal to the County Construction Board of Appeals
established under Section 9 of P.L. 1975, c. 217 (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-127) any charge to an escrow account or a deposit by any
municipal professional or consultant, or the cost of the installation
of improvements estimated by the Municipal Engineer pursuant to
Section 15 of P.L. 1991, c. 256 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4).
(4) An applicant or his authorized agent shall submit the appeal in
writing to the County Construction Board of Appeals. The applicant
or his authorized agent shall simultaneously send a copy of the
appeal to the municipality, approving authority, and any
professional whose charge is the subject of the appeal.
(5) An applicant shall file an appeal within 45 days from receipt of the
informational copy of the professional's voucher required by
Subsection c of Section 13 of P.L. 1991, c. 256 (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.2), except that if the professional has not supplied the
applicant with an informational copy of the voucher, then the
applicant shall file his appeal within 60 days from receipt of the
municipal statement of activity against the deposit or escrow
account required by Subsection c of Section 13 of P.L. 1991, c. 256
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.2).
(6) An applicant may file an appeal for an ongoing series of charges by
a professional during a period not exceeding six months to
demonstrate that they represent a pattern of excessive or
inaccurate charges. An applicant making use of this provision need
not appeal each charge individually.
(7) The contract between Old Bridge Township and any outside
professional employee who will be paid from developer's escrows
§ 250-105 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-105
10:907
§ 250-106. Performance, safety and stability and maintenance
guarantees. [Amended 2-21-1995 by Ord. No. 5-95; 4-9-2018 by Ord.
No. 2018-10]
shall contain provision requiring reimbursement to the
municipality in the event such fees are successfully challenged.
(8) In the event an applicant disputes any unpaid charge against any
escrow account for professional fees or expenses, the professional
must justify the reasonableness of such fees and charges to the
Chief Financial Officer in order that he pay it.
A. Performance guarantee. As a condition of granting final approval of a
subdivision or site plan, the approving board shall require for the
purpose of assuring the installation and maintenance of public
improvements the furnishing of a performance guarantee in favor of the
Township in an amount not to exceed 120% of the cost of installation to
be determined by the Township Engineer as set forth in Subsection D of
this section, for improvements to be dedicated to the Township, as
shown on the approved plans or plat, including streets, pavement,
gutters, curbs, sidewalks, street lighting, street trees, surveyor's
monuments as shown on the final map and required by the Map Filing
Law, P.L. 1960, c. 141 (N.J.S.A. 46-23-9.9 et seq.),197 water mains,
sanitary sewers, community septic systems, drainage structures, public
improvements of open space, and any grading necessitated by the
preceding improvements, as well as privately owned perimeter buffer
landscaping as required by ordinance or imposed as a condition of
approval for each section or phase of development.
(1) At the developer's option, a separate performance guarantee may
be posted for the privately owned perimeter buffer landscaping.
(2) In the event that a developer shall seek a temporary certificate of
occupancy for a development, unit, lot, building or phase of
development, as a condition of the issuance thereof, the developer
shall furnish a separate guarantee referred to herein as "temporary
certificate of occupancy guarantee" in compliance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53(1)(c) et seq. The municipal official
designated to administer this provision of this section is the
Township Engineer.
(3) Should a successive developer request a permit update under the
State Uniform Construction Code for the purpose of updating the
name and address of the owner of property on a construction
permit, as a condition of such permit update, the new owner shall
provide replacement performance guarantees, safety and stability
guarantees and/or maintenance guarantees as applicable to the
then current stage of development.
197. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.7 to 46:23-9.16 were repealed by L. 2011, c. 217, § 2,
effective 5-1-2012. See now N,J.S.A. 46-26B-1 et seq.
§ 250-105 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-106
10:908
B. Safety and stabilization guarantee. The developer shall furnish to the
Township a safety and stabilization guarantee to be available to the
Township for the purpose of returning property that has been disturbed
to a safe and stable condition or otherwise implementing measures to
protect the public from access to an unsafe or unstable condition in
compliance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53(1)(d) et seq. and
as follows:
(1) At the developer's option, the safety and stabilization guarantee
may be provided as a separate guarantee or as a line item in the
performance guarantee.
(2) The amount of the safety and stabilization guarantee shall be as
follows: for bonded improvements in an amount not exceeding
$100,000, the guarantee shall be $5,000. The amount of the safety
and stabilization guarantee for a development with bonded
improvements exceeding $100,000 shall be calculated as a
percentage of all the bonded improvements, or applicable phase or
stage of development as follows: $5,000 for the first $100,000 of
bonded improvements plus 2.5% of bonded improvement costs in
excess of $100,000 up to $1,000,000 plus 1% of bonded
improvement costs in excess of $1,000,000.
C. Maintenance guarantee. As a condition precedent to the issuance of a
zoning permit, the approving board shall require the furnishing of a
maintenance guarantee to be posted with the governing body as
provided for herein. Upon final acceptance of the improvements by the
Municipal Engineer consistent with the procedures as outlined in this
section and before the release of the performance guarantee by the
governing body, the developer shall post a maintenance guarantee with
the Township in the amount of 15% of the costs of the installation of the
public improvements which are being released. The developer shall also
post a maintenance guarantee in an amount not to exceed 15% of the
costs of the installation of the following private site improvements:
stormwater management system, inflow and water quality structures
within the basins, and the outflow pipes and structures of the
stormwater management system, if any. Said maintenance guarantee(s)
to run for a period of two years after release of the performance
guarantee of the improvements if such are dedicated to the public or
the date of approval by the Township Engineer if private improvements.
In the event that other governmental agencies or public utilities
automatically will own the utilities to be installed or the improvements
are covered by a maintenance guarantee to another governmental
agency, no maintenance guarantee shall be required by the municipality
for such utilities or improvements. Cash cannot be required as any part
of such maintenance guarantee by the approving board, though the
developer at its option may so provide all or a portion in cash.
D. The cost of installation of improvements for the purposes of Subsection
A, B and C of this section shall be estimated by the Township Engineer
based on documented construction costs for the public improvements
§ 250-106 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-106
10:909
prevailing in the general area of the municipality. The developer may
appeal the Township Engineer's estimate to the governing body. The
governing body shall decide the appeal within 45 days of receipt of the
appeal in writing by the Municipal Clerk. After the developer posts a
guarantee with the municipality based upon the cost of the installation
of improvements as determined by the governing body, he may institute
legal action within one year of the posting in order to preserve the
right to judicial determination as to the fairness and reasonableness of
the amount of the guarantee. The approving board shall, in addition
to other acceptable forms of surety, accept performance guarantee,
temporary certificate of occupancy guarantee, safety and stability
guarantee and maintenance guarantee which is an irrevocable letter of
credit if it:
(1) Constitutes an unconditional payment obligation of the issuer
running solely to the Township for an express initial period of time
in the amount determined pursuant to this section;
(2) Is issued by a banking or savings institution authorized to do and
doing business in this state;
(3) Is for a period of time of at least one year; and
(4) Permits the Township to draw upon the letter of credit if the obligor
fails to furnish another letter of credit which complies with the
provisions of this section within 30 days or more in advance of the
expiration date of the letter of credit or such longer period in
advance thereof as is stated in the letter of credit.
E. In the event that other governmental agencies or public utilities
automatically will own the utilities to be installed or the improvements
are covered by a performance or maintenance guarantee to another
governmental agency, no performance or maintenance guarantee, as
the case may be, shall be required for such utilities or improvements.
F. The time allowed for installation of improvements for which the
performance guarantee has been provided may be extended by the
governing body by resolution. As a condition or as a part of any such
extension, the amount of any performance guarantee shall be increased
or reduced, as the case may be, to an amount not to exceed 120% of the
costs of the installation, which costs shall be determined by the
Township Engineer as set forth in Subsection D of this section as of the
time of passage of the resolution. Also as a condition of such extension
the safety and security guarantee, and any temporary certificate of
occupancy guarantee, shall be increased or reduced as applicable.
G. If the required improvements are not completed or corrected in
accordance with the performance guarantee, the safety and
stabilization guarantee, or the temporary certificate of occupancy
guarantee, the obligor and surety, if any, shall be liable thereon to the
Township for the reasonable cost of the improvements not completed or
corrected, and the Township may, either prior to or after receipt of the
§ 250-106 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-106
10:910
proceeds thereof, complete such improvements; such completion or
correction of improvements shall be subject to the public bidding
requirements of the Local Public Contracts Law, P.L. 1971, c. 198
(N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.).
H. Review and recommendations of Township Engineer.
(1) Upon substantial completion of all required street improvements
(except for the top course), appurtenant utility improvements, and
the connection of the same to the public system, the obligor may
request of the governing body, in writing, by certified mail
addressed in care of the Township Clerk, that the Township
Engineer prepare in accordance with the itemized cost estimate
prepared by the Township Engineer and appended to the
performance guarantee pursuant to Subsection A of this section.
The request shall indicate which improvements have been
completed and which remain uncompleted in the judgment of the
obligor. Thereupon the Township Engineer shall inspect all
improvements covered by the obligor's request and shall file a
detailed list and report, in writing, with the governing body, and
shall simultaneously send a copy thereof to the obligor no later
than 45 days after receipt of the obligor's request.
(2) The list prepared by the Township Engineer shall state, in detail,
with respect to each improvement determined to be incomplete or
unsatisfactory, the nature and extent of the incompleteness of each
incomplete improvement or the nature and extent of, and remedy
for, the unsatisfactory state each completed improvement
determined to be unsatisfactory. The report prepared by the
Township Engineer shall identify each improvement determined to
be complete and satisfactory together with a recommendation as to
the amount of reduction to be in the performance guarantee
relating to the completed and satisfactory improvement, in
accordance with the itemized cost estimate prepared by the
Township Engineer and appended to the performance guarantee
pursuant to Subsection A of this section.
I. Action of the Township Council, by resolution, shall either approve the
improvements determined to be complete and satisfactory by the
Township Engineer or reject any or all of these improvements upon the
establishment in the resolution of cause for rejection, and shall approve
and authorize the amount of reduction to be made in the performance
guarantee relating to the improvements accepted, in accordance with
the itemized cost estimate prepared by the Township Engineer and
appended to the performance guarantee pursuant to Subsection A of
this section. The resolution shall be adopted not later than 45 days after
receipt of the list and report prepared by the Township Engineer. Upon
adoption of the resolution by the governing body, the obligor shall be
released from liability pursuant to its performance guarantee and
safety and stability guarantee for the approved improvements except
for that portion adequately sufficient to secure completion or correction
§ 250-106 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-106
10:911
of the improvements not yet approved, provided that 30% of the amount
of the performance guarantee and safety and stability guarantee posted
may be retained to ensure completion of all improvements. Failure of
the governing body to send or provide such notification of passage
of such resolution to the obligor within 65 days shall be deemed to
constitute approval of the improvements, and the obligor and surety, if
any, shall be released from all liability pursuant to such performance
guarantee for such improvements.
(1) If the Township Engineer fails to send or provide the list and report
as requested by the obligor pursuant to Subsection H of this section
within 45 days from receipt of the request, the obligor may apply to
the court in a summary manner for an order compelling the
Township Engineer to provide the list and report within a stated
time, and the costs of applying to the court, including reasonable
attorney's fees, may be awarded to the prevailing party. If the
Township Council fails to approve or reject the improvements
determined by the Township Engineer to be complete and
satisfactory or reduce the performance guarantee and safety and
security guarantee for the complete and satisfactory improvements
within 45 days from the receipt of the Township Engineer's list and
report, the obligor may apply to the court in a summary manner for
an order compelling, within a stated time, approval of the complete
and satisfactory improvements and approval of a reduction in the
performance and safety and stability guarantees for the approvable
complete and satisfactory improvements in and approval of a
reduction in the performance and safety and stability guarantees
with the itemized cost estimate prepared by the Township Engineer
and appended to the performance guarantee pursuant to this
section, and the cost of applying to the court, including reasonable
attorney's fees, may be awarded to the prevailing party.
(2) In the event that the obligor has made a cash deposit with the
Township as part of the performance guarantee, then any partial
reduction granted in the performance guarantee pursuant to this
subsection shall be applied to the cash deposit in the same
proportion as the original cash deposit bears to the full amount of
the performance guarantee, provided that if the developer has
furnished a safety and security guarantee, the Township may retain
such cash equal to the amount of the remaining safety and security
guarantee.
J. If any portion of the required improvements is rejected, the approving
board may require the obligor to complete or correct such
improvements, and upon completion or correction, the same procedure
of notification as set forth in this section shall be followed.
K. The obligor shall reimburse the Township for reasonable inspection fees
paid to the Township Engineer for foregoing inspections of
improvements, provided that the Township may require of the
developer a deposit for the inspection fees in the amount, except for
§ 250-106 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-106
10:912
extraordinary circumstances, the greater of $500 or 5% of the cost
of bonded improvements subject to a performance guarantee as
determined pursuant to Subsection D of this section and N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53(3)(h) et seq. Further, the Township may also require an
escrow fee not to exceed 5% of the costs of the private site
improvements that are not subject to the performance guarantee.
(1) If the Township determines that the amount in escrow for the
payment of inspection fees, as calculated pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53, is insufficient to cover the costs of additional required
inspections, the Township may require the developer to deposit
additional funds in escrow, provided that the Township delivers to
the developer a written inspection escrow deposit request, signed
by the Township Engineer, which informs the developer of the need
for the additional inspections, details the items undertakings that
require inspection, estimates the time required for those
inspections and estimates the cost for performing those
inspections.
L. In the event that final approval is by stages or sections of development
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-38a, the provisions of this section shall be
applied by stage or section.
M. Prior to the release or reduction of any performance guarantee, the
developer shall notify affected owners of property in accordance with
this subsection. The developer shall cause to be published a notice of
public hearing in a newspaper circulated within the Township of Old
Bridge, said publication to be at least 20 days prior to the date of the
proposed requested, or by personal service upon all owners of land
within the development and upon all owners of land which has
contiguous borders to the development. The notice shall state that
there will be a public hearing concerning the release or reduction of
performance guarantees concerning the said development. The
developer shall also send certified mail and regular mail notice to the
homeowners' association. The aforesaid certified mail notification to
owners of land and the homeowners' association shall be served not
less than 20 days prior to the scheduled hearing. The notice shall be on
a form provided by the Township Clerk. Any person noticed in
accordance with this chapter shall submit his (or her) comments, in
writing, to the Township Clerk, at least 12 days prior to the proposed
hearing, as well as true copies of the same to the Township Engineer
and applicant. As soon thereafter as is practicable, the Township
Engineer shall inspect the improvements which are the subject of
written public comment. Generally any person who receives actual
notification of the hearing to reduce or release performance guarantees
must file written public comment to be heard at the hearing. The
Council President, in his sole discretion, may choose to recognize any
person at the hearing, even if no written comments were submitted by
said person at least 12 days prior to the hearing. The Council shall hold
a public hearing as set forth in the notice and shall afford members,
§ 250-106 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-106
10:913
§ 250-107. Off-tract improvements.
affected owners and the public the right to speak with regard to the
final release or reduction of such performance guarantee.
N. No reduction in the amount of any performance guarantee shall be
granted notwithstanding the installation of improvements, unless the
amount of performance guarantee held by the Township is at least
120% of the current cost of installing all remaining improvements for
which the performance guarantee was originally posted. The Township
Council shall hold only so much of the performance guarantee as is
necessary to assure completion of the required improvements in an
amount equal to 120% of the current cost calculated by the Township
Engineer.
O. Should the hearing be adjourned to a new date at the applicant's
request, notice of such adjournment shall be given by public
announcement on the hearing date and by newspaper advertisement
and by regular and certified mail service to any homeowners'
association. Such newspaper advertisement shall not be on less than
five days' notice. At the discretion of the Township Council, it may
require notification by certified or regular mail of any adjournment
requested by the applicant. If the Township has requested the
adjournment, the Township Clerk shall cause the newspaper
advertisement to be published in the official Township newspaper.
A. In general.
(1) Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42, an applicant is required to pay,
prior to the granting of final subdivision or site plan approval by the
approving board, a pro rata share of the cost of providing
reasonable and necessary street improvements and water,
sewerage and drainage facilities, and easements therefor located
outside the property limits of the development in an amount
determined hereunder.
(2) The methodology, except for trip generating factors and facility
improvement costs, contained in a document entitled "Methodology
for Off-Tract Pro-Rata Analysis for the Township of Old Bridge," by
Louis Berger Associates, August 1980, as revised, is hereby
declared to be expressly incorporated herein and made part of this
chapter. A copy of this document is available for inspection in the
office of the Township Engineer.
(3) Trip generating factors and facility improvement costs are
variables which require periodic adjustments as improvements are
installed or as costs change and are not incorporated herein. The
Township Engineer shall revise these factors and submit yearly a
report to the Planning Board for its review and the approval of the
governing body.
§ 250-106 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-107
10:914
B. Drainage pro rata share.
(1) The drainage pro rata share is intended to apportion the costs of
improving culverts and cleaning stream channels in relation to the
degree to which a specific development causes the existing culverts
and stream channels to become over utilized.
(2) For purposes of this Subsection B, "pro rata share" is defined as the
sum of labor, material and engineering design costs needed to
increase the capacity of particular culverts above the level needed
to accommodate existing development. Labor and material cost for
cleaning that portion of the stream channel within the drainage
area of any one culvert is included. Pro rata share shall vary with
the size and the type of the proposed development, the total
amount and type of development within a particular culvert's
drainage area and the number of culverts downstream of the
proposed development.
(3) A particular developer's pro rata shall be calculated in accordance
with the following formula:
Pro Rata Contribution = (Acres of Land Type) (Runoff Weight for
Land Type)
The sum of all weighted acres for all developable undeveloped
land types upstream of the first affected culvert = Cost of
Improvement to First Affected Culvert (Acres of Land Type)
(Runoff Weight for Land Type)
The sum of all weighted acres for all developable undeveloped
land upstream of the second affected culvert = Cost of
Improvement to Second Affected Culvert (Acres of Land Type)
(Runoff Weight for Land Type)
The sum of all weighted acres for all developable undeveloped
land types upstream of the third affected culvert = Cost of
Improvement to Third Affected Culvert (Acres of Land Type)
(Runoff Weight for Land Type)
The sum of all weighted acres for all developable undeveloped
land types upstream of the last affected culvert = Cost of
Improvements to Last Affected Culvert.
C. Transportation pro rata share.
(1) The transportation pro rata share is intended to apportion the cost
of making roadway improvements, the need for which is caused by
new development. The amount of contributions of a new
development is determined in relation to its absolute size and the
relative amount of trips produced by the development type.
(2) For purposes of this Subsection C, "pro rata share" is defined as the
sum of base cost and adjusted base cost. Base cost consists of the
land, labor, material and engineering design costs associated with
§ 250-107 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-107
10:915
§ 250-108. Exemption from fees. [Added 8-14-2006 by Ord. No.
39-2006]
The Township may by resolution exempt any charitable, philanthropic,
fraternal or religious nonprofit organization holding a tax-exempt status
under the Federal Internal Revenue Code of 1954 from the payment of
the construction and/or installation of all traffic improvements
needed to increase the capacity of the Township roadways to
handle the traffic volumes which will be generated by new
developments. Adjusted base cost is the product of the base cost
minus the value of benefits accruing to existing property owners by
virtue of the proposed traffic improvements.
(3) Pro rata share shall be calculated in accordance with the following
formula:
Pro Rata
Contribution
= (Number of Units of Land Type)
(Trip Factor for Land Type) Total trips
produced by all currently vacant
developable land in the district
Adjusted base cost of all traffic improvements in the district.
D. Developer's agreements.
(1) Where approval is conditioned on provision by the applicant of his
pro rata share for off-tract improvements necessitated by his
development, the board shall require the applicant to enter into a
developer's agreement with the Township, setting forth:
(a) A detailed description of exactly which improvements the
applicant shall make.
(b) A detailed description of the manner by which the applicant
shall install said improvements.
(c) The timing of the construction of any improvements.
[1] The amount of and the manner for providing adequate
performance guarantees to insure that the improvements
will be installed.
(2) A developer's agreement, as described above, may be either
negotiated between the board and the applicant at the hearing, or
the board may make the entering into of such an agreement a
condition of the applicant's approval, and delegate the
responsibility for drafting and negotiating same to the approving
board attorney.
(3) In all cases, the developer's agreement must be reviewed and
approved by both the Township Engineer and the approving board
attorney.
§ 250-107 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-108
10:916
any fee charged under the Township of Old Bridge Land Development
Ordinance, provided the organization is seeking an application for
development of property owned by the Township of Old Bridge.
§ 250-108 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-108
10:917

ARTICLE XIII
Exemption
§ 250-109. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to acknowledge that the development of
certain lots within the Township were considered by the Planning Board
in connection with Application No. 24-89P for a general development plan
approval. Said properties are those properties designated on the approved
general development plan as EST parcels. These lots are indicated on the
tax map of the Township as follows:
Block 24000 Lot 18
Block 24001 Lots 13 and 23
Block 22000 Lot 25.12
Block 22001 Lots 7.12, 9.12, Part of 5, 46, and Part of 13.12 (TR. 3)
§ 250-110. Exemption for certain Class A planned development.
[Amended 12-21-1992 by Ord. No. 47-92]
A. In the Class A (formerly Class I) PD, the property owner or owners of
record as of January 1, 1983, of the following specifically designated
properties may apply for a conditional use permitting single-family
detached dwellings, patio dwellings, townhouses or cluster
development with a density not exceeding 3.25 dwelling units per gross
acre, providing that the subject site is serviced by one minor arterial
street or two collector streets, and further that the approving board
finds that:
(1) The improvement of existing and/or proposed on-tract and off-tract
public and/or private roads will substantially improve existing
traffic conditions in the surrounding area.
(2) That design features related to street layout, including the
harmonious use of materials, colors and textures; architectural
styles and varied housing types are superior to standard design
practice for each of these areas.
(3) That the proposed landscaping provides special treatment for
streetscapes, plazas, private open spaces, pedestrianways,
recreational areas and parking areas. Special treatment includes
the degree of attention paid to the relationship of site design and
species of plants.
(4) That the overall development plan includes unique features such as
clubhouse facilities, recreational ponds and lakes, on-site facilities
or other similar features, which enhance the value of the planned
development beyond ordinary subdivision and planned
development improvements.
B. This section applies to the following specifically designated properties:
§ 250-109 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-110
10:919
§ 250-111. Exemption for certain C-N zoned lots. [Added 8-26-1999
by Ord. No. 30-96]
Block Lot Acreage
14263 6 5.39
14262 11B 18.79
10252 23 12.02
11251 19A 8.13
11751 15 6.72
11251 3 7.60
10252 43A 6.30
11232 3A 7.30
10252 24 12.60
A. The purpose of §§ 250-111 and 250-112 is to acknowledge that the
development of certain lots within the Township were considered by the
Planning Board in connection with, or in relation to, the general
development plan approval of Application No. 24-89P. These certain lots
are indicated on the tax map of the Township as follows:
Block 22000, Lot 12 (approximately two acres)
Block 22000, Lot 15.02 (approximately 3.52 acres)
B. The Planning Board analysis and consideration of said general
development plan included an analysis of Block 22000, Lot 12. Said lot
was not eligible for vesting under the general development plan since
said lot was then and is now zoned neighborhood commercial (C-N),
rather than PD. All rights of the applicant which did vest as a result of
the general development plan approval, however, contemplated the
development of Block 22000, Lot 12, in a manner indicated in the
approved general development plan. It has been determined that Block
22000, Lot 12, due to its size, configuration and location to neighboring
residences, is unlikely to be developed in accordance with the
requirements of the C-N zoning district.
C. Subsequent to Planning Board's grant of the aforesaid general
development plan approval, the Planning Board considered and
approved Application No. 5-92P wherein the Planning Board granted
minor subdivision approval to create the above referenced Block 22000,
Lot 15.02. Said lot was zoned PD at the time the Planning Board
granted minor subdivision approval. The Planning Board required that
Block 22000, Lot 15.02, not be developed unless said lot merged with
adjoining lots which are part of the Application O. 24-89P general
development plan approval. Block 22000, Lot 15.02, was, thereafter,
inadvertently rezoned from the PD zoning district to the C-N zoning
district.
§ 250-110 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 250-111
10:920
§ 250-112. Planned development zoning. [Added 8-26-1999 by Ord.
No. 30-96]
Notwithstanding any contrary provisions of this chapter, the lots set forth
in § 250-111 may be developed to effect an integration of the lots into
the general development plan approved under Application No. 24-89P as if
these lots had the benefit of the permitted uses, standards and conditions of
the PD zoning upon which the general development plan approval had been
granted. These lots shall be treated, nunc pro tunc, as if eligible to receive
general development plan approval under the PD zoning in effect at the time
of general development plan approval. However, the rights granted herein
shall be subject to and conditioned upon the following:
D. These §§ 250-111 and 250-112 are intended to permit the development
of Block 22000, Lot 12, and Block 22000, Lot 15.02, as an integrated
part of the above referenced general development plan as if these lots
had the benefit of the PD zoning upon which the general development
plan approval had been granted.
A. Said lots are developed in accordance with and as a component part of
said approved general development plan.
B. The integration of said lots into the approved general development plan
shall be for the purposes of facilitating design and layout and shall not
increase the total number of residential units allowed under the
approved general development plan.
§ 250-111 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 250-112
10:921
Chapter 254
LAUNDRIES, SELF-SERVICE
§ 254-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SELF-SERVICE LAUNDRY — Any place of business operated for the
purpose of washing or drying clothes or other washable materials where
the work is done by the customers themselves in machines located on
the premises, whether coin-operated or otherwise. It shall include such
establishments as launderettes, laundromats, washomats and others with
similar names.
§ 254-2. Regulations.
In addition to conforming to all health ordinances and regulations of general
application, all self-service laundries shall be operated in accordance with
the following regulations:
A. The entire premises devoted to the operation of the laundry, including
all machines used in connection with it, shall be kept in a clean and
sanitary condition at all times. The walls and floors shall be covered
with some easily cleaned, impervious material and shall be kept clean
and dry. The premises shall be adequately lighted and ventilated.
B. No machinery used in connection with a self-service laundry shall be
operated in such a manner as to cause any unreasonable noise or
vibration.
C. No equipment using exhaust or other circulation systems shall have
vents or opening constructed or located so as to permit heat, lint, gas,
fumes or other material to be directed upon neighboring properties.
D. All parts of the premises to which the public has access shall be clearly
visible from the street.
E. The owner or operator of the premises shall be responsible for
maintaining good order among the patrons, and shall be responsible for
any disorder which may result from the lack of a supervising attendant
upon the premises during hours of operation.
F. All articles of clothing containing bodily excrement or discharges shall
be as quickly as possible placed in machines designated for that
purpose. These machines shall be conspicuously marked and shall not
be used for any other purpose.
G. All premises shall be constructed with gutters in front or behind the
machines leading to drain takes of sufficient size to contain the flow of
water in the event of connection breaks or machine breakdown.
§ 250-112 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 254-2
10:922
§ 254-3. Nuisance.
The operation of any self-service laundry in violation of this chapter is
declared to be a nuisance.
Chapter 258
LIBRARY
§ 258-1. Return of books or articles. [Amended 12-28-1978 by Ord.
No. D-256]
No person shall detain or fail to return any book or article borrowed from
the Old Bridge Free Public Library of the Township or any book or article
borrowed with the use of an Old Bridge Free Public Library card contrary
to the rules and regulations of the Free Public Library after 30 days have
elapsed from the date of posting by certified mail, return receipt requested,
of a notice demanding return thereof, addressed to such person at the last
address furnished to the Library.
§ 258-2. Damage or destruction of books or articles.
No person shall willfully or maliciously cut, tear, deface, disfigure, damage
or destroy any book or other article, or any part thereof, which is owned by
or is in the custody of such library.
§ 258-3. Furnishing false information; use of library cards.
No person with intent to defraud shall register or furnish a false name or
address, or use any card other than the one issued to such person for the
purpose of borrowing any book or article from such library.
H. No self-service laundry shall be open for business between the hours of
11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., but machines started before 11:00 p.m. need
not be stopped until the operation is completed.
I. Where an attendant is not on continuous duty, there shall be
conspicuously posted a telephone number where notice may be given in
the event of machine breakdown or some other emergency.
J. Machines which break down shall be either repaired or removed from
the premises as quickly as possible.
K. These regulations shall be posted in a conspicuous place upon the
premises of each laundry.
§ 254-2 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 258-4
10:923
§ 258-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-9-2001 by Ord. No.
16-01]
Any person who violates or refuses to comply with the regulation and
provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine
not to exceed the sum of $100.
Chapter 265
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Air pollution — See Ch. 21.
Festivals; mass gatherings — See Ch. 169.
Hazardous materials — See Ch. 221.
Mobile lunch wagons — See Ch. 273.
Nuisances — See Ch. 305.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 366.
Solid waste — See Ch. 429.
Stormwater quality — See Ch. 432.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 463.
§ 265-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
LITTER — Garbage, refuse and rubbish as defined herein, and all other
waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to
create a danger to public health, safety and welfare.
PUBLIC PLACE — All streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys, beaches or
other public ways, and all public parks, squares, spaces, docks, grounds and
buildings.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid waste (except body
wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals,
abandoned automobiles, and solid market and industrial waste.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible
and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes,
cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery
and similar materials.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used
exclusively on stationary rails or tracks.
§ 265-2. General prohibitions. [Amended 4-28-1994 by Ord. No.
16-94]
§ 258-4 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 265-2
10:924
§ 265-3. Placing in receptacles.
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private
receptacles shall do so in a manner which prevents the litter from being
carried or deposited by the elements upon a public place or upon private
property.
§ 265-4. Sweeping litter into gutters, streets and sidewalks.
No person, including merchants owning or occupying a place of business,
shall sweep into or deposit in a gutter, road, right-of-way or other public
place within the Township the accumulation of litter from a building or lot or
from a public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying
property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter.
§ 265-5. Litter thrown by persons in vehicles.
No person while a driver or passenger in a vehicle shall throw or deposit
litter in or upon any public or private property.
§ 265-6. Transportation from outside Township.
No person shall bring, cart, remove, transport or collect any litter from
outside the Township and bring it into the Township for the purpose of
dumping or disposing thereof. No truck or other vehicle containing litter
which has been transported into the Township shall be parked or allowed to
remain standing on any street in the Township or on any public property for
a period in excess of two hours.
§ 265-7. Handbills.
Advertisements, handbills, circulars and papers may be distributed in the
Township only if they are so securely placed at each dwelling that they
will not be blown away by the wind; otherwise no person shall place any
advertisement, handbill, circular or paper on or in any public street,
sidewalk, building or vehicle within the Township.
A. No person shall sweep, throw, deposit or dump litter in or on any
property whether occupied, open or vacant and whether owned by that
person, or in a public place or pond, lake or stream or other body of
water within the Township except in public receptacles or in authorized
private receptacles for collection.
B. No person shall sweep, throw, deposit or dump litter, garbage, refuse or
rubbish (including but not limited to leaves, grass and other forms of
vegetative waste) into any inlet or other part of any stormwater sewer
system within the Township of Old Bridge.
A. Throwing or distributing commercial handbills in public places. No
person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place within the
§ 265-2 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 265-7
10:925
§ 265-8. Litter receptacles provided in public places. [Added
3-6-1989 by Ord. No. 9-89]
Litter receptacles and their servicing are required at the following public
places which exist in the municipality, including sidewalks used by
Township; nor shall any person hand out, distribute or sell any
commercial handbill in any public place; provided, however, that it shall
not be unlawful on any sidewalk, street, or other public place within the
Township for any person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the
receiver, any noncommercial handbill to any person willing to accept it.
B. Placing commercial and noncommercial handbills on vehicles. No
person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any vehicle; provided, however, that it shall not be
unlawful in any public place for a person to hand out or distribute
without charge to the receiver thereof a noncommercial handbill to any
occupant of a vehicle who is willing to accept it.
C. Depositing commercial and noncommercial handbills on uninhabited or
vacant premises. No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or
noncommercial handbill in or upon any private premises which is
temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant.
D. Prohibiting distribution of handbills where property posted. No person
shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial
handbill upon any private premises if requested by anyone thereon not
to do so or if there is placed on the premises in a conspicuous position
near the entrance a sign bearing the words "no trespassing," "no
peddlers or agents," "no advertisement," or any similar notice
indicating in any manner that the occupants of the premises do not
desire to be molested or have their right of privacy disturbed or to have
any handbills left upon the premises.
E. Distributing commercial and noncommercial handbills at inhabited
private premises. No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any
commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon private premises
which are inhabited, except by handing or transmitting the handbill
directly to the owner, occupant or other person then present; provided,
however, that in the case of inhabited private premises which are not
posted, as provided in this section, the person, unless requested by
anyone upon the premises not to do so, shall have the authority to place
or deposit the handbill in or upon the inhabited private premises, if the
handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent it from being
blown or drifted about the premises or sidewalks, streets or other
public places. Mailboxes may not be so used when prohibited by federal
posted law or regulations.
F. Exemptions for mail and newspapers. The provisions of this section
shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States Postal
Corporation nor to newspapers.
§ 265-7 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 265-8
10:926
pedestrians in active retail commercially zoned areas, such that, at a
minimum, there shall be no single linear quarter-mile without a receptacle;
buildings held out for use by the public, including schools, government
buildings and bus stations; parks; drive-in restaurants; all street vendor
locations; self-service refreshment areas; construction sites; gasoline
service stations' islands; shopping centers; parking lots; campgrounds and
trailer parks; marinas and boat moorage and fueling stations; boat
launching areas; public and private piers operated for public use; beaches
and bathing areas; and at special events to which the public is invited,
including sporting events, parades, carnivals, circuses and festivals. The
proprietors of these places or the sponsors of these events shall be
responsible for providing and servicing the receptacles such that adequate
containerization is available.
§ 265-9. Storage of solid waste; disposal. [Added 3-6-1989 by Ord.
No. 9-89; amended 1-27-1994 by Ord. No. 3-94]
A. It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of any property to store
or permit storage of any household waste, including bulky household
waste such as appliances, furniture and mattresses.
B. It shall be lawful to store materials on properties within the Township of
Old Bridge when such materials are gathered for periodic pickup by
authorized solid waste haulers. Materials gathered for periodic pickup
by solid waste haulers under this section shall not be kept in excess of
10 days.
C. Should the Business Administrator of the Township of Old Bridge, any
police officer, any designated health representative of the Township of
Old Bridge, or the County of Middlesex or any code enforcement official
of the Township of Old Bridge demand to any owner or occupant of a
dwelling or place of business within the Township of Old Bridge, such
owner or occupant shall produce proof that his or her property is
covered by a contract with an authorized hauler for the disposal of solid
waste. Such proof may be shown by producing canceled checks, cash
receipt forms or documenting evidence of a contract for disposal. Each
owner or occupant is obligated to have a contractual arrangement with
a solid waste hauler that requires the periodic pickup of solid waste at
intervals of 10 days or less.
D. In the case of dwellings or buildings occupied by persons other than
owners, the occupant shall be primarily responsible for the disposal of
solid waste in accordance with this chapter. In the event the occupant
of the premises fails to comply with this chapter, the owner of the
dwelling or building shall be responsible for the disposal of such solid
waste.
E. For purposes of this chapter, "solid waste" is defined as garbage, refuse,
and other discarded materials resulting from industrial, commercial
and agriculture operations, and from domestic and community
activities, and shall include all other waste materials, including liquids,
§ 265-8 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 265-9
10:927
§ 265-10. Storage of tires. [Added 3-6-1989 by Ord. No. 9-89]
It shall be unlawful for any residential property owner to store or permit
the storage of tires in areas zoned residential. Storage does not include
materials gathered for the periodic bulk pickup by the municipality.
§ 265-11. Uncovered vehicles. [Added 3-6-1989 by Ord. No. 9-89]
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be driven, moved, stopped or parked
on any highway unless such a vehicle is constructed or loaded to prevent
any of its load from dropping, shifting, leaking or otherwise escaping
therefrom. Any person operating a vehicle from which any glass or objects
have fallen or escaped, which could cause an obstruction, damage a vehicle
or otherwise endanger travelers or public property, shall immediately cause
the public property to be cleaned of all glass or objects and shall pay the
costs therefor.
§ 265-12. Construction debris; provisions to halt soil tracks on to
public roadway. [Added 3-6-1989 by Ord. No. 9-89; amended
4-29-1993 by Ord. No. 16-93]
It shall be unlawful for any person to track soils onto a public roadway
through the use of trucks or other construction equipment without
immediately cleaning the roadway of such debris. Any development for
which approvals have been obtained which has a total of four or more units
shall provide a twenty-five-foot stone pad (consisting of stones one inch
or greater in diameter) to be installed at the entrance to any improved
public right-of-way. The purpose of the said pad shall be to vibrate soils from
the construction trucks and equipment before the same enter the public
roadway. A developer who fails to comply with this provisions shall be guilty
of a separate offense for each day such measures are not installed at the
construction site.
§ 265-13. Overflowing disposal bins. [Added 3-6-1989 by Ord. No.
9-89]
It shall be unlawful for any individual to maintain an overflowing
commercial, industrial or residential waste disposal bin.
§ 265-14. Sidewalks to be free from obstructions. [Added 3-6-1989
by Ord. No. 9-89]
Every owner or occupant in charge of a building is required to keep the
sidewalk and curb abutting said building free from obstruction and to keep
except for solid animal and vegetable wastes collected by swine
producers licensed by the State Department of Agriculture to collect,
prepare and feed such wastes to swine on their own farms. Solid
waste shall not include cans, bottles, plastics, newspapers or any other
materials which are collected pursuant to a governmental recycling
program.
§ 265-9 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 265-14
10:928
said sidewalks, yards, courts and alleys free from litter and other offensive
material.
§ 265-15. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-27-1994 by Ord. No.
3-94; 4-28-1994 by Ord. No. 16-94198]
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject, upon
conviction, to the penalty set forth in Chapter 1, Article II, Penalty.
Chapter 273
LUNCH WAGONS, MOBILE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Festivals; mass gatherings — See Ch. 169.
Food and beverages — See Ch. 203.
Littering — See Ch. 265.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 347.
Vendors — See Ch. 502.
§ 273-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MOBILE LUNCH WAGON — Any vehicle equipped for the sale of food or
refreshment to the passing public and operating from a standing or fixed
location on private property.
§ 273-2. License required; term; renewal.
No mobile lunch wagon shall be operated within the Township without the
owner or proprietor having first obtained a license from the Township Clerk
to engage in such activity. No license shall be issued for a period to exceed
one year. Licenses may be renewed upon their expiration, provided all terms
and conditions of this chapter are complied with.
§ 273-3. License fee. [Amended 6-12-2006 by Ord. No. 27-2006]
The license fee shall be $100 per calendar year or any part thereof.
§ 273-4. Conditions for issuance of permit.
A. The operator of the mobile lunch wagon shall comply with all conditions
as set forth by the Township Department of Health and Welfare under
Chapter 203, Article II, Retail Food Establishments, of the Code of the
Township. Prior approval of both the Township Department of Health
198. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 265-14 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 273-4
10:929
§ 273-5. Nontransferability.
Every license issued shall remain in full force and be valid only for the time
therein expressed and shall apply only to the person to whom the license is
granted and shall not be transferable.
Chapter 277
MAPS AND PHOTOGRAPHS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public records — See Ch. 380.
and Welfare as to health requirements and the Police Department as
to safety requirements shall be obtained prior to the issuance of any
license. [Amended 1-9-2006 by Ord. No. 38-2005]
B. The mobile lunch wagon owner or operator shall have written
permission from the property owner.
C. No temporary structure shall be permitted in conjunction with the
operation of the mobile lunch wagon.
D. The premises upon which the mobile lunch wagon is operating at a fixed
location shall be kept clean and free of debris and refuse.
E. The mobile lunch wagon shall be fully operational and properly licensed
as a motor vehicle by the State of New Jersey.
F. No mobile lunch wagon shall be permitted to operate within 500 feet of
any residential structure or food service establishment, unless consent
is given by the owner or owners and the tenant, in the event there is
one, of such residential structure or food establishment. [Amended
6-20-1983 by Ord. No. 15-83]
G. Mobile lunch wagons shall be permitted to operate only during daylight
hours from sunrise to sunset.
H. Mobile lunch wagons shall provide adequate off-street parking for its
customers, and no license shall be issued for any location which, in the
opinion of the Police Department, would create a traffic hazard to
vehicles on adjacent roadways.
I. All applicants for a license shall provide the Township Clerk with an
insurance certificate evidencing at least $100,000 liability coverage
insurance. [Added 6-18-1984 by Ord. No. 19-84]
§ 273-4 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 277-1
10:930
§ 277-1. Findings.
The Township Council makes the following findings and determinations, to
wit:
A. The contour and planimetric maps of the area of this Township
prepared by Aerial Data Reduction Associates, Inc., dated April 8, 1994,
consisting of large-scale planimetric maps at scales of one inch equals
100 feet with two-foot contours and a complete set of 240 topographic
maps at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet with two-foot contours and a
complete set of nine-inch-by-nine-inch contact prints at a scale of one
inch equals 800 feet of the flight photographs used for the preparation
of the foregoing constitute valuable irreplaceable property of this
Township; and
B. These maps and photographs constitute a valuable irreplaceable record
of the physical condition of the surface of the land in the Township at
the time of the flight photographs; and
C. Careful supervision of the use and custody of the foregoing is necessary
to prevent the loss of or damage to the foregoing maps which have been
prepared in the reproducible form on Mylar; and
D. The use of these maps to make copies by tracing on tracing paper and
the unsupervised handling of these maps and photographs will
accelerate the physical deterioration of the same and will expose the
same to an unreasonable risk of danger, deterioration and destruction;
and
E. The Township has, in the Office of the Township Engineer, facilities to
make prompt accurate copies, prints and digital copies of these maps
by reproduction methods which, if done by supervised personnel, will
not expose these maps or digital files to any unreasonable risk of loss,
damage, deterioration or destruction; and199
F. Centralization of responsibility for the care, custody, safety and the use
of these maps and photographs is desirable to insure effective control
and, since the information recorded on these maps and photographs is
of an engineering nature and of primary interest to engineers, the
Township Engineer is the municipal officer most qualified to assume
this responsibility; and
G. The cost of the preparation of these maps and photographs has been
paid out of general taxation and the cost of supervision of the care and
custody of the same and the cost of making prints and reproducible
copies such as digital copies thereof will be paid out of general taxation
and accordingly it is right and proper that fees for such prints and
copies shall be established to recover these past and future costs in
199. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 277-1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 277-1
10:931
§ 277-2. Custody of maps and photographs; inventory.
The Township Engineer shall be and is hereby charged with the custody,
safekeeping, care, control and use of the hereinabove specified maps and
photographs and shall annually file with the Township Clerk an inventory
thereof.
§ 277-3. Storage and use.
The following regulations are established to govern the storage and use of
said maps and photographs and shall be enforced by the Township Engineer,
to wit:
accordance with the value of the information and data that such copies
have on an acreage basis.
A. The maps and photographs shall be kept in locked fireproof files to be
provided, and the Township Engineer or his designee shall have sole
custody of the key or combination to the locks on such files and shall
keep these files locked.200
B. No one shall take any map or photograph out of the Office of the
Township Engineer.
C. No one shall make any tracing or other hand copy by tracing methods of
any such map or photograph.
D. During normal office hours on request, the Township Engineer or his
designee may expose to view in the Office of the Township Engineer any
single sheet of the aforesaid maps and any single flight photograph
without releasing or surrendering physical possession of the same
without charge or other fee.
E. During normal office hours, on written request and on receipt of proof
that the proper fees, herein established, have been paid to the
Township Chief Financial Officer, the Township Engineer or his
designee shall reproduce and deliver the requested copies, which may
be either prints or reproducible copies such as digital files, of any of the
foregoing maps and demand and receive a receipt therefor which shall
contain over the recipient's signature the following statement:
"The undersigned, for and in consideration of the above specified
reproducible copies of topographic maps at a scale of one inch equals
100 feet, property of the Township of Old Bridge, in the County of
Middlesex, agrees that the undersigned will not produce and sell
copies thereof, that the undersigned will not sell the above specified
reproducible copy and that the undersigned will not permit, suffer or
allow the sale of the above specified reproducible copy or the sale of
copies thereof during the next 10 years."
200. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 277-1 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 277-3
10:932
§ 277-4. Sale of prints, digital files or reproductions prohibited.
No person who obtains a print or digital file or other form of reproducible
copy of any sheet or portion of a sheet of the aforesaid topographic maps
to a scale of one inch equals 100 feet shall sell or permit, suffer or allow
the sale of such print or digital file or the sale of any reproduction or copy
thereof or the sale of any portion thereof or the sale of any reproduction or
copy of a portion thereof.
§ 277-5. Application for copies.
All applications for copies of the aforesaid maps shall be made to the
Township Engineer on application forms to be prepared by the Township
Engineer agreeably to the terms of this chapter.
§ 277-6. Payment of fees; receipt.
All fees herein established shall, after computation by the Township
Engineer or his designee, be paid to the Office of the Township CFO who
shall accept and deposit the same and issue receipts therefor in such form
as shall be acceptable to the Township Auditor for presentation to the
Township Engineer prior to the delivery of the requested prints or copies of
such maps or of any portion thereof.
§ 277-7. Fees; computation of rate.
The following fees are established for prints, digital files or other similar
reproducible copies of the aforesaid topographic maps and planimetric
maps, and such fees, computed by the Township Engineer or his designee
in accordance with the schedule of rates hereinbelow set forth, shall be
charged, paid and collected before delivery of any such copy. Where the
fee schedule bases the rate on acreage, the acreage shall be determined by
the Township Engineer or his designee and noted on the application form
and on the print or digital file. The acreage shall be rounded to the nearest
(1) In addition, the Township Engineer shall require that each print or
digital file delivered, as aforesaid, shall bear the recipient's
signature under the following statement:
"The undersigned, for and in consideration of the receipt of this
copy of a topographic map or a part of the Township of Old Bridge,
agrees that the undersigned will not sell this copy, will not sell a
reproduction of this copy and will not suffer, allow or permit the
sale thereof or any copy or reproduction thereof."
(2) In addition, each print or digital file, delivered as aforesaid, shall
bear or be clearly stamped with the following:
"The sale of this map or of any portion of this map and the sale of
any copy or reproduction of this map or of any portion of this map
is prohibited."
§ 277-3 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 277-7
10:933
whole acre. When the determination of the fee involves the application of
more than one rate per acre, the rates per acre shall be applied in the order
hereinbelow set forth. When successive applications are made by the same
applicant, each application shall be treated as a new application for the
purpose of computing the fee. Said fees shall be computed in accordance
with the following schedule of rates:
Schedule of Rates
Topographic Map to a Scale of 1 Inch Equals 100 Feet
Rate Per Acre Acreage Shown
$12.00 On the first 50 acres, plus
$6.00 On the second 50 acres, plus
$5.00 On the excess over 100 acres $60.00
Planimetric Map to a Scale of 1 Inch Equals 1,000 Feet
Planimetric Map to a Scale of 1 Inch Equals 2,000 Feet
Rate Per Acre Number of Copies
$10.00 For the first copy of any sheet
$5.00 For each additional copy of any
sheet
Minimum fee is $10.00
Chapter 284
MOSQUITO BREEDING CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Right to farm — See Ch. 151.
Nuisances — See Ch. 305.
Pesticide control — See Ch. 355.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 366.
§ 284-1. Purpose.
This chapter establishes regulations for the proper storage of motor vehicle
tires and other water-collecting receptacles to prevent mosquito breeding
and to curb the spread of the West Nile Virus and other diseases.
§ 284-2. Responsibilities of property owners; tire storage.
A. It shall be unlawful for any residential or commercial property owner to
fail to keep their property free from tires and any receptacle or
condition that maintains stagnant water which will allow the breeding
of mosquitoes.
B. Commercial property owners shall:
§ 277-7 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 284-2
10:934
§ 284-3. Enforcement.201
This chapter shall be enforceable by Township of Old Bridge Department of
Community Development, Police Department, County of Middlesex Public
Health Department, or any other designated official.
§ 284-4. Violations and penalties.202
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a
penalty for each offense of not less than $100 nor more than the maximum
penalty set forth in Chapter 1, Article II, Penalty.
Chapter 290
MULTIPLE DWELLINGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Multiple-Dwelling Emergency
Commission — See Ch. 5, Art. XIX.
Fire alarm systems in older multi-unit
residential buildings — See Ch. 26, Art. III.
Housing standards — See Ch. 235.
Rental property — See Ch. 388.
§ 290-1. Definitions.
In applying and interpreting this chapter, the following definitions shall be
used:
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or rooms, or suite of apartment thereof,
whether furnished or unfurnished, which is occupied or intended, arranged
or designed to be occupied for sleeping, dwelling or residence purposes by
one or more persons.
(1) Store tires on the rim; or
(2) Securely covered; or
(3) In an enclosure in a manner permitted under all applicable fire
regulations; or
(4) In any other manner which will prevent water from collecting in
tires and providing a breeding place for mosquitoes;
(5) Keep their property free from any receptacle or condition which
will allow stagnant water and breeding of mosquitoes.
201. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
202. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 284-2 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 290-1
10:935
EMERGENCY CONDITION — Any condition dangerous or injurious to the
health or safety of the occupants of a building or occupants of neighboring
buildings which arises out of any of the following circumstances or
conditions:
MULTIPLE DWELLING — Any building or structure of one or more stories
and any land appurtenant thereto and any portion thereof in which four
or more dwelling units are occupied or are intended to be occupied by
four or more persons who live independently of each other. Premises which
are used primarily for purposes other than sleeping, dwelling or residence
purposes shall not be considered a "multiple dwelling."
TRAILER COURTS — A plot or plots of land upon which two or more trailers
are leased upon which trailer owners lease space is herewith included
under the terms and conditions of a dwelling unit above except that the
security deposit shall be 50% of the amount required for apartment multiple
dwellings as set forth herein.[Added 10-20-1980 by Ord. No. D-325]
§ 290-2. Security deposit required.
The owner of a multiple dwelling shall deposit with the Multiple-Dwelling
Emergency Commission of Old Bridge security funds to be used for the
repair, maintenance, supply or replacement of those items of structure,
equipment or supplies which are necessary to correct, eliminate or alleviate
an emergency condition.
A. Lack of adequate ventilation or light.
B. Lack of adequate and properly functioning sanitary facilities.
C. Lack of adequate and healthful water supply.
Structural, mechanical or electrical defects which increase the hazards
of fire, accident or other calamity.
D.
From October 1 of each year until the next succeeding May 1, failure to
maintain every unit of dwelling space and every habitable room therein
at a temperature of at least 68° F. whenever the outside temperature
falls below 55° F. during the daytime hours of 6:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.,
or failure to maintain every unit of dwelling space and every habitable
room therein at a temperature of at least 55° F. whenever the outside
temperature falls below 40° F. during the nighttime hours of 11:00 p.m.
to 6:00 a.m. In meeting the aforesaid standards, the owner shall not
be responsible for heat loss and the consequent drop in the interior
temperature arising out of action by the occupants in leaving windows
or doors open to the exterior of the building.
E.
A. The amount of the security funds to be deposited with the Commission
shall be computed in the following manner:
(1) Where the owner owns between four and 25 dwelling units, the
owner shall deposit $100 for each dwelling unit.
§ 290-1 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 290-2
10:936
§ 290-3. Expenditure of deposit; time schedule to replenish deposit;
appeals.
(2) Where the owner owns between 26 and 40 dwelling units, the
owner shall deposit $2,500 for the first 25 units and $50 for each
additional dwelling unit owned.
(3) Where the owner owns more than 40 dwelling units, the owner
shall deposit $2,500 for the first 25 units, $50 per unit for the next
15 units and $30 per unit for each additional dwelling unit.
B. In no event shall an owner be required to deposit more than $5,000 in
security funds pursuant to this chapter. All funds required to be
deposited under the terms of this chapter shall be deposited with the
Commission by delivering such funds to the office of the Township
Treasurer within 10 days after receipt of notice from the Commission of
the amount due. Notice of the amount due may be given by the
Commission or its agent by personally delivering same to the owner or
the owner's agent, servant, employee or joint venturer on the owner's
premises or by certified mail sent to the owner's last registered
address. Upon receipt of such security funds, the Treasurer shall
deposit same in a demand account in the name of the Commission in
trust for the owners. The Finance Director shall invest such moneys in
the same manner as municipal funds. Interest received on such
accounts shall accrue to the particular owners on whose behalf the
account is maintained by the Commission.
A. In the event that the Commission spends money from any account, as
authorized by this chapter, thus reducing the amount in the account and
leaving less than the sum required as computed in § 290-2, the
Commission shall immediately notify the owner, in the same manner as
in § 290-2, of the amount necessary to bring that account up to the
originally required amount with the Commission and within the
following time schedule:
(1) Where the balance remaining in the owner's account is more than
$1,500, the deposit shall be made within 30 days from the date the
owner received notice.
(2) Where the balance remaining in the account is $1,500 or less, the
deposit shall be made within five days from the date the owner
received notice.
B. Where the Commission has spent money from an account, the owner of
the premises may appeal to the Township Council for a hearing
concerning solely the issues of whether an emergency condition existed
and whether the amount expended to remedy the emergency condition
was reasonable. If such an appeal is desired, the owner shall, within 10
days of receiving notice of the amount spent, file with the Township
Clerk a letter requesting such appeal. The Council shall hold a hearing
regarding the aforementioned issues not less than 10 nor more than 30
§ 290-2 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 290-3
10:937
§ 290-4. Authorization of expenditure.
§ 290-5. Violations and penalties.203
Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, pay a fine not exceeding $500. Each day that
a violation occurs shall be considered a separate offense.
Chapter 294
days after the Township Clerk has received the request from the owner,
and the Council shall render its decision within 14 days after the
hearing has been concluded. By mutual consent between the Council
and the aggrieved party, the time limitations herein stated may be
extended.
A. The Multiple-Dwelling Emergency Commission shall be authorized to
expend the moneys from the account it maintains for an owner to
correct, eliminate or alleviate an emergency condition only when:
(1) It has examined those circumstances and conditions alleged to
constitute an emergency condition and has declared the condition
to exist; and
(2) The remedying of such emergency condition is the owner's
responsibility; and
(3) The owner or the owner's agent, servant, employees or joint
venturer has received notice of the circumstances or conditions
constituting the emergency condition from either the Commission
or an affected tenant in person or by regular mail, telegram or
telephone conversation; and
(4) No work has been commenced by the owner or the owner's agent,
servant, employee or joint venturer to correct, eliminate or
alleviate the emergency condition within 24 hours after he has
received notice as described in Subsection A(3) above of the
circumstances and conditions constituting the emergency
condition; or where work was commenced within the twenty-fourhour
period referred to in Subsection A(4) above but such work has
not been reasonably completed within 72 hours after the work was
commenced and such work, under the applicable circumstances
and in the opinion of the Health Officer or the Construction Official,
could have been completed within 72 hours.
B. Any such expenditure of security funds by the Commission shall require
the signatures of any two members of the Commission, and any
withdrawal shall require the written authorization of the Director of
Finance and one other member of the Commission.
203. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 290-3 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 290-5
10:938
MUTUAL AID
§ 294-1. Cooperation with other municipalities which adopt
reciprocal ordinances.
The Township hereby cooperates with all other municipalities which adopt a
similar reciprocal ordinance, providing for intermunicipal police assistance
in times of emergency.
§ 294-2. When assistance is provided.
This intermunicipal assistance will be provided if and when the Township
of Old Bridge has an emergency within its boundaries requiring additional
police assistance to protect life and property, or to assist in suppressing a
riot or disorder; and whenever another municipality, which has enacted a
similar reciprocal ordinance, may experience a similar emergency requiring
additional police assistance.
§ 294-3. Requests for assistance.
The Chief of Police of the Township of Old Bridge, or the highest ranking
officer on duty at the time, is hereby authorized to request assistance from
the Chief, or the highest ranking officer on duty, of the police departments
of the other municipalities for intermunicipal police assistance during and/
or after an emergency situation.
§ 294-4. Provision of assistance upon request.
The Chief of Police of the Township of Old Bridge, or the highest ranking
officer on duty at the time, shall provide assistance to another municipality
or municipalities making a valid request to supply such personnel and
equipment, to the extent possible without endangering person or property
within the Township of Old Bridge.
§ 294-5. Powers and authority of police officers.
Members of Old Bridge Township Police Department supplying emergency
assistance to another municipality shall have the same powers and authority
as have the members of the police department of the municipality in which
said assistance is being rendered. Additionally, said members shall also
have, while so acting, said rights and immunities as they may otherwise
enjoy in the performance of their normal duties within the Township of Old
Bridge.
§ 294-6. Costs and expenses; reimbursement.
The Township of Old Bridge shall, upon providing assistance to another
municipality which has enacted a similar intermunicipal assistance
ordinance, assume the cost and expense of providing said personnel and
equipment to the requesting municipality; excepting such instances when
the requesting municipality receives state or federal aid as reimbursement
§ 290-5 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 294-6
10:939
therefor. In this event, the costs incurred by the Township shall be
submitted to the municipality which requested assistance for
reimbursement.
§ 294-7. Senior ranking officer.
At such times that an emergency may occur and intermunicipal police aid is
requested, the Chief of Police of the municipality wherein said emergency
situation exists shall be the senior ranking officer of all members of any
police department rendering assistance within the boundaries of said
municipality.
§ 294-8. Salary and other benefits.
In the event any member of a police force summoned pursuant to an
agreement to render assistance suffers injury or death in the performance
of his or her duties, he or she or his or her designee or legal representative
shall be entitled to such salary, pension rights, workers' compensation or
other benefits as would have accrued if such injury or death had occurred
in the performance of his or her normal duties.
§ 294-9. Transmission of copies of reciprocal ordinances.204
A copy of this chapter shall be transmitted to the municipal clerk of each
municipality within Middlesex and Monmouth Counties no later than five
business days following its adoption. The Clerk of the Township of Old
Bridge shall maintain a record of all such similar ordinances adopted by
other municipalities.
Chapter 300
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarms and alarm systems — See Ch. 26.
Animals — See Ch. 39.
Carnivals and circuses — See Ch. 95.
Right to farm — See Ch. 151.
Festivals; mass gatherings — See Ch. 169.
Self-service laundries — See Ch. 254.
Nuisances — See Ch. 305.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 342.
Motorized recreational vehicles — See Ch.
469.
204. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 294-6 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 300-1
10:940
§ 300-1. Definitions.
The following words and terms, when used in this chapter, shall have the
following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. Terms
not defined in this chapter have the same meaning as those defined in
N.J.A.C. 7:29.
CONSTRUCTION — Any site preparation, assembly, erection, repair,
alteration or similar action, including demolition of buildings or structures.
DEMOLITION — Any dismantling, destruction or removal of buildings,
structures or roadways.
EMERGENCY WORK — Any work or action necessary to deliver essential
public services, including, but not limited to, repairing water, gas,
electricity, telephone, sewer facilities, or public transportation facilities,
removing fallen trees on public rights-of-way, dredging navigational
waterways, or abating life-threatening conditions.
IMPULSIVE SOUND — Either a single pressure peak or a single burst
(multiple pressure peaks) that has a duration of less than one second.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicle that is propelled other than by human or
animal power on land.
MUFFLER — A properly functioning sound-dissipative device or system for
abating the sound of escaping gasses on equipment where such a device is
part of the normal configuration of the equipment.
MULTI-DWELLING-UNIT BUILDING — Any building comprising two or
more dwelling units, including, but not limited to, apartments,
condominiums, co-ops, multiple-family houses, townhouses, and attached
residences.
MULTIUSE PROPERTY — Any distinct parcel of land that is used for more
than one category of activity. Examples include, but are not limited to:
NOISE DISTURBANCE — Any sound which injures or endangers the safety
or health of a human, annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal
sensibilities, or endangers or injures personal or real property.
PLAINLY AUDIBLE — Any sound that can be detected by a person using
his or her unaided hearing faculties. As an example, if the sound source
under investigation is a portable or personal vehicular sound amplification
or reproduction device, the detection of the rhythmic bass component of the
A commercial, residential, industrial or public service property having
boilers, incinerators, elevators, automatic garage doors, air
conditioners, laundry rooms, utility provisions, or health and
recreational facilities, or other similar devices or areas, either in the
interior or on the exterior of the building, which may be a source of
elevated sound levels at another category on the same distinct parcel
of land; or
A.
A building which is both commercial (usually on the ground floor) and
residential property located above, behind, below or adjacent.
B.
§ 300-1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 300-1
10:941
music is sufficient to verify plainly audible sound. The investigating officer
need not determine the title, specific words, or the artist performing the
song.
PRIVATE RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway,
sidewalk, alley or easement that is owned, leased, or controlled by a
nongovernmental entity.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway,
sidewalk, alley or easement that is owned, leased, or controlled by a
nongovernmental entity.
PUBLIC SPACE — Any real property or structures thereon that are owned,
leased, or controlled by a governmental entity.
REAL PROPERTY LINE — Either:
§ 300-2. Applicability.
The imaginary line, including its vertical extension, that separates one
parcel of real property from another;
A.
The vertical and horizontal boundaries of a dwelling unit that is part of
a multi-dwelling-unit building; or
B.
On a multiuse property, the interface between the two portions of the
property on which different categories of activity are being performed
(e.g., if the multiuse property is a building which is residential upstairs
and commercial downstairs, then the real property line would be the
interface between the residential area and the commercial area).
C.
A. This chapter applies to sound from the following property categories:
(1) Industrial facilities;
(2) Commercial facilities;
(3) Public service facilities;
(4) Community service facilities;
(5) Residential properties;
(6) Multiuse properties;
(7) Public and private rights-of-way;
(8) Public spaces;
(9) Multi-dwelling-unit buildings;
(10) Motor vehicles.
B. This chapter applies to sound received at the following property
categories:
§ 300-1 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 300-2
10:942
§ 300-3. Enforcement.
(1) Commercial facilities;
(2) Public service facilities;
(3) Community service facilities;
(4) Residential properties;
(5) Multiuse properties; and
(6) Multi-dwelling-unit buildings.
(7) Industrial facilities.
C. Sound from stationary emergency signaling devices shall be regulated
in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.3, except that the testing of the
electromechanical functioning of a stationary emergency signaling
device shall not meet or exceed 10 seconds.
A. The Township of Old Bridge police are responsible for the enforcement
of the provisions of this chapter.
B. The police shall have the power to:
(1) Coordinate the noise-control activities of all the departments in the
Township of Old Bridge and cooperate with all other public bodies
and agencies to the extent practical;
(2) Review the actions of the Township of Old Bridge and advise of the
effect, if any, of such actions on noise control;
(3) Review public and private projects, subject to mandatory review or
approval by other departments or boards, for compliance with this
chapter;
(4) Investigate, resolve and/or pursue possible violations of this
chapter;
(5) Refer complaints to an appropriate Township department for
enforcement if deemed appropriate, for example, referring
complaints related to § 300-4A(3) to the Township Construction/
Zoning Department;
(6) Refer complaints to the Middlesex County Health Department in
those instances that require the measurement of sound levels or
sound pressure so that the Middlesex County Health Department
can pursue possible violations under state regulations and, if
appropriate, assist in the investigation; and
(7) Cooperate with and provide assistance to other departments and/or
county noise control officers in enforcing noise violations in the
Township.
§ 300-2 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 300-4
10:943
§ 300-4. Restricted uses and activities.
The following standards shall apply to the activities or sources of sound set
forth below:
A. Noncommercial or nonindustrial power tools and landscaping and yard
maintenance equipment shall not be operated between the hours of
8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. All motorized equipment used in these activities
shall be operated with a muffler.
B. Commercial or industrial power tools and landscaping and yard
maintenance equipment, excluding emergency work, shall not be
operated on a residential property or within 250 feet of a residential
property line when operated on commercial or industrial property,
between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on weekdays or between
the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on weekends or federal holidays.
All motorized equipment used in these activities shall be operated with
a muffler.
C. Construction and demolition activity, excluding emergency work, shall
not be performed between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Monday
through Saturday. Construction and demolition activity, excluding
emergency work, shall not be permitted on Sundays and federal
holidays without prior approval of the Business Administrator. All
motorized equipment used in construction and demolition activity shall
be operated with a muffler.
D. Motorized snowblowers, snowthrowers, and lawn equipment with
attached snowplows shall be operated at all times with a muffler.
E. An exterior burglar alarm of a building or motor vehicle must be
activated in such a manner that the burglar alarm terminates its
operation within five minutes for continuous airborne sound and 15
minutes for impulsive sound after it has been activated.
F. Personal or commercial vehicular music amplification or reproduction
equipment shall not be operated in such a manner that it is plainly
audible at a residential property line between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 8:00 a.m.
G. Personal vehicular music amplification equipment shall not be operated
in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet in any
direction from the operator between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00
p.m.
H. Self-contained, portable, hand-held music or sound amplification or
reproduction equipment shall not be operated on a public space or
public right-of-way in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a
distance of 50 feet in any direction from the operator between the hours
of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00
a.m., sound from such equipment shall not be plainly audible by any
person other than the operator.
§ 300-4 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 300-4
10:944
§ 300-5. Exceptions.
Nothing contained herein shall apply to:
I. Music or sound amplification or reproduction equipment, radios,
televisions, phonographs, cd players, musical instruments, percussion
instruments, or other sound-generating devices shall not be operated in
such a manner as to be plainly audible at a residential property line or
through partitions common to two parties within a building between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
J. No person shall use, operate or cause to be used or operated any air
conditioner, furnace, heat pump, compressor, condenser, chiller, cooling
tower or similar device the noise from which creates a noise
disturbance across property lines or through partitions common to two
parties within a building.
K. It is prohibited to own, possess, or harbor any pet animal that
frequently or for continued duration makes sounds that create a noise
disturbance across a real property line or through partitions common to
two parties within a building. For purposes of this provision, a noise
disturbance from a pet animal shall be defined as that created by a pet
animal making noise continuously for 10 minutes or intermittently for
30 minutes unless provoked.
L. It is prohibited to willfully make or cause to be made any audible noise
which is deemed objectionable because of volume, frequency, or beat
and/or which creates a noise disturbance.
A. The use of bells, chimes or sound amplifiers used by religious facilities
engaged in religious activities.
B. Municipal departments in the performance of their duties, drills, or
other necessary activities.
C. Activity conducted under the permission or authority of municipal
officials.
D. Warning devices on authorized emergency vehicles or other vehicles
used for traffic safety purposes.
E. Public or private schools in the performance of their duties, drills,
athletic events or other necessary activities.
§ 300-4 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 300-5
10:945
Chapter 305
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Air pollution — See Ch. 21.
Animals — See Ch. 39.
Housing — See Ch. 235.
Littering — See Ch. 265.
Mosquito breeding control — See Ch. 284.
Multiple dwellings — See Ch. 290.
Noise — See Ch. 300.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 342.
Pesticide control — See Ch. 355.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 366.
Solid waste — See Ch. 429.
Stormwater quality — See Ch. 432.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 463.
§ 300-5 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 300-5
10:946
ARTICLE I
Abatement of Nuisances
[Adopted as Sec. 19-1 of the 1973 Revised General Ordinances]
§ 305-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FOOD — Natural or prepared food, beverages and all other items intended
for human consumption.
OWNER — Any person having any interest, legal or equitable, either alone
or in combination with others, in any premises.
PERSON IN CONTROL OF PREMISES — Any person responsible for the
maintenance and upkeep of any premises, whether as tenant, lessee or
occupant, or as agent of any of them or as agent of an owner or otherwise.
PREMISES — Any building, structure, lot of land or part thereof.
§ 305-2. Notice to abate nuisance.
§ 305-3. Abatement by Health Officer.
If the owner or person in control of the premises upon being notified does
not comply with the notice within the time specified and fails to remove
or abate the nuisance or condition, the Health Officer or his agents or
employees shall proceed to abate the nuisance or condition or may cause it
to be removed or abated in a summary manner by such means as shall be
deemed proper.
§ 305-4. Recovery of costs.
A. Whenever anything declared by this article to be a nuisance or any
unsanitary or unhealthy condition is found on any premises within the
Township, notice shall be given to the owner or person in control of the
premises to remove or abate it within the time specified but not less
than five days from the date of service.
B. Whenever anything declared by this article to be a nuisance or any
unsanitary or unhealthy condition is found on any public property or on
any highway or other public premises or place, notice shall be given to
the person in charge to remove or abate the same within the time
specified.
A. Whenever any cost or expense is incurred by the Township as a result of
the Health Officer, his agents or employees abating or removing or
causing to be abated or removed any nuisance or unsanitary or
unhealthy condition, such costs and expenses may be recovered in the
following manner:
§ 305-1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 305-4
10:947
§ 305-5. Manner of giving notice.
Notice required by the provisions of this article shall be in writing and
shall be given to all the persons affected by it. Notice shall be served
personally upon the person affected or by leaving a copy at his usual or last
known place of abode or by mailing it to him at his usual or last known
place of abode. Where the notice relates to any premises, a duplicate of it
shall be left with one or more of the tenants or occupants. If the owner of
the premises in question cannot be notified speedily, notice may be given
by leaving it with one of the tenants or occupants or by posting it in a
conspicuous place on the premises.
§ 305-6. Emergency powers.
Whenever the Health Officer finds that the public safety will not permit
delay, he may exercise one or more of the following powers without having
to resort to legal proceedings:
(1) In all cases where permitted by law, such costs may be certified to
the Tax Collector and shall be a part of the taxes next assessed
upon the premises upon which the nuisance or unsanitary or
unhealthy condition was located.
(2) Where the Township is not permitted by law to proceed under
Subsection A(1) above, the cost or expense shall be recovered by an
action at law in any court of competent jurisdiction, which action
shall be instituted by the Health Officer in the name of the
Township.
B. Regardless of how costs are actually recovered, they shall be in addition
to and shall not affect the imposition of any penalties for the violation of
this article.
A. Power to prevent the sale of food. The Health Officer may prohibit the
importation into the Township or sale of any food, drink or other item
intended for human consumption or use from a source suspected of
being infected, contaminated, unsanitary, unhealthy or dangerous.
B. Power to seize and destroy unwholesome food. The Health Officer may
order the seizure and destruction of any unstamped meat and of any
food, drink or other item intended for human consumption which is
unwholesome or dangerous or likely to cause sickness or injury to
persons who consume it.
C. Suspension of licenses. The Health Officer may suspend temporarily the
license of any person required to be licensed by any of the provisions of
this article if he finds that the licensed activity is being conducted in
such manner as to endanger the health or safety of the public.
§ 305-4 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 305-7
10:948
§ 305-7. Inspection of premises.
The Health Officer, his agents and employees shall have the right to inspect
any premises in the Township if they have reason to believe that any
provision of this article is being violated. Any person who hinders,
obstructs, resists, delays or prevents the Health Officer or any of his agents
or employees from having full access to any premises shall be guilty of a
violation of this article.
§ 305-8. Search warrant.
In addition to any penalties imposed for the violation of § 305-7, the Health
Officer may apply to the Municipal Judge of the Township for a search
warrant. The application shall be based upon an affidavit setting forth the
conditions and circumstances that provide a reasonable basis for believing
that a nuisance or unsanitary or unhealthy condition exists on the premises.
If the Municipal Judge is satisfied as to the matters set forth in the affidavit,
he shall authorize the issuance of a search warrant permitting access to and
inspection of that part of the premises on which the nuisance or unsanitary
or unhealthy condition may exist.
§ 305-9. Rules and regulations.
The Health Officer shall have the power to make whatever written rules and
regulations he may decide are necessary for the proper administration and
enforcement of this article, but no rule or regulation shall conflict with or in
any way alter, amend or supersede any of the provisions of this article.
§ 305-10. Enforcement.
The Health Officer shall enforce the provisions of this article.
§ 305-7 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 305-10
10:949

ARTICLE II
Public Health Nuisances
[Adopted 8-28-1961 (Sec. 19-2 of the 1973 Revised General
Ordinances)]
§ 305-11. Adoption of standards.205
A code defining and prohibiting certain matters, things, conditions or acts
and each of them as a nuisance, prohibiting certain noises or sounds,
requiring the proper heating of apartments, prohibiting lease or rental
of certain buildings, prohibiting spitting in or upon public buildings,
conveyances or sidewalks, authorizing the inspection of premises by an
enforcing official, providing for the removal or abatement of certain
nuisances and recovery of expenses incurred by the Township Department
of Health and Welfare in removing or abating such nuisances and
prescribing penalties for violations is hereby established pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 to 26:3-69.6. A copy of the code is annexed to and made a
part of this article without the inclusion of the text herein.
§ 305-12. Title of code.
The code established and adopted by this section is described and
commonly known as the "Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey
(1953)."
§ 305-13. Public record.206
Three copies of the Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey (1953) have
been placed on file in the offices of the Director of the Department of Health
and Welfare and the Township Clerk for the use and examination of the
public.
205. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
206. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 305-11 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 305-13
10:951
Chapter 309
NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS
§ 309-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to require the clear display of authorized
and assigned house or building numbers for every building fronting on any
street in the Township of Old Bridge in order to assist the general public and
emergency services, public and private, in identifying any property in case
of emergency, as well as for the welfare of the general public in conducting
their normal affairs, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:67-1 et seq.
§ 309-2. Display of numbers required.
All residential, commercial, industrial or other structure erected or to be
erected within the Township of Old Bridge shall display identification
numbers on buildings or curbside mailboxes in accordance with
specifications provided herein. It shall be the duty of every property owner
to place the assigned street number upon each lot where a building is
located.
§ 309-3. Specifications.
§ 309-4. Maintenance.
Building or curbside mailbox number signs as required by this chapter shall
be periodically maintained as needed to provide continued high visibility.
The property owner shall be responsible for said maintenance.
§ 309-5. Enforcement.
A. Building or curbside mailbox numbers shall be:
(1) In Arabic numerals.
(2) A minimum height of three inches.
(3) Sufficiently legible as to contrasting background, arrangement,
spacing and uniformity so as to be clearly visible from the street.
(4) At least 30 inches above ground level and so placed that trees,
shrubs and other obstructions do no block the line of sight of the
numbers from the street upon which the building fronts.
B. Building numbers shall be mounted in a secure fashion to the front wall
or porch of the building so as to be clearly visible from the street.
Curbside mailbox numbers shall be mounted in a secure fashion and
shall appear on each side of the curbside mailbox so as to be clearly
visible from the street.
§ 305-13 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 309-5
10:952
§ 309-6. Issuance of certification of occupancy or habitability.
No certificate of occupancy or habitability shall be issued for any dwelling,
store or other building hereafter erected, enlarged or occupied unless the
provisions of this chapter shall have been complied with; temporary house
numbering must be posted immediately upon the issuance of a building
permit.
§ 309-7. Violations and penalties.
Any property owner in violation of this chapter shall receive written notice
thereof from the Township officials listed herein requiring compliance with
this chapter within 14 days. Should the property thereafter fail to comply
and remain in violation of this chapter, he shall be subject to a summons
being issued for appearance in Municipal Court which may result in a
penalty of up to $500 to be collected by the Court.
Chapter 314
OBSCENE MATERIALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 342.
§ 314-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the retail display of obscene
material, as provided by N.J.S.A. 2C:34-3.2.
§ 314-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OBSCENE MATERIAL — Any description, narrative account, display or
depiction of sexual activity or anatomical area contained in, or consisting
of, a picture or other representation, publication, sound recording, live
A. Any owner, agency, person or corporation who shall violate any
provision of this chapter or fail to comply therewith or with any of the
requirements thereof shall be subject to a penalty to be determined by
the appropriate Township official. The provisions of this chapter shall
be enforced by the Fire Official, Construction Code Official, Zoning
Officer and any other enforcement agency or individual designated by
the administration.
B. The effective date of the enforcement provisions set forth in this
chapter shall be 12 months for existing structures and 15 days from the
passage of this chapter for new structures.
§ 309-5 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 314-2
10:953
performance or a film which, by means of posing, composition, format or
animated sensual details:
PERSON — Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership or any other type
of form of business which may be conducted in this state.
RETAILER — Any person who operates a store, newsstand, booth,
concession or similar business with unimpeded access for persons under 18
years of age, who is in the business of making sales of periodicals or other
publications at retail containing pictures, drawings or photographs. Retailer
shall also include any person who operates a store, newsstand, booth,
concession or similar business for the sale or rental of sound recordings,
films and/or videotapes to the public.
§ 314-3. Display of obscene materials.
Depicts or describes in a patently offensive way, ultimate sexual acts,
normal or perverted, actual or simulated, masturbation, excretory
functions or lewd exhibition of the genitals;
A.
Lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value, when taken
as a whole; and
B.
Is a part of a work which, to the average person applying contemporary
community standards, has a dominant theme, taken as a whole, which
appeals to the prurient interest.
C.
A. It shall be unlawful and a petty disorderly persons offense for any
retailer to display or permit to be displayed at the retailer's business
premises any obscene material, as defined herein or in N.J.S.A. 2C:34-3,
at a height of less than five feet or without a binder or other covering
placed or printed on the front of the material displayed.
B. It shall not be a violation of this section for a retailer engaged in the
business of sale or rental of films and/or videotapes to the public to
display films and/or videotapes containing adult material within said
retailer's place of business, provided that the following conditions are
met:
(1) The films and/or videotapes are located in a separate room within
the business establishment.
(2) Access to the room in which the films and/or videotapes are
displayed shall be limited to persons 18 years of age or older and
shall be controlled by an employee of the business at all times;
(3) The identification of all persons desiring entrance to the separate
room shall be checked by an employee of the business; and
(4) All employees of the business establishment shall be 18 years of
age or older.
§ 314-2 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 314-4
10:954
§ 314-4. Presumptive evidence.
The public display in and of itself of obscene material shall constitute
presumptive evidence that the retailer knowingly made or permitted the
display.
§ 314-5. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 320
OUTDOOR DINING
§ 320-1. Purpose.
A. Any violation of this chapter shall subject the violator to the penalty set
forth in Chapter 1, Article II, Penalty.
B. Every day, or portion of a day, that the provisions of this chapter are
violated by any person, as defined herein, shall be a separate and
distinct violation.
A. The purpose of this chapter is to permit daytime and early evening
outdoor dining on private property and sidewalks (private and public)
adjacent to local restaurants for the enjoyment of restaurant patrons
without disturbing the immediate neighborhood or pedestrian/
vehicular traffic. It is intended to permit the tasteful, aesthetic use of
tables and chairs on adjacent property and sidewalks of local
restaurants under the direction and approval of the Township Engineer
and Zoning Officer, provided that all tables, chairs and/or similar food
service equipment meet the requirements of the New Jersey
Administrative Code at N.J.A.C. 8:24-1.1 et seq. It is the intention of the
Mayor and Council of the Township of Old Bridge to monitor and review
the use of these facilities after the adoption of this chapter to determine
its full impact upon the Township and the enjoyment of its citizens.
B. Any establishment/property that operated a lawfully existing outdoor
seating area(s) at the time of passage of this chapter shall not be
subjected to the limitations contained herein with regard to placement,
location, hours of operation, etc. For purposes of this provision, a
lawfully existing outdoor seating area shall mean any restaurant/food
establishment which, after approval from the Planning Board or Zoning
Board, established an outdoor seating area in connection with that
approved site plan.
C. It is additionally, the intention of this chapter to allow local restaurants
the ability to establish incidental outdoor dining areas to enhance the
dining experience but at no point shall an outdoor seating area exceed
eight seats.
§ 314-4 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 320-2
10:955
§ 320-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OUTDOOR SEATING — Outdoor seating provided at a restaurant as defined
in the Township Code, herein and supplemented by Township Code § 250-6
and duly licensed and approved pursuant to the New Jersey Administrative
Code at N.J.A.C. 8:24-1.1 et seq. and Township Code § 203-1 et seq., as
the same may be from time to time amended and supplemented. Outdoor
seating shall include removable seats and tables located within a defined
area of a site plan that is not otherwise devoted to a function essential to
the site. Outdoor seating shall be limited to use between January 1 and
December 31 (inclusive) of the same calendar year in which the permit is
issued. Outdoor seating permits may be issued annually and shall expire at
12:00 a.m. on December 31 of the calendar year issued. The fee shall not be
prorated.
RESTAURANT — Any establishment at which the primary activity is the
preparation and serving of food and/or beverages for consumption by
patrons on its premises.
§ 320-3. Permits required; hours for outdoor service.
§ 320-4. Permitted installations.
Outdoor tables and chairs shall be permitted within the property commonly
owned and adjacent to the retail food establishment and service thereto for
the patrons, provided that:
A. Except as otherwise provided herein, it shall be unlawful to offer
outdoor seating without first obtaining a zoning permit as required by
this chapter and by otherwise complying with all other applicable
statutes, regulations, and ordinances.
B. The hours for outdoor service shall be between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00
p.m. unless otherwise approved by variance and/or land use
application. All tables, chairs and equipment shall be removed and
placed securely indoors no later than 10:30 p.m.
C. A liquor-licensed establishment which seeks to sell alcoholic beverages
in an outdoor seating area should apply for the outdoor seating permit
first. If that permit is issued, then the New Jersey Division of Alcoholic
Beverage Control (NJABC) licensee must obtain an expansion of
premises approval from the NJABC to allow the service of alcoholic
beverages in the outdoor area. The licensee is deemed to have an
interest in this outdoor area for purposes of using and maintaining
same for the outdoor seating if a permit is approved.
A. The design of the tables and chairs is aesthetically pleasing and
complementary to the surrounding architecture and provided that all
§ 320-2 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 320-4
10:956
tables, chairs and/or similar food service equipment meet the
requirements of Township Code § 203-4.
B. The layout of tables and chairs does not in any way interfere with
pedestrian or vehicular safety, or with necessary access for fire-fighting
equipment and ambulances or personnel. At least five feet of open
unused space adjacent to the curb shall be provided on any sidewalk
area upon which seating is proposed.
C. The layout shall not cause irreparable damage to existing landscaping
and site improvements.
D. Notwithstanding Township Code § 30-1 et seq. of the Old Bridge
Township Code, alcoholic beverages of any kind may be served or
consumed in conjunction with the outdoor dining on public sidewalks
where the permittee has the appropriate NJABC license. No alcoholic
beverages brought to the establishment by patrons or other persons
shall be served or consumed in the outside facility on public sidewalks.
E. The highest standards of cleanliness of the outdoor area are to be
maintained at all times, including frequent litter removal, within and
around and beyond the subject property. A plan for litter removal, trash
handling, and overall cleanliness and maintenance must be submitted
together with the application.
F. No outdoor music or public address system shall be permitted.
G. No outside lighting shall be permitted except small individual table
lighting that is self-powered.
H. Outdoor seating shall not be permitted if it will interfere in any way
with Chapter 300, Noise, of the Township Code.
I. Low barriers of a temporary nature (not to exceed three feet in height)
may be placed at the edge of the seating area during business hours so
long as there is no interference with public safety or pedestrian
movement patterns.
J. No outside cooking of any kind shall be permitted as a component of the
outdoor seating.
K. The outdoor seating area of a retail food establishment shall be
operated and maintained by the same person named in the retail food
establishment license issued for the premises.
L. The outdoor seating area shall be for the exclusive use of patrons of the
licensed retail food establishment. Retail food establishment owners or
employees are prohibited from serving drivers or passengers of
vehicles.
M. Outdoor dining areas shall not be limited in terms of table count or
dimension but at no point shall exceed a maximum seating capacity of
eight persons.
§ 320-4 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 320-4
10:957
§ 320-5. Application review.
N. No food or drinks served at outdoor seating areas shall be prepared
other than in the interior areas of the retail food establishment
approved by the Health Division for such use.
O. All equipment used in the outdoor seating area, including but not
limited to chairs and tables, shall be nonabsorbent, smooth, easily
cleanable, of corrosive-resistant material, and meet the requirements of
the New Jersey Administrative Code at N.J.A.C. 8:24-1.1 et seq., as the
same may be from time to time amended and supplemented. No food
service equipment shall be stored in or permanently mounted to any
area of the outdoor dining area.
P. Containers used in the conveyance of soiled tableware shall not be
permanently stored outdoors. Soiled tableware shall be promptly
removed to the establishment's equipment washing area after patron
use.
Q. Smoking shall be prohibited in the outdoor dining area. Such areas
shall be marked by a sign approved by the Division of Health indicating
the prohibition of smoking.
A. Each applicant for an outdoor seating permit shall submit and file an
application with the Zoning Officer. The application shall set forth:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The name and address of the owner of the subject property (if other
than the applicant).
(3) The written authorization and approval of the owner of the
property (if other than the applicant).
(4) A description of the proposed design and location of the outdoor
seating and all temporary structures, equipment and apparatus to
be used in connection with its operation, including tables, chairs
and planters.
(5) A statement of the seating capacity of the proposed outdoor seating
and of the existing eating establishment operated by the applicant
in the adjacent building.
(6) A description of the proposed location of the outdoor seating
showing the actual dimensions of the area to be utilized and
pedestrian traffic related thereto.
(7) Scaled layout of tables and chairs, and low barrier if proposed,
showing dimensions of tables, chairs and overall area, as related to
building facade, sidewalk, existing poles, news boxes, trees or
other sidewalk installations.
§ 320-4 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 320-5
10:958
(8) A detailed narrative and plan of relevant information, describing
method of service, proposed hours of service outdoors and method
of litter control and trash handling for outdoor service.
(9) Photographs or diagrams of tables, chairs, etc., to be utilized,
showing style, design, materials, size and colors.
(10) Interior location regarding where tables and chairs, etc., will be
stored indoors after 10:30 p.m.
(11) Middlesex County and Old Bridge Township do not permit any
outdoor seating within their respective rights-of-way.
(12) A copy of the liability insurance certificate with the coverage limits
set forth below shall be submitted with the application.
B. The annual fee for an outdoor seating permit of $95 shall be submitted
with the application.
C. An outdoor seating permit may only be issued to a food establishment
permitted in accordance with § 203-5.
D. In reviewing an application for an outdoor seating permit, the Zoning
Officer, in coordination with the Township Engineer, shall consider the
following aspects of an administrative site plan, including but not by
way of limitation the following:
(1) Pedestrian and traffic circulation, to insure that pedestrian access
and traffic are not impacted;
(2) Number, type, and location of existing seats in conjunction with
approved wastewater flows;
(3) Police and first aid/emergency squad access is available to the site;
(4) Fire safety is not impacted by the use;
(5) Parking will be maintained in the same amount; and
(6) Trash removal is provided.
E. After review of the administrative site plan, the Zoning Officer may
issue an outdoor seating permit with conditions, including but not by
way of limitation:
(1) Limitation on outdoor seating so as not to exceed the total number
of existing approved indoor seats as provided in the retail food
establishment's certificate of occupancy;
(2) Ensure proper ingress and egress to the building from the outdoor
seating area;
(3) When deemed necessary, directional or other informational signs,
concrete bollards or other structural means to protect the outdoor
seating area;
§ 320-5 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 320-5
10:959
§ 320-6. Violations and Penalties.
Chapter 325
PARKING FACILITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parking fees — See Ch. 160, Art. IV. Parking permits — See Ch. 331.
(4) Any additional equipment required to be installed in the outdoor
seating area that requires a permit per N.J.A.C. 5:23 et seq.; and
(5) Any other condition that may be deemed necessary and/or
appropriate to the protection of public health, safety and welfare.
F. Plans and specifications for an addition, alteration or modification of an
outdoor seating area shall be reviewed by the Township Engineer,
Construction Code Official, and Division of Health for review and
approval in accordance with the requirements of Township Code
Chapter 203 and the New Jersey Administrative Code at N.J.A.C.
8:24-1.1 et seq., as the same may be from time to time amended and
supplemented.
G. Any applicant who has been found in violation of any ordinance, statute,
or regulation involving the outdoor seating area or its operation shall be
barred from applying for an outdoor seating permit for the next season
after the violation.
A. It shall be unlawful to violate this chapter, the terms and conditions of
any permit issued hereunder, or any provision herein.
B. Any person convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,250 as set forth in the
Code of the Township of Old Bridge, as may be amended. Each violation
of a section or subsection of this chapter, and each day that a violation
continues, shall constitute a separate offense.
C. The Township of Old Bridge reserves the right to revoke the permit of
any permit holder who, upon the expiration of 10 days after receipt of
notice from the Township of Old Bridge or its agents of a violation of the
state law or any requirements set forth in this chapter, fails to cure the
violation. If the permit holder seeks a new permit he must follow the
provisions of this chapter and apply for a new permit.
D. The Township of Old Bridge expressly reserves the right to require the
removal of all of the outdoor seating areas upon any sidewalk or public
place which are improperly maintained.
E. All violations of this chapter involving NJABC licensed premises shall be
forwarded to the Old Bridge ABC Board first for review.
§ 320-5 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 320-6
10:960
ARTICLE I
Old Bridge Park and Ride Facility
[Adopted 2-11-1993 by Ord. No. 6-93]
§ 325-1. Fees established for parking in certain municipal lot.
A fee of $1 is hereby established for parking in the parking spaces
established at the Old Bridge Park and Ride Lot in the area of Route
Nine and Ernston Road shown as Old Bridge Lot - 390 spaces on a plan
entitled "Old Bridge Park and Ride Site Plan, Parking Operation Layout."
Any person parking a vehicle in said lot shall park between the lines and
shall deposit the one-dollar fee in the lock box provided. Payment of said fee
shall constitute a license to park in the parking space for a maximum of 24
hours. Thereafter, a new parking fee of $1 shall be paid.
§ 325-2. Parking without payment of fee illegal.
§ 325-3. Violations and penalties.
Any owner or operator of a vehicle who violates or permits the violation of
this article and is found guilty in the Municipal Court of the Township of Old
Bridge shall pay a fine of $50. Each violation shall be considered a separate
offense upon each and every day in which a violation exists.
A. It shall be unlawful for a motor vehicle to be parked in the Old Bridge
Park and Ride Facility at Route Nine and Ernston Road without
payment of the established fee.
B. It shall be unlawful for a motor vehicle to remain parked in the Old
Bridge Park and Ride Facility at Route Nine and Ernston Road beyond
24 hours without payment of an additional fee.
C. It shall be unlawful for a motor vehicle to be parked in the Old Bridge
Park and Ride Facility at Route Nine and Ernston Road outside the
established parking spaces between the designated lines.
§ 325-1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 325-3
10:961

ARTICLE II
Commuter Parking Permit Area
[Adopted 3-27-2000 by Ord. No. 10-00]
§ 325-4. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish parking prohibitions in certain
areas that are on private property which is open to the public or to which
the public is invited as set forth below.
§ 325-5. Statutory authority.
This article is enacted in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.46, which does
confer upon Old Bridge Township the right to establish certain regulations
in order to preserve and safeguard the public health, safety, morals and
welfare.
§ 325-6. Designation of permit parking areas.
A. The following areas described in Subsection B shall be designated as
Old Bridge resident commuter permit parking, subject to the approval
by the Council as hereinafter provided, within the Township of Old
Bridge on which the parking of vehicles may be restricted between the
hours of 6:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on weekdays, excepting holidays, in
whole or in part, to which is bearing a valid parking permit issued
pursuant to this section.
(1) This authority may be in addition to and may be exercised in
conjunction with any other authority the Department of Police may
have to regulate the time and conditions of motor vehicle parking.
(2) Following the approval of the Township Council of the designation
of an Old Bridge resident commuter permit parking area, the
Township Clerk shall issue appropriate permits, and the
Department of Police shall cause parking signs to be erected in the
area, indicating the times, locations and conditions under which
parking shall be by permit only and further indicating that anyone
violating the restrictions shall be subject to a penalty and/or towing
of said vehicle at owner or operator expense.
(3) Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this
section shall be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and
proper regulations of resident commuter permit parking areas, and
any police officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle,
provided that the police officer or his designee shall witness the
removal of such vehicle and shall keep a record of the removing
agency and the location to where the vehicle is stored.
B. The 40 parking spaces located at the northeast corner of the A&P
Parking Lot, Route 9 South and Ferry Road in the Township of Old
Bridge, County of Middlesex, as shown on the current attached site
§ 325-4 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 325-6
10:963
plan, which is made part of this article, 207 shall be enforceable, and
for violations of any provision of this article, the maximum penalty shall
be in accordance with Chapter 1, Article II, Penalty, of the Code of the
Township of Old Bridge.
207. Editor's Note: Said site plan is on file in the Township offices.
§ 325-6 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 325-6
10:964
Chapter 331
PARKING PERMITS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 10.
Parking facilities — See Ch. 325.
Wreckers and towing — See Ch. 527.
§ 325-6 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 325-6
10:965

ARTICLE I
Commuter Permit Parking In Certain Areas
§ 331-1. Authority to designate permit parking areas.
The Mayor or his or her designee is hereby authorized to designate, by
order, subject to approval by the Council as hereinafter provided, areas
within the Township of Old Bridge on which the parking of vehicles may
be restricted to vehicles bearing a valid parking permit issued pursuant to
this article. This authority may be in addition to and may be exercised in
conjunction with any other authority the Police Department may have to
regulate the time and conditions of motor vehicle parking.
§ 331-2. Criteria for designation of areas.
In determining whether an area identified as eligible for commuter permit
parking shall be designated as a commuter permit parking area, the Mayor
or his or her designee shall take into consideration the following factors:
§ 331-3. Investigation of area.
In order to determine whether a particular location is designated as a
commuter permit parking area, the Mayor or his or her designee may
conduct, upon his or her own initiative or upon a petition of a majority
of the households in such area addressed to the Mayor or the Council, an
investigation prior to the designation once it is established.
§ 331-4. Time limits for recommendations and decisions.
Within 30 days following the close of the investigation, the Mayor or his
or her designee shall recommend, by report to the Council, whether to
designate the area under consideration as a commuter permit parking area
or to remove the designation in case of an established commuter permit
parking area. Within 45 days following the receipt of the report, the Council
shall approve or disapprove the recommendation of the Mayor or his or her
designee.
A. The local needs with respect to clean air and the requirements of
federal and district air quality plans, rules and regulations.
B. The possibility of a reduction in total vehicle miles driven in the
Township of Old Bridge.
C. The likelihood of alleviating traffic congestion, illegal parking and
related health and safety hazards.
D. The proximity of public transportation to the commuter parking area.
E. The desire and need of the residents for commuter permit parking and
their willingness to bear the administrative costs, if any, in connection
therewith.
§ 331-1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 331-5
10:967
§ 331-5. Erection of signs; restrictions on issuance of permits.
Following Council approval of the designation of a commuter permit parking
area, the Mayor shall cause parking signs to be erected in the area,
indicating the times, locations and conditions under which parking shall be
by permit only and further indicating that anyone violating the restrictions
shall be subject to a penalty and/or towing of the vehicle at owner or
operator expense. A permit shall be issued by the Township Clerk upon
application only to the owner or operator of a motor vehicle who resides
within the Township of Old Bridge, which shall include the operator of a
motor vehicle whereby the operator resides within the Township of Old
Bridge but the motor vehicle is registered to any owner who resides outside
the Township of Old Bridge and who is the full-time employer of the
operator, in which case the operator shall supply an appropriate affidavit,
to the satisfaction of the Township Clerk, that the motor vehicle is utilized
exclusively by the operator, and that the motor vehicle is principally
garaged by the owner within the Township of Old Bridge.
§ 331-6. Promulgation of rules and regulations.
Rules and regulations shall be promulgated by the Township Mayor with
the approval of the Township Council by resolution establishing procedures
regarding issuance of permits, form of the permits, applicable fees, and
related administrative matters.
§ 331-7. Parking permit stickers; yearly changes.
Parking permit stickers for commuter parking permits shall be changed to
a different color each year and shall be imprinted with year for which the
permit shall be valid.
§ 331-8. Verification of contents of permit application.
The motor vehicle registration certificate, valid insurance card, and the
operator's driver's license shall be presented at the time of making the
application in order to verify the contents thereof. The owner of any motor
vehicle applying for a commuter parking permit shall have a valid State of
New Jersey vehicle registration, New Jersey driver's license and insurance
card showing an Old Bridge residence address.
§ 331-9. Documents for application to reflect residency; exception.
No out-of-state registrations will be accepted. All required documents must
be changed to reflect the Old Bridge residence prior to application for a
parking permit. Exceptions: See leased cars and company cars.
§ 331-10. Out-of-town registrations. [Amended 9-10-2007 by Ord.
No. 2007-19]
A. A person recently moved into the Township of Old Bridge from another
part of New Jersey is required to have the change of address sticker
§ 331-5 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 331-10
10:968
§ 331-11. Removal of sticker upon expiration and sale of vehicle.
Prior year parking stickers must be removed from the vehicle upon
expiration. In instances where a vehicle is sold or is no longer in the
operator's possession, the sticker must be removed and returned to the
Township Clerk's office.
§ 331-12. Purchase of new vehicle.
Anyone purchasing a new vehicle must provide the Township Clerk's office
with a copy of the purchase order showing the pertinent information
relative to the make of the vehicle, etc., as well as the numbers off the
card attached to the back window issued by the car dealership showing
the temporary plate number and a valid New Jersey driver's license and
insurance identification card. Permits on new cars will be issued for a
period of 30 days only. Upon receipt of license plates, the temporary sticker
must be returned to the Township Clerk's office as well as submitting the
documents in § 331-8 for a new sticker.
§ 331-13. Proof of insurance.
Anyone submitting an insurance binder as part of their documentation is
required to submit a copy of their permanent insurance upon expiration of
the binder. A temporary permit will be issued for a period of 30 days only.
§ 331-14. Leased cars.
All lease cars must have proper registration. In addition to submission of the
documents outlined in § 331-8, the applicant for a commuter parking permit
must submit proof of residency in the Township of Old Bridge.
§ 331-15. Unlawful use of sticker; placement of sticker.
No person other than the permittee named thereon shall use a commuter
parking permit or display it on a vehicle operated or parked, and any such
that is issued by the Division of Motor Vehicles adhered to their driver's
license showing the change of address. On renewal of their registration,
the registration must be changed to reflect the Old Bridge address.
B. In the event that the Township of Old Bridge shall enter into an
interlocal agreement with any other municipality concerning commuter
permit parking within the Township of Old Bridge, a commuter parking
permit shall be issued to such non-Old Bridge residents who qualify for
an Old Bridge Township commuter parking permit pursuant to the
terms of the interlocal agreement concerning commuter permit parking
between the Township of Old Bridge and the other such municipality. All
applicable provisions, rules, or regulations contained in this article
shall apply to the above-referenced residents, except as may be
modified in said interlocal agreement, and this article shall be read and
interpreted accordingly.
§ 331-10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 331-15
10:969
use or display by a person other than the permittee shall constitute a
violation of this article. The parking permit shall be permanently affixed
and facing out (backing peeled off permit) on the lower left-hand corner
(from inside of car) on the last window on the driver's side so as to be
visible. The permit shall display the motor vehicle's license plate number
and the expiration date. Permits are nontransferable from one vehicle to
another. The license plate number on the sticker permit must match the
license plate number on the vehicle. It shall be a violation of this section for
any permittee to permit any other person to display a permit issued to the
permittee on any vehicle other than the one for which it is issued.
§ 331-16. Presentation of false information.
It shall constitute a violation of this article for any person to falsely
represent himself or herself as eligible for a commuter parking permit or
to furnish any false information in an application to the Township Clerk in
order to obtain or attempt to obtain a commuter parking permit.
§ 331-17. Revocation of permit.
The Township Clerk is authorized to revoke the commuter parking permit
of any permittee found to be in violation of this article, and upon which
notification thereof, the permittee shall surrender such permit to the
Township Clerk. Such revocation shall also act as a forfeiture of the
permittee's future right to apply to the Township Clerk for a parking permit
for a period of two years from the date of violation. Failure, when so
requested, to surrender a commuter parking permit so revoked shall
constitute a separate violation of this article.
§ 331-18. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction, be subject to punishment as provided in Chapter 1, Article II,
Penalty.
§ 331-19. Removal of unlawfully parked vehicles; costs.
Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this article shall
be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper regulation
of commuter permit parking areas, and any police officer may provide for
the removal of such vehicle, provided that the police officer or his or her
designee shall witness the removal of such vehicle and shall keep a record
of the removing agency and the location to which the vehicle should be
taken. The owner shall pay the reasonable cost of removal and storage
which may result from such removal before regaining possession of the
vehicle.
§ 331-20. Commuter parking permit fees.
The following fees are payable during the current licensing term:
§ 331-15 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 331-20
10:970
A. Commuter parking permit: $25.
B. Substitution of vehicle, i.e., new vehicle (requires return of former
issued permit): $5.
C. Purchase of parking permit September 1 to September 30: $5.
D. One-day parking sticker (temporary permit): $5.
E. Car lease expires (same or new vehicle; requires return of former
issued permit; copy of lease to be provided): $5.
F. Car stolen (copy of police report to be submitted): $5.
G. Rental car (temporary permit: 30 days; rental documents are to be
provided): $5.
H. Registration and insurance - Old Bridge address; driver's license not
changed yet (temporary permit: 30 days): $5.
I. New resident - documentation not yet changed to reflect Old Bridge
address (temporary permit: 30 days; requires submission of documents
affirming residency): $5.
J. Failure to pass motor vehicle driving test (temporary permit: 30 days;
requires document from DMV on new testing date, if new date more
than 30 days, temporary permit maximum 60 days): $5.
§ 331-20 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 331-20
10:971

ARTICLE II
Parking By Permit Only In Designated Residential Areas208
§ 331-21. Conditions for parking in permit parking areas.
No person shall park a vehicle on the streets or parts of streets designated
in § 10-8.9, Residential permit parking, of the Code of the Township of
Old Bridge during the hours designated in the schedule, Monday through
Friday, unless:
§ 331-22. Exemptions.
The following vehicles shall be exempt from this article and § 10-8.9,
Residential permit parking:
§ 331-23. Designation of permit parking areas.
Whenever the Director of Police, or his or her designee, shall determine
that certain streets, exclusively or primarily servicing residential land uses,
or portions of such streets, are being used for parking by the operators of
vehicles who do not reside on the streets, and that the average number of
such vehicles parking in such manner is in excess of 25% of the number of
A. The vehicle is owned or operated on a regular basis by a resident of that
street.
B. The vehicle has displayed on the lower left-hand corner (from inside the
car) on the last window on the driver's side so as to be visible, in such a
manner as to be closely examined by an officer, a current residential
parking permit.
C. The vehicle falls under one of the exceptions to this parking ban.
A. Visitors. A vehicle displaying a current visitor parking permit may park
a maximum of two days, provided that the operator of the vehicle is a
bona fide guest of a residence within the permit parking area. The
visitor's permit shall be displayed on the dashboard of the vehicle in
such a manner as to be clearly visible by an officer enforcing parking
regulations.
B. Contractors, service and delivery vehicles. Contractors, service and
delivery vehicles bearing the name and address of a commercial
business may park without a permit during the time they are rendering
service to a residence within the permit parking area.
C. Emergency vehicles. Emergency vehicles and public service, telephone
and other public utility vehicles may park within the permit parking
area during the time they are rendering service or repairs within the
area.
208. Editor's Note: The schedule of residential permit parking areas is included in § 10-8.9,
Residential permit parking.
§ 331-21 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 331-23
10:973
parking spaces on such streets and that the total number of parking spaces
actually occupied exceeds 65% of the total number of parking spaces on
such streets on the weekdays of any month, as disclosed by an engineering
or traffic study, then the Director of Police, or his or her designee, shall
recommend to the Township Council that such streets be included within
this article.
§ 331-24. Removal of unlawfully parked vehicles; costs.
Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this article shall
be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of
residential permit parking areas, and any police officer may provide for
the removal of such vehicle, provided that the police officer, or his or her
designee, shall witness the removal of such vehicle and shall keep a record
of the removing agency and the location of where the vehicle should be
taken. The owner shall pay the reasonable cost of removal and storage
which may result from such removal before regaining possession of the
vehicle.
§ 331-25. Application for permit; issuance; visitor permits.
Application for parking permits under this article shall be made in writing
on forms provided by the Township Clerk. Permits shall be granted only
under the following terms and conditions:
§ 331-26. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction, be subject to punishment as provided in Chapter 1, Article II,
Penalty.
A. To persons who are residents on the street or portion thereof upon
which parking is restricted by this article, a permanent permit shall be
issued for every vehicle owned or principally operated by such person.
B. Four visitor permits shall be issued to each residential unit on any
street or portion thereof upon which parking is restricted by this article
for use only by visitors to that residential unit. [Amended 9-24-2007
by Ord. No. 2007-23]
§ 331-23 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 331-26
10:974
Chapter 334
PAYROLL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public contracts — See Ch. 110.
§ 331-26 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 331-26
10:975

ARTICLE I
Third-Party Payroll Disbursement
[Adopted 7-11-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-13]
§ 334-1. Purpose; definitions.
§ 334-2. Authorization.
§ 334-3. Township requirements.
A. The purpose and intent of these regulations is to abide by the
requirements of N.J.S.A. 52:27D-20.1 and N.J.A.C. 5:30-17.1 et seq.,
governing electronic disbursement controls for payroll purposes.
B. Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
APPROVAL OFFICER — Person(s) responsible for authorizing and
supervising the activities of the payroll service.
PAYROLL SERVICE — Third-party payroll service organization.
TOWNSHIP — Township of Old Bridge.
A. The Township is authorized to use a payroll service to prepare payment
documentation, take possession of Township funds, and make such
disbursements itself on behalf of the Township.
B. The following payroll service providers shall be required to comply with
these regulations:
(1) Payroll service providers who use their own customized
programming process to execute disbursements for the Township;
(2) Payroll service providers who use a third-party processor to
execute disbursements for the Township.
A. The appointment of a payroll service shall be pursuant to the Local
Public Contracts Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq., and shall require the
contractor to do the following, not by way of limitation: data collection,
agency report preparation, calculation of withholding, direct deposit of
payroll disbursements, and/or transfer of Township funds to
contractor's account for subsequent disbursement of payment.
B. Any renewal or extension of a contract under these regulations shall be
by resolution.
C. The Human Resource Director is hereby appointed the approval officer
and is responsible for authorizing and supervising the activities of the
payroll service and shall further be charged with the reconciliation and
analysis of all general ledger accounts affected by the activities of the
disbursing organization.
§ 334-1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 334-3
10:977
§ 334-4. Payroll service requirements.
§ 334-5. Establishment of service.
Upon the adoption of these regulations, the Mayor, with the assistance
of the Human Resource Director and Township Attorney, as necessary, is
hereby authorized and directed to enter into a contract for payroll service
in accordance with all local public contracting laws and N.J.A.C. 5:30-17.
Appointment of the payroll service shall be by separate resolution of the
Township.
D. If required by the contract between the Township and the payroll
service, the payroll service is permitted to hold Township funds pending
transmittal to a payee.
A. A payroll service must meet all of the following requirements:
(1) Report any irregularities that may indicate potential fraud,
noncompliance with appropriate laws, dishonesty or gross
incompetence on the part of the approval officer;
(2) Report circumstances that could jeopardize its ability to continue
operations or otherwise interrupt the services provided to the
Township.
B. A payroll service must meet the requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:30-17.5,
requiring that the approval officer be assured that the servicer has its
own internal controls and appropriately guard against theft and other
adverse conditions.
C. All contracts entered into pursuant to these regulations and the laws
authorizing the same shall comply with the requirements of N.J.A.C.
5:30-17.6, which sets out a series of mandatory contractual terms and
conditions.
§ 334-3 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 334-5
10:978
ARTICLE II
Mandatory Direct Deposit
[Adopted 4-29-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-07]
§ 334-6. Direct deposit required.
All municipal employees and elected public officials who receive
compensation from the Township of Old Bridge are mandated to have direct
deposit of their compensation as of June 1, 2019 in accordance with Chapter
28 P.L. 2013, as codified at N.J.S.A. 52:14-15f(b).
§ 334-6 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 334-6
10:979
Chapter 342
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adult entertainment — See Ch. 14.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 30.
Beach and recreation areas — See Ch. 52.
Bows and arrows — See Ch. 67.
Curfew — See Ch. 114.
Festivals; mass gatherings — See Ch. 169.
Graffiti — See Ch. 215.
Littering — See Ch. 265.
Noise — See Ch. 300.
Obscene materials — See Ch. 314.
Motorized recreational vehicles — See Ch.
469.
Youth sports code of conduct — See Ch. 540.
§ 334-6 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 334-6
10:980
ARTICLE I
Interference with Police Officer
[Adopted 3-29-1945 (Sec. 4-5 of the 1973 Revised General
Ordinances)]
§ 342-1. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall, within the Township, hinder or obstruct any police officer
in the performance of his duties; nor shall any person willfully refuse or
neglect to assist any police officer when lawfully called upon by him so to
do, in the execution of any process or in the suppression of any breach of the
peace or disorderly conduct or in case of an escape, or when such officer is
resisted in the discharge of his duty; nor shall any person knowingly resist
or oppose any officer or person authorized by law in serving or attempting
to serve any writ, bill, order or process, or when making any arrest either
with or without a warrant.
§ 342-1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 342-1
10:981

ARTICLE II
Public Urination and Defecation; Disorderly Conduct
[Adopted 1-27-1994 by Ord. No. 6-94 (Sec. 4-16 of the 1973 Revised
General Ordinances)]
§ 342-2. Public urination and public defecation.
§ 342-3. Disorderly conduct prohibited.
§ 342-4. Violations and penalties.210
Any person who violates this article shall, upon conviction and subject to
the discretion of the Municipal Judge, be subject to the penalty set forth in
Chapter 1, Article II, Penalty.
A. No person shall urinate or defecate upon lands belonging to another
person or entity, nor shall any person urinate or defecate upon a public
building, street, park or other lands or property owned by the Township
of Old Bridge or any other public agency. It shall likewise be unlawful
for any person to urinate or defecate so as to be observed by another
person.
B. Nothing in this section shall prohibit a person from performing such
excretory functions in a bathroom, water closet, latrine or similar site
intended for such purposes.
A. No person shall, with purpose to cause public inconvenience,
annoyance or alarm, or recklessly creating a risk thereof:
(1) Engage in fighting or threatening, or in violent or tumultuous
behavior; or
(2) Create a hazardous or physically dangerous condition by an act
which serves no legitimate purpose of the actor.
B. No person shall, in a public place, and with purpose to offend the
sensibilities of a hearer or in reckless disregard of the probability of
doing so, address unreasonably loud and offensively coarse or abusive
language, given the circumstances of the persons present and the
setting of the utterance, to any person present. "Public" means
affecting or likely to affect persons in a place to which the public or a
substantial group has access; among the places included are highways,
transport facilities, schools, prisons, apartment houses, places of
business or amusement or any neighborhood.209
209. Editor's Note: Original Sec. 4-16.3, Lewdness, which previously followed this section, was
deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
210. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 342-2 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 342-4
10:983
Chapter 347
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Carnivals and circuses — See Ch. 95.
Festivals; mass gatherings — See Ch. 169.
Flea markets — See Ch. 193.
Vehicles used for food transportation or
sale — See Ch. 203, Art. I.
Secondhand jewelry — See Ch. 242.
Mobile lunch wagons — See Ch. 273.
Holiday sales; Christmas tree sales — See Ch.
394.
Vendors — See Ch. 502.
§ 342-4 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 342-4
10:984
ARTICLE I
Solicitors, Peddlers, Auctioneers, Junk Dealers and Used Car Lots
[Adopted by Ord. No. B-8 (Sec. 5-1 of the 1973 Revised General
Ordinances)]
§ 347-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUCTIONEER — Any person who conducts a sale by selling to the highest
bidder.
DANCE HALL — Any hall where dances are usually held.
JUNK DEALER — Any person who goes from place to place by traveling
on the streets, roads or highways from house to house and purchasing old
papers, rags, metals or any other type of junk materials.
MOTOR VEHICLE SALES LOT — Any lot parcel or area used for the purpose
of selling new or used motor vehicles.[Added 10-25-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-30]
PEDDLER — Any person who goes from place to place by traveling on the
streets, roads or highways from house to house and carries with him goods,
wares or merchandise of any description for the purpose of selling and
delivering them to purchasers.
SOLICITOR — Any person selling goods by sample or taking orders for
future delivery with or without accepting an advance payment for the
goods.211
§ 347-2. License required; ringing bells restricted; hours restricted.
[Amended 3-5-1984 by Ord. No. 2-84; 7-15-1985 by Ord. No. 34-85;
6-20-1988 by Ord. No. 22-88]
No person shall engage in the usual activities of solicitor, peddler,
auctioneer, junk dealer or used car dealer without first having obtained a
license to engage in such activity from the Township Clerk, and no solicitor,
peddler or junk dealer shall cause bells to be rung by him or use his
vehicle for the solicitation of business or the attraction of customers in the
Township after 9:00 p.m. or before 10:00 a.m., except that frozen dessert
trucks may operate until sunset.
§ 347-3. License application requirements; appeals.
A. All applications for licenses shall be in writing on forms furnished by
the Township, signed by the applicant or the agent of the applicant and
presented to the Township Clerk. The application shall state the name
of the applicant, the correct name under which the business is being
211. Editor's Note: The fomrer definition of “used car lot,” which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 10-25-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-30.
§ 347-1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 347-3
10:985
§ 347-4. Fees; expiration; service charge. [Amended 6-23-1997 by
Ord. No. 22-97; 1-9-2006 by Ord. No. 38-2005]
operated, the residence of the applicant and such other pertinent
information as may be considered necessary to properly consider the
application. All applicants shall register with the Police Department of
the Township. All applicants for solicitors' and peddlers' licenses shall
be fingerprinted and photographed by the Township Police Department
for purposes of identification.
B. All applicants for solicitors' and peddlers' licenses who use a licensed
motor vehicle shall provide the Township Clerk with an insurance
certificate evidencing at least $100,000 liability coverage insurance.
[Added 6-2-1980 by Ord. No. D-308; amended 3-21-1983 by Ord.
No. 8-83]
C. Any person aggrieved by a denial of his or her application may appeal to
the Township Council. Such application shall be taken within 14 days
after notice of the denial of the application has been mailed to such
person’s last known address. [Added 10-25-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-30]
D. The Township Council shall set a time and place for hearing on such
application, and notice of such hearing shall be given to the peddler or
solicitor via standard mail at the last known address, at least five days
prior to the date set for hearing. The Township Council may affirm,
reverse or modify the decision of the Clerk. [Added 10-25-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-30]
A. The following annual fees are hereby established for licenses issued
pursuant to this article:
(1) Solicitors, additional person(s): $25.
(2) Peddlers and solicitors with vehicle: $100.
(3) Auctions, per auction: $100.
(4) Junkyard keepers and junk dealers: $1 per square foot, $100
minimum.212
(5) Motor vehicle sales lots: [Amended 10-25-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-30]
(a) Smaller than 5,000 square feet: $500.
(b) Larger than 5,000 square feet: $750.
(6) Ice cream trucks: $100. [Added 6-12-2006 by Ord. No. 27-2006]
212. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 247, Junkyards.
§ 347-3 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 347-4
10:986
§ 347-5. Fixed location prohibited.
No peddler shall have an exclusive right to any location, nor shall he be
permitted to operate from a fixed location or in any congested area where
his operations might impede or inconvenience the public. For the purpose
of this section, the judgment of a police officer, exercised in good faith, shall
be deemed conclusive as to whether the area is congested or the public
impeded or inconvenienced.
B. All licenses shall expire at the end of the calendar year. The above fees
shall be charged for the full calendar year or any part thereof.
C. A service fee of 25% shall be retained by the Township on applications
that are rejected.
§ 347-4 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 347-5
10:987

ARTICLE II
Charitable Solicitations
[Adopted by Ord. No. B-43 (Sec. 5-2 of the 1973 Revised General
Ordinances)]
§ 347-6. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CHARITABLE, BENEVOLENT or PATRIOTIC — Includes but shall not be
limited to the purpose of ministering to the material or spiritual needs
of human beings either in the United States or elsewhere, or of relieving
suffering of animals, or of inculcating patriotism.
DONATIONS — Money, goods, wares, merchandise or any other thing of
value, contributions or financial assistance of any kind whether as a gift or
in exchange for any thing or object, entertainment or exhibition, or other
inducement to such donation.
PUBLIC SOLICITATION — Solicitation upon the streets, in any public
places, by telephone, or house-to-house or office-to-office canvass.
SUBSCRIPTIONS — Includes promises to pay any sum of money or to
deliver any goods, wares, merchandise or other thing of value, or to render
financial gift or in exchange for any thing or assistance of any kind whether
as an object, entertainment or exhibition, or other inducement to such
subscription.
§ 347-7. Permit required for public solicitation.
No person shall publicly solicit donations or subscriptions for any
charitable, benevolent or patriotic purpose in the Township without having
an unrevoked permit therefor issued by the Township Clerk or his or her
designated representative.
§ 347-8. Information to be furnished by applicant for permit.
Each applicant for a permit shall furnish to the Township Clerk or his or her
designated representative the following information:
A. The name and purpose of the cause for which permission is sought and
the method in which and the place where the funds or property
received as donations or subscriptions are to be used or expended.
B. The names and addresses of the officers and directors of the
organization, society, association or corporation.
C. The time for which permission is sought and the localities and places of
solicitation.
D. Whether or not any commissions, fees, wages or emoluments are to be
expended in connection with such solicitation.
§ 347-6 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 347-8
10:989
§ 347-9. Conditions for issuance of permit.
No person shall receive a permit to publicly solicit donations or
subscriptions for charitable, benevolent or patriotic purposes unless from
the information submitted the Township Clerk is of the opinion that the
organization, society, association or corporation is composed of and
controlled by responsible persons holding regular meetings who are directly
responsible for the finances and policy thereof and that accurate records
of receipts and disbursements of funds are kept, that such donations or
subscriptions are for truly benevolent, charitable or patriotic purposes, that
the funds or property received as donations or subscription are to be used
or expended for such purposes and that no excessive commissions, fees,
wages or emoluments are paid to solicitors.
§ 347-10. Permit issued without fee; term; revocation.
The permit shall be issued by the Township Clerk or his or her designated
representative without the payment of any fee therefor, and shall be issued
for any period not to exceed one year from date of issue, but shall be subject
to revocation by the Township Clerk at any time during such period if it
becomes known to him that facts or circumstances exist which, had they
existed or been known to him at the time of issuing such permit, the same
would have been denied under the provisions of § 347-9.
§ 347-11. Permit signed by Clerk; possession and display of permit;
permit restrictions. [Amended 1-9-2006 by Ord. No. 38-2005]
Each solicitor authorized to solicit under a permit shall receive from the
Township Clerk a permit signed by the Clerk and bearing such identification
of the person to whom issued as the Clerk deems necessary or proper.
Such person shall carry the permit at all times when soliciting donations
or contributions and shall show such permit upon demand of any peace
officer or of any person from whom a donation or subscription is solicited.
Failure to show such permit upon demand shall be deemed a violation of this
article. Said permit shall be issued for specific dates, times and locations.
Area solicitations shall be granted for one month at a time.
§ 347-12. Solicitation under permit by unauthorized solicitor.
Any person who solicits under any permit issued to him as a solicitor of any
organization, society, association or corporation of which such person is not
at the time of soliciting a duly authorized solicitor or any person who shall
E. Written permission of the store or shopping center. [Added 1-9-2006
by Ord. No. 38-2005]
F. A copy of the New Jersey State nonprofit ID number. [Added 1-9-2006
by Ord. No. 38-2005]
G. Such other information as the Township Clerk may require.
§ 347-8 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 347-12
10:990
solicit under a permit not issued to him shall be deemed guilty of a violation
of this article.
§ 347-13. Exceptions. [Amended 1-9-2006 by Ord. No. 38-2005]
This article shall not apply to any solicitation of funds conducted by any
religious or fraternal organization among its own members.
§ 347-12 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 347-13
10:991

ARTICLE III
Furniture and White Goods Sales from Trucks
[Adopted 9-8-1992 by Ord. No. 35-92 (Sec. 5-9.1 of the 1973 Revised
General Ordinances)]
§ 347-14. Sale of appliances and furniture from trucks prohibited.
Sale of washer machines, dryers, refrigerators (white goods) and furniture
from trucks is prohibited within the Township of Old Bridge.
§ 347-15. Enforcement.
It is the duty of the Township Police Department and the Township Code
Enforcement Official to enforce the provisions of this article.
§ 347-16. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person who violates any section of this article shall be subject to
the penalty set forth in Chapter 1, Article II, Penalty. [Amended
1-9-2006 by Ord. No. 38-2005]
B. Each day on which a violation occurs shall be deemed to constitute a
distinct and separate violation of this article.
§ 347-14 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 347-16
10:993
Chapter 351
PERSONNEL POLICIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Defense and indemnification of officers and
employees — See Ch. 119.
Ethics — See Ch. 145.
Volunteer incentives — See Ch. 510.
§ 351-1. Declaration of policy.
The Council hereby declares the following principles to constitute the
personnel policy of the Township:
§ 351-2. Appointment.
A. Employment in the Township government shall be based on merit and
fitness free of personal and political considerations.
B. Just and equitable incentives and conditions shall be established and
maintained in order to promote efficiency and economy in the operation
of the Township government.
C. Positions with similar duties and responsibilities shall be classified and
compensated on a uniform basis.
D. Appointments, promotions and other personnel actions requiring the
applications of the merit principal shall be based on systematic tests
and evaluations of knowledge and performance.
E. Every effort shall be made to stimulate high morale by fair
administration of this chapter and by consideration of the rights and
interests of employees, consistent with the best interest of the public
and the Township.
F. Continuity of employment shall be subject to good behavior, satisfactory
performance of work, necessity for the performance of work and
availability of funds.
A. Power of appointment. All employees, officers and department heads of
the Township shall be appointed and promoted by the Township
Administrator, except where the power to appoint rests with other
Township boards or bodies as provided for herein or by general law or
ordinance.
B. Probationary period; right of suspension or dismissal.
(1) Each new employee, including police officers, shall serve a
probationary period of 12 months. If at the end of 12 months the
probationary employee is deemed to have successfully completed
§ 347-16 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 351-2
10:994
§ 351-3. Separation from municipal service.
Employees who have acquired permanent employment status may be
temporarily suspended from the Township's employ by layoff or suspension,
or permanently separated by resignation or dismissal, as more particularly
set forth in this section.
his probationary period by means of written recommendation by
the department head and the Township Administrator, the
employee shall be granted status as a regular employee with all
rights and privileges pertaining to his employment or position. If,
however, at the conclusion of his probationary period, the employee
is not deemed to have successfully completed his probationary
period, he shall be dismissed. Nothing contained in this subsection
shall be construed to prohibit the suspension or dismissal of a
probationary employee at any time during his probationary period
if such action is in the best interests of the Township. [Amended
4-6-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-08]
(2) Each new police officer shall be required to satisfactorily complete
a basic police training program recognized by the New Jersey
Police Training Commission and serve a twelve-month probationary
period prior to receiving a permanent appointment.
C. Permanent employment status; ground and manner of removal.
Employees who satisfactorily complete their probationary period shall
have permanent status, conditioned upon good behavior and
satisfactory job performance, and where required by statute, continued
residence in the Township. Except for personnel appointed to serve at
the pleasure of the Township Administrator, all employees shall be
subject to removal by the appointing authority only for cause or for
reason of economy.
A. Layoff. The power to lay off employees shall be exercised by the Mayor.
This power shall not extend to the Township Clerk, Deputy Clerk or any
other employee who is appointed directly by the Township Council. The
power to lay off the Township Clerk, Deputy Clerk or any other
employee appointed directly by the Township Council shall be exercised
solely by the Township Council. Whenever the Mayor deems it
necessary or appropriate to lay off any employee, he or she shall inform
the Township Council of the intended layoff action at least 10 days prior
to such action taking effect. [Amended 4-29-1993 by Ord. No.
19-93]
B. Resignation.
(1) Procedure. An employee may resign from his position by tendering
a written resignation to his department head, who in turn shall
forward it to the Township Administrator. Unless there are
disciplinary charges pending against the employee, the Township
Administrator shall notify the employee in writing of the
§ 351-2 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 351-3
10:995
acceptance of his resignation in good standing. An employee shall
give a minimum of two weeks' notice before the effective date of his
resignation. Unless the Township Administrator waives such notice
in writing, failure to give the minimum notice will result in loss of
vacation and sick credits.
(2) Sick and vacation pay; supplemental compensation. The following
provisions shall govern sick and vacation pay and supplemental
compensation for any and all employees who are not represented
by a majority representative for purposes of collective bargaining:
[Amended 7-15-1991 by Ord. No. 11-91; 9-29-1994 by Ord.
No. 56-94]
(a) Termination by layoff, retirement or death: Any employee
separated from Township employment by layoff, retirement or
death in good standing shall be entitled to receive a lump sum
as supplemental compensation for each day of accumulated
unused sick time, subject to the limitations of this chapter,
which is credited on the effective date of separation.
Supplemental compensation of the amount due for
accumulated unused sick time shall be computed at the
employee's daily rate of pay as of the effective date of
separation.
(b) Termination by resignation: Any employee separated from
Township employment by resignation in good standing shall be
entitled to receive a lump sum as supplemental compensation
for each day of accumulated unused sick time, subject to the
limitations of this chapter, which is credited on the effective
date of separation. Supplemental compensation of the amount
due for accumulated unused sick time shall be computed at the
employee's rate of one-half of the daily rate of pay as of the
effective date of separation.
(c) Limitation for supplemental compensation of accumulated
unused sick time.
[1] Employees hired before July 1, 1982. Total supplemental
compensation for accumulated unused sick time shall not
exceed the lesser of the amount due for accumulated
unused sick time up to a maximum of 280 days less the
days of accumulated unused sick time repurchased by the
Township or the absolute dollar limitation of $30,000.
[a] Exception. Employees who have more than $30,000 of
accrued unused sick time on July 1, 1993, shall be
grandfathered, and the amount in effect on that date
shall become the employee's absolute dollar
limitation.
§ 351-3 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 351-3
10:996
[2] Employees hired on or after July 1, 1982, but before July 1,
1993. Total supplemental compensation for accumulated
unused sick time shall not exceed the lesser of the amount
due for accumulated unused sick time up to a maximum of
100 days less the days of accumulated unused sick time
repurchased by the Township or the absolute dollar
limitation of $15,000.
[a] Exception. Employees who have more than $15,000 of
accrued unused sick time on July 1, 1993, shall be
grandfathered, and the amount in effect on that date
shall become the employee's absolute dollar
limitation.
[3] Employees hired on or after July 1, 1993. Total
supplemental compensation for accumulated unused sick
time shall not exceed the lesser of the amount due for
accumulated unused sick time up to a maximum of 50 days
less the days of accumulated unused sick time
repurchased by the Township or the absolute dollar
limitation of $7,500.
[4] Any employee hired on or after January 1, 2018, shall not
be entitled to receive supplemental compensation of
accumulated unused sick time. [Added 10-23-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-24]
(d) Any permanent employee separated from Township
employment by layoff, retirement, death or resignation in good
standing shall be entitled to receive a lump sum payment as
supplemental compensation equal to the accumulated unused
vacation time for the year of separation, plus a maximum carryover
of five days of unused vacation from the preceding year,
subject to the limitations of § 351-5C, which is credited on the
effective date of separation. Supplemental compensation for
unused vacation shall be computed at the employee's daily rate
of pay as of the effective date of separation.
(e) In the event of death, payment of supplemental compensation
shall be paid to the estate of the employee.
(f) In the event an employee is dismissed for cause, no payment
for supplemental compensation for accumulated sick or
vacation time shall occur.
C. Dismissal or demotion. A permanent employee may be dismissed from
the service or demoted for cause. The causes for removal from the
service shall include, but not be limited to, the following: [Amended
1-9-2006 by Ord. No. 38-2005; 4-6-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-08]
(1) Neglect of duty.
§ 351-3 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 351-3
10:997
§ 351-4. Department rules and regulations.
(2) Absence without leave or failure to report after authorized leave
has expired or after such leave has been disapproved or revoked,
provided that any regular member or officer of the Police
Department who shall be absent from duty without just cause for a
term of five days continuously and without leave of absence shall,
at the expiration of such five days, cease to be a member of the
Police Department as provided in N.J.S.A. 40A:14-122.
(3) Incompetency or inefficiency or incapacity due to mental or
physical disability.
(4) Insubordination or serious breach of discipline.
(5) Intoxication while on duty.
(6) Commission of a criminal act.
(7) Disobedience of the department rules and regulations established
pursuant to § 351-4.
(8) Conduct unbecoming a public employee.
(9) Falsification of public records, including attendance and other
personnel records. [Added 4-6-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-08]
D. Suspension. An employee of the Township may be suspended:
(1) Up to five days as a disciplinary measure without bringing formal
charges.
(2) Not less than five days nor more than 15 days when formal charges
are to be brought, with the employee receiving a minimum of five
days' notice unless he waives such notice in writing.
A. Promulgation of rules and regulations. Subject to the approval of the
Township Administrator, a department head may from time to time
establish, amend and supplement rules and regulations for governing
the internal operations of his department and the conduct and decorum
of its personnel. Such department rules and regulations shall not be
inconsistent or in conflict with the provisions of any statute of the state,
collective bargaining agreement, this chapter or any ordinance of the
Township. [Amended 4-6-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-08]
B. Procedure. The rules and regulations shall be in writing, signed by the
head of the department and approved by the Township Administrator
and shall be filed in the office of the Township Clerk. They shall be
binding on all persons subject to the jurisdiction of the department. A
written copy of the rules and regulations shall be distributed to the
personnel of the department affected thereby and shall be posted in the
headquarters of the department.
§ 351-3 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 351-4
10:998
§ 351-5. Vacations. [Amended 8-21-1978 by Ord. No. D-247]
Each full-time employee of the Township shall be entitled to vacation time
each year as set forth in the following schedules:
§ 351-6. Sick leave.
C. Reporting accidents. An employee who is injured in any way in the
performance of his duties shall immediately report the accident to his
supervisor, who shall complete a form provided for such reports. The
completed accident report form shall then be submitted to a
department head who in turn shall submit it to the Township
Administrator.
A. Employees other than police officers.
(1) The Township Administrator and Township Clerk shall be entitled
to four weeks, plus an additional three days after five years, plus an
additional two days after 10 years for a total entitlement of 25 days.
(2) All department heads shall be entitled to three weeks the first year,
four weeks after five years and five weeks after 10 years.
[Amended 1-9-2006 by Ord. No. 38-2005]
(3) All other full-time employees shall be entitled to two weeks after
first year, three weeks after five years and four weeks after 10
years.
(4) Regular part-time employees hired prior to December 1, 2005, who
work a minimum of 20 hours per week, and all Before and After/
Family Day Care Program employees who work a minimum of 20
hours per week shall receive pro rata vacation. Regular part-time
employees hired after December 1, 2005, shall not be eligible for
vacation. [Amended 6-28-1999 by Ord. No. 21-99; 12-12-2005
by Ord. No. 41-2005]
(5) Temporary part-time employees shall not be eligible for vacation.
B. Applicability. The foregoing schedules shall apply to all personnel
covered under this section employed as of January 1 of the current year.
Personnel employed after January I of the current year shall be entitled
to a pro rata share of the applicable benefits based on their date of hire.
[Amended 12-12-2005 by Ord. No. 41-2005]
C. Carrying over of vacation. Upon written request from an employee
covered by this section an amount equal to one year's vacation may be
carried over into the following year with the approval of the Township
Administrator. Accumulated vacation carried over into the next year
shall not be eligible for cash payment upon separation or retirement
from employment with the Township and must be utilized by June 1 of
the following year. [Amended 12-12-2005 by Ord. No. 41-2005]
§ 351-4 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 351-6
10:999
A. Sick leave and personal days. [Amended 8-21-1978 by Ord. No.
D-247; 5-19-1980 by Ord. No. D-307; 3-9-1998 by Ord. No. 19-98]
(1) Each full-time employee shall earn one sick day for each month of
employment as time off with pay when he/she is sick or when a
family member has an illness or injury as hereinafter set forth. Sick
days may not exceed 11 days in any year. Unused sick days shall
accumulate as otherwise provided in this section.
(2) Each full-time employee shall also have four personal days each
year as time off with pay. Any personal days unused at the end of
the year shall be added to the sick time bank but shall not extend or
enlarge the maximum accumulation limits of this section of this
Code.
(3) No employee shall be eligible to receive or accumulate personal
days unless and until such employee has completed three full
months of employment.213
B. (Reserved)
C. Temporary part-time employees shall not be eligible for sick time.
Regular part-time employees hired prior to December 1, 2005, and
working a minimum of 20 hours per week shall continue to receive pro
rata sick leave. All part-time employees who were hired prior to April
15, 1999, shall receive pro rata sick leave. Part-time employees hired
after December 1, 2005, shall not be eligible for pro rata sick leave
except those employees in the Before and After/Family Day Care
Program who work a minimum of 20 hours per week. [Amended
12-12-2005 by Ord. No. 41-2005]
D. Any employee who is entitled to sick time and is sick for more than
three consecutive days shall be required to furnish his department head
with a doctor's certificate stating the nature of his illness and the
expected date of his return to work.
E. Sick leave may be used for illness in the employee's immediate family
requiring the employee's attention. "Immediate family" is defined as
mother, father, mother-in-law, father-in-law, husband, wife, children,
brother, sister or any blood relative residing in the employee's
household.214
213. Editor's Note: Original Sec. 3-5.2b, regarding a maximum number of sick days accrued, as
amended 7-15-1991 by Ord. No. 11-91, which previously followed this section, was deleted
1-9-2006 by Ord. No. 38-2005. Original Sec. 3-5.2c, regarding sick days for temporary fulltime
employees, which previously followed this section, was repealed 12-12-2005 by Ord.
No. 41-2005.
214. Editor's Note: Former Subsection 3-5.2g, which granted payment of accumulated sick
leave upon retirement, which previously followed this subsection, was repealed 7-15-1991
by Ord. No. 11-91.
§ 351-6 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 351-7
10:1000
§ 351-7. Accumulated sick time. [Added 3-22-2004 by Ord. No.
06-04]
The following rules shall apply to carry-over of accumulated sick time only
and to no other type of accumulated time:
§ 351-8. Holidays. [Amended 8-21-1978 by Ord. No. D-247]
A. Any member of a collective bargaining unit who is promoted or
otherwise transferred into a management position or a nonunion
position shall be permitted to carry and maintain all accumulated sick
time to which he or she is entitled at the time of such change in status.
B. In order to implement the employee's right to carry over such
accumulated sick time from a collective bargaining unit to nonunion
status, such employee must elect to receive such carry-over within one
year of the date of transfer. This section shall be applicable to any
persons transferring from a collective bargaining unit to a nonunion
position retroactive to July 1, 2003.
C. If an employee makes an election to transfer accumulated sick time
when he or she changes to a nonunion status, the amount of sick time
maximum and the manner by which sick time is charged and
accumulated shall be governed by the contractual rules of the collective
bargaining unit in place at the time the employee makes his or her
election to carry over accumulated sick time as provided in this section.
D. Should any employee decline to carry over and maintain accumulated
sick time from a collective bargaining unit when he or she is transferred
into a nonunion position by failing to make such election, such
employee's right to sick time maximums and the rules concerning use
and accumulation of sick leave shall be governed by the applicable
provisions of Township ordinance. The employee's date of hire for the
purposes of the Township ordinance shall be the date of his or her initial
employment with the Township of Old Bridge.
A. All full-time employees except police officers shall be entitled to the
following holidays with pay: [Amended 3-9-1998 by Ord. No. 19-98]
New Year's Day
Martin Luther King Birthday
Lincoln's Birthday
President's Day
Good Friday
Memorial Day
Independence Day
Labor Day
Veterans Day
§ 351-7 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 351-8
10:1001
§ 351-9. Longevity pay program.
Thanksgiving Day
Day after Thanksgiving
Christmas Day
Two additional holidays (floating holidays) which will be taken at the
discretion of the employee, but subject to the approval of
management. Floating holidays must be used in the year they are
provided or such holidays will be considered lost and unavailable for
use.
(1) Holidays may not be carried or banked.
B. If a holiday falls on a Saturday, it shall be observed on the preceding
Friday; if a holiday falls on a Sunday, it shall be observed on the
following Monday.215
A. Effective January 1, 1969, and retroactive thereto, all employees of the
Township, subject to the limitation of Subsection E below, shall be
entitled to and shall receive longevity pay on the following basis:
[Amended 10-23-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-24]
(1) Completion of five consecutive years' service: 2 1/2% of the base
salary.
(2) Completion of 10 consecutive years' service: an additional 2 1/2%
base salary; a total of 5%.
(3) Completion of 15 consecutive years' service: an additional 2 1/2%
of the base salary; a total of 7 1/2%.
(4) Completion of 20 consecutive years' service: an additional 2 1/2%
of the base salary; a total of 10%.
(5) Completion of 25 consecutive years' service: an additional 2 1/2%
of the base salary; a total of 12 1/2%.
(6) Completion of 30 consecutive years' service: an additional 2 1/2%
of the base salary; a total of 15%.
B. Consecutive years in service shall be computed from the date of initial
employment by the Township, except where service was interrupted. In
such cases, consecutive years' service shall be computed as follows:
(1) Authorized leave of absence at the employee's request: from the
date of initial employment less time for leave of absence.
215. Editor's Note: Original Sec. 3-5.3c, regarding holidays for police officers, which previously
followed this section, was deleted 1-9-2006 by Ord. No. 38-2005.
§ 351-8 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 351-9
10:1002
§ 351-10. Bereavement leave. [Added 5-19-1980 by Ord. No. D-307]
§ 351-11. Health benefits for retirees. [Added 8-26-1996 by Ord. No.
31-96; amended 3-9-1998 by Ord. No. 19-98; 4-10-2006 by Ord. No.
9-2006]
(2) Resignation and subsequent rehiring: No accumulation of service
shall be allowed, and consecutive employment shall be computed
only from the latest date of uninterrupted employment.
(3) Military service: Employment shall be considered as uninterrupted,
except that no credit shall be allowed for service in the armed
forces.
(4) Disciplinary action: No credit shall be allowed for employment
interruption due to disciplinary action.
C. The intent of this section is that payment of longevity shall begin in the
calendar year 1969, and no back payment shall be made to anyone who
attained an anniversary date prior to the calendar year 1969.
D. Longevity shall be paid on a biweekly basis as part of the regular pay.
E. Any employee hired on or after January 1, 2018, who is not represented
by a majority representative for purposes of collective bargaining shall
not participate in the longevity pay program, nor shall he or she be
entitled to receive longevity pay. [Added 10-23-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-24]
A. The Township Administrator shall grant upon request to each employee
a maximum of five days' bereavement leave in the event of a death of a
member of the employee's immediate family, such leave to be used at
the time of the death and funeral for the purpose of attending and
aiding the aggrieved family. The "immediate family" is defined as
mother, father, mother-in-law, father-in-law, grandparents, husband,
wife, son, daughter, brother, sister, brother-in-law, sister-in-law or any
blood relative residing in the employee's household.
B. The Township Administrator shall grant upon request to each employee
a maximum of three days' bereavement leave in the event of a death of a
relative outside of the immediate family, as defined above. Sick leave
may be used if additional time is required.
A. Policy for payment of health benefits to eligible retirees. Employees
who retire on or after June 1, 2004, and who were hired on or before
July 1, 2012, excepting those employees covered by a collective
bargaining agreement that states otherwise, will be eligible for the
benefits hereunder if they satisfy one of the following requirements:
[Amended 12-11-2006 by Ord. No. 55-2006; 5-16-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011-09; 2-6-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-03; 6-25-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-15]
§ 351-9 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 351-11
10:1003
(1) Retire on a disability pension;
(2) Retire after 25 years or more of service credit in a state or locally
administered retirement system and have been continuously
employed by the Township of Old Bridge for a period of 25 years or
longer at the time of retirement;
(3) Retire and reach the age of 62 years or older with at least the last
15 years or more of continuous service with the Township of Old
Bridge at the time of retirement.
B. All retired employees, not covered by a collective bargaining agreement
which states otherwise, who were originally hired after July 1, 2009,
and who are eligible to receive retiree health benefits as stated above,
shall be required to contribute to their cost of their health, dental and
prescription benefits based on the following formulas: [Added
4-6-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-08; 6-25-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-15]
(1) Employees whose pension income is less than $60,000 in a
calendar year shall pay to the Township on a monthly basis 5% of
the premium costs for health, dental and prescription drug
benefits.
(2) Employees whose pension income is more than $60,000 in a
calendar year shall pay to the Township on a monthly basis 10% of
the premium costs for health, dental and prescription drug
benefits.
C. Type of coverage to be provided.
(1) Retirees of the Township of Old Bridge shall receive health
insurance benefits which are equal to those being provided to the
current employees in the same job classification and status
previously held by the retiree. Modifications to such coverage in
accordance with policy changes implemented for existing
employees shall be allowed.
(2) All coverage granted under this section shall be coverage for the
individual employee and family coverage as defined by the health
insurance carrier.
(3) Upon reaching age 65, any employee who remains a beneficiary of
a policy of insurance and who otherwise qualifies for Medicare
shall be entitled to receive Medicare as primary coverage and
Township health insurance as secondary coverage.
(4) Upon retirement and each year thereafter, all retirees shall sign a
coordination of health benefits agreement. In the event that the
retiree becomes reemployed in any capacity where such employer
provides health benefits for which the retiree is eligible, and the
reemployed retiree is not required to contribute to the cost of those
benefits, said reemployed retiree shall be required to obtain such
§ 351-11 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 351-11
10:1004
§ 351-12. Health insurance coverage. [Added 12-12-2005 by Ord.
No. 41-2005]
Chapter 355
coverage as their primary insurance. The Township shall maintain
the coverage as outlined herein as a secondary insured.
(5) In the event that a retiree’s spouse is employed, or becomes
employed, and where such employer provides health benefits for
which the spouse is or becomes eligible, and the spouse is not
required to contribute to the cost of those benefits, said spouse
shall be required to obtain such coverage as their primary health
insurance. Dependents shall be primary on the plan of the
employee or spouse whose birth date comes first in the calendar
year. The Township shall maintain coverage outlined herein as
secondary insured.
(6) The provisions of this Subsection C shall not apply to any Township
employee hired on or after July 1, 2012, excepting those Township
employees covered by a collective bargaining agreement that
states otherwise. [Added 6-25-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-15]
A. Any full-time employee shall have the option of surrendering health
insurance coverage. Any employee who surrenders said coverage for 12
consecutive months shall receive a cash payment equal to half of the
Township's cost for the benefit during that same period. In order to
qualify for this payment, the employee will be required to provide proof
of other health insurance coverage. Payments will be made during
normal pay periods.
B. Nonunion employees may select any of the health insurance, dental,
prescription and vision plans offered by the Township. (Note: Certain
combinations of health and dental are limited by the plans themselves.)
C. All employees, not covered by a collective bargaining agreement which
states otherwise, who are originally hired after July 1, 2009, shall be
required to contribute to their cost of their health, dental and
prescription benefits based on the following formulas: [Added
4-6-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-08]
(1) Employees whose gross income (pension-based income) is less than
$60,000 in a calendar year shall have 5% of the actual premium
costs for health, dental and prescription drug benefits deducted
from normal payroll check.
(2) Employees whose gross income is more than $60,000 in a calendar
year shall have 10% of the actual premium costs for health, dental
and prescription drug benefits deducted from normal payroll
check.
§ 351-11 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 351-12
10:1005
PESTICIDE CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Right to farm — See Ch. 151. Mosquito breeding control — See Ch. 284.
§ 355-1. Definitions.
The following words and terms, when used in this chapter, shall have the
following meanings:
ACT — The Pesticide Control Act of 1971, as amended, N.J.S.A. 13:1F-1 et
seq.
ACTIVE INGREDIENT — Any ingredient which will prevent, destroy, repel,
control or mitigate pests or which will act as a plant regulator, defoliant or
desiccant.
AGRICULTURAL COMMODITY — Any plant, or part thereof, or animal
or animal product, produced by a person (including farmers, ranchers,
vineyardists, plant propagators, Christmas tree growers, aquaculturists,
floriculturists, orchardists, foresters or other comparable persons) primarily
for sale, consumption, propagation or other use by man or animal.
BRAND or BRAND NAME or TRADE NAME — The characteristic
designation by words, symbols, name, number or trademark of a specific,
particular pesticide or formulation thereof under which the pesticide is
distributed, sold, offered for sale, handled, stored, used or transported in
the State of New Jersey.
COMMERCIAL PESTICIDE APPLICATOR — Any person (whether or not he
is a private applicator with respect to some uses) who uses or supervises
the use of any pesticide for any purpose or on any property other than as
provided by the definition of "private pesticide applicator."
COMMERCIAL PESTICIDE OPERATOR — Any person who applies
pesticides, by equipment other than aerial, under the direct supervision of
a certified and registered responsible pesticide applicator.
COMMUNITY-WIDE OR AREAWIDE — Any pesticide application performed
on aggregate areas greater than three acres of land which is part of a
pest control program administered by a governmental agency or which is
contracted for or performed by one person who has control over the use of
the land to which the pesticide is applied.
CUSTOMER — Any person who hires a commercial pesticide applicator
business to perform an ornamental pest control application utilizing
hydraulic spraying equipment operating at a rate greater than 300 pounds
per square inch and 10 gallons per minute, airblast sprayers or aerial
application equipment on property owned or controlled by him. For the
purposes of this definition, the term "customer" shall include any person
who makes such application on property owned or controlled by him.
§ 351-12 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 355-1
10:1006
EPA — The United States Environmental Protection Agency.
ORNAMENTAL — Trees, shrubs and other planting in and around
habitations generally but not necessarily located in urban and suburban
areas, including residences, parks, streets, retail outlets and industrial and
institutional buildings.
PERSON — Includes corporations, companies, associations, societies, firms,
partnerships and joint-stock companies, as well as individuals, and shall
also include all political subdivisions of this state or any agencies or
instrumentalities thereof.
PEST — Any insect, rodent, nematode, fungus, weed or any other form
of terrestrial or aquatic plant or animal life or virus, bacteria or other
microorganism (except viruses, bacteria or other microorganisms on or in
living man or other animals) which is injurious to health or the environment.
PESTICIDE — Includes any substance or mixture of substances labeled,
designed or intended for use in preventing, destroying repelling or
mitigating any pest or any substance or mixture of substances labeled,
designed or intended for use as a defoliant, desiccant or plant regulator,
provided that the term "pesticide" shall not include any substance or
mixture of substances which the EPA does not consider to be a pesticide.
PESTICIDE APPLICATOR BUSINESS — Any person who, either wholly or
in part, holds himself out for hire to apply pesticides in the State of New
Jersey.
PRIVATE PESTICIDE APPLICATOR — Any person who uses or supervises
the use of any pesticide for purposes of producing any agricultural
commodity on property owned or rented by him or his employer or, if
applied without compensation, other than trading of personal services
between producers of agricultural commodities, on the property of another
person.
PROPER ENFORCEMENT PERSONNEL — An official designated by the
municipality, subject to approval by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, whose duties are to enforce the rules and
regulations promulgated under this chapter.
RESPONSIBLE PESTICIDE APPLICATOR — Any individual who is
accountable for the use of a pesticide by himself or any person under his
direct supervision.
RESTRICTED USE PESTICIDE — Any pesticide or pesticide use so classified
under the provisions of N.J.A.C. 7:30-2 or so classified by the Administrator
of the United States Environmental Protection Agency.
STATE REGULATIONS — Pesticide rules and regulations promulgated
under the Act and codified in N.J.A.C. 7:30.
TARGET SITE — A specific location, including but not limited to any crop,
commodity, object, delineated field or area, or structure or part thereof, that
is intended to be treated by a pesticide so that any pests therein or thereon
are controlled. This term does not include any similar site which was not a
§ 355-1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 355-1
10:1007
part of the original agreement between the contracting parties even if such
site is included on the label or labeling of the pesticide.
USE — Any act of handling or release of a pesticide or exposure of man,
property or the environment to a pesticide through acts which include, but
are limited to:
§ 355-2. Commercial pesticide operator.
§ 355-3. Commercial pesticide applicator.
§ 355-4. Pesticide applicator business.
Applying a pesticide, including mixing and loading and any required
supervisory action in or near the area of application.
A.
B. Handling, transporting or storing a pesticide or pesticide container.
Disposal actions for a pesticide and/or containers or equipment
associated with the pesticide.
C.
A. No person shall engage in the activities of a commercial pesticide
operator without having satisfied the applicable requirements
established by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
and having obtained a valid pesticide operator registration issued by
that Department.
B. Each commercial pesticide operator shall at all times have in his/her
possession the valid registration card and shall produce it upon request
by proper enforcement personnel.
A. No person shall engage in the activities of a commercial pesticide
applicator without having satisfied the applicable requirements
established by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
and having obtained a valid commercial pesticide applicator
registration issued by that Department.
B. Each commercial pesticide applicator shall at all times have in his/her
possession the valid registration card and shall produce it immediately
upon request by proper enforcement personnel.
C. Each commercial pesticide applicator must keep records of each
application of pesticides in accordance with provisions of state
regulations. Such records shall be made available to all proper
enforcement personnel.
A. No person shall engage in the activities of a pesticide applicator
business without having satisfied the applicable requirements
established by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
and having obtained a valid pesticide applicator business registration
issued by that Department. The business registration shall be made
immediately available upon request of proper enforcement personnel.
§ 355-1 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 355-4
10:1008
§ 355-5. Private pesticide applicator.
§ 355-6. Storage of pesticides.
No person shall store restricted-use pesticides without first meeting the
applicable provisions of state regulations.
§ 355-7. Pesticide equipment.
No person shall add water to any pesticide handling, storage or application
equipment via a hose, pump or other equipment unless such hose, pump
or other equipment is fitted with an effective valve or device to prevent
backflow of pesticides or liquids containing pesticides into water supply
systems, streams, lakes or sources of water or other areas, except that such
backflow devices or valves are not required when the hose, pump or other
equipment is not allowed to contract or fall below the level of the liquid
in the handling, storage or application equipment to which water is being
added and no other possible means of establishing a backsiphon or backflow
exists.
§ 355-8. Safety equipment.
All persons having employees who use, apply, transport or otherwise handle
any pesticide shall make available to such employees any necessary and
appropriate safety equipment in good working order and shall train such
employees in the proper operation of such safety equipment.
§ 355-9. Notification of community-wide or areawide applications.
B. The pesticide applicator business must keep records of each application
of pesticides in accordance with provisions of state regulations. Such
records shall be made available to all proper enforcement personnel.
A. No person shall engage in the activities of a private pesticide applicator
without having satisfied the applicable requirements established by the
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and having
obtained a valid private pesticide applicator registration issued by that
Department.
B. The valid registration card shall be made available within 24 hours of
the request of proper enforcement personnel.
C. All private pesticide applicators must keep records of each application
of pesticides in accordance with provisions of state regulations. Such
records shall be made available to all proper enforcement personnel.
A. No person shall apply any pesticide on a community-wide or areawide
basis unless prior notification of the proposed application has been
given to persons residing in the vicinity of the proposed target site.
§ 355-4 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 355-9
10:1009
(1) The notification shall be made through advertisement in at least
two newspapers having the greatest likelihood of informing the
public within the area of application.
(2) The newspaper notification must be given a maximum of 60 days
and a minimum of seven days prior to the proposed application
date.
(3) The notification must contain at least:
(a) The proposed application date.
(b) The location of the application.
(c) The name, address and registration number of the applicator
business or the responsible pesticide applicator associated
with the application.
(d) The brand name and active ingredients of the pesticide(s) to be
used.
(e) Application equipment to be used.
(f) The name, address and phone number of a person who may be
contacted and is responsible for supplying updated information
on the advertised pesticide applications to those persons
requesting it.
(4) Upon the request by a person residing in the vicinity of the
proposed target site to a person designated pursuant to Subsection
A(3)(f) above, such designated person shall provide, at a minimum,
the following information at least 12 hours prior to the application,
except that if a reasonable attempt to provide notice is
unsuccessful, an attempt to notify such person, by telephone, shall
be made immediately prior to the application.
(a) The actual time and date of application.
(b) The actual pesticide to be applied, including the EPA
registration number.
(c) Any precautionary statement(s) on the products' federal
registered label.
(5) The person designated pursuant to Subsection A(3)(f) above shall
maintain a record of all telephone calls, attempted and completed,
with persons requesting information referred to in Subsection A(4)
above and a file of related correspondence. Such record and file
shall be made available to the proper enforcement personnel upon
request. The minimum information required to be kept on the call
record shall include:
(a) The name and phone number of the person contacted.
§ 355-9 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 355-9
10:1010
§ 355-10. Notification of ornamental applications.
(b) The time and date of the call.
(6) The person making the application, subject to the notification
requirements, shall keep a record of the newspapers in which the
advertisement was placed and the dates published. This
information shall be made available to the proper enforcement
personnel upon request.
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any pesticide
application which is made for the purpose of producing an agricultural
commodity, mosquito larviciding applications or the application of
granular formulations in nonresidential areas.
A. No person shall cause or allow an outdoor ornamental pest control
application utilizing hydraulic spraying equipment, operating at a rate
greater than 300 pounds per square inch and 10 gallons per minute,
airblast sprayers or aerial application equipment on property owned or
controlled by him unless the following procedures have been
implemented:
(1) The customer may obtain copies of notices from the commercial
pesticide applicator and shall deliver such notices, at least 48 hours
prior to the proposed application, to residents of property adjacent
and contiguous to the customer's property, such notice to contain
the following information:
(a) A general statement of the purpose of the notification and
procedures to follow to obtain additional updated information.
(b) The proposed application date(s).
(c) The location of the application.
(d) The name, address and registration number of the applicator
business or the responsible pesticide applicator associated
with the application.
(e) The brand name and active ingredients of the pesticide(s) to be
used.
(f) The name, address and phone number of the applicator who
may be contacted and is responsible for supplying updated
information on the proposed pesticide applications to those
persons requesting it.
(2) Upon the request of any resident of property adjacent and
contiguous to the customer's property, to the applicator designated
above, such designated applicator shall provide, at a minimum, the
following information at least 12 hours prior to the application,
except that if a reasonable attempt to provide notice is
§ 355-9 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 355-10
10:1011
unsuccessful, an attempt to notify such person, by telephone, shall
be made immediately prior to the application:
(a) The actual time and date of application.
(b) Any precautionary statement(s) on the product's federal
registered label.
(3) The applicator designated above shall maintain a record of all
telephone calls, attempted and completed with persons requesting
information referred to in Subsection A(2) above, and a file of
related correspondence. Such record and file shall be made
available to the proper enforcement personnel upon request. The
minimum information required to be kept on the call record shall
include:
(a) The name and phone number of the persons contacted.
(b) The time and date of the call.
(4) The customer shall keep a record on file of the notice he provided
which may include a copy of the receipt for the certified letter(s), if
certified mail is utilized.
(5) The provisions of this section shall not apply to an additional
application made on the same day and in the same locality as an
application governed by this section, if the following requirements
are satisfied:
(a) The customer demonstrates to the satisfaction of the local
governing authority that he had not hired the applicator more
than 48 hours prior to the start of the application governed by
this section.
(b) The customer has personally contacted residents of property
adjacent and contiguous to property on which the application
is proposed and no objections were raised.
(6) A waiver of the minimum amount of prior notice required may be
granted at the discretion of the local governing authority.
B. Prior to performing an outdoor ornamental pest control application,
subject to the notification provisions, the commercial pesticide
applicator shall provide the customer with a written statement
outlining the customer's notification responsibilities and the specifics of
the proposed application.
C. The customer may delegate, in writing, his notification responsibilities
to the commercial pesticide applicator, provided that the commercial
pesticide applicator agrees, in writing, to assume the notification
responsibilities as delineated in this chapter.
§ 355-10 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 355-10
10:1012
§ 355-11. Notification of apiarists.
D. The commercial pesticide applicator is not responsible for any actions
resulting from the failure of the customer to fulfill his notification
obligations unless the customer has delegated and the commercial
pesticide applicator has assumed the notification responsibilities as
stated in Subsection C above.
E. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any pesticide
application which is made for the purpose of producing an agricultural
commodity or to any person required to supply advance notification
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.A.C. 7:30-10.9.
F. The provisions of this section shall not apply where the target site is
greater than 100 feet from the customer's property line.
A. No person shall make an outdoor application of a pesticide product
which has information on its label or labeling noting that the product is
toxic to bees, unless such person first notifies, at least 36 hours prior to
the application, each apiarist who:
(1) Desires notification.
(2) Maintains an apiary which is located within 1/2 mile of the target
site.
(3) Has been registered with the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection by March 1 of the calendar year in which
the applications subject to the notification requirements of this
section will occur.
B. The notification must include the following information:
(1) The intended date of the application.
(2) The approximate time of the application.
(3) The brand name and active ingredient of the pesticide to be
applied.
(4) The location of the land on which the application is to be made.
(5) The name and certified pesticide applicator registration number of
the responsible pesticide applicator.
C. If the application date is changed so that the application will not occur
on the intended date specified in the original notification of application
but will be conducted during the next consecutive day, notification must
be given to the individual apiarist as soon as reasonably possible, but
not later than 10:00 p.m. the night prior to the new application date.
D. If the owner or operator of an apiary does not choose to move, cover or
otherwise protect the apiary, the application may be made without
delay, provided that such application complies with the pesticide
§ 355-10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 355-11
10:1013
§ 355-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the
general penalty provisions of Chapter 1, Article II, Penalty. A copy of the
report of such enforcement actions will be forwarded to the Bureau of
Pesticide Control within the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.
Chapter 363
PROPERTY, ABANDONED AND VACANT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 108. Property maintenance — See Ch. 366.
labeling and any provisions of the Act or any rules and regulations
promulgated thereunder.
E. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any person using a
pesticide on an aggregate area less than three acres, provided that the
application is not made with hydraulic spraying equipment operating at
a rate greater than 300 pounds per square inch and 10 gallons per
minute, airblast sprayers or aerial equipment.
F. Any person required to notify apiarists pursuant to the provisions of this
section shall not be responsible for notifying any apiarist who cannot be
notified because the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection failed to provide information deemed necessary by the
Department for such notification.
G. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any pesticide
application which is made for agricultural purposes, except to the crops
within the dates and/or stages as stated below:
Crop Dates
Apples April 15 to May 15
Pears April 15 to May 15
Strawberries April 15 to May 15
Blueberries April 15 to May 31
Cranberries June 15 to August 15
Holly June 1 to June 30
Vince crops
(Cucurbits)
June 1 to August 31
Sweet corn Flowering stage
§ 355-11 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 355-12
10:1014
ARTICLE I
Abandoned Property List
§ 363-1. Abandoned property criteria.
A. Except as provided in N.J.S.A. 55:19-83, any property that has not been
legally occupied for a period of six months may be deemed to be an
abandoned property upon a determination by the Code Enforcement
Officer, or such other public officer designated or appointed by the
Township Administrator pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.5, if at a minimum,
any two or more of the following criteria are met:
(1) The property is in need of rehabilitation in the reasonable judgment
of the Code Enforcement Officer, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.5,
and no rehabilitation has taken place during that same six-month
period.
(2) Construction was initiated on the property and was discontinued
prior to completion, leaving the building unsuitable for occupancy,
and no construction for a period of time in accordance with the
Uniform Construction Code.
(3) At least one installment of property tax remains unpaid and
delinquent on that property as of the date of a determination.
(4) The property has been determined to be a nuisance by the Code
Enforcement Officer, for one or more of the following reasons:
(a) The property has been found to be unfit for human habitation,
occupancy, or use pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.3.
(b) The condition and vacancy of the property materially increases
the risk of fire to the property and adjacent properties.
(c) The property is subject to unauthorized entry leading to
potential health and safety hazards; the owner has failed to
take reasonable and necessary measures to secure the
property; or the municipality has secured the property in order
to prevent such hazards after the owner has failed to do so.
(d) The presence of vermin or the accumulation of debris, uncut
vegetation, or physical deterioration of the structure or
grounds have created potential health and safety hazards and
the owner has failed to take reasonable and necessary
measures to remove the hazards.
(e) The dilapidated appearance or other condition of the property
materially affects the welfare, including the economic welfare,
of the residents of the area in close proximity to the property,
and the owner has failed to take reasonable and necessary
measures to remedy the conditions.
§ 363-1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 363-2
10:1015
§ 363-2. Establishment of abandoned property list.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer shall identify abandoned property within
the Township of Old Bridge for the purpose of establishing an
abandoned property list. The abandoned property list shall include, for
each abandoned property identified, the tax block and lot number, the
name of the owner of record, if known, street address of the lot and the
date added to the list. The Code Enforcement Officer may add
properties to the abandoned property list at any time, and may delete
properties at any time when he or she finds that the property no longer
meets the definition of an abandoned property.
B. An abandoned property shall not be included on the abandoned
property list if rehabilitation is being performed in a timely manner, as
evidenced by building permits issued and diligent pursuit of
rehabilitation work authorized by those permits. A property on which
an entity other than the Township of Old Bridge has purchased or taken
assignment from the Township of a tax sale certificate which has been
placed on the abandoned property list may be removed if the owner of
the certificate pays all municipal taxes and liens due on the property
within 30 days after the property is placed on the list; provided,
however, that if the owner of the certificate fails to initiate foreclosure
proceedings within six months after the property was first placed on the
list, the property shall be restored to the abandoned property list in
accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 55:19-103.
C. The Code Enforcement Officer shall establish the abandoned property
list, after which a notice of violation will be sent, certified mail, return
receipt requested, and by regular mail, to the owner of record and any
stakeholder. The notice of violation shall identify the property
determined to be abandoned, setting forth the owner of record and any
stakeholder, if known, the tax lot and block number, street address and
the date the property was added to the list. The Code Enforcement
Officer in consultation with the Tax Collector, shall also send out a
notice by regular mail to any mortgagee, servicing organization, or
property tax processing organization that receives a duplicate copy of
the tax bill pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:4-64(d). When the owner of record is
not known for a particular property and cannot be ascertained by the
exercise of reasonable diligence by the Tax Collector, notice shall not be
mailed but instead shall be posted on the property in the manner as
provided in N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.7. The mailed notice shall indicate the
factual basis for the finding of the Code Enforcement Officer, that the
property is abandoned as that term is defined herein and in N.J.S.A.
55:19-54, and shall specify the information relied upon in making such
finding. In all cases, a copy of the mailed or posted notice shall also be
filed by the Code Enforcement Officer in the Office of the Middlesex
County Clerk. This filing shall have the same force and effect as a
formal notice under N.J.S.A. 2A:15-6. The notice shall be captioned with
the name of the Township of Old Bridge as "plaintiff" and the name of
§ 363-2 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 363-2
10:1016
the property owner as "defendant," as though an action had been
commenced by the Township against the owner.
D. An owner or lienholder may challenge the inclusion of his property on
the abandoned property list by appealing that determination to the
Township Administrator within 30 days of the owner's receipt of the
certified notice or 40 days from the date upon which the notice was
sent. An owner whose identity was not known to the Code Enforcement
Officer, shall have 40 days from the date upon which notice was posted,
whichever is later, to challenge the inclusion of a property on the
abandoned property list. For good cause shown, the Township
Administrator may accept a late filing of an appeal. Within 30 days of
receipt of a request for an appeal of the findings contained in the notice,
a hearing shall be scheduled for redetermination of the matter. Any
property included on the list shall be presumed to be abandoned
property unless the owner, through the submission of an affidavit or
certification asserting that the property is not an abandoned property,
can demonstrate that the property was erroneously included on the list.
The affidavit or certification shall be accompanied by supporting
documentation, such as, but not limited to, photographs, repair
invoices, bills and construction contracts. The sole ground for appeal
shall be that the property in question is not an abandoned property as
that term is defined in N.J.S.A. 55:19-54. The Township Administrator
shall decide any timely filed appeal within 10 days of the hearing on the
appeal and shall promptly, by certified mail, return receipt requested,
and by regular mail, notify the property owner of the decision and the
reasons therefor.
E. The property owner may challenge an adverse determination of an
appeal, in accordance with the New Jersey Court Rules, a summary trial
proceeding in the Superior Court, Middlesex County. Such action shall
be instituted within 20 days of the date of the notice of decision. The
sole ground for appeal and new hearing before the Superior Court shall
be that the property in question is not an abandoned property as that
term is defined in N.J.S.A. 55:19-54. The failure to institute an action of
appeal on a timely basis shall constitute a jurisdictional bar to
challenging the adverse determination, except that, for good cause
shown, the court may extend the deadline for instituting the action.
F. The Township shall promptly remove any property from the abandoned
property list that has been determined by the Township Administrator
or on appeal not to be abandoned and may, in its discretion, remove
properties from said list whenever he deems such removal appropriate
under the circumstances.
G. The abandoned property list shall become effective, and the Township
of Old Bridge shall have the right to pursue any legal remedy with
respect to properties on the list, at any time after at least one property
has been placed on the list and following the expiration of the period for
appeal with respect to that first property or upon the denial of an
appeal brought by the property owner of that first property.
§ 363-2 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 363-3
10:1017
§ 363-3. Removal of property from abandoned property list.
§ 363-4. Procedure for Township to place and sell liens.
A. An owner may request removal of their property from the abandoned
property list prior to sale of the tax sale certificate by paying all taxes
and Township liens due, including interest and penalties, and:
(1) By posting cash or a bond equal to the cost of remediating all
conditions because of which the property has been determined to
be abandoned pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-55 and by posting cash or
a bond to cover the cost of any environmental cleanup required on
the property, evidenced by a certification by a licensed engineer
retained by the owner and reviewed and approved by the Township
stating that the cash or bond adequately covers the cost of the
cleanup; or
(2) By demonstrating to the satisfaction of the Township that the
conditions rendering the property abandoned have been
remediated in full; provided, however, that where the
Administrator finds that the owner is actively engaged in
remediating the conditions because of which the property was
determined to be abandoned, as evidenced by significant
rehabilitation activity on the property, may be granted an extension
of time of not more than 120 days for the owner to complete all
work, during which time no further proceedings will be taken
against the owner or the property.
B. If the owner has posted cash or a bond in order to have a property
removed from the abandoned property list and the conditions because
of which the property was determined to be abandoned have not been
fully remediated within one year of the date of posting the cash or bond,
or, in the case of a property which requires a remediation of any known,
suspected, or threatened release of contaminants, if the owner has
failed to enter into a memorandum of agreement with the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection or an administrative consent
order, as the case may be, or if an agreement or order is in effect but the
owner has failed to perform the remediation in conformance with the
agreement or order, then the cash or bond shall be forfeited to the
Township, which shall use the cash or bond and any interest which has
accrued thereon for the purpose of demolishing or rehabilitating the
property or performing the environmental remediation. Any funds
remaining after the property has been demolished, rehabilitated, or
cleaned up shall be returned to the owner.
A. The Township Committee, with the approval of the Court, may place a
lien on the property to cover any costs of the Township in connection
with any proceeding under N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq., incurred prior to
the grant by the Court of an order of possession, which may include
costs incurred to stabilize or secure the property to ensure that it can
be rehabilitated in a cost-effective manner. Any such lien shall be
§ 363-3 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 363-4
10:1018
considered a Township lien for the purposes of N.J.S.A. 54:5-9, with the
rights and status of a Township lien pursuant thereto.
B. Where the Township seeks to gain title to the property, it shall purchase
the property for fair market value on such terms as the Court shall
approve and may place the proceeds of sale in escrow with the Court.
C. The Court may authorize the Township of Old Bridge to sell the building
free and clear of liens, claims and encumbrances, in which event all
such liens, claims and encumbrances shall be transferred to the
proceeds of sale with the same priority as existed prior to resale in
accordance with the provisions of this section, except that municipal
liens shall be paid at settlement. The proceeds of the purchase of the
property shall be distributed as set forth in N.J.S.A. 55:19-97.
D. Upon approval by the Court, the Township shall sell the property on
such terms and at such price as the Court shall approve and may place
the proceeds of sale in escrow with the Court. The Court shall order a
distribution of the proceeds of sale after paying Court costs in the order
of priority set forth in N.J.S.A. 55:19-97.
E. With the exception of the holding of special tax sales pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 55:19-101, the remedies available under N.J.S.A. 55:19-78, et
seq. shall be available to the Township with respect to any abandoned
property, whether or not the Township has established an abandoned
property list and whether or not the property at issue has been included
on any such list.
§ 363-4 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 363-4
10:1019

ARTICLE II
Registration, Inspection and Maintenance of Vacant Property
§ 363-5. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OPERATOR — Any person, persons or entity who is not the owner, who has
charge, care and control of a premises or part thereof, with or without the
knowledge, consent or authority of the owner. "Operator" shall also include
a creditor, as defined in P.L. 2014, c. 5, that has served a notice of intention
to foreclose on a mortgage on a residential property pursuant to P.L. 19101,
c. 244, and that property has become vacant after the filing of this intention
to foreclose.
OWNER — Shall include the title holder, any agent of the title holder having
authority to act with respect to a vacant property, any foreclosing entity
subject to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51 (P.L. 2008, c. 127, § 17,
as amended by P.L. 2009, c. 296), or any other entity determined by the
Township of Old Bridge to have authority to act with respect to the property.
VACANT PROPERTY — Any building used or to be used as a residence which
is not legally occupied or at which substantially all lawful construction
operations or residential occupancy has ceased and which is in such
condition that it cannot legally be reoccupied without repair or
rehabilitation, including but not limited to any property meeting the
definition of abandoned property in N.J.S.A. 55:19-80 or § 363-1; provided,
however, that any property where all building systems are in working order,
where the building and grounds are maintained in good order, or where the
building is in habitable condition, and where the building is being actively
marketed by its owner for sale or rental, shall not be deemed a vacant
property for purposes of this chapter.
§ 363-6. Registration requirements.
The owner and/or operator of any vacant property, as defined herein, shall,
within 30 calendar days after the building becomes vacant property or
within 30 calendar days after assuming ownership of the vacant property,
whichever is later, or within 10 calendar days of receipt of notice by the
municipality, file a registration statement for such vacant property with the
Township on forms provided by the Township for such purposes. Failure to
receive notice by the Township shall not constitute grounds for failure to
register the property.
A. Each property having a separate block and lot number as designated in
official records of the municipality shall be registered separately.
B. The registration statement shall include the name, street address,
telephone number and e-mail address (if applicable) of a person 21
years or older, designated by the owner and/or operator or owner and/
or operators as the authorized agent for receiving notices of code
§ 363-5 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 363-6
10:1021
§ 363-7. Access to vacant properties.
The owner and/or operator of any vacant property registered under this
chapter shall provide access to the Township to conduct exterior and
interior inspections of the building to determine compliance with municipal
codes, upon reasonable notice to the property owner and/or operator or the
designated agent. Such inspections shall be carried out on weekdays during
the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., or such other time as may be mutually
agreed upon between the owner and/or operator and the Township.
§ 363-8. Responsible owner or agent.
violations and for receiving process in any court proceeding or
administrative enforcement proceeding on behalf of such owners and/
or operators in connection with the enforcement of any applicable code,
and the name, street address, telephone number and e-mail address (if
applicable) of the firm and the actual name(s) of the firm's individual
principal(s) responsible for maintaining the property. The individual
or representative of the firm responsible for maintaining the property
shall be available by telephone or in person on a twenty-four-hour-perday,
seven-day-per-week basis. The two entities may be the same or
different persons. Both entities shown on the statement must maintain
offices in the State of New Jersey or reside within the State of New
Jersey.
C. The registration shall remain valid for one year from the date of
registration, except for the initial registration time, which shall be
prorated through December 31. The owner and/or operator shall be
required to renew the registration annually as long as the building
remains a vacant property and shall pay a registration or renewal fee in
the amount prescribed in § 363-10 of Article III, for each vacant
property registered.
D. The annual renewal shall be completed by January 1 each year. The
initial registration fee shall be prorated for registration statements
received less than 10 months prior to that date.
E. The owner and/or operator shall notify the Township within 30 calendar
days of any change in the registration information by filing an amended
registration statement on a form provided by the Township for such
purpose.
F. The registration statement shall be deemed prima facie proof of the
statements therein contained in any administrative enforcement
proceeding or court proceeding instituted by the Township against the
owners and/or operators of the building.
A. An owner who meets the requirements of this chapter with respect to
the location of his or her residence or workplace in the State of New
Jersey may designate him or herself as agent or as the individual
responsible for maintaining the property.
§ 363-6 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 363-8
10:1022
§ 363-9. Requirements of owners and/or operators of vacant
properties.
The owner and/or operator of any building that has become vacant property,
and any person maintaining or operating or collecting rent for any such
building that has become vacant, shall, within 30 days thereof:
B. By designating an authorized agent under the provisions of this section,
the owner consents to receive any and all notices of code violations
concerning the registered vacant property and all process in any court
proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding brought to
enforce code provisions concerning the registered building by service
of the notice or process on the authorized agent. Any owner who has
designated an authorized agent under the provisions of this section
shall be deemed to consent to the continuation of the agent's
designation for the purposes of this section until the owner notifies the
Township in writing of a change of authorized agent or until the owner
files a new annual registration statement.
C. Any owner who fails to register vacant property under the provisions of
this chapter shall further be deemed to consent to receive by posting on
the building, in plain view, and by service of notice at the last known
address of the owner of the property on record within the Township of
Old Bridge by regular and certified mail, any and all notices of code
violations and all process in an administrative proceeding brought to
enforce code provisions concerning the building.
A. Enclose and secure the building against unauthorized entry as provided
in the applicable provisions of the Township Code or as set forth in the
rules and regulations supplementing those codes; and
B. Post a sign affixed to the building indicating the name, address and
telephone number of the owner and/or operator, the owner and/or
operator's authorized agent for the purpose of service of process (if
designated pursuant to § 363-8 above), and the person responsible for
the day-to-day supervision and management of the building, if such
person is different from the owner and/or operator holding title or
authorized agent. The sign shall be of a size and placed in such a
location so as to be legible from the nearest public street or sidewalk,
whichever is nearer, but shall be no smaller than eight inches by 10
inches; and
C. Secure the building from unauthorized entry and maintain the sign until
the building is again legally occupied or demolished or until repair or
rehabilitation of the building is complete; and
D. Ensure that the exterior grounds of the structure, including yards,
fences, sidewalks, walkways, rights-of-way, alleys, retaining walls,
attached or unattached accessory structures and driveways, are well
maintained and free from trash, debris, loose litter and grass and weed
growth; and
§ 363-8 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 363-9
10:1023
E. Continue to maintain the structure in a secure and closed condition,
keep the grounds in a clean and well-maintained condition, and ensure
that the sign is visible and intact until the building is again occupied or
is demolished or until repaid and/or rehabilitation of the building is
complete.
F. If the owner of a residential property vacates or abandons any property
on which a foreclosure proceeding has been initiated, or if a residential
property becomes vacant at any point subsequent to the operator's
filing the summons and complaint in an action to foreclose on a
mortgage against the subject property, but prior to vesting of title in the
operator or any other third party, and the property is found to be a
nuisance and/or in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, the
Code Enforcement Officer shall notify the operator, which shall have the
responsibility to abate the nuisance and/or correct the violation in the
same manner and to the same extent as the title owner of the property,
to such standard or specification as may be required by state law or this
chapter. The Township shall include a description of the conditions that
gave rise to the violation with the notice of violation, and shall provide a
period of not less than 30 days from the operator's receipt of the notice
for the operator to remedy the violation. If the operator fails to remedy
the violation within that time period, the Township may impose
penalties allowed for such violations pursuant to Article III of this
chapter.
§ 363-9 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 363-9
10:1024
ARTICLE III
Enforcement
§ 363-10. Fees.
§ 363-11. Requirements of creditors of vacant or abandoned
properties.
A. The initial registration fee for each building shall be $500.
B. The fee for the first renewal is $1,500.
C. The fee for a second renewal is $3,000.
D. The fee for any subsequent renewal beyond the second renewal is
$5,000.
A. A creditor, as defined in P.L. 2014, c. 5, who files a summons and
complaint in an action to foreclose, shall be responsible for the care,
maintenance, security, and upkeep of the exterior of the vacant and
abandoned residential property subject to the foreclosure, and if
located out-of-state, shall be responsible for appointing an in-state
representative or agent to act for the foreclosing creditor.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer, or any other local official designated by
the governing body for administration of any property maintenance or
public nuisance code, may issue a notice to the creditor filing the
summons and complaint in an action to foreclose, if the public officer or
other authorized municipal official determines that the creditor has
violated any provision of this chapter by failing to provide for the care,
maintenance, security, and upkeep of the exterior of the vacant and
abandoned residential property subject to the foreclosure.
(1) Such notice shall include a description of the conditions that gave
rise to the violation with the notice of violation and shall provide a
period of not less than 30 days from the creditor's receipt of the
notice for the creditor to remedy the violation, or within 10 days of
receipt of the notice if the violation presents an imminent threat to
public health and safety.
(2) A creditor subject to this section who is found to be in violation of
this section by the Old Bridge Township Municipal Court, or by any
other court of competent jurisdiction, of the requirement to correct
a care, maintenance, security, or upkeep violation cited in a notice
issued pursuant to the ordinance shall be subject to a fine of $1,500
for each day of the violation. Any fines imposed pursuant to this
subsection shall commence 31 days following receipt of the notice,
except if the violation presents an imminent risk to public health
and safety, in which case any fines shall commence 11 days
following receipt of the notice.
§ 363-10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 363-11
10:1025
§ 363-12. Violations and penalties.
C. Any creditor whose principal place of business is located outside of the
State of New Jersey who has served a summons and complaint in an
action to foreclose on a residential property, shall provide to the
Township the full name and contact information of its in-state
representative or agent, within the ten-day period as required by
N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51, which contains the full name and contact
information of an in-state representative or agent who shall be
responsible for the care, maintenance, security, and upkeep of the
exterior of the property if it becomes vacant and/or abandoned.
(1) Any out-of-state creditor subject to the provisions of this section
who is found by the Old Bridge Township Municipal Court, or by
any other court of competent jurisdiction, in violation of the
requirement of this section to appoint an in-state representative or
agent pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to a fine of $2,500
for each day of the violation.
(2) Any fines imposed on a creditor for the failure to appoint an in-state
representative or agent shall commence on the day after the tenday
period as required by N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51 et seq. for providing
notice to the Township that a summons and complaint in an action
to foreclose on a mortgage has been served.
D. The issuance of a notice pursuant to this section shall constitute proof
that the property is "vacant and abandoned" for the purposes of P.L.
2012, c. 70 (N.J.S.A. 2A:50-73).
A. Except as otherwise provided in § 363-11 above, any owner, operator or
occupant who or which shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter
shall, upon conviction in the Old Bridge Township Municipal Court or
any such other court having jurisdiction, be sentenced to a penalty not
exceeding $1,000 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days, or
both. Each day that a violation persists shall be deemed a separate
offense and subject to the penalty provisions of this chapter.
B. For purposes of this chapter, failure to file a registration statement
within 30 calendar days after a building becomes a vacant property or
within 30 calendar days after assuming ownership of a vacant property,
whichever is later, or within 10 calendar days of receipt of notice by the
municipality, and failure to provide correct information on the
registration statement, or failure to comply with the provisions
contained herein shall be deemed to be violations of this chapter.
§ 363-11 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 363-12
10:1026
Chapter 366
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarms and alarm systems — See Ch. 26.
Animals — See Ch. 39.
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 72.
Fences — See Ch. 164.
Graffiti — See Ch. 215.
Housing — See Ch. 235.
Littering — See Ch. 265.
Mosquito breeding control — See Ch. 284.
Multiple dwellings — See Ch. 290.
Nuisances — See Ch. 305.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 309.
Pesticide control — See Ch. 355.
Solid waste — See Ch. 429.
Stormwater quality — See Ch. 432.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 435.
Trees — See Ch. 457.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 463.
§ 366-1. Adoption of International Property Maintenance Code by
reference.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of
the Township Clerk of the Township of Old Bridge, being marked and
designated as the "International Property Maintenance Code," 2006 edition,
as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted
as the Property Maintenance Code of the Township of Old Bridge, County
of Middlesex and State of New Jersey, for regulating and governing the
conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by
providing the standard for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical
things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary
and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of such existing
structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and
collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of said Property Maintenance Code on file in
the office of the Township Clerk are hereby referred to, adopted, and made
a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions,
deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in § 366-2 of this chapter.
§ 366-2. Changes to published text; code revisions specific to
Township.
The following sections of the International Property Maintenance Code are
hereby revised as follows:
A. Section 101.1, insert: Township of Old Bridge.
§ 363-12 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 366-2
10:1027
§ 366-3. Notice of failure to comply.
The Construction Code Official, Zoning Officer or other designated officer is
authorized to notify, in writing, by mailing by certified mail, return receipt
requested, and regular mail or hand delivering to the owner, or person or
entity in control of the subject premises or the agent of the owner, person
in control or entity advising him or the entity of the particular violation.
In the event the property is in foreclosure, notice may also be sent to the
mortgagee in the manner set forth herein. If the notice is returned showing
the letter was not delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous
place in or about the structure affected by such notice. The person or
entity shall have 20 days from the date of receipt of the notice to cure the
violation. Said notice shall be deemed to serve as a continuing notice for the
B. Section 102.3, amend to read: Repairs, additions or alterations to a
structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with
the current codes as adopted by the State of New Jersey, N.J.A.C. 5:23 et
seq.
C. Section 103.1, amend to read: The Department of Property
Maintenance Inspection is hereby created, and the executive official in
charge thereof shall be known as the "Construction Official, Director of
Code Enforcement," for the Township of Old Bridge. All references
within the IPM Code to "Code Official" shall mean "Construction
Official, Director of Code Enforcement."
D. Section 103.5, insert: The fee schedule will be available in the Code
Enforcement Office.
E. Section 106.4, add to section: In addition, any person who shall violate
a provision of this code shall also, upon conviction thereof, be subject to
the penalties as set forth in Chapter 1, Art. II, Penalty, of the Code of the
Township of Old Bridge.
F. Section 108.2, add to section: The closing of any vacant structure shall
not occur until a complete premises search has been conducted by the
Township of Old Bridge Police Department so that all public life, health,
safety concerns can be addressed as appropriate.
G. Section 111.1, add to section: The nonrefundable fee for filing an
appeal shall be $100 per violation appealed.
H. Section 111.2.5, amend to read: Members shall serve without
compensation.
I. Section 302.4, insert: 10 inches.
J. Section 304.14, insert dates in both locations: April 1 to November 1.
K. Section 602.3, insert dates in both locations: October 1 to May 1.
L. Section 602.4, insert dates in both locations: October 1 to May 1.
§ 366-2 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 366-3
10:1028
remainder of the violation on the subject property in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 366-4. Failure or refusal to comply.
In the event that the person or entity owning said land shall refuse or
neglect to abate or remedy the condition complained of and which
constituted a violation of this chapter, after said 20 days' notice, the
Business Administrator or his designee shall cause the condition
complained of to be abated and remedied.
§ 366-5. Unpaid charges to constitute lien on property.
If the owner, entity or person in possession of the dwelling or lands in
question shall fail to abate the condition complained of within the time
period specified after receipt of notice, the Code Enforcement Official or his
designee shall cause the condition complained of to be abated, either by
action of the Department of Public Works or by engagement of an outside
contractor, and shall present a report of the work accomplished to the
Township Council, along with a summary of the abatement undertaken to
secure compliance. He or she shall certify the actual labor costs of same
plus 25%, but not less than administrative fee of $100, to the Township
Council, which shall examine the report and certificate and, if it is correct,
cause the cost as shown thereon to be charged against the dwelling or
lands. A copy of the resolution approving the expenses shall be certified
by the Township Clerk and filed with the Tax Collector, who shall be
responsible for the collection thereof. The amount so charged shall
forthwith become a lien upon the dwelling or lands and shall be added to
and become and form part of the taxes next assessed and levied upon such
dwelling and lands, shall bear interest at the same rate as the taxes, and
shall be collected and enforced by the same officer and in the same manner
as taxes. Costs shall be in addition to any penalties imposed for any violation
of this chapter.
§ 366-6. Copies on file.
Three copies of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2006 edition,
have been placed on file in the office of the Township Clerk and will remain
there for the use and examination of the public.
Chapter 373
RACETRACKS
§ 373-1. License required.
No person shall engage in the maintaining, conducting and operating of any
racetrack, oval, scooter track, velodrome or other form of track, roadway or
similar place for the exhibition to, or use by, the public of any form of motor-
§ 366-3 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 373-1
10:1029
driven or motor-paced vehicle or conveyance without first having applied
for and obtained a license in accordance with this chapter.
§ 373-2. License application requirements.
§ 373-3. License fee.216
The annual license fee shall be $1,000, and no part thereof shall be prorated
for any fraction of the year. License fees shall be payable on a calendar year
basis expiring December 31 of the year in which the license is issued.
§ 373-4. Conditions of all licenses.
All licenses issued under this chapter shall be subject to the following
conditions and restrictions:
A. All applications for licenses shall be in writing, stating the name and
address of the applicant if an individual, the names and addresses of all
principals if the applicant is a corporation, firm, partnership or
association, the names and addresses of all the officers, and the names
and addresses of all stockholders having 10% or more financial interest.
If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation's
registered agent shall be set forth in the application.
B. All applications shall be filed with the Township Clerk, who shall cause
a copy to be sent to the Old Bridge Township Police Department. The
Township Clerk shall issue the license as a matter of course unless it
shall appear that the prior operations of the racetrack have consistently
violated any ordinances of the Township of Old Bridge, any New Jersey
statutes or regulations or any special conditions on the license.
C. All applications shall be accompanied by the annual license fee as
hereafter stated.
D. In the event the Township Clerk concludes that there is cause to believe
that a license should not be issued, the Clerk shall notify the Mayor,
who shall conduct a hearing as hereinafter provided.
A. The operator (licensee) of the racetrack facility shall take all reasonable
measures to assure that the patrons of the racetrack, employees of the
racetrack and contestants obey all laws and otherwise act in an orderly
fashion.
B. The operator (licensee) of the racetrack facility shall make periodic
announcements to patrons of any event requesting that they refrain
from disposing of litter on and along the roadside when entering and
exiting the racetrack facility.
216. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 373-1 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 373-4
10:1030
§ 373-5. Nontransferability.
No license shall be transferable. In the event a racetrack facility is
transferred to another owner or operator, such new owner or operator
shall file a separate license application before engaging in maintaining,
conducting or operating any racetrack.
§ 373-6. Days and hours of operation.
C. The operator (licensee) of the racetrack facility shall make periodic
announcements to patrons of any event requesting that they exit the
race event in a quiet and orderly manner.
A. Muffled vehicles. There shall be no limitation on the days and hours of
operation of any racetrack, oval, scooter track, velodrome or other form
of track, roadway or similar facility with respect to the operation, use,
display or racing of motor vehicles which are sound muffled.
B. Number of racing days limited. The racing of unmuffled vehicles upon
any racetrack, oval, scooter track, velodrome or other form of track,
roadway or similar facility shall be subject to the following limitations
on number of racing days: limited to two days per week, plus 15
additional days during any calendar year. Upon good cause shown, the
Mayor, or his or her designee, may authorize further racing days to be
held to a maximum of five additional days during any calendar year.
C. Hours of operation. In no event shall races be commenced prior to 9:00
a.m. or continue subsequent to 11:00 p.m. in any day. Upon good cause
shown, the Mayor, or his or her designee, may enlarge the limits set
forth herein on the hours of operation.
D. Special provisions governing the days, hours and operation of Old
Bridge Township Raceway Park.
(1) The Township Council does hereby recognize the existence of
various court orders regulating the days, hours and operations of a
certain racetrack situate within the Township of Old Bridge, known
as “Old Bridge Township Raceway Park” (formerly Madison
Township Raceway Park), Laiken et al. v. Madison Township
Raceway Park, Chancery Division, Monmouth County, Docket No.
C-109-77, which may be more restrictive than the conduct
permitted under this chapter. The Township of Old Bridge does,
however, hereby incorporate the following specific restrictions
therefrom into its ordinances, and such restrictions shall apply only
to Old Bridge Raceway Park:
(a) Jet cars, rocket cars, top fuel dragsters, funny cars and those
supercharged cars which burn nitro-methane or hydrogen
peroxide will not be operated at the racetrack premises more
than 18 days in any calendar year.
§ 373-4 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 373-6
10:1031
§ 373-7. Nonracing events at any racetrack.
§ 373-8. Revocation, nonrenewal or refusal to issue; notice and
hearing.
(b) No vehicle utilizing a J46 engine shall be operated at the Old
Bridge Township Raceway Park premises at any time.
(c) The public address system shall not be operated prior to 8:00
a.m. nor subsequent to 11:00 p.m. Such public address system
shall be utilized at the lowest volume setting which permits
reasonable broadcast to patrons and contestants while also
minimizing transmission thereof outside the racetrack
premises.
(d) In no event shall races of unmuffled vehicles at the dragstrip
portion of the property be commenced prior to 10:00 a.m. nor
continue subsequent to 10:00 p.m. except during one
Wednesday each during the months of June, July and August, at
which time racing may extend to 10:30 p.m. Nothing herein
shall be construed as a limitation or restriction upon the
operation, use, display or racing of motor vehicles which are
sound muffled.
(2) Compliance with the foregoing provisions shall be endorsed upon
the Old Bridge Raceway Park license as a special condition of
licensure.
A. It shall be unlawful for any operator (licensee) of a racetrack to
maintain, operate or suffer any festival or mass assembly unless the
licensee has first secured a license to hold an assembly pursuant to
Chapter 169, Festivals; Mass Gatherings, of the Code of the Township of
Old Bridge.
B. No licensee shall be required to secure a license to hold an assembly
pursuant to Chapter 169, Festivals; Mass Gatherings, of the Code of the
Township of Old Bridge in connection with any festival or mass
assembly which has as its primary purpose the showing or selling of
vehicles, components, parts or accessories related to motor vehicles,
motorcycles, scooters or other similar motorized conveyances.
A. In the event the Township Council concludes that a license should not
be issued or renewed, the aggrieved applicant shall have a right to
notice and hearing as set forth herein.217
B. Upon the complaint of the Police Chief, any police officer or other
official of the Township of Old Bridge, a license may be suspended or
revoked, but only upon compliance with the provisions of notice and
hearing set forth herein.
217. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 373-6 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 373-8
10:1032
Chapter 380
RECORDS, PUBLIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 160. Maps and photographs — See Ch. 277.
§ 380-1. Purpose.
New Jersey has adopted the Open Public Records Law which has as its
general purpose making government records more available to the public
than they have been in the past. In certain instances, the production of
archived or records in a format which is not the usual format maintained
by the municipality or other special circumstances would be costly and time
consuming. The New Jersey Public Records Law permits the municipality to
require the payment of fees, special service charges and/or special charges
as a prerequisite to the production of records requiring extraordinary time
and effort, special equipment or special formatting.
§ 380-2. Ordinary requests for information.
§ 380-3. No research or interpretation may be compelled.
Nothing in this chapter shall require the custodian of documents or any
other municipal official to examine, analyze, tabulate, or interpret
C. The Director of Law shall, in the case of any revocation, nonrenewal or
refusal to issue a license under this chapter, cause a written notice to be
prepared and served upon the applicant or licensee, reasonably setting
forth the charges against the applicant or licensee. Thereafter, the
Mayor, or his or her designee, shall conduct a fair and impartial hearing
to determine the charges.
D. Following the hearing provided by this section, the Township Clerk, or
his or her designee, shall be empowered to revoke, withhold renewal or
withhold issuance of any license.218
A. The statutory fee schedule shall apply to routine requests under the
Open Public Records Law. The fees of N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5 are hereby
incorporated herein as such fee schedule presently exists or as such
fees might appear in future modifications or amendments of the statute.
B. Fees for routine copies of municipal documents shall be $0.05 per
letter-size page or smaller and $0.07 per legal-size page or larger.
[Amended 10-25-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-30]
218. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 373-8 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 380-3
10:1033
documents which are subject to production under the New Jersey Open
Public Records Act.
§ 380-4. Special service charge; special charges authorized.
§ 380-5. Fees, special service charges and special charges; when
charged; amounts authorized.
A. Charges authorized. The Township Clerk or other custodian or keeper
of documents qualifying for mandatory production as "governmental
records" under the New Jersey Public Records Act shall be entitled to
special service charges and/or special charges as set forth in § 380-5 of
this chapter.
B. Requests to be in writing. Any requests for documents shall be made to
the Township Clerk on a form established by the Township Clerk for
such purposes.
C. Advance notice of fees, special service charges and special charges;
deposit. Any requester of government records which are eligible for the
imposition of a special charge or special service charge under § 380-5 of
this chapter shall receive advance notice of the amount of fees and
charges before any work is started. The Township Clerk shall require
prepayment of such charges before causing the work to begin.
A. Duplication or other work beyond capability of municipal in-house work
force. Whenever the in-house municipal work force or available
municipal equipment is insufficient to duplicate or produce government
records in a timely fashion, the Township Clerk may cause such
duplication or production to be accomplished by outside vendors such
as copy centers or producers of digital images. If the costs of such
duplication or production charged by such vendors exceeds the routine
charges set forth in N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5, the actual direct cost of same
without any additional surcharge for labor costs shall be paid.
B. Special service charges authorized. Whenever government records
cannot be reproduced by regular copying equipment or fulfillment of
the request would involve extraordinary time and effort (for example,
where a large number of records must be recovered from storage or
substantive staff time is required to review, sort and assemble records),
charges may be imposed as follows:
(1) The actual cost (materials and supplies but no staff labor) of
duplication or reproduction; plus
(2) A special service charge of $32 per hour or the actual direct cost of
labor (if less) shall be imposed for each hour of extraordinary time
predicted to be utilized to respond to the request.
C. Rates for in-house production of prints or blueprints. Any prints or
blueprints produced in-house in response to a governmental records
request shall be produced for $28 per page.
§ 380-3 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 380-5
10:1034
§ 380-6. Notice of copyright laws.
D. Cost of GIS data. The cost of any GIS data owned by the Township of Old
Bridge shall be as follows:
Topographic Price List
Based on 100 Scale
8 1/2 x 11 Xerox = 21 acres $252
8 1/2 x 14 Xerox = 27 acres $324
11 x 17 Xerox = 43 acres $516
15 x 20 Xerox = 69 acres (1/2 sheet) $714
20 x 30 Xerox = 138 acres (1 full
sheet)
$1,090
E. Digital records.
(1) If a request for governmental records involves production or
conversion of digital or computerized records or film which is:
(a) In a medium not routinely used by the agency (i.e., electronic
or film);
(b) Not routinely developed or maintained by an agency; or
(c) Requiring a substantial amount of manipulation or
programming of information technology.
(2) The requester shall pay fees and special charges as follows:
(a) Direct costs (no overhead) to comply with the request; plus
(b) Special charges; the lesser of the cost of technology and labor
actually incurred or $45 per hour.
A. The Township of Old Bridge may be compelled by New Jersey Law to
produce or duplicate governmental records but no compliance with
these legal obligations shall be deemed to constitute a license,
sublicense or waiver of copyright laws.
B. The Township Clerk shall give the following notice to any requester of
governmental records.
Notice — Copyright Laws
You must comply with U.S. copyright laws. These laws may restrict
your right to use, duplicate or modify the records provided to you
by the Township of Old Bridge. You should consult your own legal
counsel on this since severe civil and criminal penalties for violation of
copyright laws are provided.
§ 380-5 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 380-7
10:1035
§ 380-7. Waivers for governmental educational requester.
The Mayor, Clerk or Township Council (by resolution) may waive the fees
or other charges otherwise chargeable if the requester of governmental
records is a governmental or educational entity.
Chapter 388
RENTAL PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing — See Ch. 235. Multiple dwellings — See Ch. 290.
§ 380-7 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 380-7
10:1036
ARTICLE I
Rent Stabilization
[Adopted by Ord. No. D-180 (Ch. XIA of the 1973 Revised General
Ordinances)]
§ 388-1. Definitions. [Amended 12-16-1985 by Ord. No. 57-85]
The following words and phrases shall have, for the purposes of this article,
meanings as set forth herein:
AVAILABLE FOR RENT TO TENANT — Fit for habitation as defined by
the statutes, codes and ordinances in full force and effect in the State of
New Jersey, County of Middlesex, Township of Old Bridge and occupied or
unoccupied and offered for rent or rented.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT — A permanent improvement that is reasonably
expected to last more than one year. Improvement may benefit the dwelling
and must be subject to an allowance for depreciation under federal income
tax provisions. The term "capital improvement" shall not be applicable if the
improvement is merely for replacement, repair, rehabilitation or mandated
by law.
COMPLEX — Includes all housing units advertised as available for rent to
tenants under the same management and trading under the same name.
CPI — The Consumer Price Index (all items) for that region of the New
York-Northeastern New Jersey area in which the Township of Old Bridge
is included, which index is periodically published by the Bureau of Labor
Statistics of the United States Department of Labor.
DWELLING SPACE — Includes that portion of a housing space rented
or offered for rent for living purposes to an individual or family unit.
Recreation rooms in the basement shall be considered living space for the
purpose of determining surcharges or rebates.
ENERGY EMERGENCY — Any month in which the increase of the energy
portion of the CPI constitutes over 50% of the total increase in the CPI for
that month an energy emergency shall be declared.
FAIR RENTAL —
The prevailing rental applicable to each dwelling unit in the Township
as of October 18, 1976, and as may be increased in accordance with
this article.
A.
Increases.
For those tenants who received a rent increase during the first
six months of 1976, the fair rental shall be the prevailing rate on
October 18, 1976, and may be increased in accordance with this
article.
(1)
For those tenants who did not receive a rent increase during the
first nine months of 1976 but who received a rent increase after
(2)
B.
§ 388-1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 388-1
10:1037
HOUSING SPACE — Includes any building or structure or trailer or land
used as a trailer park, rented or offered for rent to one or more tenants
or family units, together with all privileges, services, furnishings, furniture,
equipment, facilities and improvements connected with the use or
occupancy of such portion of the property.
JUST CAUSE — For eviction, shall mean that the landlord recovered
possession of a housing space or dwelling for one of the reasons outlined in
N.J.S.A. 2A:18-53, as amended.
LANDLORD — Includes any person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation or other entity and any officer, agent or employee or any of
the foregoing which is the owner, rental agent, manager or otherwise has
authority to rent any rental unit to a tenant.
PERIODIC TENANCY — A tenancy that continues from month to month
or other recurring period until terminated by the landlord or tenant as
provided by law. Month-to-month tenants are included under this article and
shall be entitled to the same protection as tenants under written leases.
RENT — The amount of valuable consideration payable by the tenant to the
landlord for letting or subletting of a dwelling unit.
SENIOR CITIZEN — A person 60 years of age or older as defined under the
Title 111 Americans Act of 1965.
SERVICE — The provision of light, heat, hot water, maintenance, bathing,
elevator service, air conditioning, storm windows, screens, superintendent
service and any other benefit, privilege or facility connected with the use
or occupancy of any living space or covered under the state and municipal
code.
§ 388-2. Establishment of rents.
October 18, 1976, and before March 2, 1977, the fair rental shall
be the prevailing rate on October 18, 1976, plus the average rent
increase given during the first nine months of 1976 for that type
of dwelling unit, and may be increased in accordance with the
provisions of this article.
For all other tenants, the fair rental shall be the prevailing rental
on October 18, 1976, and may be increased in accordance with this
article.
(3)
A. Percentage of increase. [Amended 12-11-1978 by Ord. No. D-254;
4-24-1980 by Ord. No. D-304; 3-21-1983 by Ord. No. 10-83;
4-18-1984 by Ord. No. 8B-84]
(1) The fair rental, as defined above, may not be increased at the
expiration of a lease or at the termination of a periodic tenancy of
not less than one year (12 months), except as set forth herein. A
landlord shall not request or receive from a tenant nor increase
rents a percentage increase in rent which is greater than 3% of the
existing rent. Any real estate taxes being passed on to a tenant
§ 388-1 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 388-2
10:1038
shall not be included in the above increases. A landlord shall not
request or receive the percentage increase more than once every
twelve-month period for any dwelling unit. The within section shall
be reviewed annually by the Township Council. [Amended
4-15-1985 by Ord. No. 17-85; 5-18-1987 by Ord. No. 21-87;
5-16-1988 by Ord. No. 14-88]
(2) Any rental increase at a time other than at the expiration of a lease
or the termination of a period tenancy of not less than one year (12
months) shall be void.
(3) The terms and provisions of this article as pertains to rent
increases only shall not be applicable to any new lease entered
between June 1, 2006 to May 31, 2010. Rent control shall apply to
any renewal, extension or amendment of any lease now or
thereafter in effect. The percentage increase at renewal for units
covered by rent control shall not exceed 2% per year. The Township
Council may review said increase on an annual basis based upon
the recommendation of the Fair Rent Committee. [Added
5-16-1988 by Ord. No. 14-88; amended 5-18-1992 by Ord. No.
20-92219; 5-13-1996 by Ord. No. 21-96; 2-9-1998 by Ord. No.
12-98; 8-12-2002 by Ord. No. 40-02; 5-8-2006 by Ord. No.
19-2006]
(4) No landlord shall be entitled to the percentage of increase set forth
in Subsection A(1) above unless said landlord has complied with all
disclosure requirements set forth in the Code of the Township of
Old Bridge, including but not limited to this article. It shall be a
further, additional and separate violation of the Code of the
Township of Old Bridge for any landlord who may fail to provide
any certified statements that may be required by either the Tax
Assessor and/or Rent Stabilization Board of the Township of Old
Bridge as well as any other board, agency or commission for which
disclosure is required. [Added 5-16-1988 by Ord. No. 14-88]
B. Discontinuance of services. Any rental increase in excess of the sum
authorized by the provisions of this article shall be void. During the
time of this article, every landlord shall maintain the same standard of
service, maintenance, furniture, furnishings or equipment in the
housing spaces and dwelling units the landlord provided or was
requested to provide by law or lease as of the date of this article. A
discontinuance of any service shall be considered a rental increase by
the Board. Any discontinuance of service must be submitted to the Rent
Stabilization Board for approval and possible reduction in rent.
Landlord shall be required to notify all tenants of any approved
changes. [Amended 4-24-1980 by Ord. No. D-304; 12-16-85 by
Ord. No. 57-85]
219. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renewal of this section.
§ 388-2 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 388-2
10:1039
§ 388-3. Fees on washing machines. [Added 9-15-1980 by Ord. No.
D-318]
No landlord shall charge a fee to any tenant for each washing machine and
dryer which said tenant has in his apartment.
§ 388-3.1. Fees on satellite dishes. [Added 5-22-2006 by Ord. No.
25-2006]
No landlord shall charge a separate fee or security deposit to any tenant for
the installation or removal of a satellite dish.
§ 388-4. Fees on keeping dogs. [Added 9-15-1980 by Ord. No.
D-318; amended 12-5-1983 by Ord. No. 29-83]
No landlord shall charge a fee to any tenant in excess of $10 per month for
each dog kept by a tenant.
§ 388-5. Security deposits. [Added 2-16-1982 by Ord. No. 2-82]
Whenever money is collected by the landlord as a security deposit for the
performance of anything, or to be held as a security against the happening
of any event, even though said deposit is not of the type referred to in
N.J.S.A. 46:8-19 et seq., said deposit shall be treated by the landlord as
though it were a deposit provided for under N.J.S.A. 46:8-19 et seq., and all
provisions of N.J.S.A. 46:8-19 et seq. shall apply to said deposits as though
they were set forth at length in this section.
§ 388-6. Fees on keys. [Added 11-15-1982 by Ord. No. 23-82]
No landlord shall charge a separate key deposit to any tenant.220
C. Applications for increases. There shall be a separate application for
each type of dwelling unit by complex. In support of an application to
the Rent Board, the owner or landlord shall make all books and records
applicable to the operation of the dwelling unit available to the Board
and the specific tenant affected.
D. Notices to tenants. Prior to any application under this section, the
landlord shall serve upon each tenant, by registered or certified mail or
personal service, a notice of application filing, setting forth the basis for
said application, the amount of the allowable rental increase, the
allowable percentage increase applied for with respect to that tenant
and the calculations involved in computing the increase, including the
consumer price index, 120 days before the expiration of the lease. A
sample copy of such notice shall be filed with the application of the
landlord, together with an affidavit or certifications of service of notice
of application upon each tenant in the event the certified or registered
mail is not received in 10 days. Notice by regular mail or personal
service shall be made by the landlord or his agent. [Amended
12-11-1978 by Ord. No. D-254]
§ 388-2 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 388-7
10:1040
§ 388-7. Automatic rent increase for tax increase; tenant tax
rebates. [Added 10-10-2000 by Ord. No. 42-00]
§ 388-8. Real estate tax rebate.
A. Tax increase. A landlord shall receive an automatic increase in the
amount of rent upon an increase in the amount of property tax levied
upon the property which is in effect for the base year and current year.
The landlord shall divide the increase in amount of rent over the
property tax of the previous year by the number of square feet in the
dwelling to obtain the rent increase per square foot. The tenant shall
not be liable for a rent increase exceeding the tax increase per square
foot multiplied by the number of feet occupied by the tenant.
B. Notice to tenant of tax increase. The landlord shall notify the tenant of
the automatic increase in the amount of rent by certified mail return
receipt requested of the calculation involved in computing the rent
increase, including the present property tax for the dwelling, the
property tax for the dwelling the previous year, the number of square
feet in the dwelling, the increase per square foot, the number of square
feet occupied by the tenant and the maximum allowed rent increase.
C. Payment of rent increase. The rent increase each tenant is liable for
shall be paid in 12 monthly payments commencing July 1 of each year.
D. Automatic increase in rent. The automatic increase shall not be
considered rent for purposes of computing rental increases as provided
for in this article.
A. Rebates on tax appeals. [Amended 12-5-1983 by Ord. No. 29-83;
12-16-1985 by Ord. No. 57-85]
(1) In the event that a tax appeal is taken and the landlord is successful
in the appeal and taxes are reduced and a rebate made to the
landlord, the tenants shall receive 100% of all such reductions as
applied pro rata to each tenant's living space so leased. The
landlord shall be entitled to deduct from said reduction amount all
reasonable and necessary expenses incurred in connection with the
appeal. Prior to deducting these expenses, the landlord must
submit to the Rent Stabilization Board proof of each expense for
which a deduction is sought for Board approval. The net rebate or
reduction to be paid to each tenant shall be deemed to be held in
trust for the tenants, and the full pro rata amount of the rebate or
reduction shall be credited to the account of each such tenant and
returned to him by cash payment by check within 30 days of receipt
of money by the landlord. In the event that the landlord does not
return the proportionate share of the rebate to the tenant within
said thirty-day period, a tenant shall be entitled to twice the net
220. Editor's Note: Former Sec. 11A-3, Tax surcharge, as amended 12-16-1985 by Ord. No.
57-85, which previously followed this section, was repealed 5-21-1990 by Ord. No. 14-90.
§ 388-7 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 388-8
10:1041
§ 388-9. Rent Stabilization Board.
rebate. Money not returned to a tenant because of no forwarding
address should go to the Township for general purposes.
(2) The landlord shall be deemed to have received such rebate upon
his receipt thereof in cash from the receiver of taxes or upon the
execution of any agreement with the receiver of taxes to credit the
amount of the rebate to any outstanding tax bill of the landlord. The
Township Tax Collector shall notify the Rent Stabilization Board of
any changes in assessments of an apartment complex and any
rebate for taxes sent to a landlord. The landlord shall submit to the
Rent Stabilization Board, within 45 days after receipt of rent
reduction, a certification that the tenants have received their
proportionate share of the tax rebate.
B. Rebates on other real estate tax reductions. In the event that real estate
taxes are reduced for any other reason, then the tenant shall receive
100% of the reduction as applied pro rata to the tenant's dwelling space
so leased, commencing 30 days after such reduction and spread over a
twelve-month period consistent with tax surcharge.
A. Composition of Board; terms.
(1) There is hereby created a Rent Stabilization Board within the
Township. The Board shall consist of two landlords or their agents
owning apartment rental property within the Township, three
tenants residing within the Township and three homeowners who
reside in the Township who shall be neither landlord nor tenant.
The members of the Board shall be appointed by the Council.
[Amended 12-5-1983 by Ord. No. 29-83]
(2) The initial terms of office of the members shall be as follows:
[Amended 4-21-1986 by Ord. No. 12-86]
(a) One landlord, homeowner and tenant: three years.
(b) One landlord, homeowner and tenant: two years.
(c) One homeowner and tenant: one year.
(3) The terms of office of all new members appointed or all members
reappointed after initial terms as outlined above shall thereafter be
three-year terms.
(4) Alternate members. Three alternate members shall be appointed to
the Board for three-year terms, consisting of one homeowner
alternate, one tenant alternate and one landlord alternate. [Added
4-20-1980 by Ord. No. 11-81]
B. Meetings; quorum; officers; compensation.
§ 388-8 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 388-9
10:1042
(1) Four members shall constitute a quorum. [Amended 12-11-1978
by Ord. No. D-254]
(2) The Board shall meet on a monthly basis and whenever necessary.
[Amended 4-20-1981 by Ord. No. 11-81]
(3) The Board shall reorganize no later than January 15 and shall
submit a quarterly report to the Council. It shall elect a
Chairperson, a Vice Chairperson and a Secretary. [Amended
12-16-1985 by Ord. No. 57-85]
(4) Members of the Board shall serve without compensation.
C. Vacancies. Vacancies occurring on the Rent Stabilization Board shall be
filled by the Council for the unexpired term only. A member of the Board
shall be removable for cause by the Council upon written charges and
after public hearing thereon. Reasons for such action shall be missing
more than 50% of the meetings within a six-month period or other just
causes. A removed member shall be replaced by another member of the
same category. [Amended 12-16-1985 by Ord. No. 57-85]
D. Powers of the Board. The Rent Stabilization Board is hereby granted
and shall have and exercise, in addition to other powers herein granted,
all the powers necessary and appropriate to carry out and execute the
purposes of this article, including but not limited to the following:
(1) To issue and promulgate such rules and regulations as it deems
necessary to implement the purpose of this article, which rules and
regulations shall have the force of law until revised, repealed or
amended from time to time by the Board in the exercise of its
discretion, provided that such rules are filed with the Township
Clerk.
(2) To supply information and assistance to landlords and tenants to
help them comply with the provisions of this article.
(3) To hold hearings and adjudicate applications from landlords for
additional rental, as herein provided.
(4) To hold hearings and adjudicate applications from tenants. The
Board has the power to reduce rentals, award monetary
compensation and/or direct the landlord to make repairs in
accordance with the decision of the Board within 30 days after final
determination by the Board. The Board shall retain jurisdiction
until such time as its decision has been complied with. In the event
that the violation is not cured as set forth, the Rent Stabilization
Board shall have the power to issue a complaint in Municipal Court
for violation of this article. [Amended 12-16-1985 by Ord. No.
57-85]
§ 388-9 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 388-9
10:1043
(5) To retain independent experts which the Board in its discretion
shall deem necessary, provided that expenditures for such experts
do not exceed amounts budgeted therefor.
(6) The Rental Stabilization Board shall have the power to enforce this
article by issuing notices of violations to any person, firm or
corporation violating this article. The notice shall grant to the
violating party 10 days within which to cure the violation. In the
event that the violation is not cured within the ten-day period set
forth herein, the Rent Stabilization Board shall have the power to
issue a complaint in the Municipal Court for violation of this article.
(7) The Board shall give both landlord and tenant reasonable
opportunity to be heard before making any determination.
(8) To issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the
production of books and records in connection with the hearings
held in pursuant to the provisions of this article.
(9) To obtain, keep and maintain all available records, data and
information regarding the consumer price index, municipal tax
rates, municipal real estate assessments, tax appeals filed by
landlords and all other data and information necessary to the
enforcement, construction and application of this article.
E. Powers to grant increases. The Rent Stabilization Board is granted and
shall have and exercise, in addition to the specific powers enumerated
above, the following powers:
(1) Hardship rent increase. In the event that a landlord cannot meet
his mortgage payments, energy payments and maintenance, he
may apply to the Rent Stabilization Board for increased rental. The
Board may grant the landlord a hardship rent increase to meet
these payments. The landlord must provide individual notification
to each tenant by mail prior to any such application to the Board
setting forth the basis for this application. This notice must be
received by the tenant at least five days prior to the proposed date
of hearing.221
(2) Capital improvement. A landlord may apply to the Rent
Stabilization Board for a rental surcharge for capital improvements
or for increases for improved services. The landlord shall compute
the average cost of the improvement of service per year of useful
life by dividing the cost of the computed capital improvement or
service by the number of years of useful life of the improvement as
claimed by the landlord for federal income tax depreciation
purposes. The landlord shall propose to apportion the average cost
of the completed improvement of service per year of useful life
221. Editor's Note: Former Sec. 11A-5.5b, Energy surcharge, which previously followed this
section, was repealed 12-11-1978 by Ord. No. D-254.
§ 388-9 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 388-9
10:1044
among the tenants in the dwelling in accordance with one of the
following methods:
(a) If the capital improvement benefits dwelling spaces only, then
the cost of these improvements shall be surcharged to only
those tenants.
(b) If the capital improvement benefits all dwelling spaces, but in
varying degrees according to the amount of living area of each
dwelling space, then the cost of the improvement shall be
surcharged to the total dwelling space.
(c) If the capital improvement is equally beneficial to all dwelling
spaces regardless of the living area within any dwelling space,
then the cost of the improvements shall be surcharged
according to the amount of dwelling space within the housing
space. Permits as required by law are to be secured from all
agencies having control and jurisdiction for alterations,
repairs, replacements, extensions and new buildings. All work
shall adhere to appropriate code standards and shall be
inspected by all agencies having control and jurisdiction and
their approvals obtained. A certificate of occupancy shall be
secured if required by law.
(d) No rental surcharge shall be granted under this section of the
chapter if there is an outstanding violation of the Housing,
Maintenance, Building or Fire Code222 or other applicable
Township code, and the landlord shall obtain and submit to the
Rent Stabilization Board a letter from each of the code officials,
respectively, certifying that no such outstanding violations
exist as of one week before the first scheduled public hearing
date. In addition, no rental surcharge shall be granted if the
subject property is subject to any liens for the payment of real
estate taxes, water or sewer charges, and the landlord shall
obtain a letter from the Tax Collector, Old Bridge Township
Municipal Utility Authority or other appropriate official that no
such liens exist as of one week before the first scheduled public
hearing date. [Amended 12-5-1983 by Ord. No. 29-83]
(e) The Board may grant the landlord a rental surcharge under the
provisions of this section. Except for the above tax and energy
surcharge provisions, no landlord shall impose upon any tenant
a rent surcharge under this section without first obtaining
approval of the Rent Stabilization Board. It shall be within the
discretion of the Board to fix the effective date of any approved
rental surcharge to or after determination. A surcharge
granted under the provisions of this section shall not be
considered rent for purpose of computing rental increase.
222. Editor's Note: See Ch. 108, Uniform Construction Codes; Ch. 185, Fire Prevention; and Ch.
235, Art. I, Housing Standards.
§ 388-9 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 388-9
10:1045
(f) The landlord is required to set forth in his application for a
capital improvement increase a list of capital improvements for
which a surcharge is sought, the anticipated cost of each such
proposed improvement, including any financing or interest
charge that the landlord has to pay, and the exact cost to each
tenant and the number of years that an approved surcharge
would be paid by the tenant. [Added 12-5-1983 by Ord. No.
29-83]
(g) The landlord can only apply for a surcharge and the Board can
only approve a surcharge for the actual or anticipated cost of
the capital improvement, including any financing or interest
charge that the landlord has to pay. [Added 12-5-1983 by
Ord. No. 29-83]
(h) The Rent Stabilization Board shall hold a hearing on a
landlord's application for a capital improvement surcharge. At
least 60 days prior to the public hearing, the landlord shall
notify each tenant to be affected by the surcharge by mail or
personal service, and the landlord shall submit at the public
hearing an affidavit of service. The notification shall include
the date, time and place of the hearing and the substance of
the landlord's application, including all information required in
this section and by this article. The application must list and
describe each capital improvement for which the landlord is
seeking a surcharge. No capital improvements installed,
constructed, erected or already in place prior to the
application shall be listed, and no surcharge shall be approved
by the Board for said capital improvements. [Added
12-5-1983 by Ord. No. 29-83]
F. Application for hardship rent increase. [Added 4-24-1980 by Ord. No.
D-304]
(1) In the event that a landlord, due to circumstances beyond the
landlord's control, which, in the determination of the Rent
Stabilization Board, are both reasonable and necessary in order for
the landlord to receive and maintain a just and reasonable return
on his investment, or in the event that a landlord experiences an
increase in costs over the past three years in assessments and
utility costs in the excess of the increase permitted herein, a
landlord may submit an application for a hearing and review to the
Rent Stabilization Board for a hardship rental increase, which
application shall include the following information:
(a) The address of the building.
(b) The name and address of all persons with an ownership
interest, whether legal or equitable.
[1] Date of purchase.
§ 388-9 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 388-9
10:1046
[2] From whom property was purchased.
[3] What the relationship between the present and past owner
is.
(c) The name and address of the managing agent.
(d) What is the form of ownership?
(e) The total number of apartment units.
[1] The number of apartment units presently occupied.
[2] The reason for vacancies.
(f) The name and address of the mortgage holder.
[1] When was the mortgage given?
[2] What was the amount of principal borrowed?
[3] What is the term (years) of mortgage?
[4] What is the interest rate?
[5] What is the mortgage payment plan, i.e., standing, balloon,
fully amortized level payment or constant principal?
[6] What are the monthly payments?
(g) What was the owner's original investment?
(h) What is the present owner's investment, and how is the figure
arrived at?
(i) What is the amount of real estate taxes for the current tax
year? How much of these real estate taxes were passed on as a
surcharge to tenants during the past three years?
(j) Is there any property tax exemption? Explain in detail.
(k) Have there been any tax abatements or homestead tax rebates
over the past three years? Explain.
(l) Are there any outstanding real estate taxes due?
(m) What is the amount of depreciation or federal income tax
deduction over the past three years? For each year, what
method of depreciation was used in calculating this deduction?
(n) How much depreciation?
(o) What is the assessed valuation?
§ 388-9 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 388-9
10:1047
(p) Where there has been refinancing, what was the amount of the
loan? How much, if any, was reinvested in the building? Where
else was the money spent?
(q) What is the percentage rate of return? (Divide 16 by the actual
cash investment.)
(r) Is the property in substantial compliance with the local
Property Maintenance or Building Code and Health Code?
(s) Attach copies of the inspection report. Was there an energy
efficiency audit by the Department of Energy? (Attach copies of
the report.)
(t) The applicant's estimate of the rate of return for the period in
question, plus the rate of return the applicant requests and the
method used to calculate said return. List the rate of return for
the last three years and the rate of return for 1976 (fiscal year
or calendar year may be used).
(2) Cash basis statement of past three years.
Income
1. Apartment rent
2. Laundry facility
3. Parking
4. Vending machines
5. Other
Total (1 - 5)
Expenses
6. Mortgage principal
7. Mortgage interest
8. Late charges
Total (6 - 8)
9. Real estate taxes
10. Other taxes
Total (9 - 10)
11. Heat (fuel)
12. Water and sewage
13. Insurance premiums
14. Professional fees
15. Gas and electric
16. Management fees
17. Other fees
§ 388-9 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 388-9
10:1048
Total (11 - 17)
18. Exterminator expenses
19. Outside contractors
(a) Plumbing
(b) Electrical
(c) Painting
(d) Plastering/tile
(e) Carpentry
20. Custodial supplies
21. Maintenance
(a) Supplies
(b) Equipment purchases
22. Superintendent's wages
23. Superintendent's housing
24. Other wages and salaries
25. Other service contracts
26. Other
Total income (1 - 5)
Total expenses (6 - 26)
Surplus (deficit)
I have read the completed questionnaire and cash basis
statements and find them to be true and correct to the best of my
knowledge and belief. I further state that the figures contained in
this application pertain only and exclusively to the property for
which this application is being submitted.
Dated:
(Signature of Owner or
Managing Agent)
Sworn to and subscribed before me this __________ day of
__________
Required documentation: Please submit copies of signed
statements for the past three completed fiscal years. Please
submit photocopies of cancelled checks for the current fiscal year
to date expenses.
(3) The Rent Stabilization Board shall hold a public hearing on the
landlord's application. At least 30 days prior to the public hearing,
the landlord shall notify each tenant by regular mail or by personal
service. The notification shall include the date, place and time of
the hearing and the substance of the landlord's application. The
Rent Stabilization Board shall either grant or deny a hardship
§ 388-9 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 388-9
10:1049
§ 388-10. Registration. [Amended 5-20-1985 by Ord. No. 22-85;
12-22-1988 by Ord. No. 69-88]
§ 388-11. Fees relating to condominium conversion. [Added
11-7-1988 by Ord. No. 38-88]
rental increase within 45 days from the date that the landlord's
application is completed and filed unless this time period is
extended at the request of the landlord. An affidavit of service
shall be filed with the Board showing compliance with the notice
provision above.
A. Every owner of a complex shall be required to register with the Rent
Stabilization Board a statement showing the amount of rentals charged
for each rental unit as of October 1, and as of October 1 of each
succeeding year, while this article remains in effect. Such statement
shall be filed on November 15 of each year and shall remain on file with
the Rent Stabilization Board as a matter of public record. An annual
registration fee of $10 per rental unit shall be payable as of January 1 of
each year to the Department of Finance for the purpose of defraying
costs of the Rent Stabilization Board. The Department of Finance shall
forward a copy of the receipt of payment to the Rent Stabilization
Board. [Amended 4-20-1992 by Ord. No. 13-92223]
B. Owner(s) shall also furnish to the Township Clerk and provide a copy to
the Rent Stabilization Board on a monthly basis updated tenant lists,
which shall include the name(s) of new tenant(s), their apartment
number(s), their monthly rental(s), the expiration date of the lease(s)
and the date(s) the new tenancies commenced. [Added 12-9-1006 by
Ord. No. 49-96; amended 3-8-1999 by Ord. No. 8-99; 7-19-1999
by Ord. No. 22-99]
C. Any owner who shall violate a provision of Subsection A or B shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not less than $500 but not
exceeding the maximum penalty set forth in Chapter 1, Article II,
Penalty. No owner shall receive any certificate(s) of occupancy on any
new tenancies from the Township of Old Bridge if he/she/it fails to
provide/submit by the 10th day of the following month for the previous
month the monthly tenant lists with the name(s), their apartment
number(s), their monthly rental(s), the expiration date of the lease(s)
and the date(s) the new tenancies commenced and/or until such time as
the owner fully complies with the provisions of Subsections A and B. A
separate offense shall be deemed continued on each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues. [Amended 3-8-1999 by Ord.
No. 8-99; 7-19-1999 by Ord. No. 22-99224]
223. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
224. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 388-9 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 388-11
10:1050
§ 388-12. Exempt dwellings.
A. The Township of Old Bridge shall, through its Business Administrator,
establish a fee schedule, which may vary according to the size of the
building or project proposed to be converted, to be paid by the owners
desiring to convert said rental units, upon submission of tenant lists,
forms and stamped envelopes to the administrative agency or officer.
B. The fee schedule so established shall be designed to fully cover the cost
of discharging responsibilities imposed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:18-61.9
on the Rent Stabilization Board, and under no circumstances shall such
fees provide revenue in excess of the cost. A hearing fee of $250 will be
established pursuant to this article.225
A. Exempt buildings. Exempt from this article are motels, hotels and
similar type buildings and buildings in which up to 1/3 of the occupied
floor space is commercial, also housing units of two units or less.
[Amended 12-28-1978 by Ord. No. D-255; 4-24-1980 by Ord. No.
D-304; 12-16-1985 by Ord. No. 57-85]
B. New construction. New construction of multiple dwelling units
constructed after December 23, 1999, shall be exempt for a period of
time not to exceed the period of amortization of any initial mortgage
loan obtained for the multiple dwelling or for 30 years following
completion of construction, whichever is less. (N.J.S.A. 2A:42-84.2)226
C. Vacancy decontrol. A tenant who has continuously resided in an
apartment complex subject to this article for a period of at least three
years and who seeks to move into another apartment within the same
complex shall have priority to a vacant apartment. Such priority shall
not be conferred or enjoyed if the landlord is contractually bound to
provide a vacant apartment to a prospective tenant, and it shall be the
landlord's burden to prove that such a contractual agreement exists
should the issue of priority arise. The rent charged to the tenant for the
new apartment shall not exceed the maximum rent then being charged
for an apartment of equal size in that complex which has never been
decontrolled. However, if the new apartment is the same size as the
apartment being vacated by the tenant, then the rent charged to the
tenant for the new apartment shall be the same as for that which he is
vacating. Said new apartment shall not be considered as a vacancy
decontrolled apartment for purposes of this provision. The tenant shall
register his or her dated letter and/or dated application with the
landlord and with the Secretary of the Rent Stabilization Board.
[Amended 12-11-1978 by Ord. No. D-254; 6-4-1979 by Ord. No.
D-271; 4-24-1980 by Ord. No. 304; 5-3-1982 by Ord. No. 6-82;
11-5-1983 by Ord. No. 29-83; 12-16-1985 by Ord. No. 57-85]
225. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
226. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 388-11 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 388-13
10:1051
§ 388-13. Maintenance of standards.
A. Maintenance of standards required. The landlord shall maintain the
same standards of service, maintenance, furniture, furnishings,
recreational facilities and landscaping as he was required to do by law
or by the terms of the lease. Any fraudulent inducement by the landlord
which results in the signing of the lease by the tenant shall be
considered by the Rent Stabilization Board in its determination.
B. Procedure for appeals. Any individual tenant or class of tenants who are
receiving substantially the same standards of service, maintenance,
furniture, furnishings, recreational facilities or landscaping, which
existed at the signing of the lease, may have the Rent Stabilization
Board determine the reasonable value of the dwelling in view of the
deficiency. Any reductions of services or standards in violation of this
article or statute shall be referred to the landlord first. Ten days after
referral to the landlord by the tenant, if the problem still exists, the
matter shall be referred by the tenant to the appropriate Township
official or office who or which can allow up to an additional 10 days to
comply with the request. After the above time periods, the tenant may
make application to the Rent Stabilization Board. Said time limits shall
be waived for matters of emergency affecting health, safety or welfare.
[Amended 4-24-1980 by Ord. No. D-304; 12-16-1985 by Ord. No.
57-85]
C. Determinants of reasonable rental.
(1) The tenant or class of tenants shall pay the reasonable rental value
as determined by the Rent Stabilization Board as the full payment
of rent until the landlord proves that the deficiency has been
corrected. The Rent Stabilization Board shall determine the
reasonable rental value by using the following suggestive, but not
exhaustive, guidelines:
(a) Violation of applicable housing, building or sanitary code.
(b) Nature of the deficiency or defect as it affects a vital facility.
(c) The potential actual effect upon safety and sanitation.
(d) Length of time of the existence of the condition.
(e) Age of structure.
(f) Amount of the rent.
(2) A landlord shall only be entitled to rental increases provided herein
if it maintains the premises in accordance with the Maintenance
Code of Old Bridge Township and the State Code of New Jersey
with no decrease in services.
§ 388-13 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 388-14
10:1052
§ 388-14. Tenant protection.
No landlord shall take retaliatory action against any tenant who exercises
any rights conferred upon him by this article. For the purpose of this
section, "retaliatory action" shall mean any action taken by the landlord,
directly or indirectly, including undue or unusual inconvenience, violation
of privacy, harassment, reduction in quality or quantity of services, the
institution of dispossess proceedings or any other form of threat or
coercion.
§ 388-15. Substantial reduction in privileges or services.
A landlord shall not substantially reduce the privileges, services,
furnishings, furniture, equipment, facilities or improvements which had
been included in or associated with rental paid for any dwelling unit. For
the purpose of this article, any such reduction shall be deemed an increase
in the rental charged for the dwelling unit.
§ 388-16. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-16-1985 by Ord.
No. 57-85227]
A willful violation of any provisions of this article, including but not limited
to the willful filing with the Rent Stabilization Board of any material
misstatement of fact, shall be punishable as set forth in Chapter 1, Article
II, Penalty. A violation affecting more than one leasehold shall be considered
a separate violation as to each leasehold.
§ 388-17. Review of ordinances.
This article shall come under administrative review by Council and
administration one year from date of passage.
§ 388-18. Care and keeping of animals. [Added 2-2-1981 by Ord. No.
D-331]
A. Subject to the provisions of Subsections I and J below, the total number
of dogs and cats shall not exceed three animals per dwelling unit.
[Amended 7-20-1981 by Ord. No. 20-81; 3-19-1984 by Ord. No.
7-84]
B. Tenants shall notify their landlords of their maintaining or possessing of
an animal in their dwelling unit within five days of executing their initial
lease or within five days of acquiring, possessing or maintaining an
animal in their dwelling unit. Any tenant not so notifying his landlord
shall be considered to be in default of his lease.
C. Tenants shall be responsible for any and all damage caused by their
animals, and it shall be presumed by any competent court of jurisdiction
227. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 388-14 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 388-18
10:1053
§ 388-19. Miscellaneous. [Added 4-20-1980 by Ord. No. 11-81]
that their acquiring, possessing or maintaining said animals serves as
their consent to said liability.
D. "Animal" is herein defined as a dog or cat.
E. Each tenant acquiring, possessing or keeping a dog shall be responsible
to ensure that all defecation of said animals outside of said dwelling
unit is forthwith removed by said tenant and placed in a sealed garbage
container or refuse collector. Each landlord shall additionally designate
and mark an area adjacent to each housing space as an animal
discharge area and ensure that at least one garbage or refuse container
is available and located at said area.
F. The fee collected for animals as set elsewhere in this article shall be
used to maintain dog walk areas adjacent to housing space locations.
[Amended 10-1-1984 by Ord. No. 30-84]
G. Any tenant who does not ensure that his animal's defecation is properly
removed shall be issued a warning for a first violation. A second
violation shall be considered a default of the lease. A tenant may,
however, request a hearing before the Rent Stabilization Board to
contest the validity of any warning by filing said request with a copy to
the landlord within seven days of receipt of said notice. If the Board
determines the warning was improper, it shall void said notice.
H. Each tenant shall be given a copy of the provisions of this article by the
landlord upon executing a new lease or renewing an existing lease.
I. A landlord may elect to prohibit, by regulation, new lessees from
keeping any dogs or cats within their units, provided that said
regulation applies to all new tenants within the complex, and further
provided that said regulation is uniformly enforced by the landlord. A
copy of such regulation prohibiting animals shall be filed with the
Secretary of the Rent Stabilization Board within seven days of its
effective date for purposes of this subsection. The renewal of a lease
shall not constitute a new lease. [Amended 3-19-1984 by Ord. No.
7-84]
J. Nothing in this section shall prevent the keeping of a specially trained
dog by a handicapped person. [Added 3-19-1984 by Ord. No. 7-84]
A. Certificate of occupancy. A copy of any certificate of occupancy issued
for each dwelling rented as required elsewhere in this article shall be
forwarded to the Rent Stabilization Board, and a true copy thereof shall
be delivered to the tenant of the unit for which such certificate of
occupancy was issued; said certificate shall include the apartment
number, complex and effective rent on the date of issuance. All
apartment complexes must notify the Department of Community
Development of the Township of Old Bridge of the need for a certificate
of occupancy inspection at least three days prior to occupancy. It shall
§ 388-18 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 388-19
10:1054
be unlawful to charge a tenant for permit fees or other costs associated
with the landlord's obligation to obtain a certificate of occupancy and/or
the landlord's obligation to deliver same to the Rent Stabilization Board
or the tenant. [Amended 4-1-1985 by Ord. No. 18-85; 11-2-1992 by
Ord. No. 43-92228]
B. Complex personnel; security. All personnel or employees of a landlord
at said complex are to register with the Old Bridge Police Department
by giving their age, address, recent photo and any criminal convictions.
No unregistered personnel or employee shall be allowed to enter or
shall enter any dwelling unit unless accompanied by a registered
employee or representative of the landlord. The Department of
Community Development and/or the Rent Stabilization Board shall have
authority to ensure compliance with this section. Each landlord shall
additionally be responsible to ensure that a proper number of
adequately trained personnel are assigned to each complex as per
applicable state codes.229
C. Abandoned, disabled or hazardous vehicles.230 [Amended 12-16-1985
by Ord. No. 57-85; 6-17-1991 by Ord. No. 13-91]
(1) Disabled vehicles. Landlords shall have the authority to remove
unlicensed/unregistered and/or abandoned (as defined by Title 39
of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated) vehicles from their complex;
provided, however, that 48 hours' notice has first been given to the
owner of the vehicle. Notice may be given by either of the following
methods:
(a) By certified letter, return receipt requested, addressed to the
owner of the vehicle at the last known address of said vehicle
owner.
(b) By personal service of a written notice or letter upon a vehicle
owner personally or by leaving such notice with a responsible
individual over 14 years of age who resides with the vehicle
owner at his usual place of residence.
(2) Unknown owners. Landlords shall have the authority to remove
unlicensed/unregistered and/or abandoned (as defined by Title 39
of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated) vehicles from their complex
where the owners of said vehicles are unknown; provided, however,
that the landlord first fulfills the following conditions:
(a) The landlord shall make a diligent inquiry with the Old Bridge
Township Police to attempt to determine the actual owner of
the vehicle.
228. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
229. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
230. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 463, Vehicles, Abandoned.
§ 388-19 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 388-19
10:1055
§ 388-20. Appeal. [Added 5-18-1981 by Ord. No. 16-81; amended
12-5-1983 by Ord. No. 29-83; 11-21-1988 by Ord. No. 56-88;
4-20-1992 by Ord. No. 13-92]
§ 388-21. Identification of apartment complex personnel. [Added
5-19-1980 by Ord. No. D-306]
Maintenance personnel who are servants, agents or employees of any
multiunit apartment complex, herein defined as a single apartment building
or group of apartment buildings owned, controlled or managed by one
individual, association, partnership, entity or corporation, consisting of a
total of five dwelling units or more, shall wear, in a conspicuous location,
an identification tag or card containing their name, address, by whom
employed, date of expiration of the card and a current picture. It shall
(b) The landlord shall secure approval by a responsible Township
official, such as a Code Enforcement Official, prior to towing
said vehicle.
(c) The landlord shall post a visible notice upon the vehicle in
question for at least 48 hours prior to removal of the vehicle.
(3) Hazardous vehicles. Vehicles which are declared to be hazardous
by Township officials and vehicles which are declared to be parked
in emergency areas, fire lanes or hazardous areas by Township
officials may be removed by landlords under the above subsections
after 24 hours' notice, as provided herein.
A. Any party, not a member of the Board participating in a decision,
aggrieved by a final decision of the Rent Stabilization Board, may
appeal said decision to the Township Council by filing a notice of appeal
with the Township Clerk within 30 days of said decision and serving a
copy of said appeal upon all parties who appeared before the Rent
Stabilization Board. The applicant must present proof that all parties
affected by the appeal have been notified of the appeal. The appeal shall
be based upon the record below, and the Township Council shall render
its decision within 90 days of the filing of said appeal. Failure of the
Township Council to act within the above period shall be affirmance of
the decision below.
B. A fee of $125 shall accompany the notice of appeal for purposes of
defraying costs of certified mail and regular mail notices of hearing
dates to the necessary parties.231
C. Requests for postponements shall be limited to one time per party, and
all requests for postponements shall be made 24 hours in advance, in
writing, of said scheduled hearing.
231. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 388-19 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 388-21
10:1056
additionally be the duty of each owner and manager of said apartment
complex to provide each employee with said identification.
§ 388-22. Tenant late charges. [Added 5-19-1980 by Ord. No. D-309]
No tenant in any multiple-dwelling complex of four or more dwelling units
shall be required to pay late charges of more than 4% of the amount of the
rent due for any period for which the rent due is less than 30 days late.
§ 388-23. Standing of and intervention by interested parties into
proceedings of Board. [Added 12-5-1983 by Ord. No. 29-83]
§ 388-24. Availability of apartments for repairs. [Added 4-1-1985 by
Ord. No. 18-85]
Tenants shall make their apartments available for normal maintenance and
repairs, Monday through Friday, during the working hours of 8:00 a.m.
to 5:00 p.m., by providing a key to the landlord or providing a key to a
neighbor. If access is to be given by providing a key to a neighbor, the
landlord shall be notified 24 hours prior to the scheduled repairs as to the
location of the key.
A. Intervention. Any interested person or legal entity may make
application before the Rent Stabilization Board to intervene in any
matter formally pending before the Board. The Board, upon the
exercise of its sound discretion, shall make a determination as to
whether or not to allow the intervention upon considering and weighing
such factors as where the public interest lies, whether there are
common questions of law or fact involved and will the allowing of the
intervention delay the proceedings or prejudice the original parties.
B. Standing. Any interested person or legal entity may file a formal
complaint or application with the Board concerning applicable
provisions of this article, and such person or legal entity shall have
standing to do so if the Board finds and determines, upon the exercise
of its sound discretion and weighing conflicting considerations, that
such person or entity has a sufficient and real stake in the outcome of
the controversy, such person or entity has genuine and legitimate
interest in the subject matter of the application or complaint and that
there is a real adverseness in the proceeding, so as to ensure that the
Board is not called upon to render advisory opinions but rather to
decide actual cases and controversies.
§ 388-21 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 388-24
10:1057

ARTICLE II
Mobile Home Rent Stabilization
[Adopted 9-21-1981 by Ord. No. 24-81 (Ch. XIC of the 1973 Revised
General Ordinances)]
§ 388-25. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AVAILABLE FOR RENT — Fit for habitation, as defined by the statutes,
codes and ordinances in full force and effect in the State of New Jersey,
County of Middlesex, Township of Old Bridge, and occupied or unoccupied
and offered for rent.
CPI — The consumer price index (all items) for that region of the New
York-Northeastern New Jersey area in which the Township of Old Bridge
is included, which index is periodically published by the Bureau of Labor
Statistics of the United States Department of Labor.
LANDLORD — Includes a person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation or other entity and any officers, agent or employer, or any of the
foregoing which is the owner, rental agent, manager of, or otherwise has
authority to rent any rental space to a tenant.
MOBILE HOME PARK — Shall consist of a number of spaces approved by
the Township and common areas and shall mean land and premises, where
the owner, lessee, or other persons having control thereof shall offer sites
for mobile homes on a rental or lease or other basis.
MOBILE HOME SPACE — That portion of a mobile home park rented
or offered for rent for the purpose of parking or positioning a mobile
home for living and dwelling purposes to one or more tenants or family
units, together with all the privileges, services, equipment, facilities and
improvements connected with the use or the occupancy of such portions of
the property. Mobile home spaces which are newly constructed and rented
for the first time are not subject to current rentals, and the initial rent may
be determined by the owner. Existing tenants to be relocated in the mobile
home park for the convenience of management cannot be increased above
the current rent level. Any rental increase in excess of that authorized by
the provisions of this article is prohibited and void.
RENTAL INCOME — The payable rent charged and received for the mobile
home space over the previous twelve-month period exclusive of any of the
following: all real property taxes, space fees or license fees charged by the
Township of Old Bridge pursuant to any duly adopted ordinance and any
cost of the supplied utilities and services, and any increase for hardship or
major capital improvements as permitted by §§ 388-32 and 388-33 hereof.
SERVICE — Mailing to the home address, by certified mail, return receipt
requested, or in hand delivery certified to by affidavit or acknowledgment of
service executed by the person served, which affidavit or acknowledgment
of service must be retained in the records of the person causing service.
§ 388-25 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 388-25
10:1059
SUPPLIED UTILITIES — Electrical connection, water and sewer services,
garbage disposal supplied directly to the individual mobile home, for which
services the landlord is responsible to the supplier for payment.
§ 388-26. Determination of rents.
A. Establishment of rents between a landlord and a tenant to whom this
article is applicable shall hereafter be determined by the following
provisions:
(1) At the expiration of the tenancy for a mobile home space, no
landlord may request or receive any increase in the rental income
and additional charges for that mobile home space from any tenant,
new or continuing, which is greater than a combination of the
following:
(a) Any increased cost to the landlord for supplied utilities.
(b) Any increased cost to the landlord in mobile home space fees
or license fees charged by the Township of Old Bridge pursuant
to any duly adopted ordinance.
(c) Any amount equal to 4% of the previous twelve-month rental
income for the mobile home space or the percentage increase
in the consumer price index over the twelve-month period
ending 120 days prior to the date of the application for said
increase, whichever shall be less.
(2) Any new or continuing tenant at the termination of a tenancy shall
not suffer or be caused to pay any rent increase for the mobile
home space in any twelve-month period which exceeds the above
permitted increase for the twelve-month period.
B. No landlord may request or receive of the tenants any increase in rental
income or additional charges except as provided by this section and, for
any increase greater than the annual limitation of rentals set forth in
this article, until such time as the landlord shall have obtained approval
in writing from the Rent Stabilization Board, as hereinafter established,
for said increase. Furthermore, there shall be only one increase granted
per landlord per mobile home park for any increase per calendar year
for each of the increases permitted by this section, which request and
decision shall be binding upon all tenancies of that particular mobile
home park which expire thereafter during said calendar year, unless as
otherwise provided herein. The landlord shall notify the Rent
Stabilization Board in writing at least 60 days prior to the effective date
of any increase proposed pursuant to the provisions of this section. At
the same time, a copy of said notice shall be served upon any tenant
who may be affected by the increase applied for. Upon receipt of said
notice, and where the increase sought is based upon the terms of
Subsection A(1)(a) or (c) herein, the Rent Stabilization Board shall
schedule a hearing on said increase, and the landlord shall post in a
§ 388-25 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 388-26
10:1060
§ 388-27. Application for reduction in rent upon violation.
Where a mobile home park or any part thereof is being operated in violation
of municipal codes and where such violation adversely affects habitability,
any affected tenant or tenants may apply to the Board for a reasonable
reduction in rent, commensurate with any such effect on habitability.
Whereupon, the Board shall duly notify the landlord and schedule the
matter for a hearing. If, as a result of such a hearing, the Board determines
that a violation of a municipal code exists and that such violation affects
habitability, it may grant a reasonable reduction in rent to the affected
tenant or tenants, which rent shall remain in effect until the landlord
corrects said violation or violations.
§ 388-28. Timing of increases; excess increases.
Any rental income or additional charge increase at a time other than at the
expiration of a tenancy or termination of a periodic tenancy shall be void,
except as otherwise provided in this article. Any rental income or additional
charge increase in excess of that authorized by the provisions of this article
shall be void.
§ 388-29. Reasons for rent reduction; procedure.
A tenant shall be entitled to a rent reduction from a landlord because of
a decrease in the municipal property taxes or cost of supplied utilities or
any decrease in space fees or license fees charged by the municipality.
conspicuous place in or about the park a notice of said hearing date
at least five days prior to the proposed date of hearing. Where the
increase sought is based upon the terms of Subsection A(1)(b) herein,
no hearing shall be scheduled, and the increase shall become effective
on the date specified in said notice, if all other applicable provisions of
this article are complied with.
C. Rental increase shall not exceed 4% on the base monthly rate, which
should be broken down as follows:
(1) Base rent, in dollars.
(2) Pad fees.
(3) Real estate and property taxes.
(4) Municipal site fees.
(5) License fees.
(6) Electric.
(7) Sewerage.
(8) Garbage disposal and any other additional cost passed on to the
tenant.
§ 388-26 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 388-29
10:1061
The reduction shall not exceed that amount authorized by the following
provisions:
§ 388-30. Tax surcharges.
A landlord shall be entitled to a rent surcharge for any increase in municipal
property taxes. Any landlord seeking a surcharge for property taxes shall
serve the tenants with a notice at least 30 days prior to the date on which
said surcharge is to be effective of the calculations involved, including the
property tax for the mobile home park for the year immediately preceding
the year for which the tax surcharge is sought, and the increase in the
present tax over the tax for the preceding year divided by the total number
of completed mobile home spaces in the mobile home park. The tax
surcharge each tenant is liable for shall be paid in 12 monthly installments
commencing September of each year.
§ 388-31. Tax appeals.
A. Where the decrease consists of a decrease in the municipal property tax
due to aid received from the state aid for schools fund and where said
decrease is subject to the provisions of P.L. 1976, c. 63, (N.J.S.A.
54:4-6.2 et seq.) as may be amended from time to time, the landlord
shall make such rebate upon such terms as P.L. 1976, c. 63 provides.
B. Where the decrease consists of a decrease in the municipal property tax
other than that decrease provided for in Subsection A above, the
landlord shall divide the decrease in the present tax over the tax for the
previous year by the total number of completed mobile home spaces in
the mobile home park. The decrease each tenant is entitled to shall be a
credit in rent in 12 monthly installments commencing September of
each year. Any tenant entitled to a rent decrease hereunder shall be
served with a notice of the calculations involved in computing such
reduction and the effective date of such reduction.
C. Where the decrease consists of a decrease in the cost of supplied
utilities, space fees or license fees, the landlord shall divide the
decrease in the present cost of supplied utilities, mobile home space
fees or license fees of the previous year by the total number of
completed mobile home spaces in the mobile home park to obtain the
decrease per space. The decrease each tenant is entitled to shall be a
credit to rent on 12 monthly installments commencing from the
effective date of said reduction. Any tenant entitled to a rent decrease
hereunder shall be served with a notice by the landlord of the
calculations involved in computing such reduction and the effective
date of such reduction.
A. In the event that a municipal property tax appeal is taken by the
landlord and the landlord is successful in said appeal and the taxes
reduced, the tenants involved shall receive 50% of said reduction after
the landlord's costs of securing said tax reduction have been deducted.
The landlord shall receive the remaining benefits of the tax reduction.
§ 388-29 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 388-31
10:1062
§ 388-32. Capital improvements.
A landlord may seek an additional charge for major capital improvements.
"Capital improvements" shall be any item considered as such under the
Federal Internal Revenue enactments and regulations. Prior to filing an
appeal with the Rent Stabilization Board, the landlord must serve each
tenant with a notice of the total cost of the completed capital improvement,
the number of useful years of life of the improvement as claimed by the
landlord for the purposes of depreciation for income tax purposes, the
average cost, including debt service, of the improvement (calculated by
dividing the cost of the major improvement by the total number of approved
mobile home spaces in the mobile home park), and the capital improvement
surcharge he is seeking from each tenant. The landlord seeking a capital
improvement surcharge shall appeal for said surcharge to the Rent
Stabilization Board, which shall determine after the landlord has served
notice to the affected tenants of a hearing date, of said improvement and
if so, the amount of increase granted for such major improvement and
establish the conditions of such increase. If said increase is granted, it shall
not be considered rental income and not calculated in allowable increases
as otherwise set forth in this article. In any event, no increase granted by
authority of this section shall exceed 10% of the tenants' rental income,
unless said increase or capital improvement is mandated by law.
§ 388-33. Hardship rent increases.
A landlord who finds that present rental income and additional charges from
the mobile home park on which he seeks relief hereunder are insufficient
to cover the cost of payments on a first mortgage and any subsequent
mortgages used to improve and upgrade the mobile home park and/or
payments for maintenance and/or all operating costs and at the same time
ensure the landlord a just and reasonable return may appeal to the Rent
Stabilization Board for an increase in rental income. Following a hearing,
the Board may grant the landlord a hardship rent increase to meet these
needs after considering the proofs presented by the landlord, the condition
of the mobile home park and degree of hardship to the landlord. Prior to
any such appeal to the Board, a landlord must post in a conspicuous place
in and about the mobile home park a notice of said appeal setting forth the
basis for said appeal; each tenant to be affected must, at the same time, be
served with notice of the appeal. The landlord must, thereafter, serve each
affected tenant with a notice of appeal hearing date and post said notice in a
Thereafter, in succeeding years, the benefit of such successful tax
appeal shall be divided evenly between the tenants and the landlord.
B. Any such successful landlord shall serve the tenants, within 30 days
after receipt of the judgment, with a notice of the calculations involved,
including an itemization of the costs of securing said reduction and the
reduction each tenant is entitled to, determined by dividing 1/2 of the
remainder of the amount of said tax reduction by the number of
completed mobile home spaces in the mobile home park.
§ 388-31 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 388-33
10:1063
conspicuous place at the mobile home park for at least five days prior to the
appeal hearing date. If said increase is granted, it shall not be considered
rental income and not be calculated in allowable increases as otherwise set
forth in this article.
§ 388-34. Standards of service.
§ 388-35. Violations and penalties.232
A willful violation of any provisions of this article, including but not limited
to the willful filing with the Rent Stabilization Board of any material
misstatement of fact, shall be punishable as set forth in Chapter 1, Article
II, Penalty. A violation affecting more than one leasehold shall be considered
a separate violation as to each leasehold.
§ 388-36. Tenant protection.
§ 388-37. Registration.
Every owner of a mobile home park shall be required to register with the
Township Clerk and to furnish a copy to the Rent Stabilization Board a
statement showing the amount of rentals charged for each rental unit as of
October 1, and as of October 1 of each succeeding year while this article
is still in effect. Such statement shall be filed on November 15 of each year
and shall remain on file with the Township Clerk as a matter of record.
A. During the term of this article, the landlord shall maintain the same
standards of service, maintenance and equipment in the mobile home
park or mobile home spaces as he provided or was required to provide
by law or lease, written or unwritten, as of the original effective date of
this article.
B. Where the landlord fails to maintain such standards, and where such
failure results in a substantial reduction of such standards, the tenant
may apply for a hearing, whereupon the Board shall duly notify the
landlord and schedule the matter for hearing. If, as a result of such
hearing, a reduction in rent is granted, it shall take effect as specified
by the Board and shall remain in effect until the landlord proves the
standards are maintained.
A. No landlord shall take retaliatory action against any tenant who
exercises any rights conferred upon him by this article.
B. For the purpose of this section, "retaliatory action" shall mean any
action taken by the landlord, directly or indirectly, including undue or
unusual inconvenience, violation of privacy, harassment, reduction in
quality or quantity of services, the institution of dispossess proceedings
or any other form of threat or coercion.
232. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 388-33 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 388-37
10:1064
Chapter 394
SALES, HOLIDAY; CHRISTMAS TREE SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flea markets — See Ch. 193.
§ 394-1. Holiday sale of flowers and plants.
All sales of flowers and plants shall be sold from a fixed location except as
provided in this chapter. The sale of flowers and plants shall be permitted
from other locations pursuant to a permit issued by the Township Clerk's
office if the following requirements are met:
A. An application in the form prescribed by the Township Clerk shall be
submitted.
B. A fee of $100 shall be payable for each occasion specified on the
application. If the application is rejected, the fee shall be returned to
the applicant, less a service fee of 25% which shall be retained by the
municipality for rejected applications. [Amended 5-8-2000 by Ord.
No. 22-00233]
C. Applicants are required to be fingerprinted and photographed.
D. All applicants for a license shall provide an insurance certificate
evidencing at least $100,000 liability insurance coverage naming the
Township of Old Bridge as additional insured.
E. A certificate of sales tax authority shall be submitted.
F. The sale of flowers or plants shall be limited to a period within 48 hours
of the occurrence of any national holiday or religious holiday.
G. The sale of flowers or plants shall not be permitted within 2,000 feet of
any florist shop.
H. Written notarized permission of the property owner is required for any
sales of plants or flowers on private property.234
I. Approval of the location is required by the Zoning Officer and
Department of Police. The Zoning Officer or Department of Police may
deny a permit to any person or entity upon making a determination that
the proposed location presents a danger to health, safety or welfare.
233. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
234. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 388-37 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 394-1
10:1065
§ 394-2. Christmas trees.
All sales of Christmas trees shall be sold from a fixed location except as
provided in this chapter. The sale of Christmas trees shall be permitted
from other locations pursuant to a permit issued by the Zoning Officer if the
following requirements are met:
J. A hearing of any denial of a permit shall be allowed upon request of an
unsuccessful applicant if such request for hearing is made within five
days of the denial of any permit. The Township Administrator or his or
her designee shall conduct the said hearing.
K. No signs or banners are permitted attracting business to the licensed
location.
L. No other merchandise shall be offered for sale, such as but not limited
to dolls, stuffed animals, paintings, furniture.
M. No such sales are permitted upon municipal lands.
N. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit any florist shop, supermarket or
other business normally selling said flowers or plants and operating in a
fixed location from having sidewalk sales and similar types of sales
upon application to the Township Council for a permit.
A. An application in the form prescribed by the Zoning Officer shall be
submitted.
B. An application fee of $125 shall be submitted.235
C. Written notarized permission of the property owner is required for any
sale of Christmas trees.236
D. Approval of the location is required by the Zoning Officer and
Department of Police. The Zoning Officer or Department of Police may
deny a permit to any person or entity upon making a determination that
the proposed location presents a danger to health, safety or welfare.
E. A hearing of any denial of a permit shall be allowed upon request of an
unsuccessful applicant if such request for hearing is made within five
days of the denial of any permit. The Township Administrator or his or
her designee shall conduct said hearing.
F. One sign with the wording "Christmas Trees, Wreaths and Blankets" is
allowed. The sign may be double-faced. Parking information may be
included on said sign.
G. No other merchandise shall be offered for sale, such as but not limited
to dolls, stuffed animals, paintings, furniture.
235. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
236. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 394-1 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 394-2
10:1066
§ 394-3. Nontransferability.
Every license issued shall remain in full force and be valid only for the time
therein expressed and shall apply only to the person to whom the license is
granted and shall not be transferable.
Chapter 422
SMOKING IN PUBLIC BUILDINGS
§ 422-1. Purpose.
H. No such sales are permitted upon municipal lands.
I. All residue from seasonal business must be removed within seven days
after Christmas.
J. Customer parking shall be located on the subject property only. No
parking is allowed on public streets.
K. No warming fires are permitted.
L. The tree selling area shall be located at least 15 feet from the building
per the Fire Subcode Official.
M. Applicants are required to be fingerprinted and photographed.
N. All applicants for a license shall provide an insurance certificate
evidencing at least $100,000 liability insurance coverage naming the
Township of Old Bridge as additional insured.
O. A certificate of sales tax authority shall be submitted.
A. The Surgeon General of the United States has determined that
cigarette smoking has been causally linked to lung cancer,
atherosclerosis and coronary heart disease, chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease and other conditions that constitute a wide array of
serious health consequences.
B. The State Legislature has found that in those places affected by N.J.S.A.
26:3D-1 et seq., the right of the nonsmoker to breathe clean air should
supersede the right of the smoker to smoke. In addition to the
deleterious effects upon smokers, tobacco smoke is:
(1) At least an annoyance and a nuisance to a substantial percentage of
the nonsmoking public; and
(2) A substantial health hazard to a smaller segment of the
nonsmoking public.
C. It is the purpose of this chapter to protect and preserve the health and
comfort of the general public and municipal employees in all Township
owned or leased buildings and facilities.
§ 394-2 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 422-2
10:1067
§ 422-2. Smoke-free public facilities.
It is the policy of the Township of Old Bridge that all Township owned or
leased buildings and other general facilities shall be smoke-free at all times
to protect and preserve the health and comfort of the general public and the
employees from the toxic and annoying effects of tobacco smoke and also
to protect life and property from fire. It is hereby determined that, although
some areas of buildings and facilities are not generally accessible at all
times to the general public, there are no portions of any Township owned
or leased buildings or other facilities to which some members of the public
or some employees are legally prohibited from entering. Accordingly, smoke
is prohibited in all offices, corridors, hallways, rooms and all other portions
of all Township owned or leased buildings and other facilities in order to
protect the right of every person to breathe clean air.
§ 422-3. Smoking prohibited.
Smoking is hereby prohibited in all Township owned or leased buildings and
other facilities.
§ 422-4. Enforcement.
The enforcement authorities of this section shall be the Old Bridge
Township Police Department and the Health Officer of the Township of
Old Bridge and his or her respective designees. The Mayor may establish
municipal regulations to clarify or carry out the purpose of this section or
for the fair and uniform enforcement of this section to ensure smoke-free
public facilities in the Township.
§ 422-5. Violations and penalties.237
Any person who violates the provisions set forth in this chapter or any
regulation, rule or procedure duly promulgated pursuant hereto shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable as set forth in Chapter 1, Article II,
Penalty. Any Township employee who shall violate these provisions shall also
be subject to disciplinary action.
§ 422-6. Construal of provisions.
This chapter shall be liberally construed for the protection of the health,
safety and welfare of the people, the citizens of the Township of Old Bridge.
237. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 422-2 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 422-6
10:1068
Chapter 429
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Recycled product procurement policy — See
Ch. 5, § 5-57.
Festivals; mass gatherings — See Ch. 169.
Housing — See Ch. 235.
Littering — See Ch. 265.
Nuisances — See Ch. 305.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 366.
Stormwater quality — See Ch. 432.
§ 422-6 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 422-6
10:1069

ARTICLE I
Garbage Collection; Recycling
[Adopted as Sec. 19-9 of the 1973 Revised General Ordinances]
§ 429-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any building, structure or premises
not a residence, and shall include places of business, institutions, motels,
hotels, motor courts or motor hotels.
COMMERCIAL WASTE — The miscellaneous waste resulting from operation
of business enterprises and institutions, including garbage, rubbish and
ashes from offices and stores or the like, and construction waste, but
excluding trade wastes resulting from industrial operations.
CONSTRUCTION WASTE — Waste from building construction, alteration,
demolition or repair and dirt from excavations.
DOMESTIC WASTE — Waste material resulting from the usual routine of
housekeeping, and shall include garbage, rubbish and ashes.
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Consists of certain discarded products incident to
household keeping and commercial enterprises, and further defined as
commercial waste or domestic waste and construction waste.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, except body
wastes, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals
and solid market and industrial wastes, specifically including abandoned
furniture and household equipment and scrap building materials.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible
and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cigars
and tobacco wastes, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar
materials.
§ 429-2. Preparation for collection.
A. Suitable approved containers for garbage pickups. For the purpose of
this section, a "suitable approved container" shall mean a galvanized or
plastic garbage can with handles and a tight-fitting cover, or plastic
bags properly tied. [Amended 3-13-2006 by Ord. No. 5-2006]
B. Domestic garbage. Domestic garbage intended for collection shall be
drained of all free liquid, shall be wrapped or sacked, then placed and
stored in an approved container.
C. Commercial garbage. Commercial garbage intended for collection from
eating establishments such as clubs, restaurants, institutions, grocery
§ 429-1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 429-2
10:1071
§ 429-3. Provision and use of containers.
stores and other food-handling establishments need not be wrapped if
picked up daily. Undrained garbage of liquid or semiliquid nature shall
not be collected, whether in approved containers or not. All storage
shall be in a proper approved container and maintained in a sanitary
condition.
D. Rubbish. Rubbish may be stored in with garbage to utilize one
container to its maximum of 50 pounds full weight. Newspapers,
magazines or collapsible cardboard boxes or containers may be set out
in securely tied bundles, provided no one bundle shall exceed 50
pounds in weight.
E. White goods. White goods, including refrigerators, stoves, washers,
dryers, dishwashers and hot water heaters shall be picked up by
appointment only. Residents must call the Public Works Department to
schedule an appointment. [Amended 1-9-2006 by Ord. No. 38-2005;
3-13-2006 by Ord. No. 5-2006]
F. Municipal waste materials. Municipal waste materials shall be collected
if properly stored in suitable approved containers or separate
receptacles.238
G. Brush. Brush (branches, woody plants that do not exceed five inches in
diameter and 40 pounds), bundled and tied with string and placed at
the curb, shall be picked up by appointment only, March through
September, by scheduling an appointment with the Public Works
Department. [Amended 1-9-2006 by Ord. No. 38-2005; 3-13-2006
by Ord. No. 5-2006]
H. Trees, stumps, commercial rubbish and construction waste.
Arrangements for disposal of trees, tree stumps or commercial rubbish
and construction waste shall be made by the owner, occupant or person
in control of the premises affected, either personally or by agreement
with a landscape contractor or other workman engaged in work
resulting in such accumulation.
A. One- to three-family dwellings. A proper and sufficient number of
approved containers, as herein defined, for the storage of garbage and
rubbish between collections shall be provided by each family residing in
a single-family dwelling or in a two- or three-family dwelling. It shall be
the duty of the occupants to maintain such containers in good repair, in
a clean and satisfactory condition and to store rubbish and garbage
properly therein.
B. Multiple dwellings. In the case of a building housing more than three
families, the owner, lessee or agent of the premises shall provide a
sufficient number of suitable approved containers as herein defined for
238. Editor's Note: Original Sec. 19-9.2g, Dead animals, which previously followed this section,
was deleted 1-9-2006 by Ord. No. 38-2005.
§ 429-2 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 429-3
10:1072
§ 429-4. Set-out time. [Amended 1-9-2006 by Ord. No. 38-2005;
3-13-2006 by Ord. No. 5-2006; 3-9-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
All approved containers shall be placed for pickup not earlier than 5:00 p.m.
of the day prior to collection and shall be removed not later than 10:00 p.m.
of the day of collection.
§ 429-4.5. Hours and days of collection. [Added 3-9-2015 by Ord.
No. 2015-02]
The collection of solid waste shall only occur between the hours of 6:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m., Monday to Saturday.
§ 429-5. Scavenging.
No person shall overturn, spill, scatter, root through or pull apart any
garbage or refuse set out for collection, nor shall any person remove
anything from any receptacle, bundle of garbage or refuse set out for
collection.
§ 429-6. Mandatory recycling; violations and penalties. [Added
7-30-1987 by Ord. No. 27-87; amended 1-3-1989 by Ord. No. 65-88;
10-2-1989 by Ord. No. 33-89; 11-4-1991 by Ord. No. 25-91;
3-13-1995 by Ord. No. 9-95; 1-9-2006 by Ord. No. 38-2005;
1-14-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-01]
the storage of garbage and rubbish between collections and shall
maintain them in good repair and in a clean and satisfactory condition.
C. Commercial and nonresidential establishments. The proprietor,
manager, agent or person in charge of a commercial establishment,
professional office, church or any other premises where occupancy is
nonresidential in nature shall provide proper and sufficient approved
containers as defined herein.
D. Broken and illegal receptacles. After 10 days' written notice has been
given to the responsible party by the Health Officer or his duly
authorized agent to dispose of defective or illegal waste containers, the
condemned containers may be collected as rubbish.
A. Collection program established. There is hereby established a
mandatory recycling program for the separate collection of the
following listed items for recycling purposes within the Township of Old
Bridge. Such collections shall be made periodically under the
supervision of the Director of Public Works. The following sectors of the
community shall be responsible for source separating the following
items:
(1) For residential (including multifamily), commercial, industrial and
institutional, governments and office parks:
(a) Corrugated cardboard (from residential sources).
§ 429-3 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 429-6
10:1073
(b) Metal cans, glass, and plastic known as co-mingled
recyclables; metal such as soda, beer, canned pet food and
tuna cans. Please rinse the cans. Plastics with #1 PETE and #2
HDPE containers such as milk, juice jugs, water bottles and
soda bottles; glass bottles and jars of all colors. Co-mingled can
be placed in the round recycling container.
(c) Mixed paper: Glossy inserts, magazines, telephone books, junk
mail, colored paper, computer paper, office paper, paperboard
(chipboard and pressboard), nonmetallic wrapping paper,
softcover books, hardcover books with covers removed and
fine paper.
(d) Textiles: clean, dry clothing or fabric and other recyclable
textiles such as shoes, belts or handbags. Clothing or fabric
larger than 12 square inches shall be placed in the textile bag
provided by the MCIA. The bag shall be closed securely and
left at the curb with other recyclables. The collection crew
shall leave a replacement bag in its place.
(e) Brush (branches, woody plants that do not exceed five inches
in diameter and Christmas trees).
(f) Newspapers: clean newsprint and newspaper inserts only.
Newsprint shall be tied with string or sturdy cord in bundles no
higher than 12 inches. The bundles shall be placed at the curb
next to recycling bins. Newspapers shall not be placed in the
blue rectangular mixed-paper container, nor shall newspapers
be placed in plastic bags. Mail and mixed paper shall not be
tied with newspaper bundles.
(g) Motor oil.
(h) Leaves.
(i) Masonry/paving material: asphalt, block, brick, cinder and
concrete.
(j) Rechargeable batteries: nickel cadmium (Ni-Cd), nickel metal
hydride (Ni-MH), lithium ion (Li-ion) and small sealed lead
(Pb).
(k) Tires: rubber-based scrap automotives, truck, and equipment
tires.
(l) White goods: washers, dryers, ranges, refrigerators, air
conditioners. Note: All devices that contain CFC's must be
properly evaluated by licensed individuals and all CFC's
recovered must be sent to an EPA-approved reclaimer.
(2) Commercial, industrial and institutional, governments and office
parks shall also be subject to mandatory source-separated
collection as follows:
§ 429-6 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 429-6
10:1074
(a) Electronics: televisions, CPU's, monitors, laptops, and
mercury-containing devices.
(b) Fluorescent bulbs: lamps that contain mercury.
(c) Plastic film: Stretch/shrink wrap, plastic shopping bags — only
for warehouses, retail establishments and supermarkets with
25 or more employees.
(d) Wood scrap: unfinished lumber from new construction projects
including pallets. "Unfinished" shall mean nonchemically
treated (not pressure treated, impregnated with preservatives,
insecticides, fungicides, creosote, or other chemicals, and not
painted, resin-coated or otherwise surface treated, and not
laminated or bonded; and not similarly altered from its natural
condition) — only for new construction sites.
B. Regulations authorized. Said Director is hereby authorized and
directed to establish and promulgate regulations as to the manner, days
and times of such collections and the bundling, handling, location and
time of placement of all materials for collection.
C. Separation of certain items from refuse; authorized use. The items
listed in Subsection A above which are appropriate for recycling shall
be kept separate from and not mixed with regular refuse which is
collected by any private garbage collection contractor. The residential,
commercial, business, institutional and industrial sectors of the
community shall be responsible for the separating of items as listed in
Subsection A above. Newspaper shall be considered clean and
uncontaminated if it has not been exposed to substances or conditions
rendering it unusable for recycling. Persons may wrap refuse in used
newspapers and discard the same with regular refuse to the extent
necessary to properly dispose of said refuse.
D. Ownership of recyclable material; offense. From the time of placement
at the curb by any resident, commercial business or institution of any
recyclable material for collection within the Township of Old Bridge,
pursuant to the mandatory recycling program established hereby and
the rules and regulations established hereunder, such materials shall
become and be the property of the Township of Old Bridge, and it shall
be a violation of this section for any person other than authorized
personnel of the Department of Public Works, or an authorized garbage
collection contractor, to collect, pick up or cause to be collected or
picked up such recyclable materials. Each such collection in violation
hereof from each location shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense.
E. Compliance.
(1) Residential compliance requirements (single-family and up to fourfamily
houses). Citizens are responsible for source-separating
mandated items.
§ 429-6 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 429-6
10:1075
(2) Multifamily compliance requirements.
(a) The management must provide dropoff or curbside collection
for all mandated materials.
(b) Dropoff containers must be clearly marked and adequate to
hold materials between collections.
(c) The management is responsible for arranging for recyclables
to be removed from the premises and for assuring that they are
marketed.
(d) The management must issue notifications to tenants every
three months and send copies of these notices to the Municipal
Recycling Coordinator.
(e) The management must arrange for reports of recycling
tonnage information to be submitted to the municipality on a
yearly basis.
(3) Commercial compliance (retail and wholesale businesses,
restaurants, taverns, schools, institutions, warehouses, factories,
offices, construction sites, etc.).
(a) A recycling system must be established for all mandated
materials by the owner/operator.
(b) Recycling containers must be clearly marked and adequate to
hold materials between collections.
(c) The owner/operator is responsible for arranging for
recyclables to be removed from the premises and for assuring
that they are marketed.
(d) The owner/operator must provide notice to employees and
customers if they are impacted by the recycling system.
(e) The owner/operator must arrange for reports of recycling
tonnage information to be submitted to the municipality on a
quarterly basis.
F. Violations and penalties; enforcement. Any person, firm or corporation
who violates or neglects to comply with any provision of this article or
any regulation promulgated pursuant hereto shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to the penalty in Chapter 1, Article II, Penalty. This
section shall be enforceable by the Township Health Officer and/or the
Old Bridge Township Police Department.
G. Additional methods of disposal. Any resident, commercial business or
institution may donate or sell recyclable materials to any person,
partnership or corporation for proper disposal as recyclable material.
Said person, partnership or corporation will not, however, under any
§ 429-6 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 429-6
10:1076
§ 429-7. Design standards; refuse and recycling. [Added 1-14-2008
by Ord. No. 2008-01]
circumstances, pick up or collect said recyclable material from the
curbside within the Township of Old Bridge.
A. Any application to the Planning or Zoning Board of the Township of Old
Bridge for subdivision or site plan approval for the construction of
multifamily dwellings of three or more units, single-family
developments of 50 or more units or any commercial, institutional, or
industrial development for the utilization of 1,000 square feet or more
of land must include a recycling plan. This plan must contain, at a
minimum, the following:
(1) A detailed analysis of the expected composition and amounts of
solid waste and recyclables generated at the proposed
development; and
(2) Locations documented on the application's site plan that provide
for convenient recycling opportunities for all owners, tenants, and
occupants. The recycling area shall be of sufficient size, convenient
location and contain other attributes (signage, lighting, fencing,
etc.) as may be determined by the Municipal Recycling
Coordinator.
B. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the Township of
Old Bridge, the owner of any new multifamily housing or commercial,
institutional, or industrial development must supply a copy of a duly
executed contract with a hauling company for the purposes of collection
and recycling of source-separated recyclable materials, in those
instances where the municipality does not otherwise provide this
service.
C. Provision shall be made for the indoor, or enclosed outdoor, storage and
pickup of solid waste, to be approved by the Municipal Engineer.
D. Building permit. At the time of issuance of any building permit, the
Building Code Official will provide written instruction on proper
disposal and recycling of construction and demolition waste and furnish
a notification of construction/demolition activity form that must be filled
out by the permittee and faxed to the Middlesex County Division of
Solid Waste Management (MCDSWM) within 48 hours of the issuance
of a municipal permit.
§ 429-6 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 429-7
10:1077
Chapter 432
STORMWATER QUALITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 198.
Hazardous materials — See Ch. 221.
Housing — See Ch. 235.
Littering — See Ch. 265
Pesticide control — See Ch. 355.
Solid waste — See Ch. 429.
§ 429-7 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 429-7
10:1078
ARTICLE I
Waste Disposal in Storm Sewer System
[Adopted 8-16-2004 by Ord. No. 22-04]
§ 432-1. Purpose.
An ordinance to prohibit the spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials
other than stormwater to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4)
operated by the Township of Old Bridge, so as to protect public health,
safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 432-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Township of Old Bridge or other
public body and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 432-3. Prohibited conduct.
The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other than stormwater to the
municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Township of Old
Bridge is prohibited. The spilling, dumping or disposal of materials other
than stormwater in such a manner as to cause the discharge of pollutants
to the municipal separate storm sewer system is also prohibited.
§ 432-4. Exceptions to prohibition.
A. Waterline flushing and discharges from potable water sources.
B. Uncontaminated groundwater (e.g., infiltration, crawl space or
basement sump pumps, foundation or footing drains, rising
groundwaters).
§ 432-1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 432-4
10:1079
§ 432-5. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Township of Old Bridge Police
Department.
§ 432-6. Violations and penalties.239
Any person(s) who continues to be in violation of the provisions of this
article, after being duly notified, shall be subject to the penalty set forth in
Chapter 1, Article II, Penalty.
C. Air conditioning condensate (excluding contact and noncontact cooling
water).
D. Irrigation water (including landscape and lawn watering runoff).
E. Flows from springs, riparian habitats and wetlands, water reservoir
discharges and diverted stream flows.
F. Residential car washing water and residential swimming pool
discharges.
G. Sidewalk, driveway and street wash water.
H. Flows from fire-fighting activities.
I. Flows from rinsing of the following equipment with clean water.
J. Beach maintenance equipment immediately following its use for its
intended purposes.
K. Equipment used in the application of salt and deicing materials
immediately following salt and deicing material applications. Prior to
rinsing with clean water, all residual salt and deicing materials must be
removed from equipment and vehicles to the maximum extent
practicable using dry cleaning methods (e.g., shoveling and sweeping).
Recovered materials are to be returned to storage for reuse or properly
discarded. Rinsing of equipment, as noted in the above situation is
limited to exterior, undercarriage and exposed parts and does not apply
to engines or other enclosed machinery.
239. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 432-4 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 432-6
10:1080
ARTICLE II
Pet Waste Disposal
[Adopted 8-16-2004 by Ord. No. 23-04]
§ 432-7. Purpose.
An ordinance to establish requirements for the proper disposal of pet solid
waste in the Township of Old Bridge, so as to protect public health, safety
and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for failure to comply.
§ 432-8. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
IMMEDIATE — That the pet solid waste is removed at once, without delay.
OWNER/KEEPER — Any person who shall possess, maintain, house or
harbor any pet or otherwise have custody of any pet, whether or not the
owner of such pet.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PET — A domesticated animal (other than a disability assistance animal)
kept for amusement or companionship.
PET SOLID WASTE — Waste matter expelled from the bowels of the pet;
excrement.
PROPER DISPOSAL — Placement in a designated waste receptacle, or other
suitable container, and discarded in a refuse container which is regularly
emptied by the municipality or some other refuse collector, or disposal into
a system designed to convey domestic sewage for proper treatment and
disposal.
§ 432-9. Requirement for disposal.
All pet owners and keepers are required to immediately and properly
dispose of their pet's solid waste deposited on any property, public or
private, not owned or possessed by that person.
§ 432-10. Exemptions.
Any owner or keeper who requires the use of a disability assistance animal
shall be exempt from the provisions of this section while such animal is
being used for that purpose.
§ 432-7 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 432-11
10:1081
§ 432-11. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Township of Old
Bridge Police Department.
§ 432-12. Violations and penalties.240
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to the penalty set forth in Chapter 1, Article II, Penalty.
240. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 432-11 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 432-12
10:1082
ARTICLE III
Littering
[Adopted 8-16-2004 by Ord. No. 24-04]
§ 432-13. Purpose.
An ordinance to establish requirements to control littering in the Township
of Old Bridge, so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to
prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 432-14. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
LITTER — Any used or unconsumed substance or waste material which
has been discarded, whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic, rubber,
paper, or other natural or synthetic material, or any combination thereof,
including but not limited to any bottle, jar or can, or any top, cap or
detachable tab of any bottle, jar or can, any unlighted cigarette, cigar,
match or any flaming or glowing material or any garbage, trash, refuse,
debris, rubbish, grass clippings or other lawn or garden waste, newspapers,
magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers or other packaging
or construction material, but does not include the waste of the primary
processes of mining or other extraction processes, logging, sawmilling,
farming or manufacturing.
LITTER RECEPTACLE — A container suitable for the depositing of litter.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
§ 432-15. Prohibited acts and regulated activities.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, discard or otherwise
place any litter of any nature upon public or private property other than
in a litter receptacle or, having done so, to allow such litter to remain.
B. Whenever any litter is thrown or discarded or allowed to fall from a
vehicle or boat in violation of this article, the operator or owner, or
both, of the motor vehicle or boat shall also be deemed to have violated
this article.
§ 432-13 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 432-16
10:1083
§ 432-16. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Township of Old Bridge Police
Department.
§ 432-17. Violations and penalties.241
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to the penalty set forth in Chapter 1, Article II, Penalty.
241. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 432-16 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 432-17
10:1084
ARTICLE IV
Feeding Wildlife
[Adopted 8-16-2004 by Ord. No. 25-04]
§ 432-18. Purpose.
An ordinance to prohibit the feeding of unconfined wildlife in any public
park or on any other property owned or operated by the Township of Old
Bridge, so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe
penalties for failure to comply.
§ 432-19. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
FEED — To give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any edible
material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing wildlife.
Feeding does not include baiting in the legal taking of fish and/or game.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
WILDLIFE — All animals that are neither human nor domesticated.
§ 432-20. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall feed, in any public park or on any other property owned or
operated by the Township Of Old Bridge, any wildlife, excluding confined
wildlife (for example, wildlife confined in zoos, parks or rehabilitation
centers, or unconfined wildlife at environmental education centers).
§ 432-21. Enforcement.
§ 432-22. Violations and penalties.242
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to the penalty set forth in Chapter 1, Article II, Penalty.
A. This article shall be enforced by the Township of Old Bridge Police
Department.
B. Any person found to be in violation of this article shall be ordered to
cease the feeding immediately.
242. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 432-18 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 432-22
10:1085

ARTICLE V
Containerized Yard Waste
[Adopted 8-16-2004 by Ord. No. 26-04]
§ 432-23. Purpose.
An ordinance to establish requirements for the proper handling of yard
waste in the Township of Old Bridge, so as to protect public health, safety
and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 432-24. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
CONTAINERIZED — The placement of yard waste in a trash can, bucket,
bag or other vessel, such as to prevent the yard waste from spilling or
blowing out into the street and coming into contact with stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive,
or other way, which is an existing state, county, or municipal roadway,
and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or
unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking areas, and other areas within the street lines.
YARD WASTE — Leaves and grass clippings.
§ 432-25. Prohibited conduct.
The owner or occupant of any property, or any employee or contractor
of such owner or occupant engaged to provide lawn care or landscaping
services, shall not sweep, rake, blow or otherwise place yard waste, unless
the yard waste is containerized, in the street. If yard waste that is not
containerized is placed in the street, the party responsible for placement of
yard waste must remove the yard waste from the street or said party shall
be deemed in violation of this article.
§ 432-26. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Township of Old
Bridge Police Department.
§ 432-23 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 432-27
10:1087
§ 432-27. Violations and penalties.243
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to the penalty set forth in Chapter 1, Article II, Penalty.
243. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 432-27 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 432-27
10:1088
ARTICLE VI
Illicit Connections to Storm Sewer Systems
[Adopted 8-16-2004 by Ord. No. 27-04]
§ 432-28. Purpose.
An ordinance to prohibit illicit connections to the municipal separate storm
sewer system(s) operated by the Township of Old Bridge, so as to protect
public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure
to comply.
§ 432-29. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use
in the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When
not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number,
and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The
word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. The definitions
below are the same as or based on corresponding definitions in the New
Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C.
7:14A-1.2.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Waste and wastewater from humans or household
operations.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any physical or nonphysical connection that
discharges domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water, process
wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater) to the
municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Township of Old
Bridge, unless that discharge is authorized under a NJPDES permit other
than the Tier A Municipal Stormwater General Permit (NJPDES Permit No.
NJ0141852). Nonphysical connections may include, but are not limited to,
leaks, flows, or overflows into the municipal separate storm sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Nondomestic waste, including but not limited to
those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b), or (c) of the Federal
Clean Water Act [33 U.S.C. § 1317(a), (b), or (c)].
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by Township of Old Bridge or other public
body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
NJPDES PERMIT — A permit issued by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used to reduce temperature
for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come into direct contact
with any raw material, intermediate product (other than heat) or finished
§ 432-28 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 432-29
10:1089
product. Noncontact cooling water may, however, contain algaecides, or
biocides to control fouling of equipment such as heat exchangers, and/or
corrosion inhibitors.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Any water which, during manufacturing or
processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production
or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct,
or waste product. Process wastewater includes, but is not limited
to, leachate and cooling water other than noncontact cooling water.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 432-30. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged through an illicit
connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the
Township of Old Bridge any domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water,
process wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater).
§ 432-31. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Township of Old Bridge Police
Department.
§ 432-32. Violations and penalties.244
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to the penalty set forth in Chapter 1, Article II, Penalty.
244. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 432-29 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 432-32
10:1090
ARTICLE VII
Yard Waste Collection and Disposal
[Adopted 8-16-2004 by Ord. No. 28-04]
§ 432-33. Purpose.
An ordinance to establish a yard waste collection and disposal program
in the Township of Old Bridge, so as to protect public health, safety and
welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 432-34. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
CONTAINERIZED — The placement of yard waste in a trash can, bucket,
bag or other vessel, such as to prevent the yard waste from spilling or
blowing out into the street and coming into contact with stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive,
or other way, which is an existing state, county, or municipal roadway,
and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or
unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking areas, and other areas within the street lines.
YARD WASTE — Leaves and grass clippings.
§ 432-35. Yard waste collection.
Sweeping, raking, blowing or otherwise placing yard waste that is not
containerized at the curb or along the street is only allowed during the
seven days prior to a scheduled and announced collection and shall not be
placed closer than 10 feet from any storm drain inlet. Placement of such
yard waste at the curb or along the street at any other time or in any other
manner is a violation of this article. If such placement of yard waste occurs,
the party responsible for placement of the yard waste must remove the
yard waste from the street or said party shall be deemed in violation of this
article.
§ 432-36. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Township of Old
Bridge Police Department.
§ 432-33 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 432-37
10:1091
§ 432-37. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-9-2006 by Ord.No.
38-2005]
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to the penalty set forth in Chapter 1, Article II, Penalty.
§ 432-37 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 432-37
10:1092
ARTICLE VIII
Private Storm Drain Inlet Retrofitting
[Adopted 9-14-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-17]
§ 432-38. Purpose.
An ordinance requiring the retrofitting of existing storm drain inlets which
are in direct contact with repaving, repairing, reconstruction, or
resurfacing or alterations of facilities on private property, to prevent the
discharge of solids and floatables (such as plastic bottles, cans, food
wrappers and other litter) to the municipal separate storm sewer system(s)
operated by the Township of Old Bridge so as to protect public health, safety
and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 432-39. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Township of Old Bridge or other
public body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORM DRAIN INLET — An opening in a storm drain used to collect
stormwater runoff and includes, but is not limited to, a grate inlet, curbopening
inlet, slotted inlet, and combination inlet.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams
and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural or artificial,
within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
§ 432-40. Prohibited conduct.
No person in control of private property (except a residential lot with one
single-family house) shall authorize the repaving, repairing (excluding the
repair of individual potholes), resurfacing (including top coating or chip
sealing with asphalt emulsion or a thin base of hot bitumen), reconstructing
or altering any surface that is in direct contact with an existing storm drain
inlet on the property unless the storm drain inlet either:
§ 432-38 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 432-40
10:1093
§ 432-41. Design standard; exemptions.
Storm drain inlets identified in § 432-40 above shall comply with the
following standard to control passage of solid and floatable materials
through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this section, "solid and floatable
materials" means sediment, debris, trash, and other floating, suspended, or
settleable solids. For exemptions to this standard, see Subsection C below.
A. Already meets the design standard below to control passage of solid
and floatable materials; or
B. Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in § 432-41 below prior
to the completion of the project.
A. Grates.
(1) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever
they use a grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect
stormwater from that surface into a storm drain or surface water
body under the grate:
(a) The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT)
bicycle-safe grate which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the
NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning
and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
(b) A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate
has an area of no more than seven square inches or is no
greater than 0.5 inch across the smallest dimension.
(2) Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates in grate
inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening portion) of combination
inlets, grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates,
and grates of spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground
surfaces include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open
channels, and stormwater basin floors.
B. Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear space in
that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if the curb opening
has two or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no more than seven
square inches, or be no greater than two inches across the smallest
dimension.
C. This standard does not apply:
(1) Where the Municipal Engineer agrees that this standard would
cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could not practicably
be overcome by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that
meet these standards;
(2) Where flows are conveyed through any device (e.g., end-of-pipe
netting facility, manufactured treatment device, or a catch basin
§ 432-40 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 432-41
10:1094
§ 432-42. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Township Engineer of the Township of
Old Bridge.
§ 432-43. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,250.
hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all
solid and floatable materials that could not pass through one of the
following:
(a) A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches wide
(this option does not apply for outfall netting facilities); or
(b) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch.
(c) Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the bars; or
(d) Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register of
Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet
this standard is an undertaking that constitutes an
encroachment or will damage or destroy the New Jersey
Register listed historic property.
§ 432-41 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 432-43
10:1095

ARTICLE IX
Containment of Leakage from Outdoor Refuse Containers
[Adopted 9-14-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-18]
§ 432-44. Purpose.
An ordinance requiring dumpsters and other refuse containers that are
outdoors or exposed to stormwater to be covered at all times and prohibits
the spilling, dumping, leaking, or otherwise discharge of liquids, semiliquids
or solids from the containers to the municipal separate storm sewer
system(s) operated by the Township of Old Bridge and/or the waters of the
state so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe
penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 432-45. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Township of Old Bridge or other
public body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
REFUSE CONTAINER — Any waste container that a person controls,
whether owned, leased, or operated, including dumpsters, trash cans,
garbage pails, and plastic trash bags.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams
and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural or artificial,
within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
§ 432-46. Prohibited conduct.
§ 432-44 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 432-46
10:1097
§ 432-47. Exceptions to prohibition.
§ 432-48. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department of the Township of
Old Bridge.
§ 432-49. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,250.
A. Any person who controls, whether owned, leased, or operated, a refuse
container or dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster is
covered at all times and shall prevent refuse from spilling out or
overflowing.
B. Any person who owns, leases or otherwise uses a refuse container or
dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster does not leak or
otherwise discharge liquids, semiliquids, or solids to the municipal
separate storm sewer system (s) operated by the Township of Old
Bridge.
A. Permitted temporary demolition containers.
B. Litter receptacles (other than dumpsters or other bulk containers).
C. Individual homeowner trash and recycling containers.
D. Refuse containers at facilities authorized to discharge stormwater
under a valid NJPDES permit.
E. Large bulky items (e.g., furniture, bound carpet and padding, white
goods placed curbside for pickup).
§ 432-46 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 432-49
10:1098
Chapter 435
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
§ 432-49 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 432-49
10:1099

ARTICLE I
Obstruction of Streets
[Adopted 3-29-1945 (Sec. 4-4 of the 1973 Revised General
Ordinances)]
§ 435-1. Unnecessary obstructions.
No person shall unnecessarily obstruct any street, alley or public place
within the Township with any kind of vehicle or with boxes, lumber, wood or
any other things.
§ 435-2. Occupation of street during building.
The provisions of this article shall not prevent persons who are building
from occupying, until notified by any Township official to cease such
occupancy, 1/2 of the street in front of the place where they are so building,
unless another person is building on the opposite side of the street, in which
case neither shall occupy more than 1/3 of the street.
§ 435-3. Discontinuation upon notice.
No person who is building shall continue such occupancy of any street after
notice from any Township official to discontinue the same.
§ 435-1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 435-3
10:1101

ARTICLE II
Obstructions Along Roads and at Intersections
[Adopted as Sec. 4-6 of the 1973 Revised General Ordinances]
§ 435-4. Responsibility of owner or occupant. [Amended 1-9-2006
by Ord. No. 38-2005]
The owner, tenant or occupant of lands lying within the Township shall keep
all bushes, hedges and other plant life growing within 10 feet of any street
right-of-way and within 25 feet of the intersection of two street lines cut to
a height of not more than 2 1/2 feet above the elevation of the crown of the
road.
§ 435-5. Service of notice.
Notice may be given to the owner of any lands which he does not occupy by
mailing same to his last known address or to the place where the tax bills
are sent.
§ 435-6. Removal by Township.245
If the owner, tenant or occupant refuses to cut the brush, hedges or other
plant life in violation of this article, the Township Public Works Director may
direct an official or an employee of the Township to cut such brush, hedges
or other plant life. The person performing the cutting shall certify the cost
thereof, and the amount so charged shall become a lien upon the lands on
which the brush, hedges and other plant life grow and shall be added to and
become part of the taxes assessed and levied upon such lands and shall bear
interest at the same rate as other taxes and shall be collected and enforced
by the same officer and in the same manner as taxes.
245. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 435-4 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 435-6
10:1103

ARTICLE III
Snow and Ice Removal
[Adopted as Sec. 4-7 of the 1973 Revised General Ordinances]
§ 435-7. Removal from sidewalks.
A. The owner, occupant or tenant of any premises abutting or bordering
upon any street in the Township shall remove all snow and ice from the
abutting sidewalks of such streets and from any fire hydrant located on
the property or, in the case of ice which may be so frozen as to make
removal impracticable, shall cause the same to be thoroughly covered
with sand or ashes, within 12 hours of daylight after the same falls or
forms thereon.
B. In case a building is not owner-occupied and is occupied by more than
one family or business unit, the tenant or occupant of the first floor or
story thereof is hereby required to remove all snow and ice from such
portion of the sidewalk and from any fire hydrant located on the
property or, in the case of ice which it is impracticable to remove, cover
the same with sand or ashes, within 12 hours of daylight after the same
forms or falls thereon.
C. No person, owner, tenant or occupant of any premises abutting on any
street shall throw, place or deposit any snow or ice into or upon any
street in the Township, it being the intent and purpose of this provision
to prohibit all persons from throwing, casting, placing or depositing
snow and ice which accumulated within the private property belonging
to such person upon the sidewalks or streets or fire hydrants of the
Township.
D. In case such snow or ice is not be removed from the sidewalks or fire
hydrants or shall be cast, deposited or placed thereon by the owner,
tenant or occupant of any premises as provided in Subsections A, B and
C above, the same shall be removed forthwith and under the direction
of the Township Public Works Director and the cost of such removal, as
nearly as can be ascertained, shall be certified by the Township Public
Works Director to the Council. The Council shall examine such
certification and, if found to be correct, shall cause the cost to be
charged against the real estate so abutting or bordering upon the
sidewalks and fire hydrants, and the amount charged shall become a
lien and a tax upon the real estate or land and be added to, recorded
and collected in the same way and manner as the taxes next to be levied
and assessed upon such premises and shall bear interest and be
enforced and collected by the same officers and in the same manner as
other taxes. The imposition and collection of a fine or fines imposed by
the provisions of this subsection shall not constitute any bar to the right
of the Township of Old Bridge to collect the cost as certified for the
removal of the snow or ice in the manner herein authorized.246
246. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 435-7 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 435-8
10:1105
§ 435-8. Removal in garden apartment complexes.
§ 435-9. Removal of snow and ice from handicap parking spaces.
[Added 9-29-1994 by Ord. No. 59-94]
No owner or operator of premises having parking spaces reserved for
handicapped drivers and no tenant, contractor or other person may block
access to such parking stalls reserved for handicapped drivers by the
plowing, piling or placement of snow or ice in such spaces.
§ 435-9.1. Removal of snow and ice by developer. [Added 3-14-2011
by Ord. No. 2011-06]
A. The purpose of this section is to ensure clear passage through streets,
roadways and parking areas in garden apartment complexes for
ambulances, fire vehicles and other emergency vehicles after a
snowfall.
B. In the event of snowfall or a series of snowfalls resulting in snow
accumulation of one inch or more in depth, the owner or manager of
any garden apartment complex in the Township shall remove the snow
from the streets, roadways and parking areas of each garden complex
within three hours after the same shall fall or be formed thereon.
[Amended 3-4-1991 by Ord. No. 5-91]
C. The owner or manager of any garden apartment complex in the
Township of Old Bridge shall remove all snow and ice from all sidewalks
within the complex and, in the case of ice, cause the same to be
thoroughly covered with sand, rock salt or ashes, within three hours
after the same shall fall or be formed thereon. [Amended 3-4-1991 by
Ord. No. 5-91]
D. Upon the failure of the owner or manager to remove or provide for the
removal of such snow and ice, the Township may remove same and the
cost thereof charged against the lands of such garden apartment
complex from which the snow and ice is removed as follows:
(1) The officer or employee of the Township in charge of the removal
shall certify the cost thereof to the Township Council.
(2) The Township Council shall examine the certificate and, if found to
be correct, shall cause such cost to be charged against the real
estate of the garden apartment complex.
(3) The amount so charged shall thereupon become a lien and tax upon
the real estate and be added to and be part of the taxes next to be
levied and assessed thereon, and enforced and collected with
interest by the same officer and in the same manner as any other
taxes.
A. The purpose of this section is to ensure clear passage through streets,
roadways and parking areas after a snowfall in housing developments
§ 435-8 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 435-9.1
10:1106
still under the control of the developer, where the roads have not
been taken over 100% by either the homeowners' association or the
Township of Old Bridge where applicable.
B. In the event of snowfall or a series of snowfalls resulting in snow
accumulation of three inches or more in depth or the occurrence of a
freezing rain/ice event at any housing development, where the roads
have not been taken over 100% by either the homeowners' association
or the Township, the developer shall be responsible to remove the snow
and ice from the streets and roadways of each development within
three hours after the same shall fall or be formed thereon.
C. Upon the failure of the developer to remove or provide for the removal
of such snow and ice, the Township Business Administrator may direct
the Director of Public Works to perform such snow/ice removal services
deemed necessary to protect the health, safety and general welfare of
the residents within the development. Thereafter, the Director of Public
Works or his designee shall certify the cost of the snow/ice removal to
the Township Council. The Township shall send by personal delivery or
certified mail written notice to the developer of its failure to perform
required snowplowing services, including the costs incurred by the
Township to perform these services.
D. The enforcement of this section shall be under the supervision of the
Township Business Administrator or the Director of the Department of
Public Works, who shall cause suitable inspections to be made, where
appropriate, relative to compliance with this section and/or to
investigate complaints relative to noncompliance with this section.
Upon ascertaining a violation of this section, in addition to causing the
snow or ice to be removed, the Director of Public Works, his designee,
or the Construction Official or his designee shall refer charges in the
Municipal Court as provided in this subsection.
E. Any developer violating or causing to be violated any of the provisions
of this section shall be subject to a fine of not less than $1,000 and not
more than $1,250; said fines shall be in addition to any costs incurred
by the Township for snow removal at the housing development. Each
and every day in which said violation exists shall constitute a separate
violation.
§ 435-9.1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 435-9.1
10:1107

ARTICLE IV
Excavations
[Adopted 12-15-1998 by Ord. No. 87-98 (Ch. XIII of the 1973
Revised General Ordinances); amended in its entirety 5-8-2006 by
Ord. No. 21-2006]
§ 435-10. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CASH ESCROW/BOND — A sum of money as determined by this article
which shall be used to complete any road opening replacement section not
completed by a permittee, shall be used to replace a failed road opening
replacement section, and all inspections fees shall be deducted from the
required sum of money prior to the return of any funds.
EMERGENCY — A condition or circumstance which involves immediate
danger to life or property, or both, or which involves a possibility of
interruption or curtailment of any service furnished to the public by a public
utility.
PERMITTEE — Any public utility, individual or company to which a permit
has been issued under and pursuant to this article.
PUBLIC UTILITY — Any public utility as defined in N.J.S.A. 48:2-13.
§ 435-11. Permit required.
No person shall remove, dig into, disturb, excavate or take up or cause
or procure to be removed, disturbed, excavated or dug up the surface of
any public street, lane, alley, court, sidewalk or other public place or any
pavement therein, except roads not under the jurisdiction of the Township,
without the written permission of the Director of the Department of Public
Works, whose duty it shall be to grant such permission when all of the
requirements of this article for granting the same have been complied with
by the applicant. A separate permit shall be required for each opening
made. No permit shall be issued to any permittee who is in violation of this
article as a result of a prior permit.
§ 435-12. Exemption from permit.
The provisions of this article requiring a permit shall not apply to a
residential homeowner who is installing, improving, repairing or totally
removing sidewalks on said residential property.
§ 435-13. Application requirements.
Application for a permit shall be made on forms to be provided by the
Township. The application shall state the purpose of the excavation and the
name and address of the person who will restore the permanent pavement
when the same is not to be done by the Township or the applicant. The
§ 435-10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 435-13
10:1109
application shall be accompanied by a diagram indicating the nature and
extent of the excavations to be made and the work to be done and, if during
the course of the work any major variation is required, the permittee shall
file an amended diagram showing the manner in which the work is actually
being done.
§ 435-14. Fees.
§ 435-15. Commencement of work and duration of permit.
A. In addition to the cash escrow/bond provided in this article, the
applicant for any permit to disturb, excavate or dig up any street shall
pay the following nonrefundable application fee for each permit: $100.
In the event a permit is not obtained prior to the commencement of
work, the fee shall be doubled to $200 and an additional bond shall be
required as outlined in § 435-29 below (this includes emergency work).
B. A separate permit shall be required for each opening made.
C. No permit shall be issued unless and until the applicant posts the cash
escrow/bond required by this article.
D. No permit shall be issued unless and until the applicant executes a
written undertaking to be fully responsible for the costs of inspecting
the excavation and restoration of the street, lane, alley, court, sidewalk
or other public place which is the subject of the permit. The following
fees shall be paid to the Township of Old Bridge as reimbursement for
inspection fees:
(1) Fees for inspection work to be paid in one-half-hour increments:
$50 per 1/2 hour.
E. If a cash bond is not provided because the contractor is a public utility,
an escrow fund in an amount determined by the Director of the
Department of Public Works shall be posted to cover the aforesaid
inspection fees prior to the issuance of any permit. Where a cash bond
is provided, the inspection fees shall be deducted from the bond prior to
release.
A. The work on any opening to be made under the permit provided for in
this article shall be commenced within 10 days from the date of the
permit and the work prosecuted with due diligence to its completion. If
for any reason work is not commenced within 10 days, the permit shall
be void unless such period of 10 days occurs between the period from
December 15 through March 15 or the Director of the Department of
Public Works, or such other officer as the Business Administrator may
designate, shall extend it for a like period.
B. The work covered by the permit shall be completed within 180 days. At
the expiration of such period, the applicant is required to secure a new
permit.
§ 435-13 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 435-15
10:1110
§ 435-16. Oral emergency approval.
In case of emergency, any public utility, individual or company may make an
excavation in or upon the surface of any road without first having obtained
from the Director of the Department of Public Works a permit (subject to the
fees and escrows/bonds required by this article) therefor, in which case the
public utility, individual or company shall make application for such permit
within two working days after the occurrence of such emergency, provided
that the public utility, individual or company first telephones to the office of
the Director of the Department of Public Works a statement concerning the
emergency in question or, in case such office is closed, the telephone call
shall be made to Old Bridge Police Department.
§ 435-17. Use of mechanical equipment.
No mechanical excavating machinery or equipment shall be used unless the
use thereof has been set forth specifically in the application.
§ 435-18. Tunneling under pavement.
Tunneling under pavements shall not be done unless authorized in writing
by the Director of the Department of Public Works.
§ 435-19. Emergency Sunday work.
No excavation shall be made on a Sunday except in case of emergency.
§ 435-20. Guarding excavations.
The permittee shall properly guard the excavation by the erection of
suitable barricades and by displaying warning lights at night.
§ 435-21. Keeping roads open.
If the excavation is to extend the full width of the road, no more than 1/2 of
the road shall be opened at one time and such half shall be backfilled before
the other half is opened so as to permit the free flow of traffic.
§ 435-22. Backfilling.
Backfilling of the excavation shall consist of composite sandash/pozolan
backfill materials (17:2-1). The backfill shall be compacted (95%
compaction). The maximum compacted thickness of each layer shall not
exceed eight inches.
C. Except in the case of emergencies, no person shall remove, dig into,
disturb, excavate or take up or cause or procure to be removed,
disturbed, excavated or dug up any surface of any street, lane, alley,
court, sidewalk or other public place of the Township during the period
December 15 through March 15 of any year, inclusive.
§ 435-15 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 435-23
10:1111
§ 435-23. Temporary paving specifications.
After the backfill has been placed, the permittee shall install a temporary
pavement of bituminous material over the opening and shall keep such
temporary pavement to grade until it has been replaced by a permanent
pavement.
§ 435-24. Base course specifications.
The base course shall consist of dense aggregate bituminous concrete at
least five inches thick or equal to the thickness of the existing roadway,
whichever is thicker. If the existing road is constructed of concrete, the
permittee must receive prior approval from the inspector as to the type of
base required.
§ 435-25. Top course.
The final (wearing) course installed over the base course shall consist of
at least two inches of thickness, or equal to the thickness of the existing
roadway, whichever is thicker, of FABC top course materials. The final
(wearing) course shall be enlarged by a minimum of six inches in each
direction over the width of the base course and squared up to the extent
possible. If existing road is constructed of concrete, the permittee must
receive prior approval from the inspector as to the type of top course
required.
§ 435-26. Trench and bedding detail incorporated by reference.
The trench and bedding detail for utility installation is depicted in a certain
diagram described as Exhibit 1, 15 copies of which are on file with the
Director of Public Works of the Township of Old Bridge.
§ 435-27. Liability.
Any damage done to the pavement, sidewalk, curbing or trees as a result of
the permittee in installing its equipment shall be repaired by the permittee.
If the permittee fails to make such repairs, the Township shall give the
permittee written notice thereof specifying the damage to be repaired. If
the permittee fails to make such repairs within 30 days after the receipt
of such notice, the Township shall make such repairs; in which event, the
permittee shall be charged for the cost thereof, billed upon the completion
of the work and shall be paid within 30 days after the receipt of the bill
therefor.
§ 435-28. Indemnity.
In accepting a permit, the permittee shall be deemed to have agreed to
indemnify and save harmless the Township from and against any and all
loss, costs or damages incurred by reason of any damage to any property,
injury to any person or any loss of life resulting from any negligence of
§ 435-23 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 435-28
10:1112
the permittee, its grants or servants in performing the work covered by the
permit.
§ 435-29. Bond requirements for public utilities and cash escrows/
bonds for non-public utilities.
§ 435-30. Agent or servant of permittee.
Neither the Director of the Department of Public Works, nor any person
employed to perform such work under or pursuant to the provision of this
article, shall be deemed to be the agent or the servant of the permittee for
any of the purposes of this article.
§ 435-31. Administration and enforcement.
The Director of the Department of Public Works shall administer and
enforce the provisions of this article.
A. Each public utility desiring to obtain permits pursuant to this article
shall file each year with the Clerk (who, upon receipt, will provide
copies to Department of Public Works, Finance, and Engineering
Departments) a cash escrow/bond or third-party security bond, which
may be the bond of such corporation solely, in the penal sum of $10,000,
conditioned upon compliance with the applicable provisions of this
article. Every other permittee shall file with the Director of the
Department of Public Works, with respect to each permit issued
pursuant to this article, a cash bond in the form of a certified check or
third-party surety bond in such penal sum as shall be determined by the
Director of the Department of Public Works, conditioned upon the
compliance with the applicable provisions of this article, or in lieu
thereof, such permittee shall deposit with the Township cash in an
amount to be determined by the Director of the Department of Public
Works to secure compliance with the applicable provisions of this
article. The bond amount shall be set at the estimated cost to restore
the contemplated street excavation in accordance with the
specifications set forth in this article. The bond amount shall not be less
than $1,000 or $25 per square foot, whichever is greater. Each public
utility and every other permittee who fails to obtain a permit prior to
beginning the excavation (including emergency work), or who begins
work without an inspector present, or fails to provide proper notice for
inspections, shall at the discretion of the Township Engineer or Director
of the Department of Public Works be subject to reopening the
excavation and shall post a cash escrow/bond of not less than $1,000 or
$25 per square foot, whichever is greater, which shall be held by the
Township for a period of three years after the work is completed.
B. Each bond filed pursuant to this section shall be in a form satisfactory
to the Township Attorney and shall be discharged only after approval of
work by the Director of the Department of Public Works. Any thirdparty
bond shall be posted from a licensed surety.
§ 435-28 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 435-31
10:1113

ARTICLE V
Snow and Ice Emergencies
[Adopted 1-13-1997 by Ord. No. 2-97]
§ 435-32. Purpose.
Heavy snowfall or treacherous ice conditions are a threat to the safety
and well-being of Township residents. In order to minimize the adverse
impact of such conditions, a concerted and organized municipal response
is required. This article authorizes the Township Mayor to declare a snow
or ice emergency and provides for the removal of snow and ice and the
movement of traffic on major roadways during such emergencies.
§ 435-33. Declaration of snow and ice emergency.
In order to facilitate the movement of traffic and to combat the hazards
of snow and ice on the snow emergency routes set forth in this article,
the Mayor, at his/her discretion, may declare a snow and ice emergency,
designated in this article as a "snow emergency". Public notice of the
existence of a snow emergency shall be given through radio, newspaper or
other available media, and information of the termination or modification of
the emergency may be given by use of the same media.
§ 435-34. Restrictions during a snow emergency.
After any snow emergency is declared and during the existence of a snow
emergency, it shall be unlawful, at any time during the continuance of the
emergency, for any person:
§ 435-35. Snow emergency routes designated.
The following are designated snow emergency routes:
Schedule A
Snow Emergency Routes
Road for Priority Snow Removal
Madison Park
Cheesequake
Villanova
Princeton
Rutgers
A. To park or leave unattended a motor vehicle or to allow that vehicle to
remain parked or unattended anywhere on any snow emergency route
hereinafter designed; or
B. To drive any motor vehicle on any street with tires which are unsafe for
snow and ice conditions.
§ 435-32 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 435-35
10:1115
Schedule A
Snow Emergency Routes
Road for Priority Snow Removal
Cornell
Perrine
Harvard
Yale
Brandeis
Poor Farm
Cheesequake
Cheesequake Village
Balmoral
Disbrow
Lambertson/Partridge
Farrington
Highpointe
Cheesequake Estates
Sayrewoods South
Throckmorton Sign
Gaub Sign
Cindy/Grace Sign
Bushnell Sign
Owens Sign
Worth Sign
South Old Bridge
Southwood Sign
Farmbrook Sign
Ferry
Marsad
Green
Third (3rd)
Seventh (7th)
Sunset
Hilliard
Appleby
Ernest
§ 435-35 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 435-35
10:1116
Schedule A
Snow Emergency Routes
Road for Priority Snow Removal
Bentley
Central Park
Washington
Athens
Dock
Laurence Harbor
Harding/Bayview
Shoreland
Valley
Hilltop
Ely
Cliffwood Beach/Knollcroft
Ocean/Raritan
Boulevard East and West
Woodshore East and West
Industrial
Lakeridge
Lakeridge Drive, both sides
Heatherwood/Timberglen
Valley Vale Sign
Inverness Sign
Ticetown
Cottrell
Higgins
Morganville
South Old Bridge (Rural)
East and West Greystone
Pleasant Valley
Old Marlboro
Brookside
Birch
Pine
Jon
§ 435-35 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 435-35
10:1117
Schedule A
Snow Emergency Routes
Road for Priority Snow Removal
Maple
Van Tines
Miscellaneous (private responsibility)
Downing Sign
Westminister Sign
All apartment complex entrances
§ 435-36. Removal of vehicles.
Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this article shall
be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of
traffic, and any police officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle.
The owner shall pay the cost of the removal and storage which may result
from such removal before regaining possession of the vehicle. In imposing
the costs of removal, the fee structure of the Township Towing Ordinance
247 shall be imposed.
§ 435-37. Construal of provisions.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to permit parking at any time or
place where it is forbidden by other provisions of the law.
§ 435-38. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating this article shall, upon conviction in the Municipal
Court of the Township of Old Bridge, be subject to one or more of the
following penalties in the discretion of the Municipal Judge: Fine not
exceeding $500.
247. Editor's Note: See Ch. 527, Wreckers and Towing.
§ 435-35 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 435-38
10:1118
ARTICLE VI
Sidewalk and Curb Maintenance
[Adopted 6-8-1998 by Ord. No. 43-98]
§ 435-39. Repair and replacement of sidewalks and curbs.
The following repair and replacement responsibilities shall be imposed upon
the owners of land abutting sidewalks and curbs:
A. Owners of property used for residential or commercial use which abut
sidewalks which are broken or dislodged so as to present a danger to
pedestrian traffic shall repair or replace such sidewalks and render
such sidewalks safe.
B. Owners of property used for commercial purposes shall repair or
replace broken curbing along any street adjacent to their property.
C. The municipality shall repair or replace broken curbing along any street
adjacent to a property used for residential purposes.
§ 435-39 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 435-39
10:1119

ARTICLE VII
Sidewalk Maintenance
[Adopted 11-13-2000 by Ord. No. 48-00]
§ 435-40. Purpose.
The Township of Old Bridge wishes to reconstruct and improve certain
sidewalks hereinafter designated. The cost of this project shall be wholly
borne by the owner or owners of the real estate in front of which the
improvement is made. Following completion of the reconstruction and
improvement of the sidewalks authorized by this article, the proportionate
cost of such sidewalk shall be assessed against the owner and shall become
a municipal lien. This article also provides for the right to pay the
assessments in installments over a ten-year period.
§ 435-41. Right of owner to make required improvements at own
expense.
Any owner of real estate listed in this article may undertake the installation,
construction, reconstruction or improvement of such owner's sidewalk at
their own expense. If such work is undertaken by an owner, it shall not be
performed by the municipality or the municipality's contractor. The purpose
of this section is to give any owner the option to undertake and perform
the sidewalk reconstruction work at his, her or their expense. In the event
an owner fails to reconstruct the sidewalk in front of their property on or
before the 90th day following receipt of this article, the municipality shall
carry out the work and assess the cost thereof.
§ 435-42. Township Engineer to certify cost of sidewalk
improvement.
A. The Township Engineer is designated as the officer of the municipality
in charge of the improvement. The Township Engineer shall keep an
accurate account of the cost of the improvement and shall certify those
costs to the governing body of Old Bridge Township in a report. The
certification shall be substantially in the following form:
I hereby render a report on sidewalk construction and improvement
performed under the authority of Chapter 435, Article VII, Sidewalk
Maintenance. I hereby certify that the costs of the improvement as
calculated in proportion to the respective frontage of each property is
accurately set forth in this report.
B. The report shall be made under oath and shall be delivered to the
Township Clerk of the Township of Old Bridge
C. Following receipt of the Engineer's report, if the governing body shall
upon examination find that the report accurately reflects a fair
apportionment of the assessment to each property owner in proportion
to their frontage, the governing body shall confirm and file such report
with the officer charged with collection of assessments. Such
§ 435-40 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 435-42
10:1121
§ 435-43. Sidewalk assessments.
§ 435-44. Properties to be assessed for sidewalk reconstruction.
The list shall constitute the properties to receive sidewalk reconstruction
and shall be assessed the cost thereof in proportion to their improved
frontage. Said list shall be on file in the office of the Township Clerk.
§ 435-45. Action by Township officials.
The Mayor, Township Clerk and Director of Law are hereby authorized to
take any action and to sign any and all documents necessary to carry out
this article.
assessments shall thereafter become a lien against the real estate to
which it pertains.
D. Prior to confirming the report rendered by the Engineer, the governing
body shall give notice to the owner or owners named therein of the time
and place fixed for examination of the report and consideration by the
governing body of the confirmation thereof.
A. Sidewalk assessments approved by the governing body as aforesaid
shall bear interest from the time of confirmation at the same rate and
with the same penalties for nonpayment as assessments for local
improvements in the municipality. Such assessments shall from the date
of confirmation be a first and paramount lien upon the real estate
assessed to the same extent and be collected and enforced in the same
manner as assessments for local improvements.
B. The payment and collection of such sidewalk assessments may be made
in installments at the option of the property owner. Such installment
shall be over a period of 10 years. If the property upon which a sidewalk
assessment is imposed should be sold after confirmation of the
assessment, the full amount of such assessment shall then become
immediately due and payable at the time of conveyance of the property.
§ 435-42 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 435-45
10:1122
Chapter 438
SWIMMING POOLS, PUBLIC
§ 438-1. Adoption of standards.
A code regulating and controlling the location and construction, alteration
and operation of public recreational bathing places, the issuance of permits
to locate and construct, alter or operate public recreational bathing places
and declaring and defining certain swimming pools and hot tubs/spas as
nuisances and fixing penalties for violations is hereby adopted pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 8:26-1 et seq. A copy of the code is annexed to and made a part of
this chapter without the inclusion of the text herein.
§ 438-2. Title of code.
The code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "Public Recreational Bathing Code of New Jersey
(1991)".
§ 438-3. Public record.248
Three copies of the Public Recreational Bathing Code of New Jersey (1991)
have been placed on file in the office of the Township Clerk and the office
of the Secretary to the Department of Health and Welfare for the use and
examination of the public.
§ 438-4. Permit required.
No person shall locate and construct, alter or operate a swimming pool
or hot tub/spa until permits therefor have been issued by the Code
Enforcement and Health Department.
§ 438-5. Fees.
A. For the issuance of a permit to locate and construct or alter a swimming
pool or hot tub/spa: refer to code enforcement fees.
B. A permit to operate a commercial swimming pool as part of a swim club,
hotel, motel, health club or other commercial facility; or as part of a
homeowners' association, condominium association to townhouse
association, will be issued by the Health Department following a
complete inspection.
C. The fees shall be as follows for seasonal operations:
(1) Regulation swimming pool: $100 per pool.
(2) Wading pool: $50 per pool.
248. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 435-45 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 438-5
10:1123
§ 438-6. Permit expiration; denial or suspension.
Chapter 442
TAXATION
(3) Spa/hot tubs: $50 per unit.
D. The fees shall be as follows for annual operations:
(1) Regulation swimming pool: $200 per pool.
(2) Wading pool: $100 per pool.
(3) Spa/hot tubs: $50 per unit.
A. Expiration. Permits issued for the operation of a swimming pool or hot
tub/spa shall expire annually on December 31 of each year, and
application for renewal thereof shall be submitted together with the
required fee prior to December 1 of each year except for seasonal
operations (four months or less per year). These seasonal permits shall
be issued no earlier than May 15 and expire no later than September
15.
B. Denial or suspension. Permits required by this chapter may be denied
or suspended by the Health Officer or the Department of Health and
Welfare for failure to comply with this chapter. The Department of
Health and Welfare shall make the final decision concerning the
suspension or denial of a permit.249
249. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 438-5 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 438-6
10:1124
ARTICLE I
Electronic Filing by Certain Financial Institutions
[Amended 3-13-1994 by Ord. No. 11-95]
§ 442-1. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall apply to those banks, mortgage
companies or mortgage servicing agencies which pay taxes on 100 tax line
items or more in any quarter.
§ 442-2. Banks, mortgage companies and mortgaging servicing
agencies to file tax information and payment information by
electronic media.
Banks, savings and loans, mortgage companies, mortgage servicing
agencies or similar to which this article is applicable shall file quarterly
tax information and payment information relating to taxes which such
institutions and agencies pay on electronic media (3.5-inch double-sided
double-density diskette) or such other media as the Tax Collector shall
designate. Format of the data in said filing is to be either specified or
approved by the Tax Collector in advance of such filing. Improper media or
format will result in refusal of filing and assessment of penalties as stated
in § 442-3 following.
§ 442-3. Penalty. [Amended 1-9-2006 by Ord. No. 38-2005]
In the event a bank, savings and loan, mortgage company, mortgage
servicing agency or similar institution to which this article is applicable fails
to file quarterly tax information and tax payment information on electronic
media as aforesaid, a penalty therefor shall be assessed in the amount of
$0.50 per tax line item. The said penalty shall be assessed against the bank,
savings and loan, mortgage company or mortgage servicing agency which
pays or attempts to pay the said taxes in violation of this article. The total
penalty for any one filing/attempted payment shall not exceed the penalty
limit of the Municipal Court.250
250. Editor's Note: See Ch. 1, Art. II, Penalty.
§ 442-1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 442-3
10:1125

ARTICLE II
Exemption or Abatement for Construction of Commercial
Structures
[Adopted 11-25-1996 by Ord. No. 47-96251]
§ 442-4. Background and purpose.
§ 442-5. Procedure for entering into agreement for exemption or
abatement of real property taxes.
The following procedure is hereby established for entering into agreements
for exemption or abatement of real property taxes:
A. The Township Council of the Township of Old Bridge transmitted
proposed resolutions to the Planning Board of the Township of Old
Bridge describing certain areas in need of rehabilitation, known and
designated respectively as the "Parkway Zone" and the "Hospital Zone."
B. The Township Planning Board endorsed the designation of these two
areas as areas in need of rehabilitation and, on May 13, 1996, the
Township Council adopted resolutions finding and designating the said
areas to be in need of rehabilitation or redevelopment pursuant to the
Local Redevelopment and Housing Law of the State of New Jersey
(N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq.).
C. The present ordinance is inactive pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:21-8, which
requires the municipal governing body to set forth procedures for
entering into agreements for exemption and abatement of real property
taxes. Prior to the execution of a specific agreement of tax abatement,
the Township Council will be required to approve by ordinance an
agreement for a particular project or projects.
A. The applicant shall complete a written application for exemption which
sets forth the following information and/or certifications:
(1) The name of the applicant. If the applicant is a corporation, the
standards for disclosure of ownership shall be the same as the
Township employs in connection with liquor license transferees.
(2) The name of the owner of the property. If the owner of the property
is a corporation, the standards for disclosure of ownership shall be
the same as the Township employs in connection with liquor license
transferees.
(3) The application shall be supported by a certification and plot plan
from a professional engineer which designates and certifies that
the project proposed is within the Hospital Zone or Parkway Zone,
as those zones are more particularly described in the resolutions
251. Editor’s Note: This ordinance was readopted 2-11-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-03.
§ 442-4 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 442-5
10:1127
adopted by the Township Council of May 13, 1996, with respect to
the two areas.
(4) The applicant shall supply sufficient information in support of the
application for tax abatement to satisfy the Mayor and his or her
Director of Community Development that the use proposed is as
follows:252
(a) Hospital Zone.
[1] Physicians' offices and related services in single offices or
medical centers (including but not limited to
chiropractors, gynecologists, neurologists, obstetricians,
etc.).
[a] Dental offices and related services.
[b] Hospitals.
[c] Medical laboratories.
[d] Dental laboratories.
[e] Convalescent, rest home or elder-care facilities.
[f] Medical clinics.
[g] Blood banks.
[h] Related medical and health services, including
nursing, physical therapy, podiatry, psychiatry, home
health care, optometrists, and related fields of medical
or health care.
(b) Parkway Zone.
[1] Offices.
[a] Hotels.
[b] High technology laboratory or high technology
manufacturing.
[c] Flex space (office/warehousing space).
(5) In order to be eligible for tax abatement within the Parkway Zone,
an applicant shall demonstrate that its proposed project
incorporates a total floor area ratio equal to a minimum of 90%
permissible for the project's zone lot, as defined in the Land
Development Ordinance of the Township of Old Bridge.
252. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 442-5 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 442-5
10:1128
(6) The applicant shall supply and supplement as necessary any and all
information required to demonstrate that the proposed project will
not violate applicable federal, state or local laws or regulations,
including but not limited to pollution control, worker safety,
discrimination in employment, discrimination in the provision of
housing, zoning, planning and building code requirements.
(7) Each application shall contain a description of the number, classes
and types of employees to be employed at the project within two
years of its completion.
(8) Each application shall contain a statement of the reasons for
seeking tax abatement on the project and a description of the
benefits to be realized by the applicant if tax abatement is granted.
(9) The application shall contain estimates of the cost of completing
the project.
(10) The application shall contain a metes and bounds description of the
real estate which is covered by the project.
(11) The applicant shall support the application with a statement
showing: a) the real property taxes currently being levied on the
vacant land at the project site; b) the assessment of the property at
the time of application; c) the estimated tax payments that would
be made annually by the applicant during the period of tax
abatement; d) the estimated tax payments that would be made on
the project's site after the termination of the tax abatement.
(12) The application shall contain a description of any lease agreements
or other agreements between the applicant and proposed users of
the project, including a history and description of the user's
business.
(13) The application shall contain a certification that the proposed
abatement will apply to a new structure and not an addition to an
existing structure.253
B. The Mayor shall direct the Department of Community Development to
undertake a study and analysis of the application. The Mayor may make
such further inquiries as may be necessary to determine the desirability
of entering a tax abatement agreement with the applicant. Upon
completion of such study, the Mayor shall set forth his or her
recommendations in writing concerning the proposed abatement.
C. Upon receipt of the Mayor's written recommendations, the Township
Council shall consider the enactment of an ordinance to allow the tax
abatement agreement to be entered. Prior to the introduction of any
such ordinance, the proposed agreement shall be drafted and placed on
file with the Municipal Clerk. Such agreement shall set forth the
253. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 442-5 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 442-5
10:1129
§ 442-6. Continuance of tax abatement previously granted in
Parkway Zone.
method by which the abatement of local real property taxes shall be
calculated (either cost basis or gross revenue basis pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:21-10a and b). The agreement shall also set forth the tax phase-in
schedule set forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:21-10(c).
D. The ordinance conferring tax abatement for a particular project shall be
effective following the effective date of adoption of the tax abatement
ordinance. No ordinance shall be enacted without strict compliance
with the laws of the State of New Jersey, including the requirement for
public hearing and publication prior to the adoption of the ordinance.
E. Following adoption of the aforesaid ordinance, the Mayor and Township
Clerk shall sign the tax abatement agreement.
A. Nothing in this agreement shall be deemed to negate or invalidate the
tax abatement agreement previously conferred by the Township of Old
Bridge on October 20, 1980, to Edward J. Rondinelli, Manager and
General Partner of Edward J. Rondinelli and Alexandria M. Rondinelli,
Partners (Successor to Rondell Construction Company and Daleron
Investments) with respect to real property located at Block No. 2150,
Lot No. 4, on the official Tax Map of the Township of Old Bridge.
B. The aforesaid tax abatement agreement remains in effect for a period of
not more than five years from the date of project completion which shall
in no case commence later than January 1, 2007.
§ 442-5 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 442-6
10:1130
ARTICLE III
Open Space Preservation
[Adopted 8-14-2000 by Ord. No. 36-00254; amended in its entirety
3-1-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-09255]
§ 442-7. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to authorize the submission of a proposition
to the voters of the Township of Old Bridge for the 2010 general election
authorizing the imposition of an annual levy for various open space
preservation purposes.
§ 442-8. Ordinance.
The Clerk of the Township of Old Bridge shall submit to the Middlesex
County Clerk the following proposition to be decided by the voters of the
Township of Old Bridge in the 2010 general election:
Shall the Township of Old Bridge impose an additional annual tax levy of
$0.02 per $100 of assessed real property value for a period of 10 years and
the amounts raised by such levy be deposited into an "Old Bridge Township
Open Space, Recreation and Farmland Preservation Trust Fund" and used
exclusively for the following purposes:
1. The acquisition of lands for recreational and conservation
purposes;
2. The acquisition of farmland for farmland preservation purposes;
3. The historic preservation of historic properties, structures,
facilities, sites, areas, or objects, and the acquisition of such
properties, facilities, sites, areas or objects for historic
preservation purposes; and
4. The payment of debt service on indebtedness issued or incurred
by the municipality for any of the purposes set forth above.
Interpretive Statement
254. Editor's Note: This ordinance was approved by the voters at the 2000 general election.
255. Editor's Note: This ordinance was not approved at the 2010 general election.
§ 442-7 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 442-8
10:1131
The passage of this referendum would establish the "Old Bridge Township
Open Space Recreation and Farmland and Historic Preservation Trust
Fund." This fund would be used for open space preservation, farmland
preservation, historic property preservation and the payment of debt
service on indebtedness issued or incurred by the municipality for such
preservation purposes. Fund monies may be used for outright acquisition
of property or the acquisition of development rights. The fund monies
would not be used for salaries, wages, maintenance of property,
administrative expenses, office supplies, equipment and the like. The
Township would annually levy a tax rate of $0.02 per $100 of total
Township assessed real property value for 10 tax years. As an example, at
the two-cent rate, the owner of a property assessed at $125,000 would pay
an additional $25 per year in property taxes.
§ 442-8 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 442-8
10:1132
Chapter 446
TAXICABS; LIMOUSINES
§ 446-1. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit any passengers or fares within
the Township without first having obtained a license from the Clerk or his
designated representative.
§ 446-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
TAXICAB — Includes any automobile, motor car or other vehicle commonly
called "taxi" engaged in the business of carrying passengers for hire which
is held out, announced or advertised to operate or run over any of the
streets or public highways of the Township, and particularly accepts such
persons as may offer themselves for transportation within the Township.
The term shall not include autobuses, public liveries, jitneys or other such
vehicles which are hired by charter or for a particular contract agreed upon
in advance or such public conveyances as are by law subject to state or
federal regulations exclusively.
§ 446-3. Application for license.
A. Taxicab owner's license.
(1) Any person desiring to obtain a license for the operation of a
taxicab or taxicabs shall make separate application in writing to the
Clerk or his designated representative for the granting of a license
for each vehicle, which application shall be made on blank forms to
be furnished by the Township and shall contain such information as
may from time to time be deemed requisite to determine the fitness
of the applicant to conduct the business and adequacy of the
vehicle and equipment to be used.
(2) Every applicant for this license shall be a citizen of the United
States and at least 18 years of age. No application shall be
accepted unless it is accompanied by the full amount of the
required license fee.
(3) The license when issued shall in no way be construed to permit an
owner or operator to drive or operate a taxicab without a taxicab
driver's license.
B. Taxicab driver's license.
(1) Each applicant for a taxicab driver's license shall be at least 18
years of age, a citizen of the United States, and the holder of a state
driver's license issued by the State of New Jersey. Each applicant
§ 442-8 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 446-3
10:1133
shall prove to the satisfaction of the Clerk or his designated
representative that he is in good health with good eyesight and that
he is able to read and write the English language and is of good
character and that he has knowledge of the traffic regulations and
geography of the Township.
(2) All applications for taxicab driver's license shall be made in writing
to the Clerk, which applications shall be made upon blank forms to
be furnished by the Township and shall give, in addition to the
information required by this section, such further information as
may from time to time be deemed requisite to determine the fitness
of the applicant to act in the capacity specified. Each application
shall be accompanied by the full amount of the license fee as
hereinafter provided.
(3) Criminal history record background check. [Added 12-12-2011
by Ord. No. 2011-17]
(a) Each operator or driver of the autocab for which the owner
thereof is seeking the consent to operate in a municipality
must submit to the performance of a criminal history record
background check. The cost for the criminal history record
background check, including all costs of administering and
processing the check, shall be borne by the operator or driver
of the autocab.
(b) A person shall be disqualified from operating or driving an
autocab if a criminal history record background check required
pursuant to this subsection reveals a record of conviction of
any of the following crimes:
[1] In New Jersey or elsewhere any crime as follows:
aggravated assault, arson, burglary, escape, extortion,
homicide, kidnapping, robbery, aggravated sexual assault,
sexual assault or endangering the welfare of a child
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:24-4, whether or not armed with or
having in his possession any weapon enumerated in
Subsection r of N.J.S.A. 2C-39-1, a crime pursuant to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 2C:39-3, 2C:39-4 or 2C:39-9, or other
than a disorderly persons or petty disorderly persons
offense for the unlawful use, possession or sale of a
controlled dangerous substance as defined in N.J.S.A.
2C:35-2.
[2] In any other state, territory, commonwealth, or other
jurisdiction of the United States, or any country in the
world, as a result of a conviction in a court of competent
jurisdiction, a crime which in that other jurisdiction or
country is comparable to one of the crimes enumerated in
Subsection B(3)(b)[1].
§ 446-3 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 446-3
10:1134
§ 446-4. Insurance; inspection; transferability. [Amended 1-9-2006
by Ord. No. 38-2005]
No owner's license shall be issued until the applicant submits the insurance
policy or certificate in lieu thereof required by N.J.S.A. 48:16-3 covering
the taxicab to be licensed and until the taxicab has been thoroughly and
carefully inspected by the Office of Traffic and Safety, Department of Police,
and found to be in a safe, clean and sanitary condition for the transportation
of passengers. Each owner's license issued hereunder shall state the make,
motor and serial number of the car licensed and license number of the
vehicle as granted by the State of New Jersey. No owner's license shall
be transferred from one vehicle to another. Taxicab driver's licenses shall
not be transferable. All changes of residence on the part of the holder of
any license issued under this chapter shall be reported in writing to the
Township Clerk within three days after the change.
§ 446-5. Duration of license; license fees. [Amended 1-9-2006 by
Ord. No. 38-2005; 6-12-2006 by Ord. No. 27-2006]
§ 446-6. Duty of licensee.
Every driver or operator when in charge of a taxicab licensed under this
chapter shall have in his immediate possession a valid taxicab driver's
license, which license shall be exhibited at any time upon request by the
Clerk, any member of the Township Council, any police officer, any duly
authorized agent of the Township or any passenger.
§ 446-7. Taxicab stands.
[3] If a person who has been convicted of one of the crimes
enumerated in Subsection B(3)(b)[1] and [2] can produce a
certificate of rehabilitation issued pursuant to N.J.S.A.
2A:168A-8 or, if the criminal offense occurred outside New
Jersey, an equivalent certificate from the jurisdiction
where the criminal offense occurred, the criminal offense
shall not disqualify the applicant from operating or driving
an autocab.
A. Licenses shall be valid from January 1 of the current year to December
31 of the current year.
B. The fees to be paid for licenses shall be as follows:
(1) For every taxicab: $100.
(2) For every taxicab driver: $50. [Amended 10-25-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-30]
A. The Township Council is authorized to designate by resolution or
ordinance such places in the Township as public stands for taxicabs as it
may deem expedient and proper and may give such direction regarding
§ 446-3 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 446-7
10:1135
§ 446-8. Availability required.
Every taxicab while occupying space on a public stand or public street shall
be immediately available for hire. Upon request, no owner or driver unless
previously engaged shall refuse or neglect to carry any orderly person
anywhere within a radius of 10 miles of the Township. No owner or driver
shall leave his vehicle unattended, or in any manner render the vehicle
unready for immediate use while it is occupying space within any public
stand or public street.
§ 446-9. Solicitation.
No passengers shall be solicited for any taxicab except by a driver duly
licensed by the Township who is operating a taxicab licensed by the
Township. No person operating such a taxicab shall permit or allow any
person other than a passenger being transported for hire in or about such
taxicab when in service as a taxicab.
§ 446-10. Misrepresentations prohibited.
No owner or driver of any taxicab shall induce any person to employ him by
knowingly misinforming or misleading such person either as to the time or
place of the arrival or departure of any train or bus, or as to the location
of any hotel, public or private place, nor shall any such owner or driver
deceive any person, make false misrepresentations to him or convey any
passenger to any other place or over any other route than that indicated by
the passenger.
§ 446-11. Vehicle identification.
the places and position to be occupied as public stands as it may deem
necessary to preserve order and promote public convenience.
B. No vehicle which is not licensed hereunder shall occupy any part of a
public stand as so designated.
A. Every taxicab licensed under this chapter shall carry affixed therein so
that the same may be conveniently read by any passenger a card
containing the name of the owner of the vehicle and the number of the
owner's license.
B. Every taxicab shall have painted on both sides the words "Taxi," "Cab"
or "Taxicab" or the name of the operating owner containing the words
"Taxi," "Cab" or "Taxicab" in letters at least two inches high.
C. Every taxicab shall also carry in such a position an electric sign not less
than four inches by eight inches by 10 inches which shall be illuminated
and shall plainly show the word "Taxi" or the owner's name or the
owner's telephone number.
D. The owner of an autocab shall cause to be displayed on the body of the
vehicle the taxi license number issued to that vehicle. The number shall
§ 446-7 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 446-11
10:1136
§ 446-12. Rates.
The owners or operators of taxicabs within the Township shall only charge
the schedule of rates of fares for transportation within the Township or to
points outside the Township as have been submitted to the Clerk with the
application for a license and which schedule of rates has been approved by
the Clerk.
§ 446-13. Number of taxicab licenses.
The number of taxicab licenses authorized to be issued under the provisions
of this chapter shall be limited to one such license for each 3,000 residents
of the Township as determined by the latest federal census.
§ 446-14. Revocation and suspension.
Any license may be revoked or suspended at any time for cause. When so
suspended or revoked, such license shall not be reissued except for good
and sufficient reason shown.
§ 446-15. Regulatory powers.
The Clerk may make such rules and regulations in relation to the operation
of taxicabs and the conduct of the operators thereof as he may from time
to time determine to be necessary and proper in the best interest of the
citizens of the Township. Any violation of such rules and regulations shall
constitute a violation of this chapter. Such rules and regulations shall not
become effective until 48 hours after they have been promulgated and
posted in a conspicuous place in the Township Hall and copies thereof
mailed to the current holders of taxicab owners' and taxicab drivers'
licenses.
§ 446-16. Limousines. [Amended 7-20-1992 by Ord. No. 26-92]
be three inches in height and located in the center of the rear quarter
panels on the driver and passenger sides and the rear center line of
the trunk of the vehicle. Each autocab shall display on each rear door
of the autocab the name of the municipality or municipalities which
have issued the autocab a taxi license in letters three inches in height.
[Added 12-12-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-17]
A. Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, words and phrases herein
shall have the same meaning as in N.J.S.A. 48:16-13.
B. Insurance. [Amended 7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 35-02]
(1) No limousine shall be operated wholly or partly along any street in
any municipality until the owner of the limousine shall have filed
with the Clerk of the municipality in which the owner has his
principal place of business, an insurance policy of a company duly
licensed to transact business under the insurance laws of this state
§ 446-11 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 446-16
10:1137
in the sum of $1,500,000 against loss by reason of the liability
imposed by law upon every limousine owner for damages on
account of bodily injury or death suffered by any person as the
result of an accident occurring by reason of the ownership,
maintenance or use of the limousine upon any public street. Such
operation shall be permitted only so long as the insurance policy
shall remain in force to the full and collectible amount of
$1,500,000.
(2) The insurance policy shall provide for the payment of any final
judgment recovered by any person on account of the ownership,
maintenance and use of such limousine, or any fault in respect
thereto, and shall be for the benefit of every person suffering loss,
damage or injury as aforesaid.
C. Power of attorney. The owner of the limousine shall execute and deliver
to the Division of Motor Vehicles, concurrently with filing of a policy
referred to in N.J.S.A. 48:16-14, a power of attorney, wherein and
whereby the owner shall appoint the Director of the Division of Motor
Vehicles his true and lawful attorney for the purpose of acknowledging
service of any process out of a court of competent jurisdiction to be
served against the insured by virtue of the indemnity granted under the
insurance policy filed. A copy of the power of attorney shall be placed
on file in the office of the Township Clerk. [Amended 6-30-1994 by
Ord. No. 45-94; 7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 35-02256]
D. License application. [Amended 1-28-2002 by Ord. No. 01-02;
7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 35-02]
(1) In addition to the submission of an insurance policy and the power
of attorney, the applicant must submit a valid New Jersey driver's
license and a valid registration for the vehicle to be licensed. The
applicant shall submit to a background check and being
photographed and fingerprinted by the Police Department. The
minimum fee for such initial background check, fingerprinting and
photographing shall be $30. For renewal of fingerprinting and
photographing, the minimum fee shall be $18. Fees are to be paid
by money order made payable to the Division of State Police.257
(2) An applicant residing in an apartment complex must submit a
current lease demonstrating Old Bridge Township residency. A
letter on the apartment complex stationery must be submitted
indicating permission for garaging of said vehicle on private
premises.
256. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
257. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 446-16 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 446-16
10:1138
Chapter 450
TOBACCO, SALE OF
(3) An applicant residing in a planned unit development must submit a
letter from his or her housing association stating applicant is
permitted to garage a limousine.
(4) An applicant shall be limited to one license per address. An
applicant who wishes to obtain an additional license must submit a
notarized letter from the garage or owner of commercial property
where the applicant's additional limousine shall be garaged, stating
the applicant is permitted to garage his or her limousine at such
address.
E. Issuance of license to operate limousine; fees. [Amended 7-22-2002
by Ord. No. 35-02]
(1) The clerk of the municipality in which the owner has his principal
place of business, upon the filing of the required insurance policy,
required documentation, and the payment of a fee of $50, shall
issue in duplicate a license to operate showing that the owner of
the limousine has complied with the terms and provisions of this
article.258
(2) The license shall recite the name of the insurance company, the
number and date of expiration of the policy, a description of
limousine insured thereunder and the registration number of the
same.
(3) The duplicate license shall be filed with the Division of Motor
Vehicles before any such car is registered as a limousine.
(4) The original license shall be retained within the limousine and be
available for inspection by any police officer in the state. In lieu of
insurance information required on the license pursuant to this
section, the owner of a limousine may affix to the original license
retained within the limousine, a notarized letter from an insurance
company containing the same insurance information required in
the recital, which shall constitute proof of insurance coverage, and
which shall also be available for inspection by any police officer in
the state. A copy of the notarized letter shall constitute proof to the
Director of the Division of Motor Vehicles that the applicant has
complied with the insurance provision of this section.
258. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 446-16 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 446-16
10:1139

ARTICLE I
Tobacco Vending Machines
[Amended 3-27-1995 by Ord. No. 3-95]
§ 450-1. Restrictions.
§ 450-2. Violations and penalties.259
Any person owning, operating, renting or permitting the use of a cigarette
vending machine on premises under his or her control shall be subject to
the penalty set forth in Chapter 1, Article II, Penalty. Each day on which
such a machine is owned, operated, rented or permitted on the premises
shall result in an additional fine.
A. In view of the indiscriminate sales of tobacco products to minors by
automatic vending machines, all vending machines with any tobacco
products are hereby prohibited in the Township of Old Bridge.
B. This prohibition shall not extend to premises having vending machines
where the operation of the machine to vend tobacco products is
possible only by the activation of an electronic lockout switch or other
device, which switch or device is controlled by the tobacco retailer or
his designated employee, and only after the tobacco retailer or his
employee has made a reasonable determination that the person wishing
to use the tobacco vending machine is 18 years of age or older.
259. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 450-1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 450-2
10:1141

ARTICLE II
Possession or Use by Minors
[Adopted 5-26-1998 by Ord. No. 42-98]
§ 450-3. Findings and purpose.
A. WHEREAS, the Surgeon General of the United States has determined:
(1) Cigarette smoking has been causally linked to lung cancer,
atherosclerosis, coronary heart disease, chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease, birth defects and other conditions that
constitute a wide array of serious health consequences; and
(2) Smoking and smokeless tobacco use are "almost always initiated
and established in adolescence," typically by age 16; and
(3) Since nicotine addiction occurs during adolescence, adolescent
"tobacco users are likely to become adult tobacco users," and
(4) Tobacco use is associated with alcohol and illicit drug use and is
generally the first drug used by young people who enter a sequence
of drug use that can include alcohol, marijuana and harder drugs,
the purchase, possession or use of which by minors is already
prohibited; and
(5) Active smoking by young people is associated with significant
health problems during childhood and adolescence and with
increased risk factors for health problems in adulthood
("Preventing Tobacco Use Among Young People: A Report of the
Surgeon General," issued in 1994); and
B. WHEREAS, the United States Department of Health and Human
Services estimates that each day more than 3,000 children start
smoking and that more than 3,000,000 American children under the
age of 18 consume more than 947,000,000 packs of cigarettes yearly
(United States Department of Health and Human Services, Office of the
Inspector General, Office of Evaluation and Inspection, Youth Access to
Cigarettes 1, May 1990); and
C. WHEREAS, the Surgeon General of the United States estimates that an
additional 1,000,000 adolescents use smokeless tobacco ("Preventing
Tobacco Use Among Young People: A Report of the Surgeon General");
and
D. WHEREAS, the State of New Jersey prohibits the sale of or furnishing of
cigarettes or tobacco in any form to minors (N.J.S.A. 2C:33-13.1); and260
E. WHEREAS, enforcement actions conducted by the Middlesex County
Health Department by request of the New Jersey Department of Health
260. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 450-3 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 450-3
10:1143
and Senior Services uncovered that tobacco products were sold by
retail establishments to minors under the age of 18 at a rate of 84% of
the time, which is 10% higher than the national average, despite state
laws banning sales to minors by retail tobacco distributors, thereby
demonstrating the necessity for more comprehensive measures to
prevent tobacco use by minors; and
F. WHEREAS, even the major manufacturers of cigarettes and other
tobacco products believe that minors should not smoke (Philip Morris
U.S.A.: "At Philip Morris we have always believed that minors should
not smoke, nor should they have access to cigarettes. Period. Smoking
is — and must remain — strictly an adult choice."; R.J. Reynolds
Tobacco Company: "R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company does not, under
any circumstances, want kids to smoke."); and
G. WHEREAS, efforts to lessen the use of tobacco products may result in
long-term financial benefits because, according to the Center for
Disease Control, direct medical costs from smoking in 1993 were over
$50,000,000,000 or 7% of all health costs and that these added health
costs cause financial burdens on all levels of government and all
taxpayers; and
H. WHEREAS, the Township Council of the Township of Old Bridge has
determined that neither state nor federal legislation governing the use
of tobacco products has been comprehensive enough to address the
health and safety interests of children and that additional specific
legislation is needed in the public interest to protect the children; and
I. WHEREAS, neither the New Jersey Legislature nor the United States
Congress has preempted municipal governments from enacting
ordinances governing the use and possession of tobacco products; and
J. WHEREAS, the Township Council of the Township of Old Bridge finds
that it is in the public interest to enact ordinances consistent with and
complementary to the law of this state or of the United States
controlling the use of tobacco products by minors; and
K. WHEREAS, it is the intention of the Township Council of the Township
of Old Bridge to work in collaboration with parents and youth in our
community in reinforcing the message of the ills of tobacco and in
providing additional means by which parents may discourage and
youths may reject tobacco use; and
L. WHEREAS, the Township Council of the Township of Old Bridge seeks
to provide a legal means for official intervention to discourage the use
of tobacco products by our youth; and
M. WHEREAS, it is the further intention of the Township Council of the
Township of Old Bridge that enforcement of this ordinance and the
imposition of any penalties shall be done in consultation and
cooperation with the parents of any violator; and
§ 450-3 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 450-3
10:1144
§ 450-4. Prohibition of purchase or use of tobacco products by
minors.
No person under the age of 18 shall purchase, or within or upon any public
place or area, use or possess, whether actually or constructively, cigarettes
or other tobacco products within the Township of Old Bridge.
§ 450-5. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PUBLIC PLACE OR AREA — Any place or area to which the public is invited
or upon which the public is permitted, including but not limited to any
sidewalk, street, or any other right-of-way, park, playground, and any other
property owned by the Township, any mall or shopping center, and any
school property.
TOBACCO PRODUCT — Any product made from the tobacco plant for the
purpose of smoking, chewing, inhaling or other personal use, including
cigars, chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff and cigarettes in any form.
§ 450-6. Construal of provisions.
This article shall be liberally construed for the protection of the health,
safety and welfare of the people, the citizens of the Township of Old Bridge.
§ 450-7. Violations and penalties.
N. WHEREAS, the intent of the Township Council of the Township of Old
Bridge is that this ordinance be educational and helpful, not punitive.
A. Any person under the age of 18 who purchases, or within or upon any
public place or area, possesses, whether actually or constructively, or
uses cigarettes or other tobacco products, shall receive parental
notification by the Health Officer and/or agent and materials which
explain the risk of tobacco use and the purposes for which Old Bridge
Township has adopted this article, the form of such notice and materials
to be determined by the Health Officer and/or agent. The enforcement
officer who issues a warning under this section shall ensure that the
Health Officer and/or agent receives timely notification of the violator's
identity and address and the names of the violator's parents.
B. Repeat offenders under this article under the age of 18 shall have a
juvenile complaint signed against them and processed under the
current procedures for processing juvenile complaints and shall receive
a second parental notification as set forth in Subsection A above and
shall receive a fine of no less than $25 plus court costs, in addition to
any other penalties authorized pursuant to this article. Such individuals
may also be required to participate at their own expense in an
educational program determined by the Health Officer and/or agent
concerning the dangers of smoking and tobacco use.
§ 450-3 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 450-8
10:1145
§ 450-8. Enforcement.
Enforcement of this article shall be within the jurisdiction of the Police
Department of the Township of Old Bridge. Upon a complaint alleging a
violation of this article sworn to by an employee of the Old Bridge Township
Board of Education, a designated school safety officer of the Township of
Old Bridge Police Department shall issue a summons to any individual in
violation of this article in accordance with other provisions of the law.
§ 450-8 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 450-8
10:1146
ARTICLE III
Signs Posted at Establishments Convicted of Selling to Minors
[Adopted 9-9-2002 by Ord. No. 43-02]
§ 450-9. Purpose.
This article requires persons or entities convicted of selling cigarettes
or other tobacco products to minors to display a sign publishing such
conviction in a conspicuous place in the store where such sale occur.
§ 450-10. Sign required to be posted by persons or entities
convicted of selling cigarettes or other tobacco products to minors.
§ 450-11. Violations and penalties.261
Any person convicted of a violation of this article shall, upon conviction, be
subject to the penalty set forth in Chapter 1, Article II, Penalty.
A. Any person or entity operating a store licensed or otherwise authorized
to sell cigarettes within the municipal boundaries of the Township of
Old Bridge found guilty of selling cigarettes or other tobacco products
to a minor shall post a sign in its front window or upon its front door in
the following form and with the following content:
(The following shall be printed in forty-point type:
THIS ESTABLISHMENT IS IN VIOLATION: SALE OF CIGARETTES OR
OTHER TOBACCO PRODUCT TO MINOR
The following shall be in twenty-five-point type:
This establishment has been found guilty of selling cigarettes or other
tobacco product to minors on the following occasions:
[List dates of all violations with reference to the caption of the matter
(if any) with docket number or case number which resulted in a
conviction for selling cigarettes or other tobacco products to minors]
B. The sign required by this article shall be posted for not less than six
months following any conviction of selling cigarettes or other tobacco
products to minors. The signage requirement of this article shall bind
any successor corporation having substantially the same officers or
ownership as its predecessor.
261. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 450-9 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 450-11
10:1147
Chapter 457
TREES AND INVASIVE SPECIES
§ 457-1. Intent and purposes.
A. Indiscriminate, uncontrolled and excess destruction, removal and
cutting of trees upon lots and tracts of land within Township of Old
Bridge may cause increased drainage control costs, increased soil
erosion and sedimentation, decreased fertility of the soil, degradation
of water resources, decreased groundwater recharge, increased
buildup of atmospheric carbon dioxide, the establishment of a heat
island effect and increased dust and pollution. The singular or
cumulative effect of any of the foregoing could adversely impact the
character of Old Bridge, decrease property value, render the land unfit
and unsuitable for its most appropriate use and negatively affect the
health, safety and general welfare of Old Bridge residents. Thus, the
Township desires to regulate and control indiscriminate and excessive
cutting of trees within the Township and require appropriate tree
replacement.
B. It is recognized that there is a strong interrelationship between the
integrity of Old Bridge's water resources, development on steep slopes,
tree removal, soil disturbance, stormwater management and the
general use of the land resources. Fewer trees throughout the area also
correlates with increased air pollution. Therefore, the Township of Old
Bridge finds that the appropriate management of these resources is an
important health, safety and general welfare concern. Managing its
tree resource is consistent with our state-approved Community
Forestry Management Plan, as P.L. 1996, c.135.262 The appropriate
management guidelines for tree preservation to be utilized are:
(1) The American National Standard, ANSI A300 (Part 5) -
Management;
(2) Trees and Development: A Technical Guide to Preservation of Trees
During Land Development, Nelda Matheny and James R. Clark;
(3) Protection and Care of the Urban Forest, NJDEP Division of Parks
and Forestry; and
(4) Up By Roots; Healthy Soils and Trees in the Built Environment,
James Urban ISA Books.
C. Trees are declared to be an important cultural, ecological, scenic and
economic resource. Proper management of this resource will ensure its
maintenance and result in economic returns. A forestry management
program is intended to meet the objectives of preserving, protecting,
enhancing and maintaining trees and providing opportunities for the
262. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:1L-17.1 et seq.
§ 450-11 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 457-1
10:1148
§ 457-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CALIPER: ANSI Z60 FOR NURSERY STOCK — Caliper is a type of diameter
measurement used in the nursery industry. The height measurement shall
be taken from ground level for field grown stock and from the soil line
for container grown stock, which should be at or near the top of the root
flare. Caliper measurement of the trunk shall be taken six inches above the
top of root flare up to and including four-inch caliper size. If the caliper
at six inches above the ground exceeds four inches, the caliper should be
measured at 12 inches above the top of root flare. Seldom are tree trunks
perfectly round. The most accurate measurement will result from the use
of a diameter tape. Caliper measurements taken with manual or electronic
"slot" or "pincer" type caliper tools should be the average of the smallest
and largest measurements.
COMMUNITY FORESTRY MANAGEMENT PLAN — A plan developed by
municipalities/counties outlining the goals and objectives for managing
trees on municipal/county property with the intent of minimizing liability to
the municipality/county and maximizing the useful life of the tree resource.
The plan is to be approved by the N.J. Department of Environmental
Protection, Division of Parks and Forestry, N.J. Forest Service. A Shade
continued use of forest resources which are compatible with the
maintenance of the environment. This will be accomplished by ensuring
proper management of forest and trees through the application of
sound management practices. To that end, it shall be unlawful to cut
down, damage, poison or in any other manner destroy or cause to be
destroyed any trees covered by this chapter, except in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter.
D. The purpose of the provisions relating to heritage/historic trees within
this article is to require the preservation of those trees which are
identified as mature (fully developed) trees of a specific size and species
and those trees involved in documented historic events. Permission to
remove such trees from any property, other than a modified home site
as hereinafter defined, within the Township, except in the most
compelling and extraordinary circumstances, shall be prohibited.
Removal shall take place only after a thorough investigation and
recommendation by a New Jersey board-licensed tree expert and the
agreement of the Township Conservation Officer.
E. The enforcement of this chapter shall be the duty of the Shade Tree
Commission of Old Bridge and its agents, such as the Conservation
Officer, through the regulation, planting, care and control of shade,
ornamental and evergreen trees and shrubs in the streets, highways,
public places of the Township and tree removal on all lands within Old
Bridge.
§ 457-1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 457-2
10:1149
Tree Commission shall be formed to oversee the implementation of the
Community Forestry Management Plan.
CONSERVATION OFFICER —
DIAMETER BREAST HEIGHT (DBH) — The diameter of a tree measured
4 1/2 feet above the ground level.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, ice, wind and gravity.
EXEMPT AREA — The lot area as provided in this chapter for which tree
replacement shall not be required.
FOREST MANAGEMENT PLAN — A plan for the management of timbered
or forested lands approved by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, N.J. Forest Service, or similar state or federal agency.
HERITAGE TREE — Any tree by reason of its diameter measured 4 1/2 feet
above the ground (dbh) on the uphill side to be a mature tree of significant
size. The Township Conservation Officer shall prepare and maintain the
standards for determining heritage trees for individual tree species. These
standards shall set forth the size requirement for determining a heritage
tree.
HISTORIC TREE — A tree that has been found to be of notable historic
interest to Old Bridge because of its age, type, size or historic association
and which has been so designated and that designation has been officially
The governing body shall appoint a Conservation Officer. This individual
shall be responsible for the inspection of sites for which application(s)
are filed under this chapter. This individual will be responsible for
the administration and protection requirements of this chapter and
enforcement of the ordinance and with respect to those sections
pertaining solely to trees, as directed by the Shade Tree Commission.
[Amended 12-11-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-26]
A.
A Conservation Officer is either of the following:
A forester who shall have a bachelor's degree in forestry or
arboriculture from a college or university, shall be certified as a
certified tree expert by the State of New Jersey and shall have
a minimum of three years' experience in planting, care and
maintenance of trees. The forester shall have the responsibility of
reviewing an approved forest management plan and inspecting the
forested site for plan compliance if requested by the tax assessor.
(1)
A Conservation Officer who shall be certified as a certified tree
expert by the State of New Jersey and shall have a minimum of
three years' experience in planting, care and maintenance of trees.
(2)
B.
The Conservation Officer shall be paid from the Tree Fund, which is
established herein, and shall be paid in accordance with a fee schedule
established by contract with the municipality.
C.
§ 457-2 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 457-2
10:1150
made and promulgated as part of the official records of the municipality,
county or state.
OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved
and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public or private use
and enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of
land adjoining or neighboring such open spaces, provided that such areas
may be improved with only those buildings, structures, streets and off-street
parking and other improvements that are designated to be incidental to the
natural openness of the land.
SHADE TREE COMMISSION — Shade Tree Commissions formed by
municipal ordinance, Title 40 Chapter 64, §§ 1-14, as amended 1984 or by a
Board of Freeholder Resolution, Title 40, Chapter 37, §§ 1.11, as amended
1958.
SPECIMEN TREE — Any tree in fair or better condition which is so
designated by the Shade Tree Commission, or its designee, based on
considerations of whether the tree is a rare species of specimen thereof:
is abnormal in height, trunk diameter or drip line circumference for a tree
of its species; has foliage of an unusual quality for a tree of its species;
occupies a location which confers special shade tree, fragrance, erosion
control, aesthetic, scenic enhancement, historic, preservation or cultural
values to the community. For purposes of this definition, "in fair or better
condition" shall mean that a tree has a relatively sound and solid trunk with
no evidence of extensive decay or visual evidence of being hollow and with
no major insect or pathological problem.
TREE — Any deciduous or coniferous species which has a DBH of six inches
or greater.
TREE ESCROW FUND — A fund established by the governing body for the
administration and promotion of tree and shrubbery resource sustainability
projects and practices which may be consistent with the Community
Stewardship Incentive Program as outlined within the New Jersey Shade
Tree and Community Forestry Assistance Act, P.L. 1996, Chapter 135.263
TREE PLANTING PLAN — A specific plan adopted by municipality for the
location and placement of trees on public property.
TREE PRESERVATION & REMOVAL PLAN (TREE SAVE PLAN) — A specific
plan that contains tree locations and other information in accordance with
§ 457-5 herein, and §§ 250-91, 250-74 and 250-13M of the Township Code.
TREE REMOVAL PERMIT — The permit issued by the Conservation Officer,
Shade Tree Commission or, its designee, to remove or destroy a tree or
trees.
TREE REPLACEMENT PLAN — A specific plan for replacement of removed
trees in accordance with the provision of this chapter.
263. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:1L-17.1 et seq.
§ 457-2 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 457-3
10:1151
§ 457-3. Applicability.
The terms and provisions of this chapter shall apply as follows:
A. Unless specifically excepted in Subsection C below, it shall be unlawful
for any person to remove or cause to remove trees with a dbh of six
inches or more without first having obtained a tree removal permit as
provided herein.
B. Specimen and historic trees: Trees which have been designated as
specimen or historic under the provisions of this chapter shall be
maintained in a living condition and it shall be unlawful for any person
to remove such tree without an approved tree removal permit. No
specimen or historic tree shall be removed unless the applicant has
obtained the approval of the governing body, with consideration of the
Shade Tree Commission's recommendations.
(1) The condition of trees proposed to be saved shall be evaluated by
use of guides as follows:
(a) Evaluation of Hazard Trees in Urban Areas. ISA Books, Nelda
Matheny and James R. Clark.
(b) Urban Tree Risk Management, USDA Forest Service,
Northeastern Area.
(c) The Guide for Plant Appraisal, The Council of Tree and
Landscape Appraisers.
(d) Up By Roots, ISA Books, James Urban.
C. Exceptions: The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the
following:
(1) Any property upon which no trees are located, as confirmed by a
statement of no tree verification.
(2) Any tree of less than six inches dbh.
(3) Any tree or trees removed or cut in accordance with a forest
management plan provided that such plan is filed with the
Conservation Officer, Shade Tree Commission, or its designee and
Tax Assessor.
(4) Any tree or trees removed or cut in accordance with an approved
conservation plan prepared by the Soil Conservation District,
provided that such plan has been filed with the Shade Tree
Commission, or its designee and Tax Assessor.
(5) Any tree or trees planted and grown for commercial purposes on
property used as a commercial nursery, tree farm, garden center,
Christmas tree plantations or tree orchards.
§ 457-3 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 457-3
10:1152
§ 457-4. Tree removal permits, generally.
(6) Any tree growing in a utility right-of-way or fire trail subject to the
approval of the Old Bridge Shade Tree Commission, or its designee.
A. Any person wishing to obtain a tree removal permit shall make
application to the Department of Community Development Division of
Engineering by filing a written application with the Director of
Community Development and paying such fees as set forth in § 457-8.
No permit shall be issued until a tree preservation and removal plan for
the lot or parcel has been reviewed and approved as compliant with
§ 457-5 by the Shade Tree Commission, or its designee and until the
filing of a written on-site inspection report by the Conservation Officer.
B. Where an application, as required by this chapter, has been submitted,
no permit shall be issued until a tree save plan for the lot or parcel has
been reviewed and approved as compliant with § 457-5 by the
Conservation Officer, and until the filing of a written report of an on-site
inspection by the Conservation Officer.
C. All required escrow and bond fees for any application, including
required tree replacements or fees, shall be verified as paid prior to the
issuance of the tree removal permit.
D. Tree removal permit applications shall be filed at the Office of the
Director of Community Development and shall be completed in full. The
application must be deemed complete and all required fees, as set forth
in § 457-8, be paid prior to review.
E. Where an application is made in connection with the construction of a
building or other improvement, no building permit shall be issued until
the tree removal permit has been issued.
F. Inspections: Upon the preliminary/final approval of site plan or
subdivision, by the Planning/Zoning Boards as appropriate, and after
the application is complete and reviewed, the Conservation Officer shall
inspect the trees and property which are the subject of the permit
application within 30 days. The Conservation Officer may, upon
inspection, provide recommendations to the applicant prior to the
issuance of the tree removal permit.
G. Permit approval or denial: Upon the Conservation Officer's
recommendation, the Shade Tree Commission, or its designee, shall
approve or deny the tree removal permit within 10 business days after
completion of the inspection. The Shade Tree Commission shall notify
the applicant in writing of the factual basis and criteria for any denial.
The final decision of the Shade Tree Commission may be appealed to
the governing body by filing written notice within 10 days of the Shade
Tree Commission's final decision. The governing body shall hold a
public hearing and issue its decision within 60 days after notice of
§ 457-3 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 457-4
10:1153
§ 457-5. Tree removal permit application, tree preservation and
removal plan.
A tree preservation and removal plan shall be submitted to the Conservation
Officer. Applications that require Planning Board or Zoning Board approval
shall have tree preservation and removal plans as part of the submittal to
the Planning Board or Zoning Board and said plans shall be provided to the
Conservation Officer for review and approval prior to hearing in accordance
with this chapter. Tree preservation and removal plans shall contain the
following:
appeal is filed, unless the applicant requests, and the governing body
consents to an extension of time.
A. The name and address of the applicant.
B. The name and address of the owner of the property from which the
trees are to be removed.
C. The lot(s) and block(s) of the property.
D. The shape and dimensions of the lot or parcel, including the location of
all easements. If the tree removal permit is for a single-family or duplex
residence, the plan shall consist of a tree location sketch containing the
minimum amount of pertinent information to enable the determination
of compliance with the regulations in this chapter, including the
information set forth in Subsection D(1) and (2) below and, if necessary,
in Subsection D(6) and (8) below. The plan for any other property shall
include a survey prepared by a licensed land surveyor that contains tree
locations. The survey shall contain, at a scale of no less than one inch
equals 50 feet, the following information:
(1) The existing and proposed tree preservation limits;
(2) The proposed limit of the clearing and all individual trees to be
retained outside the tree clearing identified by an approved method
as determined by the Conservation Officer such as flagging, prior
to the field inspection. For any clearing equal to or greater than
three acres, a representative 5% of the wooded areas proposed to
be cleared shall be inventoried. The representative 5% of the
wooded areas proposed to be cleared shall be inventoried. The
representative 5% shall be determined by agreement between the
Conservation Officer and the applicant. Unless otherwise
determined by the Conservation Officer, where less than three
acres is proposed to be cleared, all trees to be removed shall be
inventoried;
(3) The installation and limits of a temporary existing tree protection
fence along the limits of the proposed tree removal shall be in
compliance with § 457-9;
§ 457-4 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 457-5
10:1154
§ 457-6. Term of permit.
Any and all permits approved by the Shade Tree Commission, or its
designee, shall be declared null and void if the tree removal is not
completed within a reasonable time, not to exceed 12 months after permit
issuance. In no case will the permit be valid for more than 12 months, unless
the Conservation Officer determines that the applicant has sufficiently
demonstrated a hardship. In that event, the Conservation Officer shall be
permitted to grant an extension of up to six months. Permits not used within
this period will require a new application and the payment of new fees. For
purposes of this section, a permit shall no longer be valid when the work
authorized by the permit is completed.
§ 457-7. Criteria for issuance of permits.
(4) Locations of all forest types shall be identified by common and
botanical names of dominant tree species;
(5) All specimen, historic and heritage trees to be removed shall be
indicated on the plan. All reasonable efforts shall be made to
preserve such trees, including, but not limited to, if feasible,
relocation of infrastructure, roadways and buildings. Removal of
such trees shall require specific written approval of the governing
body with consideration of the Shade Tree Commission's, or its
designee's, recommendations;
(6) A proposed tree replacement plan in accordance with this chapter.
A tree replacement plan shall be considered the proposed
landscaping plan required for all subdivision and site plan
approvals;
(7) A North arrow; and
(8) The location of existing and proposed structures and
improvements, if any.
A. Upon completion of the Conservation Officer's field inspection report
and review of any requested recommendations, the Conservation
Officer shall recommend approval of a permit if:
(1) The tree preservation and removal plan is compliant with § 457-5;
(2) The tree replacement plan is approved;
(3) None of the conditions set forth below in Subsection B exists;
(4) At least one of the criteria as follows has been satisfied:
(a) The tree is located in an area where a structure or
improvements will be placed according with the approval of
Planning/Zoning Boards and the tree cannot be relocated on
the site because of age, type or size of the tree.
§ 457-5 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 457-7
10:1155
§ 457-8. Fees.
(b) The tree is dead, diseased, injured, in danger of falling, is too
close to existing or proposed structures, interferes with
existing utility service, creates unsafe vision of clearance or
conflicts with other ordinances or regulations.
(c) The tree is to be removed for harvesting as a commercial
product or for the purpose of making land available for farming
or other agricultural activity, or is to be removed in furtherance
of a forest management plan or soil conservation plan, or to
serve some other purpose which is consistent with the
purposes of this chapter.
B. The Shade Tree Commission, or its designee, with recommendations
considered from the Conservation Officer, may deny a permit if the
removal will contribute to:
(1) Extra runoff of surface water onto adjacent properties;
(2) Erosion; or
(3) Silting and such conditions are not otherwise satisfactorily
addressed; or if the tree removal will cause:
(a) Impairment to the growth or development of remaining trees
on the applicant's property or upon adjacent properties;
(b) Soil instability;
(c) Dust;
(d) Drainage or sewerage problems; or
(e) Dangerous or hazardous conditions.
A. Application.
(1) The applicant, at time of filing the application as set forth herein,
shall pay the application fee of $35 in accordance with an approved
fee structure for each new or existing lot. No application shall be
considered without the payment of the required fees.
(2) Replacement fee will be in accordance with § 457-10.
B. Tree Fund. A Tree Fund shall be established and maintained by Old
Bridge to receive and disburse replacement tree contributions.
Appropriations from the Tree Fund shall be authorized by the governing
body with consideration of the Shade Tree Commission, or its
designee's, recommendation in accordance with the municipal tree
planting plan. The primary purpose of said fund is to provide for the
replacement of trees. The fund will also cover administrative costs
incurred by the Conservation Officer to implement the provisions of this
chapter, including but not limited to site inspections, processing of
§ 457-7 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 457-8
10:1156
§ 457-8.1. Replacement trees.
permits and supervision of tree replacements by the Conservation
Officer. Implementation of this chapter shall not exceed 30% of the
fund, as determined on an annual basis.
A. Any tree removed pursuant to this chapter, unless exempt under
§ 457-3C shall be replaced based on the following:
TABLE 8.1
Number
of trees
to be
removed
Size/Diameter
(inches at
dbh)
Number of
replacement
trees
Size of
replacement
trees
(inches)
Or dollar
amount
1 Greater than 6
up to 10
1 2 — 2 1/2 $240
2 Greater than 6
up to 10
1 3 1/2 — 4 $420
1 Greater than
10 up to 16
2 2 — 2 1/2 $480
1 Greater than
16 up to 23
2 3 $840
1 Greater than
23 up to 30
4 3 1/2 — 4 $1,680
1 Greater than
30
5 3 1/2 — 4 $2,100
Note:
In cases where the tree cost requirement criteria is combined with
other criteria of this subsection, the value of proposed shade,
ornamental, evergreen and shrub material shall be deducted from the
calculated amount for replacement trees. The value of the proposed
landscape material shall be calculated based upon average local
material costs for planting.
B. The applicant will receive a one-for-one replacement tree credit should
stands of 10 or more trees greater than four inches in diameter be
preserved within the limit of the disturbance line.
C. All replacement trees shall be planted on site in accordance with the
foregoing. However, if one or more of the following conditions exist,
some or all of the replacement trees may be planted off-site:
(1) The site in question cannot physically accommodate the total
replacement amount of trees, and the applicant contributes an
amount equal to the calculated monetary value of nonreplaced
trees to the Tree Fund; or
§ 457-8 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 457-8.1
10:1157
§ 457-9. Existing tree protection during construction.
(2) The Conservation Officer and applicant agree in writing that the
applicant shall make payment to the Tree Escrow Fund based upon
the chart provided; or
(3) The Conservation Officer and applicant agree in writing that the
applicant shall plant replacement trees off-site on municipally
owned property pursuant to the municipal tree planting plan.
A. Protective barriers.
(1) Prior to construction and any tree removals, suitable tree
protective barriers shall be erected and this protection, where
required, shall remain until such time as the protection is
authorized to be removed by the Conservation Officer or after
issuance of a final certificate of occupancy. In addition, during
construction no attachments or wires shall be attached to any of
said trees so protected. Where some grading must take place
within the drip line of trees in the protection zone, appropriate
measures shall be taken to minimize impact to the trees. Any trees
seriously damaged during construction must be professionally
treated by a New-Jersey-certified tree expert, assessed a monetary
fee in accordance with the guide for tree appraisal or replaced if
the damage is beyond treatment.
(2) A detail of the existing tree self-supported protective barrier shall
be provided on all applications. The protective barrier shall be a
minimum of four feet high.
(3) The self-supported protective barrier shall be placed, as approved
by the Conservation Officer, at the drip line of any tree along the
limit of clearing and around the entire drip line for trees to remain
undisturbed within the limit of clearing. Refer to Trees and
Development, Table 6.2, page 74.
(4) It shall be unlawful for any person in the construction of any
structure or other improvement to place solvents, material,
construction machinery or temporary soil deposits within the drip
line.
B. Street right-of-way and utility easements may be delineated by placing
stakes a minimum of 50 feet apart and tying ribbon, plastic tape, rope,
etc., from stake to stake along the outside perimeters of such areas to
be cleared.
C. Large property areas separate from construction and land-clearing
areas into which no equipment will venture may also be delineated as
set forth above in § 457-9B as determined by the Conservation Officer
following a field evaluation.
§ 457-8.1 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 457-10
10:1158
§ 457-10. Tree replacement.
Any tree removed pursuant to a tree removal permit shall be replaced
as provided below, unless said tree is located in an exempt area or is
dead or fatally diseased as determined by a certified tree expert. Tree
replacement shall be required in accordance with the standards set forth in
ANSI Z60.1, American Standard for Nursery Stock. Tree replacement shall
be in accordance with either Subsection A, B, C or D below or a combination
of Subsection A, B, C and D.
A. One-to-one tree replacement. For each tree six inches in dbh or greater
that is removed, the applicant shall prepare a replanting plan for other
areas of the property. The replacement plan or landscape plan shall
reflect a one-to-one tree replacement for each tree six inches or greater
to be removed. All proposed replacement trees shall be in accordance
with selections from most current edition of Trees For New Jersey
Streets, published by the New Jersey Shade Tree Federation, and Street
Tree Factsheets, a publication of the Municipal Tree Restoration
Program, and submitted for review and approval prior to the issuance
of a tree removal permit. (Note: neither publication contains conifers!)
B. Tree area replacement/reforestation: For each square foot of tree area
to be removed, the applicant shall prepare a reforestation scheme on
other treeless open space areas of the property to compensate for the
tree removals. The reforestation plan shall be based on a twenty-footby-
twenty-foot grid. Of this number of trees, 10% shall be balled and
burlaped, two-inch to two-and-one-half-inch caliper, 20% shall be balled
and burlaped, one-and-three-quarter-inch to two-inch caliper, 30% shall
be bare root one-and-one-quarter to one-and-one-half-inch caliper, and
40% shall be bare root six-foot to eight-foot tall whips. A mixture of
trees, indigenous to the area and site, shall be utilized. Proposed trees
shall be planted in natural groves and may be spaced five feet to 20 feet
on center. The reforestation formula shall follow the guidelines as set
forth in the New Jersey No Net Loss Reforestation Act, P.L. 1993, c.106
(N.J.S.A. 13:1L-14.2).
C. Credits. The permit applicant will receive a one-to-one replacement
tree credit:
(1) For stands of 10 or more trees within a dbh of six inches or greater
preserved within the limit of the disturbance line; or
(2) Forested areas of one acre or greater, which are developable and
left natural and conveyed to Old Bridge with a deed restriction, will
remain forested and undeveloped. This conveyance excludes all
previous dedicated easements.
D. All replacement trees shall be planted on site, unless all of the
replacement trees cannot be physically accommodated. In such
instance, the applicant shall plant replacement trees off-site as directed
by the Shade Tree Commission, or its designee, or pay the tree
replacement fee in accordance with the schedule set forth in § 457-8.
§ 457-10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 457-10
10:1159
§ 457-11. Emergencies.
In case of emergencies such as hurricanes, fire, windstorm, ice storm, flood,
freezing temperatures or other disaster, or in the case of dead or diseased
trees which are a hazard to persons or property, the requirements of the
regulations set forth in this chapter may be waived by the Conservation
E. Exempt areas.
(1) For all existing residential properties and new residential
development with a proposed lot area less than 40,000 square feet,
up to 50% of the lot area may be exempt area.
(2) For residential development with a proposed area of 40,000 square
feet or greater, up to 20,000 square feet in area may be exempt
area. The exempt area shall be calculated as a contiguous, circular
area from a fixed point within the footprint of the existing or
proposed primary residential structure on the property. The exempt
area should be positioned to minimize any adverse environmental
impacts.
(3) Agricultural operations are exempt from replacement
requirements because such operations are governed by the Rightto-
Farm Act, N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 to 10, which preempts local regulation.
Property owners claiming exemption under this subsection must
continue to farm the property in question as described on the tree
removal permit for a minimum of five consecutive years after the
date of clearing or date of commencement of the prescribed
farming activity is deemed compliant by the Conservation Officer.
An approved permit must be submitted prior to clearing. If the
property is not farmed as prescribed on the tree removal permit
within three years of the tree removal or is developed for any other
use before the five years expires, the reforestation replacement
obligation in accordance with § 457-10B will be enforced according
to the new use of the property.
(4) In all commercial and nonresidential developments, 50% of the
contiguous lot area may be exempt area. The exempt area shall be
positioned to minimize any adverse environmental impacts.
(5) Utility line clearance operations provided that such plan is filed
with the Conservation Officer and work performed in accordance
with ANSI A300 Part 7: BMP "Utility Pruning of Trees," and Board
of Tree Experts "Pruning Standards for Shade Trees," Section
5.5.A.
(6) Any tree removed from an area of property to be dedicated as
public improvement as a public roadway shall be exempt from the
replacement provisions of this chapter, except that where private
roadways, parking areas or open space are proposed, all trees are
subject to replacement in accordance with this chapter.
§ 457-10 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 457-11
10:1160
Officer upon a finding that such waiver is necessary so that the public or
private work to restore order on the property in Old Bridge will not be
impeded.
§ 457-12. Stop-work orders.
§ 457-13. Enforcement.
The Shade Tree Commission in conjunction with the Conservation Officer
shall oversee all tree removals pursuant to an issued tree removal permit.
The Conservation Officer shall conduct adequate inspections of all sites
for which a tree removal permit has been issued. Upon the ascertainment
of a violation of this chapter, the Conservation Officer or Shade Tree
Commission shall be permitted to refer enforcement actions to either the
Conservation Officer or the Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 457-14. Applicability to tree removal construction companies;
permit required.
All provisions of this chapter shall apply to any person removing trees
on behalf of any other person, including all tree removal construction
companies or persons in the business of removing trees or construction.
It shall be unlawful for any person or company to remove or cause to be
removed any tree or undertake any work for which a permit is required
pursuant to this chapter unless a valid permit therefor is in effect and
is displayed in accordance with the provisions set forth in § 457-15; such
removal or work shall constitute a violation of this section and shall subject
the person or company violating this section to all penalties provided
herein.
§ 457-15. Display of permit; carrying of plan or authorization; right
of entry.
A. The Shade Tree Commission, or its designee, are hereby authorized to
issue stop-work orders to the holder of the tree removal permit and the
Conservation Officer is authorized to recommend the issuance of stopwork
orders to the Township officials in the event that there is:
(1) A failure to comply with the approved plan such as a site plan,
forest management plan or soil conservation plan;
(2) Noncompliance with the tree removal permit granted pursuant to
this chapter; or
(3) Noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. The stop-work order shall remain in effect until the Shade Tree
Commission, or its designee, upon recommendation of the Conservation
Officer, has determined that the resumption of work will not violate the
plans, permit or the provisions of this chapter.
§ 457-11 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 457-15
10:1161
§ 457-16. Duties of Conservation Officer. [Amended 12-11-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-26]
The Conservation Officer shall perform the duties set forth in this chapter
and shall be responsible for the enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter and with respect to those sections pertaining solely to trees, as
directed by the Shade Tree Commission. In this regard, the Conservation
Officer is authorized and shall perform any necessary inspections and is
further authorized and shall issue violation notices and shall sign
complaints and provide testimony in the Municipal Court for violations
of this chapter. The Conservation Officer has the authority to enter onto
private property whereon there is located a tree, shrub, plant or plant
part that is suspected to be a public nuisance and to order its removal
if necessary. A public nuisance is any tree or plant with an infectious
disease or insect problem; dead or dying trees; an invasive plant that
A. The applicant shall prominently display on the site the tree removal
permit issued. Such permit shall be displayed continuously while trees
are being removed or replaced or work done as authorized on the
permit and for 10 days thereafter. In addition, the person or persons
cutting or removing trees, if other than the applicant, shall carry with
him/her authorization from the owner or applicant authorizing such
person to cut or remove trees. In the event that the trees are being cut
or removed in accordance with a forest management plan or a soil
conservation plan, a copy of the plan shall be in the possession of the
person cutting or removing such trees.
B. As a condition for the issuance of the permit, the applicant shall agree
in writing to the entry onto his/her premises by representatives of the
Township and all law enforcement officers as necessary to effectuate
the provisions of this chapter, and such entries shall be deemed lawful.
Failure to allow such entry shall be unlawful and shall constitute a
violation of this chapter and shall constitute failure to display the
permit as required herein. It shall be unlawful and considered a
violation of this chapter for any person to engage in the business of
plant cutting, trimming, and removal, spraying or otherwise treating
trees, shrubs or vines within Old Bridge and without the applicable
certification or license for the designated work. All contractors offering
tree care services for hire within the Township shall register annually
with the Conservation Officer, provide a current certificate of insurance
showing evidence of employer liability and workers compensation
coverage for the work to be performed, and shall comply with
applicable OSHA regulations, ANSI Z133-2012 Safety Standards, New
Jersey Board of Tree Experts Pruning Standards for Shade Trees and
ANSI A300 Practice Standards. All work to be performed in Old Bridge
shall be by or under the direction of a New-Jersey-certified tree expert
and in compliance with New Jersey Board of Tree Experts Pruning
Standards for Shade Trees, ANSI Z133-2012 Safety Standards and
ANSI A300 practice standards unless otherwise directed by or
approved by the Conservation Officer and the Shade Tree Commission.
§ 457-15 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 457-16
10:1162
adversely affects the environment or properties as defined by New Jersey
DEP Invasive Species Council list; [NOTE: An "invasive species" is a plant,
fungus, or animal species that is not native to a specific location (an
introduced species) and which has a tendency to spread to a degree
believed to cause damage to the environment, human economy or human
health.] USDA National Invasive Species Information and Field and
Reference Guide NA-TP-05-04; United States Forest Service Invasive List
for the Northeast Region; and Rutgers University Invasive Plant Monitoring
List; a tree limb(s) or encroaching root(s) that obstruct streetlights, traffic
signs, free passage of pedestrians or vehicles; a tree that poses a threat to
safety, etc.
§ 457-17. Violations and penalties.
§ 457-18. Appeal; hearing.
Any applicant or permit holder or any person otherwise aggrieved under
this chapter may appeal to the Township Council any decision of the Shade
Tree Commission and/or Township Conservation Officer by filing written
notice with the Township Clerk within 10 days of said decision. The
Township Council is hereby authorized and empowered in such cases to
hear and fully decide and dispose of such matters. The Township Council
shall hold a public hearing thereon and act upon the same no later than 60
days after the notice has been filed, unless the applicant requests, and the
Township Council consents, to extend the time for such action.
§ 457-19. Regulations for planting, growing or cultivating invasives.
[Added 12-11-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-26]
A. Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, association or other legal
entity violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction of such violation be punished by a fine of up to $2,000 for
each offense or to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or
both, in the discretion of the judge before whom conviction may be had.
Each illegally removed tree shall be considered a separate violation.
Each violation of any of the provisions of this chapter and each day the
same is violated shall be defined and taken to be a separate and distinct
offense. In addition, the court may order restitution (fine and/or
appraised value, whichever is greater) and/or replacement of the tree
illegally removed.
B. In addition to other remedies, the Shade Tree Commission,
Conservation Officer or other authorized official may institute any
appropriate legal action to prevent a continuing violation of the terms
of this chapter.
A. Purpose. This purpose of this section is to set forth regulations to
control the planting, cultivating or growing of invasive plants in the
Township of Old Bridge and to require barriers to prevent the spread of
existing invasives into other areas of the Township.
§ 457-16 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 457-19
10:1163
B. Regulations.
(1) Subject to certain exemptions set forth in this section, no persons,
or other property owners or tenants, shall plant, cultivate, or cause
to grow any invasives on any lot or parcel of ground in the
Township, subject to the following exceptions:
(a) The root system of such invasive plants is entirely contained
within an above-ground-level planter, barrel, or other vessel of
such design, material, and location as to entirely prevent the
spread of growth of the invasive plant's root system beyond the
container beyond which it is planted; or
(b) The root system is contained within a properly constructed and
maintained barrier system.
(2) Whether planted or growing in a container, as described herein, all
invasive plants shall be located, trimmed and maintained so that no
part of the plant shall be closer than 10 feet from any property line.
C. Exemptions. This provision of this § 457-19 shall not apply to any
landowner or possessor who, prior to the effective date of this section,
has planted or caused to grow any invasive on any property within the
Township limits unless the Conservation Officer determines on his own
or upon complaint from any abutting or nearby property owner that any
portion of such invasive has been allowed to grow upon, extend roots
across, or extend branches, stalks or leaves over any public way or any
private property not owned by or in the possession of such landowner
or any possessor of said land.
D. Complaint notice, order for removal and compliance. Whenever a
complaint is received by the Township Conservation Officer regarding
the encroachment of any invasive plant or root, or whenever the
Township, on its own observations and inspections, determines that
there is an encroachment of invasive plants or roots onto the property
of another landowner or tenant in possession of the property, or both,
which notice shall be substantially as follows:
(1) The notice shall be mailed by certified mail, return receipt
requested, properly addressed and with sufficient postage, and also
by first-class mail. Notice by certified mail shall be deemed
complete on the date of personal delivery or the date the certified
mail is marked refused or unclaimed or otherwise undeliverable by
the United States Post Office, when the first-class mail was not
returned.
(2) The notice shall specify the nature of the violation.
(3) The notice shall state that the violation must be corrected within 30
days from the date of the received or returned mailing.
§ 457-19 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 457-19
10:1164
Chapter 463
VEHICLES, ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing — See Ch. 235. Littering — See Ch. 265.
§ 463-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PROPERTY — Any real property, either public or private, within the
Township which is not a street or highway.
(4) The notice shall state specifically what must be done by the
responsible party to correct the violation.
E. Violations and penalties. Notwithstanding the provisions of § 457-17
herein, the following penalty provisions shall apply to any person or
entity found to have violated this § 457-19:
(1) Any person determined by any court of competent jurisdiction to
have violated this section shall be subject to pay a fine of not less
than $250 per day nor more than $2,000 per day, or each day the
violation existed after the date for removal as set forth in the notice
which was sent to violator, and received by the violator. Each day of
a continuing violation shall constitute a separate offense, for which
an additional fine can be levied. The per-day fine will be in addition
to a penalty for failure to comply with the provisions of this section.
This fine can be up to the maximum penalty set by the State of New
Jersey.
(2) If the violation is not remedied within the time set forth in the
aforesaid notice, the Township is hereby authorized to remove or
have removed any encroaching invasive and to take all reasonable
steps to eradicate the regrowth of the invasive on the public rightsof-
way, including sidewalks, and to restore such land to its normal
condition, prior to such removal and eradication.
(3) The cost of the corrective action together with any civil penalties,
legal fees and other costs shall be recoverable from the responsible
party.
(4) The provisions of § 457-18 above pertaining to an appeal and
hearing to the Township Council shall not apply to any person or
entity found to have violated or otherwise failed to comply with this
§ 457-19 as determined by the Conservation Officer or court of
competent jurisdiction shall not be entitled any appeal or hearing.
§ 457-19 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 463-1
10:1165
STREET or HIGHWAY — The entire width between the boundary lines of
every way maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public
for purpose of vehicular travel.
VEHICLE — A machine propelled by other than human power, designed to
travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners or slides and to
transport persons or property or pull machinery, including but not by way
of limitation an automobile, truck, trailer, motorcycle, tractor, buggy and
wagon.
§ 463-2. Abandonment of vehicles prohibited.
No person shall abandon a vehicle on any street, highway or property within
the Township, and no person shall leave a vehicle at any such place for such
time and under such circumstances as to cause the vehicle to reasonably
appear to be abandoned.
§ 463-3. Leaving of wrecked, nonoperating vehicles on street
prohibited.
No person shall leave any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked or
junked vehicle on a street or highway in the Township or on any property
except as provided in § 463-4.
§ 463-4. Disposition of wrecked or discarded vehicles.
No person in charge or control of any property, whether as owner, tenant,
occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall allow partially dismantled,
nonoperating, wrecked, junked, unlicensed or discarded vehicles to remain
on the property longer than 48 hours, and no person shall leave such
vehicles exposed to public view on any property for a longer time than 48
hours. This section shall not apply to a vehicle in an enclosed building; a
vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place
and manner, when necessary to the operation of the business enterprise;
or a vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a
lawful place and manner by the Township.
§ 463-5. Impounding; storage fee.264
The Chief of Police or any member of the Police Department designated by
him is authorized to remove or have removed any vehicle left at any place
within the Township which appears to be present in violation of this chapter.
Such vehicle shall be impounded until lawfully claimed or disposed of in
accordance with applicable statutes. The Chief of Police or any member of
the Police Department acting for him shall notify the registered and legal
owner in writing by personal service or by certified mail, at the last known
address of the owner, of the removal of the vehicle, the reason for the
removal and the location of the vehicle. The vehicle shall be retained and
264. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 463-1 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 463-5
10:1166
impounded until the owner or his authorized agent pays the cost of such
taking and removal, together with a garage charge of $20 for each day that
the vehicle is retained and impounded.
Chapter 469
VEHICLES, MOTORIZED RECREATIONAL
§ 469-1. Purpose.
The Township finds that the operation of such motorized recreational
vehicles has previously been conducted in a manner so as to disturb the
peace, quiet and tranquility of others and in a careless, reckless or
negligent manner so as to endanger or be likely to endanger the safety of
others or the property of others. This chapter proposes to regulate their use.
§ 469-2. Restrictions on use.
No person shall operate any recreational motorized vehicles, including but
not limited to snowmobiles; two-wheel vehicles known as minibikes, trail
bikes; motor scooters; three- or four-wheel motor vehicles known as allterrain
vehicles (ATVs) and four-wheel motor vehicles known as go-carts,
under the following circumstances:
§ 469-3. Exceptions.
The terms and provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable to police
or other emergency vehicles, including but not limited to ambulances,
motorcycles, fire control vehicles and the like, or to motorized lawn mowers,
tractors or farm vehicles or construction equipment.
§ 469-4. Confiscation.
The Old Bridge Police Department is hereby authorized to confiscate and
impound any recreational motorized vehicle or ATV operated in a prohibited
area or in a prohibited manner in violation of the terms of this chapter.
The recreational motorized vehicle or ATV shall be returned to the owner
A. On the private property of another without the express permission of
the owner or occupant of the property.
B. On any public grounds or lands owned by the Township, excluding
streets, the use of which is expressly provided for by the New Jersey
statutes.
C. In a manner so as to create loud, unnecessary or unusual noise so as to
disturb or interfere with the peace and quiet of other persons.
D. In a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger or be
likely to endanger the safety or property of any person, including the
operator of the vehicle.
§ 463-5 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 469-4
10:1167
thereof upon payment of any fine imposed as a result of a violation of
this chapter or upon the direction of any court, except that a second or
subsequent violation shall result in the forfeiture of such vehicle.
§ 469-5. Violation and penalties.265
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be, upon
conviction, be subject to a minimum fine of $250 and a maximum penalty as
set forth in Chapter 1, Article II, Penalty.
Chapter 475
VEHICLES, SALE OF
§ 475-1. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of selling or
exchanging motor vehicles on any open lot in the Township without first
obtaining a license.
§ 475-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OPEN LOT — Any lot, tract or parcel of land not enclosed in a substantial,
permanent building and shall not include any lot, tract or parcel of land
upon which is erected a substantial, permanent building used as a public
garage wherein is conducted the business of public motor vehicle repair or
public storage of motor vehicles, but shall include any lot, tract or parcel of
land adjacent to the lot, tract or parcel of land upon which such garage is
erected.
BUSINESS OF SELLING OR EXCHANGING MOTOR VEHICLES — Includes
the offering of motor vehicles for sale or exchange by exhibiting, storing,
parking, locating or keeping such motor vehicles upon an open lot, as
aforesaid, with the intent to sell or exchange such motor vehicles.
§ 475-3. Application requirements; issuance of license.
A. Applications for licenses to conduct the business of selling or
exchanging motor vehicles on an open lot shall be made to the
Township Clerk and shall be accompanied by the required license fee.
Such applications shall be made upon forms to be prepared by the
Township Clerk and shall set forth the following information:
(1) The full name of the applicant with his post office address.
265. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 469-4 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 475-3
10:1168
§ 475-4. License fees.266
The annual license fee for the license aforesaid shall be as set forth in
§ 347-4.
§ 475-5. Assignment and transfer of license.267
No license shall be assigned unless application is made to the Clerk or
his designated representative and his approval obtained. No license shall
be transferred to a different location than that for which issued, unless
application is made to the Clerk and his approval obtained.
§ 475-6. Location of motor vehicles.
No motor vehicle shall be exhibited, stored, parked, located or kept under
the license issued hereunder except upon the premises described in the
application, and this shall not be construed to include the sidewalk or street
or streets upon which the premises abuts.
Chapter 502
VENDORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Beach and recreation areas — See Ch. 52.
Carnivals and circuses — See Ch. 95.
Festivals; mass gatherings — See Ch. 169.
Flea markets — See Ch. 193.
Food and beverages — See Ch. 203.
Mobile lunch wagons — See Ch. 273.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 347.
Holiday sales; Christmas tree sales — See Ch.
394.
(2) An accurate description of the open lot whereon the business is to
be conducted including a sketch of such location.
(3) The number of square feet to be devoted to such business.
(4) The name of the owner of the open lot with his post office address.
(5) Such other information as may be required by the Township Clerk.
B. If no legal reasons appear why the license should not be issued and if
the applicant has paid the license fee, the Township Clerk shall issue
the license, which shall bear the date of issue and shall expire one year
thereafter.
266. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
267. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 475-3 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 475-6
10:1169
§ 502-1. Permit required.
No vendor shall be permitted on Township property or property under the
care or control of the Township without first obtaining a permit from the
Township Clerk. Written permission must also be obtained from the Director
of Parks and Recreation prior to vending on Township park property. These
properties include but are not limited to: Lake Duhernal recreation area,
Laurence Harbor Park, Veterans Park, Central Park, Ticetown Road Soccer
Complex, Higgins Road Soccer Complex, South Old Bridge Community
Center, Geick Park and the Civic Center Recreational Complex.
§ 502-2. Issuance requirements. [Amended 4-20-1992 by Ord. No.
11-92; 5-13-1996 by Ord. No. 23-96]
§ 502-3. Limitation on number of permits issued.
Not more than one permit shall be issued for each location for any said oneweek
period, except with the written permission of the Director of Parks and
Recreation.
Chapter 510
VOLUNTEER INCENTIVES
A. Duration of permit; selection procedure. Permits for food, beverage and
novelties shall be issued monthly for each location. The selection of
vendor shall be made by the Recreation Director in a manner which is
fair and without favoritism. All Township youth sports organizations
shall have priority on their respective sites to operate food concessions,
provided prior permission is granted by the Director of the Department
of Parks and Recreation. This shall be effective on all Township-owned
park and recreation properties, as well as properties leased for
recreational purposes.
B. Franchise fees; liability insurance. The successful vendors drawn shall
be required to pay a franchise fee of $300 for each month they are
assigned and shall satisfy the Clerk that they have adequate liability
insurance, including coverage for products sold by the vendor, and a
certificate of insurance of at least $250,000, naming the Township of
Old Bridge as certificate holder, and shall meet all standards and
requirements of the Department of Health and Welfare. Successful
bidders shall pay for all approved dates and locations at the time of the
permit issuance.268
268. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 475-6 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 502-3
10:1170
ARTICLE I
Volunteer Fire Companies, First Aid Squads and Auxiliary Police
[Adopted 10-17-1988 by Ord. No. 50-88; amended in its entirety
1-22-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-03]
§ 510-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish an incentive program to increase
enrollment in volunteer fire companies, first aid squads, auxiliary police,
Office of Emergency Management and Citizens Emergency Response Team
("CERT") within the Township of Old Bridge and to reward such volunteers
for their tireless efforts and many hours spent to preserve and protect the
health, property and welfare of the residents of the Township of Old Bridge,
24 hours a day, without compensation. This article shall be limited solely
to volunteer members in good standing, as certified by the Chief Executive
Officer/Director of the Old Bridge Township fire companies, first aid squads,
auxiliary police, Office of Emergency Management or CERT.
§ 510-2. Qualifications for benefits.
This article shall apply only to residents who are volunteer members in good
standing in local fire companies, first aid squads, auxiliary police, Office of
Emergency Management or CERT, and are certified to be members in good
standing by the Chief Executive Officer/Director of the respective volunteer
company, squad, or office as required hereafter.
§ 510-3. Member in good standing.
A. A "member in good standing" is hereby defined as a volunteer who has
served at least one year of continuous service to his respective
company, squad or office, and has been certified in writing by the Chief
Executive Officer/Director of his respective company, squad, or office to
have served the required percentage of activity or participation to
qualify as a bona fide member of such organization.
B. The certification shall be signed by the Chief Executive Officer/Director
and notarized accordingly and shall be provided to the Township Clerk
and shall be recorded in the office of the Township Clerk as a public
record.
C. Certification of a member in good standing shall be filed with the
Township Clerk annually and shall be provided to the Clerk between
January 1 and January 15 of each year. A new certification must be filed
each year and as of January 15 of each year, the certification from the
preceding year shall be null and void. The deadline for late submissions
submitted to the Township Clerk's office is February 28. No listing will
be accepted after February 28, and no benefits shall be provided for
that year.
§ 510-1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 510-4
10:1171
§ 510-4. Benefits.
A member in good standing, as defined herein, shall be entitled to certain
benefits within the Township of Old Bridge as follows:
§ 510-5. Exclusions.
This article shall not apply to any fee which goes in whole or in part to any
other governmental or private agency or entity. This article shall not apply
to any fine, penalty or related charge incurred by any person.
A. A ten-thousand-dollar term life insurance policy.
B. Exemption from payment of Old Bridge Township fees for certain
activities, licenses, permits and rentals, provided that the fee is for the
personal and nonprofit use of the member in good standing or a
member of his immediate family. The fees included in this article are as
follows:
(1) Township courses sponsored by the Old Bridge Recreation
Department.
(2) Fees for use of recreation building.
(3) Fees for Recreation Department activities, such as ice skating rink
and tennis courts, and application fees for recreation programs.
(4) Building permits are to be issued to volunteers only for residences
which they own and occupy.
(5) License fees for activities of a personal nonprofit nature, which fees
are payable to and deposited solely by the Township of Old Bridge.
(6) Library rentals at the Old Bridge Township Library.
(7) Certificates of occupancy.
(8) Commuter parking permit fees for one vehicle only, per year,
registered to the volunteer member in good standing.269
269. Editor's Note: This benefit shall be prospective only, and shall be in effect for 2007-2008
commuter parking permits. No refunds will be considered or given for past payment of
said fees.
§ 510-4 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 510-5
10:1172
ARTICLE II
Tuition Credit Program
[Adopted 6-28-1999 by Ord. No. 20-99]
§ 510-6. Purpose.
The State of New Jersey recently enacted a law creating a program whereby
a person who is an active member of a volunteer fire company or volunteer
first aid or rescue squad or association in good standing and the dependent
children and spouse of the volunteer may enroll in a postsecondary program
at a county college, county vocational school or county technical institute on
a tuition-free basis. The purpose of this article is to announce the Township
of Old Bridge's participation in this program and to enumerate the rules of
the program.
§ 510-7. Tuition credit program.
The Township of Old Bridge elects to participate in the tuition credit
program authorized by N.J.S.A. 18A:71-78.1 et seq., allowing a person who
is an active member of a volunteer fire company or volunteer first aid or
rescue squad or association in good standing and the dependent children
and spouse of the volunteer to enroll in a postsecondary program on a
tuition-free basis in a county college, county vocational school or county
technical institute.
§ 510-8. Eligibility. Amended 1-9-2006 by Ord. No. 38-2005]
A person who is an active member of a volunteer fire company or volunteer
first aid or rescue squad or association in good standing and the dependent
children and spouse of the volunteer shall be eligible for tuition credit at
a county college, county vocational school or county technical institute,
provided the person enters into an agreement with the Township to serve
as a volunteer for four years with the volunteer fire company or volunteer
first aid or rescue squad or association. The volunteer or dependent child or
spouse must maintain a "C" grade average or equivalent in order to remain
eligible for tuition credit. Upon completion of each semester, the volunteer
or dependent child or spouse shall submit a transcript to the Township
Business Administrator.
§ 510-9. Letter of eligibility.
Volunteers eligible to receive tuition credit may apply for a letter of
eligibility from the Business Administrator to present to the appropriate
institution to verify that the volunteer has performed the service required
for tuition credit. The Township Business Administrator shall issue a letter
of eligibility to eligible volunteers. The letter of eligibility must state that
the volunteer is a member in good standing of a volunteer fire company,
volunteer first aid or rescue squad or association.
§ 510-6 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 510-10
10:1173
§ 510-10. Maximum tuition credit.
Following each year of volunteer service performed, the volunteer or the
spouse or dependent child shall be entitled to receive tuition credit of up to
$600, not to exceed a maximum of $2,400 for the volunteer, children and
spouse over a four-year period.
§ 510-10 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 510-10
10:1174
ARTICLE III
Length of Service Awards Program
[Adopted 8-16-1999 by Ord. No. 27-99]
§ 510-11. Purpose.
§ 510-12. Contributions.
The LOSAP shall provide for fixed annual contributions to a deferred income
account for each volunteer member who meets the criteria set forth below;
such contributions shall be made in accordance with a plan that shall be
established by the Township pursuant to P.L. 1997, c. 388; and such plan
shall be administered in accordance with the laws of the State of New
Jersey, the U.S. Internal Revenue Code, and this article.
§ 510-13. Criteria for eligibility.
The LOSAP shall provide for annual contributions to each eligible member
who meets the criteria as follows:
§ 510-14. Estimated cost of program.
The estimated cost of the program has been calculated as follows:
§ 510-15. Schedule of points credited for service.
Each active volunteer member shall be credited with points for volunteer
services provided to the first aid organization in accordance with the
following schedule:
A. A Length of Service Awards Program (LOSAP) is herewith created in
accordance with Chapter 388 of the Laws of 1997, to reward members
of the volunteer first aid organizations within the Township of Old
Bridge. Specifically, the eligible volunteer first aid organizations are as
follows: Cheesequake Volunteer First Aid Squad; Laurence Harbor First
Aid Squad and Safety Squad, Inc.; Madison Park First Aid Squad; Old
Bridge First Aid and Rescue Squad; and Old Bridge Volunteer
Emergency Medical Service, Inc., to be administered under the
contract with Old Bridge Township Emergency Medical Services, Inc.
A. Number of points required each year: 75.
B. "Eligibility" is defined as five years of prior service.
A. Regular annual services: $1,150 per year.
B. Total annual cost of program: $115,000 per year (100 eligible members
at $1,150 each).
A. Training courses: maximum points = 25.
§ 510-11 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 510-15
10:1175
(1) Includes in-house training done by the squads: one point per
month.
(2) EMT required courses: one point per hour of training.
(3) CEU courses: one point per hour of training.
B. Drills: maximum points = 15.
(1) In-house drills: one point per hour.
(2) Participation in Township disaster drill: five points per year.
(3) Outside training drills (at fire department, etc.): one point per hour.
C. EMS "on-call" shifts: maximum points = 55.
(1) On-call requirements, 50 hours per calendar month: five points per
month.
(2) Extra response (general calls, prearranged transports): one point
per call answered.
(3) Standby. A standby is defined as a line-of-duty activity of the
volunteer first aid squad lasting for four hours and not falling under
one of the other categories.
D. Elected or appointed positions: maximum points = 25.
(1) Completion of one-year term as any line officer: 25 points.
(2) Completion of one-year term as any executive officer: 25 points.
(3) Delegates to the First Aid Council: one point per meeting
E. Attendance at meetings: maximum points = 20.
(1) Attendance at any official meeting of the volunteer first aid squad:
one point per meeting.
(2) Attendance at any official subcommittee meeting of the volunteer
first aid squad (O.B.T.E.M.S, The Volunteer Task Force, Emergency
Management, L.E.P.C., etc.): one point per meeting.
F. Miscellaneous activities: maximum points = 10.
(1) Participation in inspections, maintenance, fund-raising and other
activities not otherwise listed: one point per activity.
(a) Required points obtained to receive percentage of pension. In
order to qualify for the LOSAP program, members will be
required to accumulate a minimum of 75 points. Members who
receive more than 75 points will receive a higher sum based on
the following scale:
§ 510-15 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 510-15
10:1176
§ 510-16. Voter approval.
This article shall not take effect unless it is approved by voters as a public
question at the next general election.270
Number of Points Percentage of Pension
0 to 74 0%
75 to 89 50%
90 to 104 60%
105 to 114 70%
115 to 124 80%
125 to 135 90%
135 to 150 100%
Over 150 points does not entitle any member to more than
100%.
270. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 27-99 was approved by the voters at the general election.
§ 510-15 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 510-16
10:1177
Chapter 515
WATER SYSTEMS; WATER SUPPLY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Mosquito breeding control — See Ch. 284.
Nuisances — See Ch. 305.
Stormwater quality — See Ch. 432.
Water shortage emergency — See Ch. 519.
§ 510-16 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 510-16
10:1178
ARTICLE I
Protection of Water Systems Equipment
[Adopted by Ord. No. C-54 (Sec. 14-3 of the 1973 Revised General
Ordinances)]
§ 515-1. Unlawful activity.
It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, damage, deface or
destroy, in whole or in part, any meters, devices, pipes, valves, or any
other article or piece of equipment or facility used in connection with the
supplying of water in the Township; to interfere directly or indirectly with
the normal usage of water meters, devices, pipes, valves or any other article
or piece of equipment or facility used in connection with the supplying of
water in the Township; and to tamper with, damage, deface, destroy or
interfere with any personal property belonging to the Township Municipal
Utilities Authority wherever the same may be located.
§ 515-1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 515-1
10:1179

ARTICLE II
Individual and Semipublic Water Supply
[Added 3-4-1985 by Ord. No. 14-85 (Sec. 19-11 of the 1973 Revised
General Ordinances)]
§ 515-2. Purpose.
This article requires all owners of nonresidential potable wells within the
Township to test their water annually for certain toxic chemicals and report
the laboratory test results to the Township Division of Health, and also
regulates the construction and certification of all new potable water wells.
The regulations provided in this article are intended to protect the health of
consumers of well water in the Township of Old Bridge, provide information
to enable the community to monitor groundwater quality and assure that all
new potable wells meet certain construction and water quality standards.
§ 515-3. Definitions.
The words, terms or phrases listed below for the purpose of this article shall
be defined and interpreted as follows:
CERTIFIED LABORATORY — A laboratory certified by the New Jersey State
Department of Environmental Protection, pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:18-1.1 et
seq., to conduct testing for individual hazardous contaminants.
NONPUBLIC WATER SYSTEM — A water supply used for potable or
domestic purposes in a family residence.
PITLESS WELL ADAPTOR — A device fabricated at the job site designed
for attachment to one or more openings through a well casing and so
constructed as to prevent the entry of contamination into the well or potable
water, conduct water from the well, protect the water from freezing or
extremes of temperature and provide access to water system components
within the well.
PITLESS WELL UNIT — A preassembled device which extends the upper
end of a well casing to above grade, provided with a pitless well cap and
so constructed as to prevent the entry of contamination into the well or
potable water, conduct water from the well, protect the water from freezing
or extremes of temperature and provide access to the well and to the water
system components within the well.
POTABLE WATER — Any water used for drinking or culinary purpose.
PUBLIC NONCOMMUNITY WATER SYSTEM — A well which is not used
exclusively to provide water for domestic purposes. A water supply system
from which potable water is supplied to customers, including employees,
members, guests or the public at large. Examples of public noncommunity
water supplies include commercial offices, industrial buildings, commercial
shops and retail stores, motels, hotels, mobile home parks, food
establishments, gasoline service stations, day facilities, houses of worship,
boarding- and rooming houses, clubhouses, camps of all types, health-care
institutions and similar uses.
§ 515-2 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 515-4
10:1181
§ 515-4. Annual testing required.
All owners of public noncommunity water systems in Old Bridge Township
are required, at their expense, to have an annual certified laboratory test of
their well water for the following volatile organic compounds:
Benzene
Bromoform
Bromodichlormethane
Bromomethane
Carbon tetrachloride
Chlorobenzene
Chloroethane
2-Chloroethyl vinyl ether
Chloroform
Chloromethane
cis-1,3-Dichloropropene
Dibromochloromethane
Dichlorodifluoromethane
1,1-Dichloroethane
1,2-Dichloroethane
1,1-Dichloroethylene
trans-1,2-Dichloroethylene
trans-1,3-Dichloropropene
1,2-Dichloropropane
Ethylbenzene
Methylene chloride
1,1,2,2-Tetrachloroethane
Tetrachloroethylene
Toluene
1,1,1-Trichloroethane
1,1,2-Trichloroethane
Trichloroethylene
Trichlorofluoromethane
Vinyl chloride
§ 515-5. Testing by certified laboratory.
All testing shall be performed by a laboratory that is certified by the State
of New Jersey.
§ 515-4 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 515-6
10:1182
§ 515-6. Method.
The laboratory technique to be used will be from the United States
Environmental Protection Agency. Method 624 shall be followed for organic
chemical analysis.
§ 515-7. Frequency of testing.
§ 515-8. (Reserved)271
§ 515-9. Permit required for construction of potable water wells.
No potable water well shall be located or constructed in the Township of
Old Bridge until a permit has been issued by the Division of Health.
§ 515-10. Permit fee. [Amended 4-2-1990 by Ord. No. 10-90]
The permit fee shall be $150.
§ 515-11. State standards to control well construction.
All potable water wells shall be constructed in strict compliance with state
regulations as set forth and known as "Standards for Construction of Public
Noncommunity and Nonpublic Water Systems" (N.J.A.C. 7:10-12.1 through
7:10-12.43 inclusive).
§ 515-12. Pitless adapters or pitless units required.
A pitless adapter or pitless unit shall be provided on every new potable
water well constructed.
§ 515-13. Certification necessary before new well is placed in
service.
No potable water well shall be placed in service until the Division of Health
has issued a written certificate of approval to the owner of the property.
§ 515-14. Requirements for approval.
A. Initial testing. Within 90 days after adoption of this article, a certified
copy of the required written laboratory test results shall be furnished to
the Old Bridge Division of Health by all nonresidential well owners.
B. Annual testing. Each calendar year thereafter, commencing in 1986, the
required test shall be performed, and a copy of the written laboratory
test report shall be provided to the Division of Health no later than April
1.
271. Editor's Note: Former § 515-8, Collection of samples, was repealed 3-1-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-04.
§ 515-6 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 515-14
10:1183
§ 515-15. Violations and penalties.272
Any person who violates any section or provision of this article shall be
subject to a minimum penalty $100 and the maximum penalty set forth
in Chapter 1, Article II, Penalty. Each day that a violation continues shall
constitute an additional, separate and distinct offense.
A. Laboratory testing. Upon notification by the property owner or well
driller, a representative of the Division of Health will collect well water
samples and submit the samples to a laboratory for testing. Tests shall
include those volatile organics as listed in § 515-4 and a bacteriological
examination.
B. Well water to meet state drinking-water standards and guidelines. No
well-water supply shall be approved by the Division of Health if the
water fails to meet current New Jersey drinking water quality standards
and guidelines.
272. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 515-14 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 515-15
10:1184
Chapter 519
WATER SHORTAGE EMERGENCY
§ 519-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the health, safety and welfare
of the residents of the Township and to aid in the prevention of injury to
life and of damage and destruction to property because of the existence of a
water shortage emergency by giving to the Mayor such control over the use
of water as may be necessary to prevent the existence or continuance of a
shortage of water, and to invest the Township with all powers necessary or
convenient to effectuate the saving of water during such an emergency.
§ 519-2. Power of Mayor.
The Mayor is empowered, from time to time, at his discretion, to determine
whether there is an adequate amount of water in the municipal water supply
system for the purpose of maintaining the health, safety and welfare of the
residents of the Township.
§ 519-3. Declaration of emergency.
If the Mayor determines that an insufficient amount of water exists for
that purpose, he shall declare an emergency and, at his discretion, may
prohibit the use of water for sprinkling lawns, gardens, trees or shrubs,
private swimming pools, washing of motor vehicles or any other such uses
of water which may be deemed by him to be nonessential. Due notice of
such prohibitions will be given to the Township residents.
Chapter 527
WRECKERS AND TOWING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 463.
§ 527-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABSORBENT MATERIAL — Material such as sand or Speedy Dry used
to collect liquids such as radiator fluid, oil, gasoline or diesel fuel
spills.[Added 5-11-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-12]
ADMINISTRATIVE FEE — Shall not be included in standard tow. This fee
is for postaccident service to include insurance inspection, telephone calls
§ 515-15 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 527-1
10:1185
or faxes, removal of personal items and additional paperwork. This shall
be assessed only one time per vehicle.[Added 5-11-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-12]
BASIC TOWING SERVICE — The removal and transportation of a vehicle
from a highway, street or other public or private road, or a parking area, or
from a storage facility, and other services normally incident thereto.
CATEGORY I VEHICLE — All vehicles 0 to 10,000 pounds gross vehicle
weight.
CATEGORY II VEHICLE — All vehicles over 10,000 pounds gross vehicle
weight.
CLEANUP — Removal and/or disposal of any debris left on the roadway
or property as a result of a motor vehicle accident or recovery.[Added
5-11-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-12]
CRUISING — The operation of an unengaged tow truck along the public
streets in any fashion intended or calculated to solicit business.
GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT — The registration weight, the manufacturer's
gross vehicle weight rating or actual weight.
EMPLOYEE — Any person employed by a licensee to operate a wrecker.
RESPONSE TIME — The time the operator receives the telephone call from
the Old Bridge Township Police Department until the time the operator
arrives on the scene.[Added 5-11-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-12]
SERVICE CALL — A response to a motorist to provide aid for the changing
of flat tires and/or providing fuel.[Added 5-11-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-12]
VEHICLE — Any automobile truck, trailer, motorcycle, minibike, moped, gocart,
bus, farm equipment, or any other mechanically powered conveyance
which shall be or become disabled or which is required to be removed from
the scene of a crash, or other removal of which is necessary in order to
safeguard the public health, safety and welfare. Vehicle weight must be less
than four tons (8,001 pounds).[Added 5-11-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-12]
WINCHING — The process of moving a vehicle by the use of the cable from
a position that is not accessible for direct hookup by conventional means for
loading onto a tow vehicle. Winching is not pulling a vehicle onto a tilt bed
or carrier. It is neither lifting a motor vehicle with a conventional tow sling
nor pulling it with a chain hooked to a wrecker.[Added 5-11-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009-12]
WRECKER — A vehicle used to tow or remove other vehicles usually so
damaged or disabled that they cannot proceed under their own power. Class
I wreckers are capable of towing or removing a category I vehicle and class
II wreckers are capable of removing or towing a category II vehicle.
§ 527-1 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 527-2
10:1186
§ 527-2. License.
A license shall be required to perform police-requested towing and roadside
repair services on roadways within the Township of Old Bridge. Any person
or entity wishing to obtain a license pursuant to this chapter shall submit a
license application to the Township Clerk.
§ 527-3. Term of license.
Licenses shall be issued by the Township Clerk. Each license shall be issued
for a maximum term of one year and shall terminate on January 1 of the
year following its issuance.
§ 527-4. License fee.
§ 527-5. Requirements for licenses.
No person or entity shall be eligible for the issuance of a license unless the
following requirements are fulfilled:
A. A fee of $100 shall be paid annually by license applicants in order to
obtain a license.
B. License applicants shall be charged a prorated license fee for a license
issued for a partial license term.
C. License fees shall be nonrefundable for any reason.
A. All towing equipment utilized by applicants shall be in compliance with
state, federal and local laws.
B. Applicants shall have the following minimum equipment:
(1) One wrecker capable of removing any category I vehicle.
(2) Safety equipment to be carried on all trucks shall include: a
universal towing sling, except flatbeds; J-hooks and chains; one
snatch block for three-eighths- to one-half-inch cable, two high-test
safety chains; auxiliary safety light kit to place on rear of towed
vehicle; four-lamp or three-lamp revolving amber light or lamp bars
of at least 500 candlepower pointed to the rear, mounted so as not
to be obstructed by the towed vehicle(s) and said lights must be
engaged during the removal of the vehicle(s); at least three flares
or other suitable warning devices visible for a distance of not less
than 1,000 feet from the disabled vehicle(s); toolbox with
assortment of hand tools; rear working lights and rear marker
lights; cab lights; body-clearing lights located to clear towed
vehicle; blocking choke for wrecker while working; safety cones;
shovels and broom; steering wheel lock or tie-down; and an
operational fire extinguisher designed for vehicular fires which
must be 25 pounds BC dry chemical; and five gallons of absorbent
granules for cleaning up fluid spills.
§ 527-2 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 527-5
10:1187
(3) All wreckers must be properly and permanently lettered on both
sides according to Title 39 of the Motor Vehicle Code of New Jersey.
C. License applicants shall submit a detailed list of all wreckers and
service vehicles, as well as supplemental/auxiliary equipment owned or
leased which will be used in performance of this chapter. A copy of the
vehicle registration, amber light permit(s), certificate of insurance for
vehicles and property, insurance cards and leases must also be provided
with the list. The list must contain the following information: type of
vehicle, year/make, capacity and condition of the vehicle.
D. License applicants shall demonstrate that they maintain a storage
facility properly zoned for such use. Each license applicant must have
an outdoor storage area large enough to accommodate at least 10 class
I vehicles. Each license applicant may have an indoor, secured storage
area sufficient to house at least two vehicles and provide twenty-fourhour
security for the same for the storing of impounded vehicles
involved in criminal matters.
E. License applicants shall maintain the following insurance: [Amended
1-9-2006 by Ord. No. 38-2005; 5-11-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-12]
(1) A garage keeper’s liability policy as set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:3-84.8
covering fire, theft and explosion in the minimum amount of
$100,000.
(2) A garage liability policy covering the operation of the licensee’s
equipment or vehicles for the amount of $300,000 for any one
person killed or injured in any one accident and $100,000 for all
property damage from one accident.
(3) Automobile liability insurance as set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:3-84.8 in
an amount of not less than $1,000,000 combined single limit for
bodily injury and property damage liability.
(4) Workers’ compensation insurance insuring the obligation of the
wrecker operator under the New Jersey Workers’ Compensation
and Occupational Disease Laws.
(5) Insurance policies shall provide collision coverage for vehicles in
tow.
(6) Each licensee shall have his/her insurance agent submit a
certificate of coverage to the Township. The Township of Old Bridge
shall be listed as an additional insured.
(7) Annual renewal:
(a) Certificate of insurance must be submitted to the Township of
Old Bridge prior to the renewal date.
(b) Insurance carriers shall notify the Township of Old Bridge
immediately if a policy is canceled.
§ 527-5 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 527-5
10:1188
§ 527-6. Licensee standards of conduct and performance.
(c) The insurance carrier shall make written notification to the
Township of Old Bridge of any changes in insurance coverage
at least 10 days prior to the change.
F. License applicants shall submit the following for the applicant and all
employees: name, address, date of birth, social security number,
photocopies of all New Jersey drivers’ licenses (including commercial
driver’s licenses), signature, name and address of an individual to
contact in case of emergency. The Old Bridge Police Department shall
conduct background investigations of all license applicants and their
employees. Any person with a criminal record will not be allowed to
perform Police Department towing and service and/or be issued a
license. [Amended 5-11-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-12]
G. Each licensee shall execute an indemnification agreement indemnifying
the Township of Old Bridge and holding it harmless from any and all
claims arising directly or indirectly from the actions of the licensee.
[Added 5-11-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-12]
A. All licensees shall comply with the following requirements of conduct
and performance:
(1) Signs in view of the public shall be posted at storage facilities
which contain the licensee's license number, business name, phone
number, hours of operation and towing fee schedule as outlined in
this chapter in its entirety. Such signs shall be at least two feet by
two feet in size.
(2) Outdoor storage areas must be able to be entirely lit from dusk
through dawn and must be entirely enclosed and secured by a
sturdy fence at least eight feet in height, unless any statute or
regulation requires otherwise. Storage areas shall be kept clean so
as to be reasonably accommodating to persons who may come upon
said premises.
(3) Licensees shall not store towed vehicles on top of one another, shall
not park any said vehicles on public roadways or sidewalks, nor
shall licensees block any public roadways or sidewalks with towed
vehicles.
(4) Employees of licensees must be registered with the Old Bridge
Police Department prior to performing any services for licensees.
Information on employees shall be updated every 90 days in order
to keep current with changes in personnel.
(5) Licensees and/or their employees must possess a valid New Jersey
driver's license.
(6) Licensees and/or their employees shall be fully trained and
knowledgeable in the operation of all required equipment.
§ 527-5 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 527-6
10:1189
(7) Licensees and/or their employees must be equipped with and
trained in the basic tools necessary to perform minor roadside
repairs.
(8) Licensees and/or their employees must be equipped with and
trained in the necessary tools and equipment to perform all facets
of the safe and efficient removal of all types of motor vehicles under
this chapter regardless of the physical condition of the vehicle.
(9) Licensees are responsible for the removal of all debris from an
accident scene, which includes sweeping the roadway. Licensees
and/or their employees must be equipped with and trained in the
necessary equipment needed to completely remove, and must
remove, all nonhazardous debris from the scene of the accident.
Debris must be placed in a container or bag. Any minor fluid spills
will be picked up by the wrecker operator and may be put out in the
regular trash after 24 hours.
(10) Licensees and their employees must wear orange reflective safety
vests when engaged in the towing or repair of motor vehicles while
on public roadways.
(11) Licensees and their employees must follow the directions of law
enforcement personnel.
(12) Licensees and their employees are expected to always act in a
professional manner and at all times to be courteous and respectful
towards members of the public. Licensees and their employees
shall not represent to any member of the public that they are
employees of the Township of Old Bridge.
(13) Licensees shall not engage in cruising.
(14) Licensees shall be responsible for all vehicles and contents in their
custody that were towed off the roadway under the direction of the
police.
(15) Licensees and their employees shall preserve evidence needed for
potential criminal and civil cases at the direction of law
enforcement personnel. Vehicles involved in criminal matters
which are impounded and stored in a licensee's storage area shall
not be removed from such storage area until written permission is
obtained from the Old Bridge Police Department.
(16) Licensees shall notify the Old Bridge Police Department on a
monthly basis if they are in custody of any unclaimed vehicles. The
Police Department will file for titles of abandoned motor vehicles
left on a licensee's premises. Any licensee failing to notify the Old
Bridge Police Department within 30 days that a vehicle has been
abandoned shall forfeit storage fees for any days in excess of 30
days such vehicle is stored.
§ 527-6 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 527-6
10:1190
(17) Licensees and their employees shall cooperate with other licensees
and their drivers in the case of emergency services at the scene of
accidents and/or disasters.
(18) Licensees will dispatch, within the time permitted by this chapter,
wreckers, when requested by the desk officer, to respond to a
police request for service.
(19)Wreckers shall be maintained and operated in a safe and prudent
manner and in accordance with all existing traffic regulations.
(20) Licensees shall maintain an accurate file of all vehicles towed. Such
files shall be maintained for three years.
(21) Licensees must maintain an accurate inventory of all towed
vehicles stored in their impound sites.
(22) Licensees must maintain a record of all property found anywhere in
a towed vehicle, including trunk and glove compartment, if open. If
a key is available, they shall be responsible for the safeguard and
release of the contents to the owner.
(23) Authorized representatives of the Old Bridge Police Department or
their designees shall have access to any of the records required to
be kept by licensees.
(24) Licensees, upon receiving a vehicle and ownership information
relating thereto, shall immediately contact the owner of the vehicle
by telephone and/or in writing, and within 48 hours, to inform the
owner that:
(a) The licensee is in possession of the vehicle;
(b) The costs the owner has incurred;
(c) The procedure for obtaining a release of the vehicle;
(d) The consequences for failure to retrieve the vehicle within the
proper time frame.
(25) Licensees must maintain accurate records of owner notifications
and attempted notifications.
(26) Licensees must not release any impounded vehicle from an
impound site unless it is authorized by the Old Bridge Police
Department.
(27) Licensees must follow the proper procedures and directions of all
applicable laws for the disposal of vehicles not retrieved by the
owner. Any vehicles which are not released according to proper
procedure shall be reported to the Old Bridge Police Department.
(28) Licensees shall be responsible for any vehicle and the contents
thereof after receiving said vehicle in their custody and control,
§ 527-6 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 527-6
10:1191
and shall reimburse the owner of such vehicle removed for any
such damage or loss sustained to any vehicle while in the towing
service company's custody and control.
(29) Licensees shall not make any repairs to any vehicle towed or
removed as provided for hereunder without first receiving written
authorization of the owner thereof or its authorized agent.
(30) Licensees shall use, at a minimum, the manufacturer's suggested
towing or removal method for removal of damaged or impounded
passenger cars or light vehicles, including pickup trucks, minivans,
motorcycles and vans.
(31) Storage facilities must be in compliance with all applicable codes
and municipal ordinances and must be zoned for all of the uses for
which they are, or will be, dedicated.
(32) All storage facilities must satisfy all licensing requirements
promulgated by the State of New Jersey and the municipality
regarding all aspects of their use, and/or intended use, including
but not limited to the towing, storage, repair and sale of motor
vehicles.
(33)No licensee shall charge fees in excess of the maximum fees set
forth in this chapter.
(34) All licensees shall maintain the insurance coverage required by the
article.
(35) A licensee may use another licensee to take a call after regular
hours and on holidays and weekends; the towed vehicle must be
towed to the original assigned licensee's facility immediately. Both
the original assigned licensee and the replacement licensee will be
held liable for any infractions. The original assigned licensee will
be charged for the call. Licensees shall make all requests for
replacement wreckers or for additional wreckers at the scene of an
accident through the Old Bridge Police Department.
(36) Licensees shall make their storage facilities open to the public
Monday through Friday 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. and on Saturday
8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon.
(37) Licensees must post the fee schedule contained in this chapter in
its entirety on each wrecker in easy view of the public. The fee
schedule signs for wreckers will be purchased at the wrecker
operator's expense through the Old Bridge Police Department.
(38) Licensees shall fill out an abandoned vehicle form and bring it to
the Old Bridge Police Department on the 31st day of holding a
vehicle. If the vehicle is sold at a public auction, the minimum bid
will be the cost of the tow and storage fees unless a lower bid is
authorized by the licensee.
§ 527-6 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 527-6
10:1192
§ 527-7. Maximum fees to be charged by licensees. [Amended
5-11-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-12]
(39) All licensees must have a phone number where they can be reached
24 hours a day to take calls for police-requested towing and
service. Such phone number may not be a beeper number.
(40) There will be at least one yearly meeting between all licensees and
the Old Bridge Police Department. All licensees will have at least
one representative present.
(41) If a licensee fails to respond to a towing or service call in a timely
manner, the next licensee on the appropriate list shall be called to
handle the call. A wrecker which arrives at the site of a towing or
service call after the time to respond has expired shall not be
allowed to handle that call in the event a second licensee has
already been called to handle the towing or service call.
(42) A licensee shall only store towed vehicles at the licensee's storage
facility unless advised otherwise by the Old Bridge Police
Department.
(43) Licensees may not transfer a license issued pursuant to this
chapter under any circumstances.
(44) All towing equipment utilized by licensees shall be in compliance
with state, federal and local laws and shall be inspected by the Old
Bridge Police Department on an annual basis.
A. No storage fees may be charged for a vehicle retrieved within 12 hours
after its initial placement at a licensee's storage facility.
B. No storage fees shall be imposed for the day an owner or motorist
retrieves the vehicle, if such retrieval occurs before 11:00 a.m.
C. The following fees are the maximum fees which may be charged by
licensees:
(1) Towing charge.
(a) Category I light duty (all vehicles 0 to 10,000 pounds GVW):
$105.
(b) Category II.
[1] All vehicles over 10,000 pounds GVW: $300.
[2] All vehicles, over 26,000 pounds GVW, including buses:
$450.
(2) Additional charges for category I vehicles.
(a) Winching cable: $50 per quarter-hour increment/maximum one
hour.
§ 527-6 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 527-7
10:1193
(b) Uprighting: $50 per quarter-hour increment/maximum one
hour.
(c) Tarping: $25.
(d) Mileage: $3 per mile/round trip outside the Township.
(3) Storage.
(a) Inside storage:
[1] Category I vehicle: $40 per day.
[2] Category II vehicle: $80 per day.
(b) Outside storage:
[1] Category I vehicle: $30 per day.
[2] Category II vehicle: $75 per day.
(4) In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.50, all fees to be paid to a
licensee by the Township of Old Bridge for the storage of motor
vehicles shall not exceed the following:
(a) A limit of $3 per day for the first 30 days of storage per vehicle;
(b) A limit of $2 per day for the 31st day of storage and any day
thereafter, and
(c) A limit of $400 per vehicle stored regardless of the duration of
the storage, except that a waiver may be granted for good
cause upon the request of a municipality by the Division of
Local Government Services in the Department of Community
Affairs.
(5) Vehicles stored on the property of the Township of Old Bridge shall
be subject to a storage fee of $40 per day, payable to the Township.
(6) Service calls.
(a) Jump starts: $50.
(b) Tire changes: $50.
(c) Fuel: $50.
(7) Additional charges, Class II vehicles:
(a) Air line: $25.
(b) Removal of bumper: $25.
(c) Use of wheel lift: $25.
(d) Brake release, per axle: $25.
§ 527-7 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 527-7
10:1194
§ 527-8. License suspension or revocation.
(8) These additional Category II vehicle charges are for typical tows.
Any additional charges must be justified, and there must be a
documented need for additional personnel, equipment and/or
supplies.
(9) Licensees may accept Visa, MasterCard or cash as payment for
services. Checks, if accepted, will be by mutual consent of tow
company and motorist.
(10) Cleanup fee for the cleanup of debris on the highway or at the
scene of an accident and application of absorbent material may be
charged at a rate of $45 per vehicle. The fee for absorbent material
shall be $15 per bag.
(11) A licensee may assess a one-time "administrative fee" in the
amount of $25 for motor vehicle accidents only, to compensate for
time spent on the telephone with the customers, insurance
companies or police and time spent copying, faxing or sending emails
by staff.
D. Mileage fees are not permitted within the borders of Old Bridge. No
other fees or charges are permitted except as set forth above.
E. Response times for police calls.
(1) Class I wrecker:
(a) 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.: 25 minutes.
(b) 6:01 p.m. to 7:59 a.m.: 30 minutes.
(2) Class II wrecker:
(a) 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.: 30 minutes.
(b) 6:01 p.m. to 7:59 a.m.: 40 minutes.
A. The Police Chief or his designee may suspend or revoke the license of
any licensee if the licensee fails to comply with the requirements of this
chapter.
B. The Chief of Police or his designee shall hold a hearing prior to
suspending or revoking any license, except that the Chief of Police or
his designee may order an immediate temporary licensee suspension in
the interest of public health safety and welfare. Licensees shall be given
notice of the hearing at least five business days prior to the hearing
date. Licensees shall be entitled to a hearing within five business days
of any temporary suspension to determine whether any further action is
necessary.
§ 527-7 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 527-9
10:1195
§ 527-9. Police-requested towing and service on rotational basis.
The Police Department shall maintain current rotational lists of wrecker
operators for police-requested service calls and towing calls. The Police
Department shall maintain a list for service calls and two towing call lists,
one for wreckers capable of towing category I vehicles and one for wreckers
capable of towing category II vehicles.
§ 527-10. Rules and regulations. [Amended 5-11-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-12]
The Director of Police may promulgate rules and regulations to implement
the provisions of this chapter.
§ 527-11. Fee increases. [Added 5-11-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-12]
Effective January 1, 2010, the fees contained in this chapter shall increase
by 2% per year on the first January each year.
Chapter 536
YOUTH CAMPS
§ 536-1. Adoption of standards.
A code regulating and controlling the location, construction and operation
of youth camps, the issuance of permits to locate and construct, alter or
operate youth camps, and declaring and defining certain youth camps as
nuisances, is hereby adopted pursuant to N.J.A.C. 8:25-1 et seq. A copy of
the code is annexed to and made part of this chapter without the inclusion
of the text herein.
§ 536-2. Title of code.
The code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as "New Jersey Youth Camp Safety Act Standards,"
readopted May 1993.
§ 536-3. Public record.
Three copies of the "New Jersey Youth Camp Safety Act Standards (1993)"
have been placed on file in the office of the Township Clerk and the office
of the Secretary of the Department of Health and Welfare for the use and
examination of the public.
§ 536-4. Licensing.
A. License required. No person shall locate and construct, alter or operate
a youth camp until permits have been issued by the Department of
Health and Welfare and the Department of Community Development.
§ 527-9 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 536-4
10:1196
§ 536-5. Fees.
The annual fee for a day camp or residential camp shall be the total of the
following:
§ 536-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of or order promulgated under
this chapter or the code established herein shall, upon conviction thereof,
be liable to a penalty of not less than $50, nor more than $1,000 for
each violation. Each day a particular violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
Chapter 540
YOUTH SPORTS CODE OF CONDUCT
§ 540-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to formally adopt a procedure whereby the
Athletic Code of Conduct and Coaches Code of Ethics, governing coaches,
participants and attendees of youth sport team events funded by or held on
property owned by the Township of Old Bridge, can be enforced.
§ 540-2. Youth Sports Athletic Code of Conduct.
Youth sports team organizations who are funded by or hold games on
property owned by the Township of Old Bridge shall adhere to the Athletic
Code of Conduct and the Coaches Code of Ethics, as adopted by resolutions
on August 11, 2003. Ten copies of the Athletic Code of Conduct and the
Coaches Code of Ethics shall be filed with the Township Clerk and the
B. License expiration. Permits issued for the operation of a youth camp
shall expire annually on December 31 of each year, and application for
renewal thereof shall be submitted together with the required fee prior
to December 1 of each year. Seasonal permits shall be issued no earlier
than May 15 and expire no later than September 15.
C. Denial or suspension. Permits required by this chapter may be denied
or suspended by the Health Officer or his designee due to lack of
compliance. The Department of Health and Welfare shall make the final
decision concerning the suspension or denial of the permit.
A. Basic fee for day camps: recommendation of the Township.
B. Basic fee for residential camp: recommendation of the Township.
C. Retail foods: see appropriate code section.
D. Reinspection fee for other than satisfactory rating: $50.
E. Recreational bathing: see appropriate Code section.
§ 536-4 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 540-2
10:1197
Township Director of Parks and Recreation in accordance with the filing
requirements of N.J.S.A. 40:69A-181.
§ 540-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ATHLETIC CODE OF CONDUCT — A written specification of behavior of
the parents, guardians, attendees, coaches and officials at youth sports
activities, prepared by the Township of Old Bridge, which will incorporate
the terms of the within chapter and must be consented to in writing by the
parents and legal guardians of the minor participants of each youth sports
activity.
COACHES CODE OF ETHICS — A written specification of behavior of
the youth sport coaches during youth sports activities, prepared by the
Township of Old Bridge, which will incorporate the terms of the within
chapter and set forth ethical guidelines for all coaches which must be
consented to in writing by every coach of a youth sports team.
YOUTH SPORTS ACTIVITY — Any sports organization which is affiliated
with or receives monetary or other support from the Township of Old Bridge
or which regularly utilizes any facilities owned, operated or maintained by
the Township of Old Bridge, which participates in sporting competitions
involving minors.
YOUTH SPORTS EVENT — Any competition, practice or instructional event
involving one or more youth sports activities.
§ 540-4. Adherence to Athletic Code of Conduct.
Every youth sports activity in the Township of Old Bridge shall be required
to follow the Athletic Code of Conduct and the Coaches Code of Ethics as
adopted by resolutions on August 11, 2003.
§ 540-5. Enforcement.
Each youth sports organization shall be charged with enforcing the
provisions of this chapter at its youth sports event. The Director of Parks
and Recreation shall have the final review and disposition on any appeals
taken as a result of an organization's enforcement practices.
§ 540-6. Prohibited acts; penalty for violations.
Youth sports teams' organizations which are funded by or hold games on
property owned by the Township of Old Bridge may ban the presence of a
person at a youth sports event in accordance with the following guidelines:
A. A coach, parent, player, participant, league official or other youth sports
event attendee who violates one or more of the provisions contained in
the Athletic Code of Conduct may be banned from attending, coaching
or participating in at least one youth sports event if the person:
§ 540-2 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 540-6
10:1198
§ 540-7. Authority to remove violators from premises.
Any parent, official, coach or spectator at any youth sporting event shall be
subject to the authority of all field officials, including umpires, referees and
elected league officials or coaches of the youth sports activity. This authority
shall also include any youth team's practice or instructional event, and such
authority shall include the authorization to direct any person or persons
involved in any incident in violation of this chapter or applicable code of
conduct to immediately remove themselves from the premises.
§ 540-8. Violation procedures and appeal hearing.
(1) Has been issued a prior written warning for violating one or more
of the provisions contained in the Athletic Code of Conduct.
(2) Violates the Athletic Code of Conduct by engaging in verbal or
physical threats or abuse aimed at any coach, parent, player,
participant, league official or any other attendee.
B. Any such person who violates the Athletic Code of Conduct by initiating
a fight or scuffle with any coach, parent, participant, league official or
any other attendee will be banned for one calendar year from the time
of infraction.
A. Upon determination by the highest ranking official and the governing
board of the youth sports organization that a parent, guest, spectator,
coach or official at any youth sports event sponsored by such youth
sports organization has violated a provision of this chapter or the code
of conduct of the youth sports activity, the Director of Parks and
Recreation shall forward to such violators a notice via regular and
certified mail, identifying the date, location, nature of violation and the
period of the banning or other action to be taken in response to such
violation.
B. Any person receiving such notice who wishes to contest same shall
appeal to the Old Bridge Township Director of Parks and Recreation
within seven calendar days of the mailing of said notice by forwarding a
copy of said notice with a written request for appeal, specifically setting
forth the basis of such person's contest of the notice of violation, via
personal delivery, fax or certified mail to the Director of Parks and
Recreation at the address specified.
C. Upon receipt of such appeal, the Director of Parks and Recreation shall
schedule a hearing within seven days and provide an opportunity for
said person and any interested person or persons to appear and be
heard with respect to the occurrence of any violation and action taken
by the Director.
D. The Director shall review statements, firsthand accounts and any other
pertinent information or documentation relevant to the violation and
§ 540-6 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 540-8
10:1199
§ 540-9. Anger management counseling for violators; permission to
resume participation.
§ 540-10. Failure to participate in Athlete Code of Conduct or
Coaches Code of Ethics.
Any youth sports team organization that chooses not to participate in the
Athletic Code of Conduct or the Coaches Code of Ethics, as adopted by
resolutions dated August 11, 2003, and as enforced by this chapter, shall
not receive Township funding, Township liability coverage, nor will they be
permitted to use Township property facilities for their program.
Appendix
Chapter A600
may sustain, overturn or modify the notice of violation consistent with
this chapter or the code of conduct.
E. Any person while appealing his/her violation of the code of conduct
shall be reinstated with full rights and authority until such time that a
determination and disposition of his/her appeal has been made.
F. All notices of violation and banning or other actions shall remain in
effect until overturned or modified by the Director of Parks and
Recreation.
G. In the event any notice of violation is not appealed within seven days of
such notice, said notice of violation and action taken by the official
Director, including banning from youth sports events or other action
taken, shall become final.
A. A youth sports team organization shall require a person banned
pursuant to the provisions of § 540-6B, above, to complete an anger
management-counseling program at their own expense, consisting of
not less than 12 hours of instruction and shall provide proof of
satisfactory completion to the Director of Parks and Recreation.
B. A coach, parent, player, spectator or league official or other youth
sports event attendee may attend, coach or participate in a youth sports
event from which the person has been previously banned one year, if
the person:
(1) Provides a written request for permission to resume participation
or attendance to the youth sports team organization which issued
the ban, after the one-year ban has expired.
(2) Provides a written apology to the youth sports team organization
which issued the ban and to the person or persons who are the
subject of the behavior which constituted the violation of the code,
as directed by the youth sports team organization.
§ 540-8 OLD BRIDGE CODE § 540-10
10:1200
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
§ A600-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the terms defined above shall have the
meanings there indicated,273 and the following additional terms shall have
the following meanings:
ACT or CABLE TELEVISION ACT — That statute of the State of New Jersey
relating to cable television, known as the Cable Television Act, N.J.S.A.
48:5A-1 et seq.
APPLICATION — Cablevision's application for renewal of municipal
consent, which application is on file in the Township Clerk's office and
is incorporated herein by reference and made a part hereof, except as
modified, changed, limited or altered by this chapter.
BOARD — The Board of Public Utilities of the State of New Jersey or its
successor agency.
COMPANY — CSC TKR, LLC, d/b/a Cablevision of Raritan Valley
("Cablevision"), the grantee of rights under this chapter.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
FEDERAL ACT — That federal statute relating to cable communications
commonly known as the "Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984," 47
U.S.C. § 521 et seq., and the Telecommunications Act of 1996, or as those
statutes may be amended.
FEDERAL REGULATIONS — Those federal regulations relating to cable
television services, 47 CFR 76.1 et seq. (and, to the extent applicable, any
other federal rules and regulations relating to cable television, including but
not limited to those described in 47 CFR 76.3), or as such regulations may
be amended.
STANDARD INSTALLATION — The installation of drop cable to a customer's
premises where the distance from the point of entry into the building being
served is less than 150 feet from the active cable television system plant.
STATE — The State of New Jersey.
STATE REGULATIONS — Those regulations of the State of New Jersey
Board of Public Utilities relating to cable television: N.J.A.C. 14:17-1.1 et
seq. and N.J.A.C. 14:18-1.1 et seq., or as such regulations may be amended.
TOWNSHIP — The governing body of the Township of Old Bridge in the
County of Middlesex and the State of New Jersey.
§ A600-2. Statement of findings.
A public hearing concerning the consent herein granted to Cablevision was
held after proper public notice pursuant to the terms and conditions of the
273. Editor's Note: "Terms defined above" refers to terms defined in the preamble to this
ordinance, which are also defined in this section.
§ 540-10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § A600-2
10:1201
Act. Said hearing having been held and fully open to the public, and the
municipality having received all comments regarding the qualifications of
Cablevision to receive this consent, the Township hereby finds Cablevision
possesses the necessary legal, technical, character, financial and other
qualifications to support municipal consent and that Cablevision's operating
and construction arrangements are adequate and feasible.
§ A600-3. Grant of authority.
The Township hereby grants to Cablevision its nonexclusive consent to
place in, upon, along, across, above, over, and under its highways, streets,
alleys, sidewalks, public ways, and public places in the municipality poles,
wires, cables, and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation in
the Township of a cable television system or other communications facility
and for the provision of any communications service over such facilities.
Operation and construction, pursuant to said consent, is conditioned upon
prior approval of the Board of Public Utilities.
§ A600-4. Duration of franchise.
This consent granted herein shall be nonexclusive and shall be for a term of
10 years from the date of issuance of a certificate of approval by the Board.
§ A600-5. Expiration and subsequent renewal.
If Cablevision seeks successive consent, it shall, prior to the expiration of
this consent, apply for a municipal consent and certificate of approval in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-16 and applicable state and federal rules
and regulations. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-25.1, both the Township
and Cablevision shall be bound by the terms of this municipal consent until
such time as Cablevision converts the municipal consent (and any certificate
of approval) into a system-wide franchise.
§ A600-6. Franchise territory.
The consent granted under this chapter to Cablevision shall apply to the
entirety of the Township and any property hereafter annexed.
§ A600-7. Service area.
Cablevision shall be required to proffer video programming service along
any public right-of-way to any person's residence or business within the
portion of the franchise territory, as described in the application for
municipal consent, at Cablevision's schedule of rates for standard and
nonstandard installation.
§ A600-8. Extension of service.
Commercial and residential entities will be proffered service in accordance
with the company's line extension policy as identified in the application.
§ A600-2 OLD BRIDGE CODE § A600-9
10:1202
§ A600-9. Franchise fee.
Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Cable Television Act,
Cablevision shall pay to the Township, as an annual franchise fee, a sum
equal to 2% of the actual gross revenues received from all recurring
charges in the nature of subscription fees paid by subscribers for its cable
television reception services in the Township. In the event applicable law
hereinafter permits a larger franchise fee to be collected but does not fix
the amount thereof, the Township and Cablevision shall negotiate in good
faith with respect to the amount thereof; provided, however, that nothing
herein shall be construed to permit the Township to require payment of a
franchise fee by Cablevision that is higher than the fee paid by all other
cable television service providers offering service in the municipality.
§ A600-10. Free service.
§ A600-11. Construction/system requirements.
Cablevision shall perform construction and installation of its plant and
facilities in accordance with applicable state and federal law. The company
shall be subject to the following additional construction requirements with
respect to the installation of its cable plant and facilities in the Township:
A. Cablevision shall, upon written request, provide free of charge one
standard installation and monthly cable television reception service to
all state or locally accredited public schools and all municipal public
libraries, as well as municipal buildings located within the Township.
B. Upon written request from the Township, the Company shall provide to
state and locally accredited elementary and secondary schools and
municipal public libraries in the Township, without charge, the
following: 1) one standard installation per school or library; 2) one
cable modem per installation; and 3) basic cable modem service for the
term of this chapter for each installation. This offer shall be subject to
the terms, conditions and use policies of the company, as those policies
may exist from time to time.
C. Upon written request from the Township, the company shall provide to
one municipally owned facility, without charge, the following: 1) one
standard installation; 2) one cable modem per installation; and 3) basic
cable modem service for the term of this chapter for each installation.
This offer shall be subject to the terms, conditions and use policies of
the company as those policies may exist from time to time.
A. In the event that the company or its agents shall disturb any pavement,
street surfaces, sidewalks, driveways or other surfaces, the company
shall at its sole expense restore and replace such disturbances in as
good a condition as existed prior to the commencement of said work.
B. If, at any time during the period of this consent, the municipality shall
alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other way or place, the
§ A600-9 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § A600-11
10:1203
§ A600-12. Technical and customer service standards.
Cablevision shall comply with the technical and customer service standards
established for the cable industry under applicable federal and state laws,
rules and regulations.
§ A600-13. Local office or agent.
Cablevision shall establish and maintain during the entire term of this
consent a local area business office or agent for the purpose of receiving,
investigating and resolving complaints regarding the quality of service,
equipment malfunctions and similar matters. Said office shall be open daily
during normal business hours and in no event less than 9:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m., Monday through Friday, with the exception of holidays.
§ A600-14. Designation of complaint officer.
The Office of Cable Television is hereby designated as the complaint officer
for the Township pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 48:5A-26. All
complaints shall be reviewed and processed in accordance with N.J.A.C.
14:17-6.5.
§ A600-15. Liability insurance.
Cablevision agrees to maintain and keep in full force and effect at its
sole cost at all times during the term of this consent sufficient liability
insurance, naming the Township as an additional insured and insuring
against loss by any such claim, suit, judgment, execution or demand in the
minimum amounts of $500,000 for bodily injury or death to one person and
$1,000,000 for bodily injury or death resulting from any one accident or
company, upon reasonable notice by the Township, shall remove or
relocate its equipment, at the company's own expense.
C. Upon request of a person holding a building or moving permit issued by
the Township, the company shall temporarily move or remove
appropriate parts of its facilities so as to permit the moving or erection
of buildings or for the performance of other work. The expense of any
such temporary removal or relocation shall be paid in advance to the
company by the requesting party, except when requested by the
Township of Old Bridge, in which case the company shall bear the cost.
In such cases, the company shall be given not less than 14 days' prior
written notice in order to arrange for the changes required.
D. During the exercise of its rights and privileges under this consent, the
company shall have the authority to trim trees upon and overhanging
streets, alleys, sidewalks and public places of the Township so as to
prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the
wires, cables, conduits and fixtures of the company. Such trimming
shall be only to the extent necessary to maintain proper clearance for
the company's facilities.
§ A600-11 OLD BRIDGE CODE § A600-15
10:1204
occurrence stemming from or arising out of the company's exercise of its
rights hereunder.
§ A600-16. Performance bond.
Cablevision shall obtain and maintain, at its sole cost and expense, during
the entire term of this agreement, a bond to the municipality in the amount
of $25,000. Such bond shall be to insure the faithful performance of all
undertakings of the company as represented in its application and
incorporated herein.
§ A600-17. Rates.
A. The rates of the company for cable television service shall be subject to
regulation to the extent permitted by federal and state law.
B. Cablevision shall implement a senior citizen discount in the amount of
10% off the monthly broadcast basic level of cable television service
rate to any person 62 years of age or older, who subscribes to cable
television services provided by the company, subject to the following:
(1) Such discount shall only be available to eligible senior citizens who
do not share the subscription with more than one person in the
same household who is less than 62 years of age; and
(2) In accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-11.2, subscribers seeking
eligibility for the discount must meet the income and residence
requirements of the Pharmaceutical Assistance to the Aged and
Disabled program pursuant to N.J.S.A. 30:4D-21; and
(3) The senior discount herein relates only to the broadcast basic level
of cable television service and shall not apply to any additional
service, feature, or equipment offered by the company, including
any premium channel services and pay-per-view services; and
(4) Senior citizens who subscribe to a level of cable television service
beyond expanded basic service, including any premium or perchannel
a la carte service, shall not be eligible for the discount; and
C. The company shall have no further obligation to provide the senior
discount herein in the event that 1) the company converts the municipal
consent granted herein to a system-wide franchise in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 48:5A-25.1, or 2) upon Board approval of a certification that
another cable television service provider offering services to residents
of the Township files, in accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-30d, is capable
of serving 60% or more of the households within the Township. In the
event the company does cease providing a senior discount pursuant to
this provision, it shall comply with all notice requirements of applicable
law.
§ A600-15 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § A600-18
10:1205
§ A600-18. Emergency uses.
Cablevision shall be required to have the capability to override the audio
portion of the system in order to permit the broadcasting of emergency
messages by the Township pursuant to state and federal requirements.
The company shall in no way be held liable for any injury suffered by
the Township or any other person, during an emergency, if for any reason
the municipality is unable to make full use of the cable television system
as contemplated herein. The Township shall utilize the state-approved
procedures for such emergency uses.
§ A600-19. Equitable terms.
§ A600-20. Removal of facilities.
Upon expiration, termination or revocation of this chapter, Cablevision, at
its sole cost and expense and upon direction of the Board, shall remove the
cables and appurtenant devices constructed or maintained in connection
with the cable services authorized herein, unless Cablevision, its affiliated
entities or assignees should, within six months after such expiration,
A. In the event that the service of another multichannel video program
provider not subject to the Township's regulatory authority within the
Township creates a significant competitive disadvantage to Cablevision,
the company shall have the right to request from the Township lawful
amendments to its franchise that relieve it of burdens which create the
unfair competitive situation. Should the company seek such
amendments to its franchise, the parties agree to negotiate in good
faith appropriate changes to the franchise in order to relieve the
company of such competitive disadvantages. If the parties can reach an
agreement on such terms, the Township agrees to support the
company's petition to the Board for modification of the consent in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47 and N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7.
B. If the parties are unable to reach an agreement on appropriate
amendments to the franchise, the Township acknowledges that the
company shall have the right to petition the Board directly for such
amendments in accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47 and N.J.A.C.
14:17-6.7; provided, however, that the Township shall be under no
obligation to support Cablevision's request for such relief from the
Board.
C. In any subsequent municipal consent, the Township shall require, at a
minimum, the same terms and conditions of any other provider of
multichannel video programming subject to the Township's regulatory
authority as those contained in the instant consent. In the event such
subsequent consent does not contain the same terms and conditions as
the instant consent, Township agrees to support the company's petition
to the Board for modification of the consent in accordance with N.J.S.A.
48:5A-47 and N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7 to relieve the company of competitive
disadvantages identified in the company's petition.
§ A600-18 OLD BRIDGE CODE § A600-20
10:1206
termination or revocation, obtain certification from the FCC to operate an
open video system or any other federal or state certification to provide
telecommunications.
§ A600-21. Public, educational, and governmental access.
A. Cablevision shall continue to make available noncommercial public,
educational and governmental (PEG) access services available to the
residents of the Township as described in the application for municipal
consent. All Cablevision support for PEG access shall be for the
exclusive benefit of Cablevision's subscribers.
B. The Township agrees that Cablevision shall retain the right to use the
PEG access channel, or portion thereof, for non-PEG access
programming, during times when the Township is not utilizing the
channel for purposes of providing PEG access programming. In the
event that the company uses said PEG access channel for the
presentation of such other programming, the PEG programming shall
remain the priority use, and the company's rights with respect to using
the channel for non-PEG programming shall be subordinate to the
Township's provision of PEG access programming on such channel.
C. Cablevision shall have discretion to determine the format and method
of transmission of the PEG access programming provided for in this
§ A600-21.
D. Cablevision shall construct and maintain a fiber access return lines at
One Old Bridge Plaza, for use by the Township in the production of
noncommercial educational and governmental access programming on
the cable system.
E. In consideration for the rights granted in this chapter, Cablevision shall
provide the Township with 1) an initial grant payment of $10,800
payable within 90 days of the issuance of the certificate of approval by
the Board of Public Utilities (the "initial grant"), and 2) a grant up to
$79,200 provided in annual installments of $8,800 each, upon written
request by the Township (the "annual grant"). Each installment of the
annual grant shall be payable to the Township annually during the term
of this franchise, within 90 days from receipt of the Township's written
request. Cablevision shall not be obligated to make any additional
payments beyond year 10 of this franchise term.
F. The Township agrees that the initial grant and the annual grant
provided pursuant to Subsection E shall be used by the Township for
any cable and/or other telecommunications-related purpose and/or for
the exclusive support of PEG access programming, such as the
purchase and/or rental of PEG access equipment and facilities. On
request, the Township shall provide Cablevision with a certification of
compliance with this § A600-21F.
§ A600-20 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § A600-21
10:1207
§ A600-22. Incorporation of application.
All of the commitments contained in the application and any amendment
thereto submitted in writing to the Township by the company, except as
modified herein, are binding upon Cablevision as terms and conditions of
this consent. The application and any other written amendments thereto
submitted by Cablevision in connection with this consent are incorporated
in this chapter by reference and made a part hereof, except as specifically
modified, changed, limited, or altered by this chapter, or to the extent that
they conflict with state or federal law.
§ A600-23. Consistency with applicable laws.
This consent shall be construed in a manner consistent with all applicable
federal, state and local laws, as such laws, rules and regulations may be
amended from time to time.
§ A600-24. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this
chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct
and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portion thereof.
§ A600-25. Notice.
Notices required under this chapter shall be in writing and shall be mailed,
first class, postage prepaid, to the addresses below. Either party may
change the place where notice is to be given by providing such change in
writing at least 30 days prior to the time such change becomes effective.
The time to respond to notices under this chapter shall run from receipt of
such written notice.
Notices to the company shall be mailed to:
Altice USA, Inc.
1 Court Square West
Long Island City, NY 11101
Attention: Vice President for Government/Public Affairs, New Jersey
With a copy to:
G. The company shall have no further obligation to provide any PEG grant
payments due and payable after the date upon which the company
converts the municipal consent granted herein to a system-wide
franchise in accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-25.1.
§ A600-21 OLD BRIDGE CODE § A600-25
10:1208
CSC TKR, LLC, d/b/a Cablevision of Raritan Valley
c/o Altice USA, Inc.
1 Court Square West
Long Island City, NY 11101
Attention: Legal Department
Notices to the Township shall be mailed to:
Township of Old Bridge
One Old Bridge Plaza
Old Bridge, New Jersey 08857
Attention: Township Administrator
§ A600-26. When effective; Board of Public Utilities approval.
This chapter shall take effect upon issuance of a certificate of approval
as issued by the Board of Public Utilities that incorporates the material
terms of this chapter. Nothing herein shall alter the right of the company
to seek modification of this chapter in accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47
and N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-25.1, the terms
of this chapter will no longer be in effect upon Cablevision converting
the municipal consent (and any certificate of approval) into a system-wide
franchise.
Derivation Table
Chapter DT
DERIVATION TABLE
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
17-2005 Redevelopment plan NCM
18-2005 Dangerous dogs Not adopted
§ A600-25 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1209
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
19-2005 Compensation:
department heads
NCM
20-2005 7-11-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 10
21-2005 8-01-2005 Land development
amendment
Ch. 250
22-2005 8-22-2005 Dangerous dogs Ch. 39, Art. III
23-2005 8-22-2005 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
24-2005 8-22-2005 Recreation fees
amendment
Ch. 160, Art. I
25-2005 8-22-2005 Uniform construction
codes amendment
Ch. 108
26-2005 8-22-2005 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
27-2005 9-12-2005 Commercial property
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2009-03
28-2005 9-12-2005 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 235, Art. I
29-2005 9-12-2005 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
30-2005 10-17-2005 Flood Control Commission Ch. 196
31-2005 10-17-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 10
32-2005 Bond NCM
33-2005 Bond NCM
34-2005 Bond NCM
35-2005 Bond NCM
36-2005 Bond NCM
37-2005 12-05-2005 Land development
amendment
Ch. 250
38-2005 1-9-2006 General provisions:
adoption of Code
Ch. 1, Art. III
39-2005 Possession or consumption
on private property by
underage persons
amendment
Tabled
40-2005 12-12-2005 Recreation fees
amendment
Ch. 160, Art. I
§ DL-1 OLD BRIDGE CODE § DL-1
DT:1210
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
41-2005 12-12-2005 Personnel policies
amendment
Ch. 351
1-2006 Vacation of land NCM
2-2006 1-23-2006 Public contracts:
prohibition on awarding to
certain contributors
Ch. 110, Art. I
3-2006 Maintenance of retention,
detention and recharge
basins
Tabled
4-2006 Reintroduced as
Ord. No. 9-2006
5-2006 3-13-2006 Solid waste amendment Ch. 429
6-2006 3-13-2006 Traffic amendment Ch. 10
7-2006 Traffic signal installation NCM
8-2006 Traffic signal installation NCM
9-2006 4-10-2006 Personnel policies
amendment
Ch. 351
10-2006 4-10-2006 Traffic amendment Ch. 10
11-2006 Land development
amendment
Tabled
12-2006 4-24-2006 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
13-2006 4-24-2006 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
14-2006 4-24-2006 Redevelopment plan NCM
15-2006 5-8-2006 Brush, grass and weeds:
maintenance of retention,
detention and recharge
basins
Ch. 72, Art. I
16-2006 Police amendment Tabled
17-2006 Lease of property NCM
18-2006 Sale of land NCM
19-2006 5-8-2006 Rental property
amendment
Ch. 388
20-2006 Sale of land NCM
21-2006 5-8-2006 Streets and sidewalks:
excavations amendment
Ch. 435, Art. IV
22-2006 Sale of property (auction) NCM
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1211
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
23-2006 5-22-2006 Traffic amendment Ch. 10
24-2006 Street vacation NCM
25-2006 5-22-2006 Rental property
amendment
Ch. 388
26-2006 Conservation easement NCM
27-2006 6-12-2006 Fees amendment Chs. 5; 160; 273;
347; 446; 510
28-2006 6-27-2006 Land development
amendment
Ch. 250
29-2006 6-27-2006 Land development
amendment
Ch. 250
30-2006 6-27-2006 Trees amendment Ch. 457
31-2006 6-27-2006 Lease NCM
32-2006 6-27-2006 Compensation:
department heads
NCM
33-2006 7-17-2006 Conveyance of vacated
street
NCM
34-2006 7-17-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 10
35-2006 7-17-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 10
36-2006 7-17-2006 Acquisition of property NCM
37-2006 7-17-2006 Bond NCM
38-2006 8-14-2006 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
39-2006 8-14-2006 Land development
amendment
Ch. 250
40-2006 8-14-2006 Sale of property NCM
41-2006 8-14-2006 Acquisition of property NCM
42-2006 9-18-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 10
43-2006 9-18-2006 Acceptance of property NCM
44-2006 9-18-2006 Acceptance of property NCM
45-2006 9-18-2006 Acquisition of property NCM
46-2006 10-23-2006 Land development
amendment (stormwater
management)
Ch. 250
§ DL-1 OLD BRIDGE CODE § DL-1
DT:1212
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
47-2006 10-23-2006 Acceptance of deed of
sidewalk and grading
easement
NCM
48-2006 10-23-2006 Redevelopment plan NCM
49-2006 11-20-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 10
50-2006 11-20-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 10
51-2006 11-20-2006 Games of chance
amendment
Ch. 210
52-2006 11-20-2006 Conveyance of easement NCM
53-2006 11-20-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 10
54-2006 11-20-2006 Land development
amendment
Ch. 250
55-2006 12-11-2006 Personnel policies
amendment
Ch. 351
56-2006 12-11-2006 Bond NCM
57-2006 12-11-2006 Bond NCM
58-2006 12-11-2006 Bond NCM
59-2006 12-11-2006 Bond NCM
60-2006 12-11-2006 Bond NCM
61-2006 12-11-2006 Bond NCM
2007-01 1-8-2007 Acceptance of property NCM
2007-02 1-8-2007 Interlocal services
agreement renewal
NCM
2007-03 1-22-2007 Volunteer fire companies,
first aid squads and
auxiliary police
amendment
Ch. 510, Art. I
2007-04 2-5-2007 Compensation:
department heads
NCM
2007-05 3-12-2007 Alcoholic beverages:
licensing, sale and
transportation amendment
Ch. 30, Art. II
2007-06 3-26-2007 Licensing and regulation
of dogs and cats
amendment
Ch. 39, Art. II
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1213
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2007-07 3-26-2007 Recreation fees
amendment
Ch. 160, Art. I
2007-08 4-23-2007 Street naming NCM
2007-09 5-14-2007 Fees: vital statistics
amendment; retail food
establishments
amendment
Chs. 160, Art. V;
203, Art. II
2007-10 6-25-2007 General provisions:
adoption of land
development legislation
Ch. 1, Art. IV
2007-11 5-14-2007 Conveyance of property NCM
2007-12 6-25-2007 Acceptance of deed of
conservation, access and
maintenance easement
NCM
2007-13 6-25-2007 Vacation of drainage
easement
NCM
2007-14 6-25-2007 Uniform construction
codes amendment
Ch. 108
2007-15 7-16-2007 Land development
amendment
Ch. 250
2007-16 6-25-2007 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 235, Art. I
2007-17 6-25-2007 Lease NCM
2007-18 7-16-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 10
2007-19 9-10-2007 Parking permits
amendment
Ch. 331
2007-20 9-24-2007 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
2007-21 9-24-2007 Fees: various goods and
services amendment
Ch. 160, Art. III
2007-22 10-1-2007 Bond NCM
2007-23 9-24-2007 Parking permits
amendment
Ch. 331
2007-24 10-22-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 10
2007-25 10-22-2007 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 185
§ DL-1 OLD BRIDGE CODE § DL-1
DT:1214
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2007-26 10-22-2007 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 185
2007-27 12-10-2007 Acceptance of property NCM
2007-28 11-19-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 10
2007-29 11-19-2007 Abandoned property Ch. 363
2007-30 12-10-2007 Redevelopment plan NCM
2007-31 12-10-2007 Conveyance of property NCM
2008-01 1-14-2008 Solid waste: garbage
collection; recycling
amendment
Ch. 429, Art. I
2008-02 1-28-2008 Compensation:
department heads
NCM
2008-03 2-25-2008 Purchase of property NCM
2008-04 3-10-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 10
2008-05 3-10-2008 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 185
2008-06 3-24-2008 Sale of property NCM
2008-07 4-7-2008 Conveyance of easement NCM
2008-08 4-28-2008 Fees: day-care program
amendment
Ch. 160, Art. VIII
2008-09 4-28-2008 Bond NCM
2008-10 5-19-2008 Deed of easement NCM
2008-11 6-9-2008 Deed of dedication NCM
2008-12 5-19-2008 Conveyance of easements NCM
2008-13 5-19-2008 Sale of property NCM
2008-14 5-19-2008 Graffiti amendment Ch. 215
2008-15 6-9-2008 Fees: vital statistics
amendment; individual
subsurface sewage
disposal systems
Ch. 160, Arts. V
and X
2008-16 6-9-2008 Recreation fees
amendment
Ch. 160, Art. I
2008-17 6-9-2008 Lease NCM
2008-18 7-14-2008 Land development
amendment
Ch. 250
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1215
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2008-19 6-30-2008 Uniform construction
codes amendment
Ch. 108
2008-20 6-30-2008 Bond NCM
2008-21 6-30-2008 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 185
2008-22 6-30-2008 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 235, Art. I
2008-23 8-11-2008 Redevelopment plan for
Old Bridge Crossroads
NCM
2008-24 10-6-2008 Land development
amendment
Ch. 250
2008-25 9-22-2008 Defined Contribution
Retirement Program
NCM
2008-26 9-8-2008 Loan NCM
2008-27 9-8-2008 Sale of property NCM
2008-28 9-8-2008 Lease NCM
2008-29 9-22-2008 Amusement devices and
vending machines
amendment
Ch. 35, Art. I
2008-30 9-22-2008 Conveyance of easement NCM
2008-31 9-22-2008 Traffic signal installation NCM
2008-32 10-6-2008 Land development
amendment
Ch. 250
2008-33 Personnel policies
amendment
Not adopted
2008-34 11-17-2008 Conveyance of property NCM
2008-35 12-15-2008 Uniform construction
codes amendment
Ch. 108
2008-36 Tabled
2008-37 12-15-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 10
2008-38 12-15-2009 Bond NCM
2008-39 12-15-2008 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
2009-01 1-5-2009 Land development
amendment
Ch. 250
2009-02 1-5-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 10
§ DL-1 OLD BRIDGE CODE § DL-1
DT:1216
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2009-03 2-9-2009 Property maintenance Ch. 366
2009-04 3-9-2009 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 185
2009-05 3-9-2009 Lease NCM
2009-06 4-6-2009 Land development
amendment
Ch. 250
2009-07 4-6-2009 Bond NCM
2009-08 4-6-2009 Personnel policies
amendment
Ch. 351
2009-09 4-6-2009 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
2009-10 5-11-2009 Fees: day-care program
amendment
Ch. 160, Art. VIII
2009-11 5-11-2009 Calendar fiscal year
reversion viability
determination
NCM
2009-12 5-11-2009 Wreckers and towing
amendment
Ch. 527
2009-13 5-26-2009 Bond NCM
2009-14 Land development
amendment
Tabled
2009-15 Land development
amendment
Withdrawn
2009-16 9-14-2009 Sale of property NCM
2009-17 9-14-2009 Stormwater quality:
private storm drain inlet
retrofitting
Ch. 432, Art. VIII
2009-18 9-14-2009 Stormwater quality:
containment of leakage
from outdoor refuse
containers
Ch. 432, Art. IX
2009-19 10-5-2009 Bond NCM
2009-20 10-5-2009 Bond NCM
2009-21 12-14-2009 Land development
amendment
Ch. 250
2009-22 12-14-2009 Fees: day-care program
amendment
Ch. 160, Art. VIII
2010-01 1-1-2010 Acceptance of deed of
easement
NCM
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1217
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2010-02 1-1-2010 Vacation of deed of
drainage easement
NCM
2010-03 3-15-2010 Land development
amendment
Ch. 250
2010-04 3-1-2010 Individual and semipublic
water supply amendment
Ch. 515, Art. II
2010-05 3-1-2010 Noise Ch. 300
2010-06 3-1-2010 Land development
amendment
Ch. 250
2010-07 3-1-2010 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 250
2010-08 3-15-2010 Increase cap index;
establish cap bank
NCM
2010-09 3-1-2010 Open space preservation
amendment
Ch. 442, Art. III
2010-10 3-15-2010 Intersection improvements NCM
2010-11 3-15-2010 Charitable clothing bins Ch. 99
2010-12 4-12-2010 Flood damage prevention Ch. 198
2010-13 4-12-2010 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 250
2010-14 5-10-2010 Acceptance of deed of
easement
NCM
2010-15 5-10-2010 Fees: recreation fees
amendment; various goods
and services amendment;
vital statistics amendment;
miscellaneous fees
amendment
Ch. 160, Arts. I,
III, V and IX
2010-16 5-10-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 10
2010-17 6-14-2010 Compensation for
department heads, Tax
Assessor, and Township
Clerk
NCM
2010-18 6-28-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 10
2010-19 Wreckers and towing
amendment
Denied
§ DL-1 OLD BRIDGE CODE § DL-1
DT:1218
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2010-20 6-28-2010 Drunk-driving-free school
zones amendment; drugfree
public areas
amendment; drug-free
school zones
Ch. 124, Arts. I, II
and III
2010-21 8-16-2010 Bond NCM
2010-22 8-16-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 10
2010-23 8-16-2010 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
2010-24 Tabled
2010-25 9-13-2010 Bond NCM
2010-26 10-4-2010 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
2010-27 9-13-2010 Bond NCM
2010-28 10-25-2010 Land development
amendment
Ch. 250
2010-29 Land development
amendment
Adopted as Ord.
No. 2010-32
2010-30 10-25-2010 Fees amendment Chs. 35; 39; 160;
210; 242; 347;
380; 446
2010-31 10-25-2010 Land development
amendment
Ch. 250
2010-32 11-22-2010 Land development
amendment
Ch. 250
2010-33 12-13-2010 Acceptance of deed of
conveyance
NCM
2010-34 12-13-2010 Conveyance of property NCM
2010-35 12-13-2010 Licensing and regulation
of dogs and cats
amendment
Ch. 39, Art. II
2011-01 2-7-2011 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 185
2011-02 2-7-2011 Sale of property NCM
2011-03 2-28-2011 Tax Collector fees
amendment
Ch. 160, Art. II
2011-04 3-14-2011 Fees: various goods and
services amendment
Ch. 160, Art. III
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1219
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2011-05 Streets and sidewalks:
snow and ice removal
amendment
Not adopted
2011-06 3-14-2011 Streets and sidewalks:
snow and ice removal
amendment
Ch. 435, Art. III
2011-07 4-11-2011 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
2011-08 5-16-2011 Recreation fees
amendment
Ch. 160, Art. I
2011-09 5-16-2011 Personnel policies
amendment
Ch. 351
2011-10 9-12-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 10
2011-11 9-12-2011 Fees: day-care program
amendment
Ch. 160, Art. VIII
2011-12 10-3-2011 Acceptance of deed of
dedication
NCM
2011-13 10-3-2011 Establishment of traffic
control signal
NCM
2011-14 Cable television franchise
renewal
Not adopted
2011-15 10-3-2011 Acceptance of deed of
conservation restriction
easement
NCM
2011-16 11-14-2011 Alcoholic beverages:
licensing, sale and
transportation amendment
Ch. 30, Art. II
2011-17 12-12-2011 Taxicabs; limousines
amendment
Ch. 446
2011-18 12-12-2011 Conveyance of easements Rescinded by
Ord. No. 2013-04
2012-01 1-23-2012 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
2012-02 1-23-2012 Conveyance of deed of
dedication
NCM
2012-03 2-6-2012 Personnel policies
amendment
Ch. 351
2012-04 2-6-2012 Cable television franchise Superseded by
Ord. No. 2018-13
§ DL-1 OLD BRIDGE CODE § DL-1
DT:1220
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2012-05 3-12-2012 Land development
amendment
Ch. 250
2012-06 2-27-2012 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
2012-07 2-27-2012 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
2012-08 3-12-2012 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
2012-09 3-12-2012 Recreation fees
amendment
Ch. 160, Art. I
2012-10 Personnel policies
amendment
Denied
2012-11 4-23-2012 Salaries NCM
2012-12 4-23-2012 Refunding bond NCM
2012-13 4-23-2012 Conveyance of
construction easements
NCM
2012-14 6-11-2012 Salaries amendment NCM
2012-15 6-25-2012 Personnel policies
amendment
Ch. 351
2012-16 7-9-2012 Bond NCM
2012-17 Administration of
government amendment
Denied
2012-18 9-24-2012 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
2012-19 11-19-2012 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
2013-01 2-11-2013 Construction easements NCM
2013-02 Refunding bond Not adopted
2013-03 2-11-2013 Exemption or abatement
for construction of
commercial structures
Ch. 442, Art. II,
footnote only
2013-04 2-11-2013 Rescission of easements NCM
2013-05 3-11-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 10
2013-06 Flood damage prevention Not adopted
2013-07 4-8-2013 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
2013-08 4-22-2013 Sale of real property NCM
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1221
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2013-09 5-6-2013 Fees: various goods and
services amendment
Ch. 160, Art. III
2013-10 5-20-2013 Bond NCM
2013-11 6-24-2013 Deeds of easement NCM
2013-12 7-22-2013 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
2013-13 Administration of
government amendment
Not adopted
2013-14 8-19-2013 Land development
amendment
Ch. 250
2013-15 8-19-2013 Leasing of real property NCM
2013-16 Salaries amendment Not adopted
2013-17 9-9-2013 Ethics amendment Ch. 145
2013-18 9-9-2013 Deed of dedication NCM
2013-19 9-9-2013 Deed of dedication NCM
2013-20 9-23-2013 Tax abatement and
exemption
NCM
2013-21 Salaries amendment Not adopted
2013-22 10-7-2013 Salaries NCM
2013-23 10-21-2013 Deed of dedication NCM
2013-24 Municipal Alliance
Committee
Not adopted
2014-01 2-24-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 10
2014-02 3-10-2014 Flood damage prevention Ch. 198
2014-03 3-24-2014 Salaries NCM
2014-04 4-21-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 10
2014-05 4-21-2014 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
2014-06 5-19-2014 Street name change NCM
2014-07 6-16-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 10
2014-08 6-16-2014 Bond NCM
2014-09 6-16-2014 Bond NCM
2014-10 6-30-2014 Establishment of traffic
control devices
NCM
§ DL-1 OLD BRIDGE CODE § DL-1
DT:1222
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2014-11 7-14-2014 Conveyance of temporary
easement
NCM
2014-12 7-28-2014 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
2014-13 7-28-2014 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
2014-14 8-11-2014 Lease agreement NCM
2014-15 8-11-2014 Fees: day-care program
amendment
Ch. 160, Art. VIII
2014-16 9-29-2014 Trees amendment Ch. 457
2014-17 10-20-2014 Bond NCM
2014-18 10-20-2014 Anti-nepotism Ch. 42
2014-19 12-8-2014 Salaries NCM
2014-20 12-8-2014 Boards, commissions and
committees: Municipal
Alliance Committee
Ch. 32
2014-21 12-8-2014 Bond NCM
2014-22 12-8-2014 Fences amendment Ch. 164
2014-23 12-8-2014 Government energy
aggregation program
NCM
2014-24 12-8-2014 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
2015-01 3-9-2015 Land development
amendment
Ch. 250
2015-02 3-9-2015 Solid waste: garbage
collection; recycling
amendment
Ch. 429, Art. I
2015-03 3-9-2015 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
2015-04 3-23-2015 Bond NCM
2015-05 3-23-2015 Bond NCM
2015-06 3-23-2015 Junkyards amendment Ch. 247
2015-07 3-23-2015 Secondhand jewelry Ch. 242
2015-08 5-4-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 10
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1223
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2015-09 6-29-2015 Authorization to waive
certain permit fees for
participants in Superstorm
Sandy Blue Acres Buyout
Program
NCM
2015-10 7-13-2015 Bond NCM
2015-11 7-13-2015 Salaries NCM
2015-12 8-10-2015 Establishment of traffic
control device
NCM
2015-13 8-10-2015 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 185
2015-14 8-21-2015 Fees: day-care program
amendment
Ch. 160, Art. VIII
2015-15 10-5-2015 Sale of property NCM
2015-16 12-14-2015 Bond NCM
2016-01 2-8-2016 Redevelopment plan NCM
2016-02 2-8-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 10
2016-03 3-21-2016 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
2016-04 3-21-2016 Bond NCM
2016-05 3-7-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 10
2016-06 3-7-2016 Fees: various good and
services amendment
Ch. 160, Art. III
2016-07 4-11-2016 Conveyance of real
property to county
NCM
2016-08 4-11-2016 Recreation fees
amendment
Ch. 160, Art. I
2016-09 4-25-2016 Salaries NCM
2016-10 5-23-2016 Deed of dedication NCM
2016-11 5-23-2016 Deed of dedication NCM
2016-12 7-11-2016 Abandoned and vacant
property amendment
Ch. 363
2016-13 7-11-2016 Third-party payroll
disbursement
Ch. 334, Art. I
2016-14 Denied
2016-15 Denied
2016-16 Denied
§ DL-1 OLD BRIDGE CODE § DL-1
DT:1224
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2016-17 Denied
2016-18 Denied
2016-19 Denied
2016-20 10-14-2016 Land development
amendment
Ch. 250
2016-21 10-14-2016 Land development
amendment
Ch. 250
2016-22 10-14-2016 Land development
amendment
Ch. 250
2016-23 10-14-2016 Land development
amendment
Ch. 250
2016-24 10-14-2016 Land development
amendment
Ch. 250
2016-25 11-21-2016 Land development
amendment
Ch. 250
2016-26 12-5-2016 Appropriation NCM
2016-27 12-5-2016 Uniform construction
codes amendment
Ch. 108
2016-28 12-5-2016 Uniform construction
codes amendment
Ch. 108
2017-01 3-27-2017 Bond NCM
2017-02 3-27-2017 Bond NCM
2017-03 2-27-2017 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
2017-04 2-27-2017 Redevelopment plan NCM
2017-05 2-27-2017 Uniform construction
codes amendment
Ch. 108
2017-06 2-27-2017 Uniform construction
codes amendment
Ch. 108
2017-07 3-13-2017 Acceptance of easement NCM
2017-08 3-27-2017 Acceptance of deed of
dedication
NCM
2017-09 3-27-2017 Licensing and regulation
of dogs and cats
amendment
Ch. 39, Art. II
2017-10 Not adopted
2017-11 5-8-2017 Salaries NCM
2017-12 5-22-2017 Financial agreement NCM
2017-13 6-12-2017 Acceptance of right-of-way NCM
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1225
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2017-14 Failed
2017-15 Failed
2017-16 7-20-2017 Land development
amendment
Ch. 250
2017-17 8-7-2017 Acceptance of roadways NCM
2017-18 8-7-2017 Continuation of
government energy
aggregation program
NCM
2017-19 8-7-2017 Land development
amendment
Ch. 250
2017-20 Animals Amendment Tabled
2017-21 9-18-2017 Acceptance of Right-of-
Way
NCM
2017-22 10-9-2017 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 10
2017-23 10-23-2017 Animals: Dangerous Dogs
Amendment
Ch. 39, Art. III
2017-24 10-23-2017 Personnel Policies
Amendment
Ch. 351
2017-25 No title found for
reference Number not
used
Ch. Number not
used
2017-26 12-11-2017 Trees Amendment Ch. 457
2018-01 2-5-2018 Acceptance of Right-of-
Way
NCM
2018-02 2-5-2018 Acceptance of Deed of
Dedication
NCM
2018-03 2-26-2018 Administration of
Government Amendment
Ch. 5
2018-04 4-9-2018 Bond NCM
2018-05 3-19-2018 Exceed Budget; Cap Bank NCM
2018-06 4-23-2018 Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 250
2018-07 3-19-2018 Acceptance of Right-of-
Way
NCM
2018-08 3-19-2018 Administration of
Government Amendment
Ch. 5
2018-09 4-23-2018 Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 250
§ DL-1 OLD BRIDGE CODE § DL-1
DT:1226
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2018-10 4-9-2018 Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 250
2018-11 4-9-2018 Acceptance of Right-of-
Way
NCM
2018-12 5-7-2018 Salaries NCM
2018-13 5-21-2018 Cable Television Franchise Ch. A600
2018-14 5-21-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 10
2018-15 6-21-2018 Outdoor Dining Ch. 320
2018-16 7-9-2018 Administration of
Government Amendment
Ch. 5
2018-17 7-9-2018 Drug and Drunk-Driving-
Free Zones: Drunk-
Driving-Free School Zones
Amendment; Drug-Free
Public Areas Amendment;
Drug-Free School Zones
Amendment
Ch. 124, Art. I;
Ch. 124, Art. II;
Ch. 124, Art. III
2018-18 7-9-2018 Fire Prevention
Amendment
Ch. 185
2018-19 7-9-2018 Administration of
Government Amendment
Ch. 5
2018-20 7-9-2018 Fees: Day-Care Program
Amendment
Ch. 160, Art. VIII
2018-21 Not adopted
2018-22 9-24-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 10
2018-23 9-24-2018 Easement NCM
2018-24 9-24-2018 Appropriation NCM
2018-25 9-24-2018 Fees: Tax Collector Fees
Amendment
Ch. 160, Art. II
2018-26 9-24-2018 Fees: Various Goods and
Services Amendment
Ch. 160, Art. III
2018-27 9-24-2018 Animals: Licensing and
Regulation of Dogs and
Cats Amendment
Ch. 39, Art. II
2018-28 11-19-2018 Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 250
2018-29 Not adopted
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1227
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2019-01 2-11-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 10
2019-02 2-11-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 10
2019-03 2-25-2019 Exceed Budget; Cap Bank NCM
2019-04 3-25-2019 Bond NCM
2019-05 3-11-2019 Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 250
2019-06 4-8-2019 Target Enforcement Zones NCM
2019-07 4-29-2019 Mandatory Direct Deposit Ch. 334, Art. II
2019-08 5-13-2019 Authorization of Traffic
Signal
NCM
§ DL-1 OLD BRIDGE CODE § DL-1
DT:1228

ORDINANCE NO 2019-14
AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF OLD BRIDGE AMENDING CHAPTER 250
OF THE CODE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF OLD BRIDGE, ENTITLED “OLD BRIDGE
TOWNSHIP LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE” BY AMENDING §250-66 D
BE IT ORDAINED by the Township Council of the Township of Old Bridge, County of
Middlesex and State of New Jersey as follows:
SECTION 1: PURPOSE
The purpose of this Ordinance is to amend §250-66 (D) of Township Land Development
Ordinance that permits the imposition of development fees pursuant to the Fair Housing Act of
1985 (the Act), N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq., and the State Constitution to include a provision
that would exempt the imposition of residential development fees in certain instances when the
development is for an owner/occupied residential structure.
SECTION 2: AMENDMENT TO SECTION 250-66 (D). §Section 250-66 “Development
fees”, paragraph (D) of the Code of the Township of Old Bridge is hereby amended as follows
(additions are bolded and underlined; deletions have strikethrough):
D. Residential development fees.
(1) Imposed fees.
(a) Within the Township of Old Bridge district(s), residential developers, except for
developers of the types of development specifically exempted below, shall pay a
fee of 1.5% of the equalized assessed value for residential development, provided
that no increased density is permitted.
(b) When an increase in residential density pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d (5)
(known as a "d" variance) has been permitted, developers may be required to pay
a development fee of 6% of the equalized assessed value for each additional unit
that may be realized. However, if the zoning on a site has changed during the twoyear period preceding the filing of such a variance application, the base density
for the purposes of calculating the bonus development fee shall be the highest
density permitted by right during the two-year period preceding the filing of the
variance application. Example: If an approval allows four units to be constructed
on a site that was zoned for two units, the fees could equal 1.5% of the equalized
assessed value on the first two units; and the specified higher percentage up to 6%
of the equalized assessed value for the two additional units, provided that zoning
on the site has not changed during the two-year period preceding the filing of such
a variance application.
(2) Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for residential development.
(a) Affordable housing developments and developments where the developer has
made a payment in lieu of on-site construction of affordable units shall be exempt
from development fees.
(b) Developments that have received preliminary or final site plan approval prior to
the adoption of a municipal development fee ordinance shall be exempt from
development fees, unless the developer seeks a substantial change in the
approval. Where a site plan approval does not apply, a zoning and/or building
permit shall be synonymous with preliminary or final site plan approval for this
purpose. The fee percentage shall be vested on the date that the building permit is
issued.
(c) Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an existing structure
undergoes a change to a more intense use, is demolished and replaced, or is
expanded, if the expansion is not otherwise exempt from the development fee
requirement, the development fee shall be calculated on the increase in the 
equalized assessed value of the improved structure. In instances where the
existing structure is an owner-occupied residential structure prior and
subsequent to a change to a more intense use, demolition and replacement or
expansion, the developer shall be exempt from paying any development fee.
(d) Developers of residential structures demolished and replaced as a result of a
natural disaster shall be exempt from paying a development fee and developers
of a single, owner-occupied residential structure where the owner will
continue to own and occupy the residential structure for a minimum of one
year from the date of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for said
residential structure, shall also be exempt from paying a development fee. In
the event that the developer fails to own and occupy the residential structure
for the one year period stated herein, then the developer shall be assessed a
development fee at the time of transfer of the residential structure. The
payment of the development fee shall be also be a prerequisite to the issuance
of a Certificate of Approval required under §235-16 of the Township Code.
SECTION 3: INCONSISTENT ORDINANCES
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with or in conflict with this ordinance are
hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
SECTION 4: PARTIAL INVALIDITY
If any section, paragraph, clause or provision of this ordinance shall be adjudged invalid, such
adjudication shall apply only to the section, paragraph, clause or provision so adjudged and the
remainder shall be deemed valid and effective.
SECTION 5: COPIES OF ORDINANCE
At least three copies of said full Ordinance are on file in the Office of the Municipal Clerk for
public examination and acquisition. Copies are available for inspection or acquisition during
regular weekday working hours and arrangements have been made for the publication of said
proposed Ordinance in pamphlet or other similar form which will be available for purchase from
the Township Clerk.
SECTION 6: NOTICE
The Township Clerk is hereby directed to give notice at least ten days prior to the hearing on the
adoption of this Ordinance to the County Planning Board, and to all others entitled thereto
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S. 40:55D-15. Upon adoption of this Ordinance, after public
hearing thereon, the Township Clerk is further directed to publish notice of passage thereof and
file a copy of this Ordinance as finally adopted with the County Planning Board as required by
N.J.S. 40:55D-16 and with the Township Tax Assessor.
SECTION 7: EFFECTIVE DATE
A. Except as set forth at subparagraphs B and C hereof, this Ordinance shall take effect
on the earlier of the following dates: (1) on the date the Mayor affixes his/her signature thereto
and returns same to the Municipal Council by delivering it to the Municipal Clerk pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40A:69A-41 or (2) on the tenth day following presentment to the Mayor of the
Ordinance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:69A-41 applicable when the Mayor has failed to return the
Ordinance; whichever occurs first.
B. If the Mayor vetoes the Ordinance (in the manner set forth at N.J.S.A. 40:69A-41),
this Ordinance shall become effective upon the Township Council’s vote to override the Mayor’s
veto.
C. Notwithstanding any other provision hereof, this Ordinance shall not take effect less
than twenty (20) days after its final passage by the Council and approval by the Mayor, where
such approval is required, unless the Council shall have also adopted a resolution declaring an
emergency and at least two thirds (2/3) of all the members of the council vote in favor of such
resolution.
FIRST READING: August 5, 2019
Moved by Councilwoman Greenberg-Belli, seconded by Councilman Paskitti and so ordered
on the following roll call vote:
AYES: Councilmembers Brown, Cahill, Greenberg-Belli, Merwin, Murphy, Paskitti
Razzoli, Walker, President Sohor
NAY: None
SECOND READING: September 9, 2019
Moved by Councilwoman Greenberg-Belli, seconded by Councilman Paskitti and so ordered
on the following roll call vote:
AYES: Councilmembers Brown, Cahill, Greenberg-Belli, Merwin, Murphy, Paskitti
Razzoli, Walker, President Sohor
NAY: None
ATTEST:
_____________________________ ______________________________
Stella Ward, Township Clerk Mary R. Sohor, Council President
_____________________________ ______________________________
DEPARTMENT OF LAW Owen Henry, Mayor
Mark Roselli, Esq.

ORDINANCE NO 2019-15
AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF OLD BRIDGE AMENDING CHAPTER 250
OF THE CODE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF OLD BRIDGE, ENTITLED “OLD BRIDGE
TOWNSHIP LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE” BY AMENDING §250-38.1,
“ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT OPPORTUNITY DISTRICT ZONING AND DESIGN
STANDARDS”; AMENDING §250-34 AND §250-35 TO CHANGE THE ZONING
CLASSIFICATION OF CERTAIN PROPERTIES FROM THE C-N ZONING DISTRIT
TO THE EDO-1 ZONING DISTRICT AND TO AMEND THE TOWNSHIP ZONING
MAP
BE IT ORDAINED by the Township Council of the Township of Old Bridge, County of
Middlesex and State of New Jersey as follows:
SECTION 1: PURPOSE
The purpose of this Ordinance is to amend certain provisions of §250-38.1 of the Old Bridge
Township Land Development Ordinance, to change the classification of certain properties that
are currently included in the Township’s C-N Zoning District to the EDO-1 Zoning District
pursuant to the recommendation of the Township Planner and as recommended in the Master
Plan Reexamination Report for the Township of Old Bridge (Dated September 22, 2017 and Last
Revised June 11, 2019) and to amend the Township’s Zoning Map accordingly.
SECTION 2: AMENDMENTS TO §250-38.1 “Economic Development Opportunity
District Zoning and Design Standards.” §250-38.1, “Economic Development Opportunity
District Zoning and Design Standards” of the Code of the Township of Old Bridge is hereby
amended as follows (Additions are bolded and underlined; deletions have strikethrough):
§250-38.1. Economic Development Opportunity District Zoning and Design Standards.
A. EDO-1 Zoning District.
***
(4) Permitted uses. The land uses permitted in the EDO-1 District are set forth
herein below, except as otherwise indicated:
(a) Retail sales and services
(b) Retail food establishment
(c) Bank and Financial Institutions
(d) Studio of a teacher of art, music and dance
(e) Art galleries
(f) Professional photography studio
(g) Health and fitness center under 10,000 square feet
(h) Business offices
(i) Medical offices
(j) Professional offices
(k) Personal Services
(l) Public and private parking areas
(m) Restaurants: full-service restaurants, limited-service eating
places
(n) Fast-food restaurants
(o) Café and Taverns
(p) Daycare facilities: Child-care and Adult-care facilities
(q) Animal day cares, kennels, hospitals and clinics, but not
including the outdoor keeping of animals or outdoor play areas;
(r) Educational services: tutoring classes, training facilities,
cosmetology and barber schools, fine arts schools, language
schools, exam preparation and tutoring and similar uses limited
to 10,000 square feet.
(s) Mini-warehousing, including self-storage and flex warehousing
limited to 15,000 square feet
(t) Mini-warehouse and office for electricians, carpenters,
plumbers, woodworking and cabinet makers and similar trades
limited to 15,000 square feet
(u) Wellness Center and Spa
***
B. Economic Development Opportunity Zone-3 (EDO-3)
***
(4) Permitted uses. The land uses permitted in the EDO-3 District are set forth
herein below, except as otherwise indicated:
(a) Retail sales and services;
(b) Retail food establishment;
(c) Banquet facilities;
(d) Bank and Financial Institutions;
(e) Studio of a teacher of art, music and dance;
(f) Art galleries;
(g) Professional photography studio;
(h) Business offices;
(i) Medical offices;
(j) Personal Services;
(k) Recreational Facilities;
(l) Public and private parking areas/structured parking;
(m) Educational services: tutoring classes, training facilities,
cosmetology and barber schools, fine arts schools, language
schools, exam preparation and tutoring limited to 10,000 square
feet;
(n) Restaurants: full-service restaurants, limited-service eating
places;
(o) Cafes;
(p) Taverns and micro-breweries;
(q) Wholesale trade including,
[1] Wholesale stores and showrooms involving sale in bulk or quantity
to retailers or others for resale to the ultimate consumer;
[2] Wholesale distribution centers;
[3] Warehouse clubs and supercenters;
(r) Light Industrial use;
(s) Services/recreation/entertainment,
[1] Printing and duplicating;
[2] Postal, parcel and courier mailing, shipping and delivery
services.
[3] Health and fitness centers, including gyms, indoor tennis,
racquetball, swimming, skating, bowling and similar uses;
[4] Theaters for the performing arts, sports etc.; movie
theaters and similar events (excluding adult
entertainment);
[5] Amusement parks;
[6] Funeral homes;
[7] Day-care facilities, including child-care and adult-care
centers;
[8] Animal day cares, kennels, hospitals and clinics, but not
including the outdoor keeping of animals or outdoor play
areas;
[9] Catering facilities;
(t) Warehousing,
[1] Mini-warehousing/self-storage facilities;
[2] Building and construction contractor equipment storage
buildings; and,
[3] Warehouse and office for electricians, carpenters,
plumbers, woodworking and cabinet makers and similar
trades.
(5) Conditional uses.
The land uses that are conditionally permitted in the EDO-3 District
are listed below. For conditions related to each use refer to Section
250-41:
(a) Retail Gasoline stations, including gasoline station with
convenience store or mini mart;
(b) Retail convenience with fueling services;
(c) Drive-thru facilities related to Banks or financial institutions,
Pharmacy or Fast-food restaurants;
(d) Banks and restaurants on pad sites with or without drive-thru
(e) New car dealers, used car dealers and recreational vehicle
dealers;
(f) Educational services greater than 10,000 square feet;
(g) Accommodations and food services: hotels (except casino
hotels) lodging facilities and motels;
(h) Other Services:
[1] Automotive Repair and Maintenance;
[2] Religious organizations, grantmaking and giving services,
social advocacy organizations, civic and social
organizations and business, professional, labor, political
and similar organizations.
***
(7) Design standards. In addition to the design standards otherwise set forth in
Article X of the Land Development Ordinance, the following design standards
shall apply to all developments in the EDO-3 Zoning District. Where standards
contained herein conflict with the standards otherwise set forth in Article X, the
standards herein shall govern.
***
(e) Sidewalks*:

[1] Sidewalks, which are at least five (5) feet wide, shall be
integrated connecting all parking areas throughout the site.
[2] Sidewalks, which are at least five (5) feet wide, shall be
provided along both sides of all commercial streets.
[3] Sidewalks, which are at least five (5) feet wide, shall be
provided along the frontage of the site.
[4] Sidewalks, which are at least twelve (12) feet wide, shall
be provided along the front access areas to commercial
buildings.
*The requirements contained herein enumerate general sidewalk
requirements. Sidewalks and bikeways along county roads or state
highways shall be held to Middlesex County and NJDOT requirements,
respectively.
SECTION 3: AMENDMENT TO §250-34 “Zones and Zoning Map.” §250-34, “Zones and
Zoning Map” of the Code of the Township of Old Bridge is hereby amended and supplemented
as follows:
The zoning classification for the list of properties set forth in Schedule A attached hereto and
made a part hereof shall be changed from the C-N (Neighborhood Commercial) Zoning District
to the EDO-1 (Economic Development Opportunity) Zoning District and the Township’s Zoning
Map shall be amended accordingly.
SECTION 4: AMENDMENT TO SECTION 250-35 “Zoning Map.” §250-35, “Zoning
Map,” of the Code of the Township of Old Bridge is hereby amended in its entirety to read as
follows:
§250-35 Zoning Map. The official Zoning Map of the Township of Old Bridge dated
January 9, 2018 is hereby amended by amended Map dated October 21, 2019, and
incorporated herein by reference. Copies of the amended Zoning Map are on file in the
office of the Township Clerk.
SECTION 5: INCONSISTENT ORDINANCES
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with or in conflict with this ordinance are
hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
SECTION 6: PARTIAL INVALIDITY
If any section, paragraph, clause or provision of this ordinance shall be adjudged invalid, such
adjudication shall apply only to the section, paragraph, clause or provision so adjudged and the
remainder shall be deemed valid and effective.
SECTION 7: COPIES OF ORDINANCE
At least three copies of said full Ordinance are on file in the Office of the Municipal Clerk for
public examination and acquisition. Copies are available for inspection or acquisition during
regular weekday working hours and arrangements have been made for the publication of said
proposed Ordinance in pamphlet or other similar form which will be available for purchase from
the Township Clerk.
SECTION 8: NOTICE
The Township Clerk is hereby directed to give notice at least ten days prior to the hearing on the
adoption of this Ordinance to the County Planning Board, and to all others entitled thereto
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S. 40:55D-15. Upon adoption of this Ordinance, after public
hearing thereon, the Township Clerk is further directed to publish notice of passage thereof and
file a copy of this Ordinance as finally adopted with the County Planning Board as required by
N.J.S. 40:55D-16 and with the Township Tax Assessor.
SECTION 9: EFFECTIVE DATE
A. Except as set forth at subparagraphs B and C hereof, this Ordinance shall take effect on the
earlier of the following dates: (1) on the date the Mayor affixes his/her signature thereto and
returns same to the Municipal Council by delivering it to the Municipal Clerk pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40A:69A-41 or (2) on the tenth day following presentment to the Mayor of the
Ordinance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:69A-41 applicable when the Mayor has failed to return the
Ordinance; whichever occurs first. In addition, in accordance with the provisions of §250-35(B)
(1)(a) of the Township’s Land Development Ordinance, this Ordinance amending the
Township’s zoning map shall not take effect until the Zoning Map has been amended in
accordance with the provisions of §250-35 of the Township’s Land Development Ordinances.
B. If the Mayor vetoes the Ordinance (in the manner set forth at N.J.S.A. 40:69A-41), this
Ordinance shall become effective upon the Township Council’s vote to override the Mayor’s
veto.
C. Notwithstanding any other provision hereof, this Ordinance shall not take effect less than
twenty (20) days after its final passage by the Council and approval by the Mayor, where such
approval is required, unless the Council shall have also adopted a resolution declaring an
emergency and at least two thirds (2/3) of all the members of the council vote in favor of such
resolution.
FIRST READING: September 23, 2019
Moved by Councilman Paskitti, seconded by Councilman Murphy and so ordered on the
following roll call vote:
AYES: Councilmembers Brown, Greenberg-Belli, Murphy, Paskitti
Razzoli, Walker, President Sohor
NAYS: None
ABSENT: Councilmembers Cahill and Merwin
SECOND READING: October 21, 2019
Moved by Councilwoman Walker, seconded by Councilman Razzoli and so ordered on
the following roll call vote:
AYES: Councilmembers Brown, Cahill, Greenberg-Belli, Merwin, Paskitti
Razzoli, Walker, President Sohor
NAYS: None
ABSENT PODIUM: Councilman Murphy
ATTEST:
_____________________________ ______________________________
Stella Ward, Township Clerk Mary R. Sohor, Council President
_____________________________ ______________________________
DEPARTMENT OF LAW Owen Henry, Mayor
Mark Roselli, Esq.
First Reading: 09/23/2019
Publication: 09/28/2019
Second Reading: 10/21/2019
Publication: 10/25/2019
Effective Date: 11/14/2019
NO. BLOCK LOT ADDRESS NUMBER STREET ADDRESS PROPERTY LOCATION
1 1 54.11 HWY 35 HWY 35
2 2.12 1 HWY 35 HWY 35
3 3.11 1 HWY 35 AND LAURENCE PKWY HWY 35 AND LAURENCE PKWY
4 3.11 2 LAURENCE PKWY LAURENCE PKWY
5 9 272 272 LAURENCE PKWY 272 LAURENCE PKWY
6 9 275 275 LAURENCE PKWY 275 LAURENCE PKWY
7 9 276 276 LAURENCE PKWY 276 LAURENCE PKWY
8 10 302.12 303 LAURENCE PKWY 303 LAURENCE PKWY
9 10 306 299 HWY 35 HWY 35
10 10 316 301 HWY 35 HWY 35
11 12 1 HWY 34 HWY 35
12 12 4 4 LAURENCE PKWY 4 LAURENCE PKWY
13 12 5 5 LAURENCE PKWY 5 LAURENCE PKWY
14 12 7 8 LAURENCE PKWY 8 LAURENCE PKWY
15 12 11 14 LAURENCE PKWY 14 LAURENCE PKWY
16 12 32 32 HWY 35 32 HWY 35
17 12 34 34 HWY 35 34 HWY 35
18 12 37 38 SUNSET AVE 38 SUNSET AVE
19 13 101 101 HWY 35 101 HWY 35
20 13 102 103 HWY 35 103 HWY 35
21 36 1 LAURENCE PKWY LAURENCE PKWY
22 36 7 7 LAURENCE PKWY 7 LAURENCE PKWY
23 36 9 9 LAURENCE PKWY 9 LAURENCE PKWY
24 36 11 11 LAURENCE PKWY 11 LAURENCE PKWY
25 36 12 12 LAURENCE PKWY 12 LAURENCE PKWY
26 36 14 15 LAURENCE PKWY 15 LAURENCE PKWY
27 36 16 16 LAURENCE PKWY 16 LAURENCE PKWY
28 36 18 20 LAURENCE PKWY 20 LAURENCE PKWY
29 36 21 22 LAURENCE PKWY 22 LAURENCE PKWY
30 49 1 HWY 34 HWY 35
31 49 6 7 HWY 35 7 HWY 35
32 215 5 160 HWY 35 160 HWY 35
33 215 6 186 HWY 35 186 HWY 35
34 222 8.12 CRESTWOOD PL CRESTWOOD PL
35 222 9.11 178 HWY 35 178 HWY 35
36 222 10 170 HWY 35 170 HWY 35
37 222 11 HWY 34 HWY 35
NO. BLOCK LOT ADDRESS NUMBER STREET ADDRESS PROPERTY LOCATION
38 222 12 301 HWY 35 301 HWY 35
39 1010 867.11 902 HWY 34 902_904 HWY 35
40 1010 867.12 SUMMERFIELD AVE SUMMERFIELD AVE
41 1050 1.11 HWY 35 AND OUTLOOK BLVS HWY 35 AND OUTLOOK BLVS
42 1050 1.12 1300 HWY 35 1300 HWY 35
43 1051 1 HWY 35 AND ROSEWOOD DR HWY 35 AND ROSEWOOD DR
44 1058.11 1 196 HWY 35 196 HWY 35
45 1067 192 HWY 34 HWY 35
46 1069 1 69 HWY 35 69 HWY 35
47 3230 2.11 95 MATAWAN RD 95 MATAWAN RD
48 3230 2.14 339 MATAWAN RD 339 MATAWAN RD
49 3230 2.15 MORRISTOWN RD MORRISTOWN RD
50 3230 3.12 359 MATAWAN RD 359 MATAWAN RD
51 3234 1.11 1 CLIFFWOOD AVE 1 CLIFFWOOD AVE
52 3235 1 2 CLIFFWOOD RD 2 CLIFFWOOD RD
53 3235 2 43678 CLIFFWOOD RD 8_1 CLIFFWOOD RD
54 3235 4 4 MORRISTOWN RD 4 MORRISTOWN RD
55 3235 5 10 MORRISTOWN RD 10 MORRISTOWN RD
56 3235 6 22 MORRISTOWN RD 22 MORRISTOWN RD
57 3235 7 26 MORRISTOWN RD 26 MORRISTOWN RD
58 3236 14 25 MORRISTOWN RD 25 AND 27 MORRISTOWN RD
59 5000.11 54.13 3008 BORDENTOWN AVE 3008 BORDENTOWN AVE
60 5000.11 54.14 308 ERNSTON RD 308 ERNSTON RD
61 5000.11 54.16 3010 BORDENTOWN AVE 3010 BORDENTOWN AVE
62 5000.11 54.18 3018 BORDENTOWN AVE 3018 BORDENTOWN AVE
63 5000.11 55 3000 BORDENTOWN AVE 3000 BORDENTOWN AVE
64 8000 12.12 64 OLD MATAWAN RD 64 OLD MATAWAN RD
65 8000 13 58 OLD MATAWAN RD 58 OLD MATAWAN RD
66 8000 15 44 OLD MATAWAN RD 44 OLD MATAWAN RD
67 8000 16 40 OLD MATAWAN RD 40 OLD MATAWAN RD
68 8000 17 39 OLD MATAWAN RD 36 OLD MATAWAN RD
69 8000 18 32 OLD MATAWAN RD 32 OLD MATAWAN RD
70 8000 19 28 OLD MATAWAN RD 28 OLD MATAWAN RD
71 8000 20 22 OLD MATAWAN RD 22 OLD MATAWAN RD
72 8000 22 16 OLD MATAWAN RD 16 OLD MATAWAN RD
73 8001 1 2 HWY 516 2 HWY 516
74 8001 2 99 OLD MATAWAN RD 99 OLD MATAWAN RD
NO. BLOCK LOT ADDRESS NUMBER STREET ADDRESS PROPERTY LOCATION
75 8001 3 65 OLD MATAWAN RD 65 OLD MATAWAN RD
76 8002 1 20 HWY 516 20 HWY 516
77 8002 2 155 OLD MATAWAN RD 155 OLD MATAWAN RD
78 8002 3 151 OLD MATAWAN RD 151 OLD MATAWAN RD
79 8002 4 147 OLD MATAWAN RD 147 OLD MATAWAN RD
80 8002 5 137 OLD MATAWAN RD 137 OLD MATAWAN RD
81 8002 6.11 125 OLD MATAWAN RD 125 OLD MATAWAN RD
82 8002 6.12 HWY 516 HWY 516
83 8002 7 117 OLD MATAWAN RD 117 OLD MATAWAN RD
84 8002 8 111 OLD MATAWAN RD 111 OLD MATAWAN RD
85 8002 9 107 OLD MATAWAN RD 107 OLD MATAWAN RD
86 8002 10 10 HWY 516 10 HWY 516
87 8002 11 182 HWY 516 182 HWY 516
88 8002 12 HWY 516 HWY 516
89 8002 13 105 OLD MATAWAN RD 105 OLD MATAWAN RD
90 8003 7.11 OLD MATAWAN RD OLD MATAWAN RD
91 8003 9 148 OLD MATAWAN RD 148 OLD MATAWAN RD
92 8003 10.11 2 OLD MATAWAN RD 2 OLD MATAWAN RD
93 8003 11 180 OLD MATAWAN RD 180 OLD MATAWAN RD
94 8003 12.11 292 HWY 516 292 HWY 516
95 8003 13 76 HWY 516 70 HWY 516
96 8003 14.12 WATER WORKS ROAD WATERWORDS ROAD
97 8003 16 60 HWY 516 60 HWY 516
98 8003 17 120 HWY 516 120 HWY 516
99 18006 1 1300 ENGLISHTOWN RD 1300 ENGLISHTOWN RD
100 18006 3 1302 ENGLISHTOWN RD 1302 ENGLISHTOWN RD
101 18006 5 1306 ENGLISHTOWN RD 1306 ENGLISHTOWN RD
102 18006 6 1308 ENGLISHTOWN RD 1308 ENGLISHTOWN RD
103 18006 9 1314 ENGLISHTOWN RD 1314 ENGLISHTOWN RD
104 18006 48.12 1320 ENGLISHTOWN RD 1320 ENGLISHTOWN RD
105 18006 55 1316 ENGLISHTOWN RD 1316 ENGLISHTOWN RD
106 18027 274.13 1194 ENGLISHTOWN RD 1194 ENGLISHTOWN RD
107 18031 1 20 KENSINGTON AVE 2 KENSINGTON AVE
108 18031 2 10 KENSINGTON AVE 10 KENSINGTON AVE
109 18031 16.11 998 ENGLISHTOWN RD 998 ENGLISHTOWN RD
110 18031 17 11 RANDOLPH AVE 11 RANDOLPH AVE
111 18061 29 3 RIDGE RD 3 RIDGE RD
NO. BLOCK LOT ADDRESS NUMBER STREET ADDRESS PROPERTY LOCATION
112 18061 45 43484 HWY 515 1_9 HWY 516
113 18069 5 1130 ENGLISHTOWN RD 1130_1132 ENGLISHTOWN RD
114 18069 97 1120 ENGLISHTOWN RD 1120_1128 ENGLISHTOWN RD
115 18072 1 1146 ENGLISHTOWN RD 1146 ENGLISHTOWN RD
116 18072 110 9 GORDON AVE 9 GORDON AVE
117 18072.1 1.11 7 GORDON AVE 7 GORDON AVE
118 18078 1 1 GEORGE AVE 1 GEORGE AVE
119 18078 2.11 936 ENGLISHTOWN RD 936 ENGLISHTOWN RD
120 18078 84 FARLESS AVE FARLESS AVE
121 18078 85.11 938 ENGLISHTOWN RD 938 ENGLISHTOWN RD
122 18078 86 948 ENGLISHTOWN RD 948 ENGLISHTOWN RD
123 18081 87 956 ENGLISHTOWN RD 956 ENGLISHTOWN RD
124 18081 205.11 APPLEBY AVE APPLEBY AVE
125 18084 112.11 36 RANDOLPH AVE 36 RANDOLPH AVE
126 18084 126 974 ENGLISHTOWN RD 974_976 ENGLISHTOWN RD
127 18084 127 986 ENGLISHTOWN RD 986 ENGLISHTOWN RD
128 18090 39.12 922 ENGLISHTOWN RD 922 ENGLISHTOWN RD
129 20001 1 ENGLISHTOWN RD ENGLISHTOWN RD
130 20001 5 TEXAS RD TEXAS RD
131 20001 6 1850 ENGLISHTOWN RD 1850 ENGLISHTOWN RD
132 20001 7 1838 ENGLISHTOWN RD 1838 ENGLISHTOWN RD
133 20001 8 1828 ENGLISHTOWN RD 1828 ENGLISHTOWN RD
134 20001 9 1810 ENGLISHTOWN RD 1810_1816 ENGLISHTOWN RD
135 20001 10 1778 ENGLISHTOWN RD 1778 ENGLISHTOWN RD
136 20001 11 1776 ENGLISHTOWN RD 1776 ENGLISHTOWN RD
137 20001 12 1772 ENGLISHTOWN RD 1772 ENGLISHTOWN RD
138 20001 13 1762 ENGLISHTOWN RD 1762 ENGLISHTOWN RD
139 22000 21 1976 ENGLISHTOWN RD 1976 ENGLISHTOWN RD
140 22000 23 2028 ENGLISHTOWN RD 2028 ENGLISHTOWN RD
141 22000 24 ENGLISHTOWN RD ENGLISHTOWN RD
142 22000 25.11 301 JOHN WALL RD 301_303 JOHN WALL RD
143 22100 1 1886 ENGLISHTOWN RD 1886 ENGLISHTOWN RD
144 23001 1 2094 ENGLISHTOWN RD 2094 ENGLISHTOWN RD
145 23001 2 ENGLISHTOWN RD ENGLISHTOWN RD
146 23001 6.11 3020 ENGLISHTOWN RD 3020 ENGLISHTOWN RD
147 24000 27 124 TEXAS RD 124 TEXAS RD
148 24000 28 ENGLISHTOWN RD ENGLISHTOWN RD
NO. BLOCK LOT ADDRESS NUMBER STREET ADDRESS PROPERTY LOCATION
149 24000 31 1891 ENGLISHTOWN RD 1891 ENGLISHTOWN RD
150 24000 34.11 1900 ENGLISHTOWN RD 1900 ENGLISHTOWN RD
151 24000 34.12 1905 ENGLISHTOWN RD 1905 ENGLISHTOWN RD
152 24000 38 1989 ENGLISHTOWN RD 1989 ENGLISHTOWN RD
153 24000 39.11 1959 ENGLISHTOWN RD 1959 ENGLISHTOWN RD
154 24000 42 ENGLISHTOWN RD ENGLISHTOWN RD
155 24000 46 116 TEXAS RD 116 TEXAS RD
156 24000 47.11 120 TEXAS RD 120 TEXAS RD
157 24000 47.12 122 TEXAS RD 122 TEXAS RD
158 24001 5 3043 ENGLISHTOWN RD 3043 ENGLISHTOWN RD
159 24001 6 3059 ENGLISHTOWN RD 3059 ENGLISHTOWN RD
160 24001 7 3071 ENGLISHTOWN RD 3071 ENGLISHTOWN RD
161 24001 8 ENGLISHTOWN RD ENGLISHTOWN RD
162 24001 9 ENGLISHTOWN RD ENGLISHTOWN RD
163 24001 10 321 MATCHAPONIX RD 321 MATCHAPONIX RD
164 24001 24 3087 ENGLISHTOWN RD 3087 ENGLISHTOWN RD
165 24204 17 3023 ENGLISHTOWN RD 3023 ENGLISHTOWN RD
166 25000 37 143 TEXAS RD 143 TEXAS RD
167 25000 38 147 TEXAS RD 147 TEXAS RD
168 25000 39 145 TEXAS RD 145 TEXAS RD
169 25000 41 1861 ENGLISHTOWN RD 1861 ENGLISHTOWN RD
170 25000 41.12 151 TEXAS RD 151 TEXAS RD
171 25000 42 1855 ENGLISHTOWN RD 1855 ENGLISHTOWN RD
172 25000 43 1851 ENGLISHTOWN RD 1851 ENGLISHTOWN RD
173 25000 47 1845 ENGLISHTOWN RD 1845_1847 ENGLISHTOWN RD
174 25000 48 1837 ENGLISHTOWN RD 1837 ENGLISHTOWN RD
175 25000 49 1829 ENGLISHTOWN RD 1829 ENGLISHTOWN RD
176 25000 50 1821 ENGLISHTOWN RD 1821 ENGLISHTOWN RD
177 26009 42 2 BROOKSIDE AVE 2 BROOKSIDE AVE
178 26009 43 1275 ENGLISHTOWN RD 1275 ENGLISHTOWN RD
179 26009 44 1273 ENGLISHTOWN RD 1273 ENGLISHTOWN RD
180 26009 45.11 1269 ENGLISHTOWN RD 1269 ENGLISHTOWN RD
181 26009 45.12 1267 ENGLISHTOWN RD 1267 ENGLISHTOWN RD
182 26009 46 1265 ENGLISHTOWN RD 1265 ENGLISHTOWN RD
183 26009 47.11 1261 ENGLISHTOWN RD 1261 ENGLISHTOWN RD
184 26009 47.12 1259 ENGLISHTOWN RD 1259 ENGLISHTOWN RD
185 26009 47.13 1257 ENGLISHTOWN RD 1257 ENGLISHTOWN RD
NO. BLOCK LOT ADDRESS NUMBER STREET ADDRESS PROPERTY LOCATION
186 26009 48.11 1255 ENGLISHTOWN RD 1255 ENGLISHTOWN RD
187 26018 1 1189 ENGLISHTOWN RD 1189 ENGLISHTOWN RD
188 26018 4 1193 ENGLISHTOWN RD 1193 ENGLISHTOWN RD
189 26018 7 1199 ENGLISHTOWN RD 1199 ENGLISHTOWN RD
190 26018 9 1201 ENGLISHTOWN RD 1201 ENGLISHTOWN RD
191 26018 10 1205 ENGLISHTOWN RD 1205 ENGLISHTOWN RD
192 26018 23 1209 ENGLISHTOWN RD 1209_1211 ENGLISHTOWN RD
193 26018 25 1233 ENGLISHTOWN RD 1233 ENGLISHTOWN RD
194 26018 26 1221 ENGLISHTOWN RD 1221 ENGLISHTOWN RD
195 26018 27 1213 ENGLISHTOWN RD 1213_1215 ENGLISHTOWN RD
196 26019 1 1165 ENGLISHTOWN RD 1165 ENGLISHTOWN RD
197 26019 3 1173 ENGLISHTOWN RD 1173 ENGLISHTOWN RD
198 26019 4 1177 ENGLISHTOWN RD 1177 ENGLISHTOWN RD
199 26019 5 1179 ENGLISHTOWN 1179 1181 1183 ENGLISHTOWN
200 26020 1 1107 ENGLISHTOWN RD 1107 ENGLISHTOWN RD
201 26020 2 1109 ENGLISHTOWN RD 1109 ENGLISHTOWN RD
202 26020 3 1113 ENGLISHTOWN RD 1113 ENGLISHTOWN RD
203 26020 4 1119 ENGLISHTOWN RD 1119 ENGLISHTOWN RD
204 26020 5.11 1123 ENGLISHTOWN RD 1123 ENGLISHTOWN RD
205 26020 7.11 ENGLISHTOWN RD ENGLISHTOWN RD
206 26020 9 1137 ENGLISHTOWN RD 1137 ENGLISHTOWN RD
207 26020 10 1143 ENGLISHTOWN RD 1143 ENGLISHTOWN RD
208 26020 11.11 1145 ENGLISHTOWN RD 1145 ENGLISHTOWN RD
209 26020 12.11 1151 ENGLISHTOWN RD 1151 ENGLISHTOWN RD
210 26020 13 1157 ENGLISHTOWN RD 1157 ENGLISHTOWN RD
211 26021 81 957 ENGLISHTOWN RD 957 ENGLISHTOWN RD
212 26021 87 973 ENGLISHTOWN RD 973 ENGLISHTOWN RD
213 26021 93 981 ENGLISHTOWN RD 981 ENGLISHTOWN RD
214 26021 95 987 ENGLISHTOWN RD 987 ENGLISHTOWN RD
215 26021 97.12 991 ENGLISHTOWN RD 991 ENGLISHTOWN RD
216 26021 99 997 ENGLISHTOWN RD 997 ENGLISHTOWN RD
217 26054 102 1245 ENGLISHTOWN RD 1245 ENGLISHTOWN RD

ORDINANCE NO 2020-09
AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF OLD BRIDGE AMENDING CHAPTER 250
OF THE CODE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF OLD BRIDGE, ENTITLED “OLD BRIDGE
TOWNSHIP LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE” BY AMENDING VARIOUS
SECTIONS OF SAME
BE IT ORDAINED by the Township Council of the Township of Old Bridge, County of
Middlesex and State of New Jersey as follows:
SECTION 1: PURPOSE
The purpose of this Ordinance is to revise certain sections of the Old Bridge Township Land
Development Ordinance pursuant to the recommendations of the Township Planner and Township
Engineer.
SECTION 2: AMENDMENT TO §250-78 “Stormwater Management” §250-78, “Stormwater
Management” of the Code of the Township of Old Bridge is hereby amended as follows (Additions
are bolded and underlined; deletions have strikethrough.):
SECTION 3: RESCIND AND REPLACE §250-78L “Maintenance and repair.” §Section
250-78L, “Stormwater Management” of the Code of the Township of Old Bridge be and is hereby
rescinded and replaced with the following:
§250-78 Stormwater Management
A.-K. No change.
L. Maintenance and Repair.
(1) No change.
(2) General maintenance.
(a) No change.
(b) The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventative maintenance tasks and
schedules; cost estimates, including estimated cost of sediment, debris, or trash
removal; and the name, address, and telephone number of the person or persons
responsible for preventative and corrective maintenance (including replacement).
Maintenance guidelines for stormwater management measures are available in the
New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. If the maintenance plan
identifies a person other than the developer (for example, a public agency or
homeowners' association) as having the responsibility for maintenance, the plan shall
include documentation of such person’s a Homeowner Association's agreement to
assume this responsibility, or of the developer's obligation to dedicate a stormwater
management facility to such association under an applicable ordinance or regulation.
(c) If the person responsible for maintenance identified under Subsection L(2)(b) above
is not a public agency, the The maintenance plan and any future revisions based on
Subsection L(2)(f) below shall be recorded upon the deed of record for each property
on which the maintenance described in the maintenance plan must be undertaken.
(d) No change.
(e) The person Developer or Homeowner’s Association responsible for maintenance
identified under Subsection L(2)(b) above shall maintain a detailed log of all
preventative and corrective maintenance for the structural stormwater management
measures incorporated into the design of the development, including a record of
all inspections and copies of all maintenance-related work orders.
(f) The person Developer or Homeowner’s Association responsible for maintenance
identified under Subsection L(2)(b) above shall evaluate the effectiveness of the
maintenance plan at least once per year and adjust the plan and the deed as needed.
A summary of the report shall be submitted each year to the Township Engineer.
(g) The person Developer or Homeowner’s Association responsible for maintenance
identified under Subsection L(2)(b) above shall retain and make available, upon
request by any public entity with administrative, health, environmental, or safety
authority over the site, the maintenance plan and the documentation required by
Subsection L(2)(e) and (f) above.
(h) No change.
(3) No change.
(4) Stormwater Management facility maintenance (SWMF) responsibilities. The
following shall apply to allocate responsibility for stormwater management facilities:
(a) A Stormwater Management facility required for a commercial or industrial
development. Whenever a detention basin SWMF is required for a commercial or
industrial development, the basin shall be a part of an individual lot owned and
maintained by the property owner. No responsibility, maintenance or otherwise, shall
be transferred to the Township.
(b) Stormwater Management facility required for a rental multifamily (e.g., apartments)
development. Whenever a detention basin SWMF is required for a development
approval for a rented multifamily building (e.g., apartments), the detention basin shall
be a part of the development and provisions for long-term maintenance of the basin
shall be established. No responsibilities, maintenance or otherwise, shall be
transferred to the Township.
(c) Stormwater Management facility required for the development of a for-sale,
multifamily (e.g., condos, townhouses, etc.) development. Whenever a detention
basin SWMF is required for a developmental approval for a multifamily building
which will be sold to individual owners, the detention basin SWMF shall be part of
a common open space owned by a homeowners' association. No responsibilities,
maintenance or otherwise, shall be transferred to the Township.
(d) Single-family detached dwellings requiring a small Stormwater Management facility.
Whenever a Stormwater Management facility is required in connection with
developmental approvals for single-family detached dwellings, the long-term
maintenance of the stormwater management facility shall be the responsibility of the
developer. Developer or the Homeowner’s Association created for the residential
development. The aforesaid obligation of maintenance shall be required by the
approving board to be memorialized and recorded as a deed restriction on the
lot involved. No such facility shall be modified or eliminated following issuance
of the initial certificate of occupancy unless the Township of Old Bridge permits
such modification or elimination, which shall be approved by the Township
Engineer and the Planning or Zoning Board. At the developer's sole option, the
Township shall accept responsibility for maintenance if the following conditions
are met:
[1] Maintenance of small stormwater management facilities to remain lot
owner'sresponsibility:
[a] A "small stormwater management facility" is hereby defined as
water quality basins, improved channels and swales which are
entirely situated and contained on a single building lot.
Stormwater management facilities which are primarily
intended to manage stormwater generated by a single residential
dwelling shall be situated and contained on such lot. Such 
facilities shall be designed in accordance with ordinances of the
Township of Old Bridge, the developmental approvals and
accepted engineering standards of design and practice. No such
facility shall be constructed with a slope of greater than one to
five, nor shall any such facility exceed a depth of one foot.
[b] A small stormwater management facility as defined above shall
not be maintained by the Township of Old Bridge. Maintenance
of small stormwater management facilities, as defined above,
shall be the responsibility of the owner of the single residential lot
upon which the facilities were constructed. The aforesaid
obligation of maintenance shall be required by the approving
board to be memorialized and recorded as a deed restriction on
the lot involved. No such facility shall be modified or eliminated
following issuance of the initial certificate of occupancy unless the
Township of Old Bridge permits such modification or elimination
by adoption of an ordinance.
[2] Medium-size stormwater managementfacilities.
[a] "Medium-size stormwater management facilities" are defined
as those facilities situated and contained on a separate lot and
that meet the following additional criteria:
[b] The lot is five acres or less in area;
[c] The lot is not a residential building lot; and
[d] The lot is not also utilized for open space or recreation.
[e] Such facilities shall be designed in accordance § 250-78. Any
basin shall be set back on the lot a minimum of 25 feet as
measured from the lot line to the right-of-way line to the onehundred-year flood line elevation. All stormwater management
facilities shall have either direct access from or an access
easement to a public road. Such facilities shall have a durable
load-bearing access driveway which shall be sufficient in
design, in the sole judgment of the Township Engineer, to
accommodate maintenance vehicles commonly utilized for
maintenance of swales, channels, drainage pipes and drainage
facilities.
[f] The Township of Old Bridge shall, upon request by the
developer during the approval process of the residential
developmental application, accept the responsibility of
maintenance of any medium- size stormwater management
facilities so long as the approving board accepts such
maintenance responsibility on behalf of the Township of Old
Bridge and the funding (by escrow) of initial maintenance
cost is posted with the Department of Finance of the
Township of Old Bridge as hereinafter set forth and required.
[3] Large-project stormwater management facilities.
[a] "Large-project stormwater management facilities" are
defined as those facilities situated and contained on one or more
separate lots which meet the following additional criteria:
[i] At least one lot containing stormwater management
facilities at the project is larger than five acres;
[ii] One or more lots is a multipurpose stormwater controlrecreational facility over five acres in size.
[b] Such facilities shall be designed in accordance§ 250-78. Any
basin shall be set back on the lot a minimum of 25 feet as
measured from the lot line to the right-of-way line to the one-
hundred-year flood line elevation. All stormwater management
facilities shall have either direct access from or an access
easement to a public road. Such facilities shall have a durable
load-bearing access driveway which shall be sufficient in
design, in the sole judgement of the Township Engineer, to
accommodate maintenance vehicles commonly utilized for
maintenance of swales, channels, drainage pipes and drainage
basins.
[c] The Township of Old Bridge shall, upon request by the
developer during the approval process of the residential
developmental application, accept the responsibility of
maintenance of any large project stormwater management
facilities so long as the approving board accepts such
maintenance responsibility on behalf of the Township of Old
Bridge and the funding (by escrow) of initial maintenance
cost is posted with the Department of Finance of the
Township of Old Bridge as hereinafter set forth.
(5) Posting of escrow for initial maintenance; recorded developer's agreement.
In the event the developer requests and the approving board agrees that a
development of single- family detached dwellings may dedicate and the
Township shall accept medium-size or large-project stormwater
management facilities, the Township's acceptance shall be expressly
conditioned upon the following:
(a) The Township and the developer shall enter a developer's
agreement in recordable form which shall clearly set forth the
developer's obligation to post initial maintenance fees to escrow,
an obligation which shall run with the land.
(b) The developer shall as an express condition of Township
acceptance of the stormwater management facilities provide post
maintenance fees with the Director of Finance of the Township
of Old Bridge as follows:
[1] The amount of escrow contribution shall be based upon a
contribution fee determined by the Township Engineer. The fee
shall be based on the cost to adequately maintain the
stormwater management facility over a twenty-year period.
The fee estimate shall consider short-term and long-term
periodic maintenance requirements. The Township Engineer
shall consider the recommendations of the maintenance plan
as required by Subsection J when determining the required
contribution fee.
[2] The developer shall pay the maintenance contribution fee
amount before the signing of the approved subdivision plats or
site plan by the Township Engineer.
(c) The aforesaid maintenance fee shall be set aside and reserved in
an escrow fund dedicated solely to the maintenance of
stormwater management facilities. Such funds shall not be used
for maintenance of any lands or improvements other than
stormwater management facilities.
(d) Nothing herein shall reduce or eliminate the developer's
obligation to adequately construct all stormwater management
facilities. Adequate performance guarantees shall be posted to
assure the good and workmanlike installation of such stormwater
maintenance facilities pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53. The
Township Engineer shall not accept any stormwater management
facilities unless and until the developer's engineers shall have
submitted to the Township Engineer as-built drawings certifying
that the said facilities were constructed in accordance with the 
approved plans.
(e) During a period of maintenance immediately following the
release of performance guarantees, it shall continue to be the
developer's obligation, together with the surety, to adequately
maintain the stormwater management facilities. Only after the
expiration of maintenance guarantees shall the escrowed funds
be utilized for maintenance of stormwater management facilities.
M.- U. No change.
 ***
SECTION 6: INCONSISTENT ORDINANCES
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with or in conflict with this ordinance are hereby
repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
SECTION 7: PARTIAL INVALIDITY
If any section, paragraph, clause or provision of this ordinance shall be adjudged invalid, such
adjudication shall apply only to the section, paragraph, clause or provision so adjudged and the
remainder shall be deemed valid and effective.
SECTION 8: COPIES OF ORDINANCE
At least three copies of said full Ordinance are on file in the Office of the Municipal Clerk for
public examination and acquisition. Copies are available for inspection or acquisition during
regular weekday working hours and arrangements have been made for the publication of said
proposed Ordinance in pamphlet or other similar form which will be available for purchase from
the Township Clerk.
SECTION 9: NOTICE
The Township Clerk is hereby directed to give notice at least ten days prior to the hearing on the
adoption of this Ordinance to the County Planning Board, and to all others entitled thereto pursuant
to the provisions of N.J.S. 40:55D-15. Upon adoption of this Ordinance, after public hearing
thereon, the Township Clerk is further directed to publish notice of passage thereof and file a copy
of this Ordinance as finally adopted with the County Planning Board as required by N.J.S. 40:55D16 and with the Township Tax Assessor.
SECTION 10: EFFECTIVE DATE
A. Except as set forth at subparagraphs B and C hereof, this Ordinance shall take effect on the
earlier of the following dates: (1) on the date the Mayor affixes his/her signature thereto and
returns same to the Municipal Council by delivering it to the Municipal Clerk pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40A:69A-41 or (2) on the tenth day following presentment to the Mayor of the
Ordinance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:69A-41 applicable when the Mayor has failed to return
the Ordinance; whichever occurs first.
B. If the Mayor vetoes the Ordinance (in the manner set forth at N.J.S.A. 40:69A-41), this
Ordinance shall become effective upon the Township Council’s vote to override the Mayor’s
veto.
C. Notwithstanding any other provision hereof, this Ordinance shall not take effect less than
twenty (20) days after its final passage by the Council and approval by the Mayor, where
such approval is required, unless the Council shall have also adopted a resolution declaring
an emergency and at least two thirds (2/3) of all the members of the council vote in favor of
such resolution.
FIRST READING: FEBRUARY 10, 2020
Moved by Councilman Paskitti, seconded by Councilman Razzoli and so ordered on the
following roll call vote:
AYES: Councilmembers Brown, DePalma, Greenberg-Belli, Merwin, Paskitti, Razzoli,
Walker and President Sohor
.
NAYS: Councilman Murphy
SECOND READING: MARCH 16, 2020

ORDINANCE NO 2020-11
AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF OLD BRIDGE AMENDING CHAPTER 250
OF THE CODE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF OLD BRIDGE, ENTITLED “OLD BRIDGE
TOWNSHIP LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE” BY AMENDING §250-41
ENTITLED “CONDITIONAL USES”
BE IT ORDAINED by the Township Council of the Township of Old Bridge, County of
Middlesex and State of New Jersey as follows:
SECTION 1: PURPOSE
The purpose of this Ordinance is to revise certain sections of the Old Bridge Township Land
Development Code, specifically, §250-41 entitled “Conditional Uses,” pursuant to the
recommendations of the Township Planner.
SECTION 2: AMENDMENT TO §250-41 “Conditional Uses” §250-41, “Conditional Uses”
of the Code of the Township of Old Bridge is hereby amended as follows (additions are bolded
and underlined; deletions have strikethrough):
§250-41 Conditional uses.
A.-F. No change.
G. Automotive gasoline stations, automotive repair garages, and automotive service stations.
Automotive gasoline stations, automotive repair garages and automotive service stations
are permitted in the C-M, C-N EDO-1, C-C and SD Zones, provided that:
(1) - (11) No change.
(12) Automotive gasoline stations open 24 hours a day.
(a) Any such structure shall not be located within 250 ft of any residential
property line or residential zoning district.
(b) Any such use shall not be located within 1,000 feet of another similar or
same use.
H. No change.
I. Commercial recreation activities.
(1) Commercial recreation uses and activities, as hereinbelow set forth, are permitted in
the following zones:
Miniature golf: C-C, C-M, ER, SD, R-120
Golf driving ranges: ER, SD, R-120
Tennis courts (nonresidential): O-G, C-C, SD
Gymnasiums and athletic clubs: O-G, C-M, C-N, C-C, SD, ER
Swimming pools (nonresidential): O-G, C-C, SD, C-M, ER
Go-cart tracks: SD
Dance halls and ball rooms: C-C
Billiard and pool rooms: C-C
Outdoor firearms and archery: ER
(2)-(4) No change.
J-AA. No change.
BB. Automotive gasoline stations and Retail gasoline stations with mini mart or
convenience store are permitted in the EDO-1 and EDO-3 Zones, provided that the
following conditions are met:
(1)-(5) No change.
(6) Automotive gasoline stations and Retail gasoline stations with mini mart or
convenience store open 24 hours a day.
(a) Any such structure shall not be located within 250 ft of any residential
property line or residential zone.
(b) Any such use shall not be located within 1,000 feet of another similar or
same use.
CC. Retail convenience with fueling services is permitted in the EDO-1 and EDO-3 Zone,
provided that the following conditions are met:
(1) No change.
(2) Other requirements. All other requirements from § 250-41CCBB, except for § 250-
41CCBB(1) shall apply.
DD.-II. No change.
JJ. Any use permitted within any non-residential zoning district, except for medical
uses, health and fitness centers, including gyms, funeral homes, proposing to
operate 24 hours a day are permitted, provided that the following conditions are
met:
(1) Any such structure shall not be located within 250 ft of any residential property
line or residential zone.
(2) Any such use shall not be located within 1,000 feet of another similar use.
 ***
SECTION 6: INCONSISTENT ORDINANCES
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with or in conflict with this ordinance are hereby
repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
SECTION 7: PARTIAL INVALIDITY
If any section, paragraph, clause or provision of this ordinance shall be adjudged invalid, such
adjudication shall apply only to the section, paragraph, clause or provision so adjudged and the
remainder shall be deemed valid and effective.
SECTION 8: COPIES OF ORDINANCE
At least three copies of said full Ordinance are on file in the Office of the Municipal Clerk for
public examination and acquisition. Copies are available for inspection or acquisition during
regular weekday working hours and arrangements have been made for the publication of said
proposed Ordinance in pamphlet or other similar form which will be available for purchase from
the Township Clerk.
SECTION 9: NOTICE
The Township Clerk is hereby directed to give notice at least ten days prior to the hearing on the
adoption of this Ordinance to the County Planning Board, and to all others entitled thereto pursuant
to the provisions of N.J.S. 40:55D-15. Upon adoption of this Ordinance, after public hearing
thereon, the Township Clerk is further directed to publish notice of passage thereof and file a copy
of this Ordinance as finally adopted with the County Planning Board as required by N.J.S. 40:55D16 and with the Township Tax Assessor. 
SECTION 10: EFFECTIVE DATE
A. Except as set forth at subparagraphs B and C hereof, this Ordinance shall take effect on the
earlier of the following dates: (1) on the date the Mayor affixes his/her signature thereto and
returns same to the Municipal Council by delivering it to the Municipal Clerk pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40A:69A-41 or (2) on the tenth day following presentment to the Mayor of the
Ordinance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:69A-41 applicable when the Mayor has failed to return
the Ordinance; whichever occurs first.
B. If the Mayor vetoes the Ordinance (in the manner set forth at N.J.S.A. 40:69A-41), this
Ordinance shall become effective upon the Township Council’s vote to override the Mayor’s
veto.
C. Notwithstanding any other provision hereof, this Ordinance shall not take effect less than
twenty (20) days after its final passage by the Council and approval by the Mayor, where
such approval is required, unless the Council shall have also adopted a resolution declaring
an emergency and at least two thirds (2/3) of all the members of the council vote in favor of
such resolution.
FIRST READING: MARCH 3, 2020
Moved by Councilwoman Greenberg-Belli, seconded by Councilman Razzoli and so
ordered on the following roll call vote:
AYES: Councilmembers Brown, DePalma, Greenberg-Belli, Merwin, Murphy, Paskitti,
Razzoli, Walker and President Sohor
.
NAYS: None
