Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adoption of Code by Board of Health — See
Ch. 259, Art. I.
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 8-20-2001 by Ord. No. 762-01]
§ 1-1. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the Borough of Old Tappan
of a general and permanent nature adopted by the Mayor and Council
of the Borough of Old Tappan, as revised, codified and consolidated into
chapters and sections by General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of
Chapters 1 through 255, together with an Appendix, are hereby approved,
adopted, ordained and enacted as the "Code of the Borough of Old Tappan,"
hereinafter known and referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede the 1975 Code and all other
general and permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this
Code, except such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from
repeal or continued in force.
§ 1-3. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
§ 1-4. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Borough Clerk/Administrator and shall remain there for use and
examination by the public until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if
this ordinance shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk/
Administrator of the Borough of Old Tappan by impressing thereon the Seal
of the Borough, as provided by law, and such certified copy shall remain
on file in the office of the Clerk/Administrator of the Borough, to be made
available to persons desiring to examine the same during all times while
said Code is in effect.
§ 1-5. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the governing
body to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Borough of Old
Tappan" shall be understood and intended to include such additions and
amendments. Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the
Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided
hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as
amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:3
§ 1-6. Publication; filing.
The Clerk/Administrator of the Borough of Old Tappan, pursuant to law,
shall cause this Adopting Ordinance to be published, in the manner
required, in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. Sufficient
copies of the Code shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk/
Administrator for inspection by the public at all times during regular office
hours. The enactment and publication of this Adopting Ordinance, coupled
with availability of copies of the Code for inspection by the public, shall
be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication of all
provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk/Administrator or someone authorized and
directed by the Clerk/Administrator to keep up-to-date the certified copy of
the book containing the Code required to be filed in his or her office for
the use of the public. All changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted
subsequent to the effective date of this codification which shall be adopted
specifically as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included
therein by reference until such changes or new ordinances are printed as
supplements to said Code book, at which time such supplements shall be
inserted therein.
§ 1-8. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the Clerk/Administrator, or an authorized agent of the Clerk/Administrator,
upon the payment of a fee to be set by the Mayor and Council. The Clerk/
Administrator may also arrange for procedures for the periodic
supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-9. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Borough of
Old Tappan to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section or
any part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to one or more
of the following: a fine of not more than $1,000, imprisonment for not more
than 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, in the
discretion of the Judge imposing the same.
§ 1-10. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed
to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts
thereof.
§ 1-6 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 1-11
1:4
§ 1-11. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-12. Inconsistent ordinances repealed.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions
contained in the Code adopted by this ordinance are hereby repealed;
provided, however, that such repeal shall only be to the extent of such
inconsistency, and any valid legislation of the Borough of Old Tappan which
is not in conflict with the provisions of the Code shall be deemed to remain
in full force and effect.
§ 1-13. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-12 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
B. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
C. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
D. Any agreement entered into or any franchise, license, right, easement
or privilege heretofore granted or conferred.
E. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
F. Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of
the Borough's indebtedness.
G. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
H. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges or the approval
of the municipal budget.
§ 1-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:5
§ 1-14. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
I. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
J. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
K. Any ordinance adopting or amending the Zoning Map.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain grammatical
changes and other minor changes were made in one or more of said
ordinances. It is the intention of the Mayor and Council that all such
changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so changed
had been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the changes, amendments or revisions as set forth in below
are made herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this
ordinance. (Chapter and section number references are to the
ordinances as they have been renumbered and appear in the Code.)
(1) References throughout the Code to the "Revised General
Ordinance of the Borough of Old Tappan" have been changed to the
"Code of the Borough of Old Tappan."
(2) Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, Definitions and Word
Usage:
(a) Former Sections 1-1 and 1-4 of the 1975 Revision have been
deleted as being covered under this Code Adoption Ordinance
for the 2001 Code, to be included as Article I of Chapter 1 of
the Code of the Borough of Old Tappan.
(b) Section 1-16 is amended to delete the definitions of "chapter,"
"section," "subsection" and "paragraph" as they no longer have
applicability, as defined for purposes of the 1975 Code, in the
organization of the 2001 Code.
§ 1-13 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 1-14
1:6
ARTICLE II
Definitions and Word Usage
[Adopted 5-26-1975 as Secs. 1-1 through 1-4 of the 1975 Code;
amended 8-20-2001 by Ord. No. 762-01]
§ 1-15. Definitions.
A. For the purpose of the Code of the Borough of Old Tappan, and in the
interpretation and application of all other ordinances heretofore or
hereafter adopted, except as the context may otherwise require:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Old Tappan in the County of Bergen and
State of New Jersey.
BOROUGH COUNCIL or COUNCIL — The Mayor and Councilmen of
the Borough.
CLERK or BOROUGH CLERK — The Municipal Clerk duly appointed
pursuant to law.
DEPARTMENT — An organizational unit of the Borough government
established or designated by ordinance or this Code as a department,
together with any agency or instrumentality of the Borough
government assigned to the organizational unit by the Borough Council.
LICENSED — Licensed in accordance with the appropriate section or
chapter of this Code.
MONTH — A calendar month unless otherwise specifically provided.
ORDINANCE — Any of local legislation heretofore or hereafter
adopted, and including this Code, so long as it shall have been adopted
by the procedure required for the adoption of an ordinance and so long
as it shall remain in force and effect pursuant to law.
PERSON — Any individual, natural persons, partnerships, joint
ventures, societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts, corporations or
unincorporated groups; or any officers, agents, employees, servants,
factors or any kind of personal representatives of any thereof in any
capacity, acting either for himself or for any other person, under either
personal appointment or pursuant to law.
STREET — Includes a street, avenue, road, alley, lane, highway,
boulevard, concourse, driveway, culvert, sidewalk and crosswalk, and
every class of road, square, place or municipal parking field used by the
general public.
YEAR — A calendar year unless otherwise specifically provided.
B. Whenever certain hours are named in this Code, they shall mean either
Eastern standard time or Eastern daylight saving time, as may be in
current use in the Borough.
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-16
1:7
§ 1-16. Construction.
For the purpose of this Code and any other ordinances heretofore or
hereafter adopted, except as the context may otherwise require:
A. The present tense includes the past and future tenses and the future,
the present.
B. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
C. The singular number includes the plural and the plural, the singular.
D. "Shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive.
E. The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by
excluding the first and including the last day and if the last day be a
Sunday, a legal holiday, or a day on which the offices of the Borough are
closed, that day shall be excluded.
F. "Writing" and "written" shall include printing, typewriting and any
other mode of communication using paper or similar material which is
in general use, as well as legible handwriting.
G. Whenever a specific time is used in this Code, it shall mean the
prevailing and established time in effect in the State of New Jersey
during any day in any year.
§ 1-16 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 1-16
1:8
ARTICLE III
General Penalty
[Adopted 5-26-1975]
§ 1-17. Maximum penalty. [Amended 6-19-2006 by Ord. No. 914-06]
For violation of any provisions of this chapter, any other chapter or any
other ordinance of the Borough where no specific penalty is provided
regarding the section violated, the maximum penalty, upon conviction, shall
be a fine not exceeding $2,000 or imprisonment for a period not exceeding
90 days, or both.
§ 1-18. Separate violations.
Except as otherwise provided, each and every day in which a violation of
any provision of this code or any other ordinance of the Borough exists shall
constitute a separate violation.
§ 1-19. Application.
The maximum penalty stated, in the general penalty clause of this article,
is not intended to state an appropriate penalty for each and every violation.
Any lesser penalty, including a nominal penalty or no penalty at all, may be
appropriate for a particular case or a particular violation.
§ 1-20. Minimum penalty.
The governing body may prescribe that, for the violation of any particular
Code provision or ordinance, at least a minimum penalty shall be imposed
which shall consist of a fine which may be fixed at an amount not exceeding
$100.
§ 1-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-20
1:9

ARTICLE IV
Meeting Attendance Policy for Boards, Commissions and
Committees
[Adopted 2-6-2012 by Ord. No. 1041-11]
§ 1-21. Removal of member for unexcused absence.
Except as prohibited by law, any member of a board, commission or
committee appointed by the Mayor and approved by the Council pursuant to
an ordinance of the Borough of Old Tappan or other law, who has unexcused
absences from 40% of the scheduled meetings in any calendar year of the
board, commission or committee to which said member is appointed, shall
be removed from said board, commission or committee by resolution of the
Mayor and Council.
§ 1-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-21
1:11
Chapter 5
AFFORDABLE HOUSING AGENCY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 255.
§ 1-21 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 1-21
5:12
ARTICLE I
Agency Established
§ 5-1. Establishment.
There is hereby established the Affordable Housing Agency of the Borough
of Old Tappan, hereinafter called the "Agency."
§ 5-2. Membership; terms; conflicts of interest. [Amended
1-24-2000 by Ord. No. 702-00]
§ 5-3. Alternates.
The Mayor, with the advice and consent of Council, shall appoint such
number of alternates as may be appropriate for terms not to exceed two
years, or may, in the alternative, appoint alternates on a case by case basis.
§ 5-4. Compensation.
No regular or alternate member of the Agency shall receive compensation
for his/her service.
§ 5-5. Vacancy.
Any vacancy occurring for any reason shall be filled for the unexpired term
only, by appointment by the Mayor.
§ 5-6. Organization. [Amended 12-4-2006 by Ord. No. 922-06]
The Agency shall organize annually and from its members elect a
Chairperson. If and when required, the Mayor may appoint a secretary, who
may be considered a member of the Agency.
§ 5-7. Contracting of debt.1
The Agency shall not contract any debt of any kind or nature except by prior
approval of the Mayor and Council.
A. The agency shall consist of six members to be appointed by the Mayor,
with the advice and consent of Council. Members shall be appointed for
a term of three years commencing on January 1, except that the initial
appointments shall be staggered so that the terms of two members
expire each year.
B. No member of the agency shall hold any elective office or position in the
Borough. No member shall be permitted to act on any matter in which
that member has, directly or indirectly, a personal or financial interest.
All members of the agency shall be residents of the Borough.
1. Editor's Note: Former § 5-7, Powers and duties, was repealed 12-4-2006 by Ord. No.
922-06. This ordinance also renumbered former §§ 5-8 through 5-10 as §§ 5-7 through 5-9,
respectively.
§ 5-1 AFFORDABLE HOUSING AGENCY § 5-8
5:13
§ 5-8. Meetings.
All meetings of the Agency shall be open to the public and shall be held
at the Borough Hall or other Borough meeting rooms, as appropriate. The
Agency shall keep records of all such meetings as required by law.
§ 5-9. Application fee.
A. Each applicant seeking to be qualified by the Agency as a prospective
purchaser and/or tenant of low- and moderate-income housing or, in the
case of tenants already residing in low- and moderate-income rental
housing, review their qualifications for continued eligibility for such
housing, shall submit to the Agency a fee in the amount of $25 with
such application.
B. Applicants seeking to be qualified by the Agency as a prospective
purchaser who have previously filed an application with the Agency
shall not be responsible for the payment of any further application fee
upon reapplication.
§ 5-8 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 5-9
5:14
ARTICLE II
Municipal Housing Liaison
[Added 12-4-2006 by Ord. No. 922-06]
§ 5-10. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MUNICIPAL HOUSING LIAISON — The person charged by the governing
body with the responsibility for oversight and administration of the
affordable housing program for the Borough of Old Tappan.
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — The entity responsible for administering the
affordability controls of some or all units in the affordable housing program
for the Borough of Old Tappan to ensure that the restricted units under
administration are affirmatively marketed and sold or rented, as applicable,
only to low- and moderate-income households.
§ 5-11. Position established; appointment; powers and duties.
A. Establishment of position of Municipal Housing Liaison. There is hereby
established the position of Municipal Housing Liaison for the Borough
of Old Tappan.
B. Subject to the approval of the New Jersey Council on Affordable
Housing (COAH), the Municipal Housing Liaison shall be appointed by
the Mayor.
C. The Municipal Housing Liaison, with the assistance of the members of
the Affordable Housing Agency and other Borough officials, shall be
responsible for oversight and administration of the affordable housing
program for the Borough of Old Tappan, including the following
responsibilities which may not be contracted out:
(1) Serving as the Borough’s primary point of contact for all inquiries
from the State, affordable housing providers, and interested
households;
(2) Monitoring the status of all restricted units in the Borough’s Fair
Share Plan;
(3) Compiling, verifying, and submitting annual reports as required by
COAH;
(4) Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers; and
(5) Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring, and affirmative marketing as
offered or approved by COAH.
D. Subject to approval by COAH, the Borough may contract with or
authorize a consultant, authority, government or any agency charged by
§ 5-10 AFFORDABLE HOUSING AGENCY § 5-11
5:15
the governing body, which entity shall have the responsibility of
administering the affordable housing program of the Borough, except
for those responsibilities designated to the Municipal Housing Liaison
under Subsection C above. If the Borough contracts with another entity
to administer all or any part of the affordable housing program,
including the affordability controls and Affirmative Marketing Plan, the
Municipal Housing Liaison shall monitor the services of the contracting
administrative agent.
E. The Affordable Housing Agency shall be the administrative agent for all
affordable units within the Borough, except that the Housing Authority
of Bergen County shall be the administrative agent for the 29 units of
senior rental housing located on Russell Avenue.
F. Administrative powers and duties assigned to the administrative agent:
(1) Affirmative marketing:
(a) Conducting an outreach process to ensure affirmative
marketing of affordable housing units in accordance with the
Affirmative Marketing Plan of the Borough and the provisions
of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15; and
(b) Providing counseling services to low- and moderate-income
applicants on subjects such as budgeting, credit issues,
mortgage qualification, rental lease requirements, and
landlord/tenant law; or the Borough may contract for such
services.
(2) Household certification:
(a) Soliciting, scheduling, conducting and following up on
interviews with interested households;
(b) Conducting interviews and obtaining sufficient documentation
of gross income and assets upon which to base a determination
of income eligibility for a low- or moderate-income unit;
(c) Providing written notification to each applicant as to the
determination of eligibility or noneligibility;
(d) Requiring that all certified applicants for restricted units
execute a certificate substantially in the form, as applicable, of
either the ownership or rental certificates set forth in
Appendices J and K of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.;
(e) Creating and maintaining a referral list of eligible applicant
households living in the housing region and eligible applicant
households with members working in the housing region
where the units are located; and
§ 5-11 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 5-11
5:16
(f) Employing the random selection process as provided in the
Affirmative Marketing Plan of the Borough when referring
households for certification to affordable units.
(3) Affordability controls:
(a) Furnishing to attorneys or closing agents forms of deed
restrictions and mortgages for recording at the time of
conveyance of title of each restricted unit;
(b) Creating and maintaining a file on each restricted unit for its
control period, including the recorded deed with restrictions,
recorded mortgage and note, as appropriate;
(c) Ensuring that the removal of the deed restrictions and
cancellation of the mortgage note are effectuated and properly
filed with the appropriate county’s register of deeds or county
clerk’s office after the termination of the affordability controls
for each restricted unit;
(d) Communicating with lenders regarding foreclosures; and
(e) Ensuring the issuance of continuing certificates of occupancy
or certifications pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.10.
(4) Resale and rental:
(a) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information between owners and applicants
regarding the availability of restricted units for resale or
rental; and
(b) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information to low- and moderate-income
households regarding the availability of restricted units for
resale or rerental.
(5) Processing requests from unit owners:
(a) Reviewing and approving requests from owners of restricted
units who wish to take out home equity loans or refinance
during the term of their ownership;
(b) Reviewing and approving requests to increase sales prices
from owners of restricted units who wish to make capital
improvements to the units that would affect the selling price,
such authorizations to be limited to those improvements
resulting in additional bedrooms or bathrooms and the cost of
central air conditioning systems; and
(c) Processing requests and making determinations on requests
by owners of restricted units for hardship waivers.
(6) Enforcement:
§ 5-11 AFFORDABLE HOUSING AGENCY § 5-11
5:17
(a) Securing annually lists of all affordable housing units for which
tax bills are mailed to absentee owners and notifying all such
owners that they must either move back to their unit or sell it;
(b) Securing from all developers and sponsors of restricted units,
at the earliest point of contact in the processing of the project
or development, written acknowledgement of the requirement
that no restricted unit can be offered, or in any other way
committed, to any person, other than a household duly
certified to the unit by the administrative agent;
(c) Posting annually in all rental properties, including two-family
homes, of a notice as to the maximum permitted rent together
with the telephone number of the administrative agent to
whom complaints of excess rent can be made;
(d) Sending annual mailings to all owners of affordable dwelling
units, reminding them of the notices and requirements outlined
in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.18(d)4;
(e) Establishing a program for diverting unlawful rent payments to
the municipality's affordable housing trust fund or other
appropriate municipal fund approved by the DCA;
(f) Creating and publishing a written operating manual, as
approved by COAH, setting forth procedures for administering
such affordability controls; and
(g) Providing annual reports to COAH as required.
(7) The administrative agent shall have authority to take all actions
necessary and appropriate to carry out its responsibilities
hereunder.
§ 5-11 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 5-11
5:18
Chapter 9
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Meeting attendance — See Ch. 1, Art. IV.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 45.
Golf courses — See Ch. 146.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 218.
Zoning — See Ch. 255.
Board of Health legislation — See Part III.
§ 5-11 AFFORDABLE HOUSING AGENCY § 5-11
5:19

ARTICLE I
(Reserved)2
§ 9-1. (Reserved)
2. Editor's Note: Former Art. I, Board of Adjustment, adopted 5-26-1975 as Sec. 2-17 of the
1975 Code, was repealed 1-5-2002 by Ord. No. 771RR-01.
§ 9-1 AFFORDABLE HOUSING AGENCY § 9-1
5:21

ARTICLE II
Planning Board
[Adopted 5-26-1975 as Sec. 2-18 of the 1975 Code]
§ 9-2. Establishment.
There shall be a Planning Board established pursuant to and with such
powers as are set forth in Article I of Chapter 45, Land Use Procedures.
§ 9-2 AFFORDABLE HOUSING AGENCY § 9-2
5:23

ARTICLE III
Board of Health
[Adopted 5-26-1975 as Sec. 2-19 of the 1975 Code, as amended
through Ord. No. 485-92]
§ 9-3. Membership; terms; officers; alternate members. [Amended
6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 793-02]
§ 9-4. Meetings.
All meetings of the Board of Health shall be held at the Borough Council
rooms and shall be public meetings. The Board shall keep records of all
meetings and shall report annually thereon on December 31 to the Borough
Council.
§ 9-5. Powers and duties.
The Board of Health shall adopt rules and regulations and adopt ordinances
for its own government. The Board shall appoint a Registrar of Vital
Statistics, Clerk, and Sanitary Inspector and may also appoint such other
officers or assistants as are necessary to carry out its duties. The Board of
Health shall have all of the jurisdiction conferred upon boards of health by
Title 26 of the Revised Statutes.
A. There shall be a Board of Health in the Borough which shall consist of
seven members to be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the Council. Members shall be appointed for a term of three
years each, commencing on January 1 annually. A vacancy occurring
otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled by the Mayor for the
unexpired term only. The Board shall elect a president from among its
members.
B. The position of alternate member of the Board of Health is hereby
established. The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Council,
shall appoint three alternate members to the Board of Health. Alternate
members shall be designated at the time of appointment by the Mayor
as "Alternate No. 1," "Alternate No. 2," "Alternate No. 3" and "Alternate
No. 4." The terms of the alternate members shall be for two years. A
vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of the term shall be
filled by the Mayor for the unexpired term only. [Amended 3-21-2011
by Ord. No. 1030-11; 8-15-2011 by Ord. No. 1036-11]
C. Alternate members may participate in all matters but may not vote
except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member of any
class. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular member may
vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a choice must be
made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote
first.
§ 9-3 AFFORDABLE HOUSING AGENCY § 9-6
5:25
§ 9-6. Contracting of debt.
The Board of Health shall not contract any debt of any kind or nature in
excess of the amount of the appropriation made for its use by the Council
except in accordance with N.J.S.A. 26:3-44.
§ 9-7. Special health reporting officers.
There shall be, when appointed by the Council, special health reporting
officers who shall promptly report to the Department of Health every
violation of health ordinances, rules and regulations which may come within
their observation or knowledge. The police and fire officers, the Building
Inspector and the Engineer may be designated as special health reporting
officers.
§ 9-6 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 9-7
5:26
ARTICLE IV
Board of Recreation Commissioners
[Adopted 5-26-1975 as Sec. 2-21 of the 1975 Code]
§ 9-8. Establishment; membership.
There is hereby created and established a Board of Recreation
Commissioners of the Borough consisting of seven members.
§ 9-9. Powers and duties. [Amended 7-24-2000 by Ord. No. 722-00;
11-17-2003 by Ord. No. 835-03]
The Board of Recreation Commissioners is authorized to make and adopt
suitable rules, regulations and bylaws for the purpose of carrying out its
objects and to elect a Chairman and such other officers as it may deem
advisable from among its members. The Board shall have all of the powers,
duties and functions, obligations and responsibilities as provided in N.J.S.A.
40:12-1 et seq., and the supplements and amendments thereto, including
specifically, but without limitation, organization and administration of Town
Day, summer day camp, Ragamuffin Parade, and Easter Egg Hunt, oversight
and scheduling of use of the Borough's athletic fields and parks, and
oversight of Borough's athletic associations and Senior Activities
Association, as necessary. Subject to the consent of, and in conjunction with,
the Mayor and Council, the Board may appoint a Recreation Director.
§ 9-10. Alternate members. [Added 1-24-2000 by Ord. No. 699-00]
A. The position of alternate member of the Recreation Commission is
hereby established. The Mayor shall appoint two alternate members to
the Recreation Commission. Alternate members shall be designated at
the time of appointment by the Mayor as "Alternate No. 1" and
"Alternate No. 2." The terms of the alternate members shall be for three
years, except that the terms of the alternate members shall be
staggered by the appointment of one of the alternates for an initial term
that is a year less than a regular term.
B. Alternate members may participate in all matters but may not vote
except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member of any
class. In the event that a choice must be made as to which alternate
member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote.
§ 9-8 AFFORDABLE HOUSING AGENCY § 9-10
5:27

ARTICLE V
Golf Course Commission
[Adopted 5-26-1975 as Sec. 2-22 of the 1975 Code, as amended
through Ord. No. 569-96]
§ 9-11. Establishment.
A Golf Course Commission, consisting of five members, is hereby created
and established.
§ 9-12. Appointment; membership; terms; officers. [Amended
12-16-2002 by Ord. No. 812-02]
§ 9-13. Powers and duties.
The Golf Course Commission shall:
A. The Mayor shall nominate and, with the advice and consent of the
Council, appoint all members and alternate members of the
Commission.
B. The term of each member of the Commission shall be three years.
C. The Commission shall elect a Chairperson and other officers as it may
deem advisable from its numbers.
D. Number of alternate members.
(1) The Mayor shall appoint three alternate members to the
Commission. Alternate members shall be designated at the time of
appointment by the Mayor as "Alternate No. 1," "Alternate No. 2"
and "Alternate No. 3." The terms of the alternate members shall be
for two years, except that the terms of the alternate members shall
be staggered by the appointment of one of the alternates for an
initial term of one year.
(2) There shall be added three new alternate members, as “Alternate
No. 4, “ “Alternate No. 5” and “Alternate No. 6,” each to serve twoyear
terms, except that two of the alternates, No. 5 and No. 6, shall
serve an initial term of one year. [Added 2-16-2010 by Ord. No.
1006-10]
E. Alternate members may participate in all matters but may not vote
except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member of any
class. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular member may
vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a choice must be
made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote
if one alternate member is to vote, and Alternate No. 1 and No. 2 shall
vote if two alternate members are to vote.
A. Be responsible for the supervision and control of the operation and
regulation of the Old Tappan Municipal Golf Course and over all forms
§ 9-11 AFFORDABLE HOUSING AGENCY § 9-13
5:29
of recreation, playground and public entertainment and activities
carried on therewith.
B. Establish and adopt suitable rates, charges, rules, regulations and
bylaws for the purpose of carrying out its objects, provided that no such
rates, charges, rules, regulations or bylaws shall become effective
without the approval of the Mayor and Borough Council.
C. Keep regular and accurate financial records and make same available
for review by the Mayor and Council and present the same to the Mayor
and Council at least once a year.
D. Have all the powers, duties, functions, obligations and responsibilities
as provided in N.J.S.A. 40:61-22.9 and the supplements and
amendments thereto.
§ 9-13 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 9-13
5:30
ARTICLE VI
Environmental Commission
[Adopted 5-26-1975 as Sec. 2-27 of the 1975 Code, as amended
through Ord. No. 627-98]
§ 9-14. Establishment; membership; compensation.
In accordance with the provisions of P.L. 1968, c. 245, codified at N.J.S.A.
40:56A-1 et seq., as same may be amended and supplemented, there is
hereby established an Environmental Commission of the Borough. The
Environmental Commission shall consist of five members, one of whom shall
also be a member of the Borough Planning Board and all of whom shall be
residents of the Borough. The members shall serve without compensation,
except as may hereinafter be provided.
§ 9-15. Appointment of members and officers.
The Mayor shall appoint all the members of the Environmental Commission
and shall designate one of such members to serve as Chairman and
presiding officer of the Commission.
§ 9-16. Terms of members; vacancies; removal.
§ 9-17. Alternate members. [Added 1-24-2000 by Ord. No. 700-00]
A. All members of the Environmental Commission shall be appointed for
terms of three years and until their successors are duly appointed and
qualified; provided, however, that in the case of the initial appointment
of members of the Commission, two members shall be appointed for a
term of one year each, two members shall be appointed for a term of
two years each, and one member shall be appointed for a term of three
years.
B. A vacancy on the Commission occurring otherwise than by expiration of
a term shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as an
original appointment.
C. The Mayor and Council may remove any member of the Commission for
cause, on written charges served upon the member and after a hearing
thereon at which the member shall be entitled to be heard in person or
by counsel.
A. The position of alternate member of the Environmental Commission is
hereby established. The Mayor shall appoint two alternate members to
the Environmental Commission. Alternate members shall be designated
at the time of appointment by the mayor as "Alternate No. 1" and
"Alternate No. 2." The terms of the alternate members shall be for two
years, except that the terms of the alternate members shall be two
years for Alternate No. 1 and one year for Alternate No. 2 so that the
term of not more than one alternate member shall expire in any one
year.
§ 9-14 AFFORDABLE HOUSING AGENCY § 9-17
5:31
§ 9-18. Powers and duties.
Subject to the availability of duly appropriated funds by the Mayor and
Council, the Environmental Commission shall have the following powers
and duties:
§ 9-19. Acquisitions by Commission.
Subject to the approval of the Mayor and Council, the Environmental
Commission may acquire property, both real and personal, in the name of
the Borough by gift, purchase, grant, bequest, devise or lease for any of its
purposes and administer the same for such purposes subject to the terms
of the conveyance or gift. Such acquisition may be to acquire the fee or
any lesser interest, development right, easement (including conservation
easement), covenant or other contractual right (including a conveyance
B. Alternate members may participate in all matters but may not vote
except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member of any
class. In the event that a choice must be made as to which alternate
member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote.
A. Conduct research into the use and possible use of the open land areas
of the Borough;
B. Study and make recommendations concerning open space
preservation, protection of wetlands, water resources and watershed
property, management, air pollution control, solid waste management,
recycling, noise control, soil and landscape protection, environmental
appearance, marine resources and protection of flora and fauna;
C. Coordinate the activities of unofficial bodies organized for purposes
similar to those set forth in Subsections A and B above;
D. Advertise, prepare, print and distribute books, maps, charts, plans and
pamphlets which in its judgment it deems necessary for its purposes;
E. Keep an index of all open areas, publicly or privately owned, including
open marshlands, watershed property, swamps and other wetlands, in
order to obtain information on the proper use of such areas, and may,
from time to time, recommend to the Planning Board of the Borough of
Old Tappan plans and programs for inclusion in the Borough master
plan and for the development and use of such areas;
F. Appoint such clerks and other employees or consultants as it may from
time to time require, provided that the costs of such appointments are
within the limit of funds appropriated to the Commission; and
G. To attend such conventions, conferences, seminars or other courses of
instruction as they deem useful or necessary for the performance of
their duties and receive reimbursement of all expenses incurred for the
same as well as for other necessary expenses related to the
Commission's purposes.
§ 9-17 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 9-19
5:32
on conditions or with limitations or reservations), as may be necessary to
acquire, maintain, improve, protect, limit the future use of, or otherwise
conserve and properly utilize open spaces and other land wetlands and
water areas in the Borough.
§ 9-20. Records; annual report.
The Environmental Commission shall keep complete and accurate records
of its meetings and activities and shall make an annual report to the Mayor
and Council.
§ 9-21. Annual appropriation; estimate; amount.
A. By December 31 of each year, the Commission shall certify to the Mayor
and Council the estimated sum necessary for the proper conduct of its
work during the subsequent calendar year.
B. The Mayor and Council shall annually appropriate such sum as it may
deem necessary for the purposes of the Environmental Commission.
§ 9-19 AFFORDABLE HOUSING AGENCY § 9-21
5:33
Chapter 13
BOROUGH COUNCIL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Mayor — See Ch. 50, Art. III.
Clerk — See Ch. 50, Art. IV.
Attorney — See Ch. 50, Art. VIII.
Ordinances — See Ch. 56.
§ 13-1. Composition.
The Mayor and Councilmen of the borough shall constitute the Borough
Council.
§ 13-2. Meetings.
The Council shall hold an annual meeting on January 1, at 12:00 noon, or
during the first seven days of January in any year, and such other meetings
or adjourned meetings at such time and place as it may by resolution direct,
but all regular meetings shall be held within the borough. The Mayor shall,
when necessary, call special meetings of the Council; in case of his neglect
or refusal, any four members of the Council may call such meeting at such
time and place in the borough as they may designate, and in all cases
of special meetings, written notice shall be given to all the members of
the Council left at their places of residence, or by actual contact with the
members by telephone or otherwise.
§ 13-3. Quorum.
Three Councilmen and the Mayor or, in the absence of the Mayor, four
Councilmen, shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, but a
smaller number may meet and adjourn from time to time.
§ 13-4. President.
The Council at its annual meeting shall, by the vote of a majority of the
Council, elect from its number a President of the Council, who shall preside
at all its meetings when the Mayor does not preside. He shall hold office
for one year and until the next annual meeting. He shall have the right
to debate and vote on all questions before the Council. If the Council at
its annual meeting fails to elect a President, the Mayor shall appoint the
President from the Council, and in that case no confirmation by the Council
shall be necessary.
§ 13-5. Acting Mayor.
If the Mayor is absent from the borough for a period of three days or for
any reason is unable to act, the President of the Council shall perform
all the duties of the Mayor during such absence or inability. In case of
§ 9-21 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 13-5
13:34
his intended absence from the borough for more than three days at any
one time, the Mayor shall notify the President in writing of the intended
absence, whereupon the President shall be and become acting Mayor from
the receipt of the notice and continue to act until the Mayor's return. In case
of the temporary inability of the President of Council to so act, the member
of Council having the longest term of service may act temporarily for the
President of Council.
§ 13-6. Powers.
The Council shall possess all the powers granted by or permissible under
the laws of the State of New Jersey.
§ 13-7. Rules of procedure.
The Council shall provide rules of procedure by resolution. These rules shall
not be inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter. Except where the
Council provides otherwise by resolution, the proceedings at all meetings
shall be conducted in accordance with Robert's Rules of Order, revised. The
Borough Attorney shall be ex officio parliamentarian and shall be prepared,
at the request of any member of the Council, to give his opinion on any
question of procedure.
§ 13-8. Attendance at meetings.
All regular and special meetings of the Council shall be open to the public.
The Borough Attorney, the Clerk, and any other borough officer or employee
whose presence is required by resolution of the Council shall attend such
meetings.
§ 13-9. Informal conference meetings.
The Council may convene at any time in informal conference for the study
of municipal business or to plan for the agendas of its future meetings. No
persons other than those specifically invited by the Council to attend shall
be permitted to be present at such conference.
Chapter 18
CLAIMS PROCEDURE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Treasurer — See Ch. 50, Art. VI.
§ 18-1. Procedure.
A. Disbursements in payment of bills and demands shall be made by the
Treasurer upon his/her pre-audit and approval by the Council, except
§ 13-5 CLAIMS PROCEDURE § 18-1
18:35
§ 18-2. Payroll account.
that payments from the payroll account shall be made pursuant to
§ 18-2.
B. Every warrant shall be in the form of a check payable to the order of the
person entitled to receive it and shall specify the purpose for which it is
drawn and the account or appropriation to which it is chargeable.
C. Each check shall be signed by the Mayor and Borough Clerk and
thereafter countersigned by the Borough Treasurer. In the event of the
absence of any of the above-named officials, those duly authorized by
law to act in their absence shall sign the necessary checks.
A. There shall be approved an account to be designated the "Borough of
Old Tappan Payroll Account" and from time to time the Borough
Treasurer, upon receipt of a warrant for an amount due such payroll
account, shall deposit the same to the credit of the payroll account,
charging the appropriate budgetary accounts therewith. The Payroll
Clerk or Borough Treasurer shall thereafter draw checks on the payroll
account to officers and employees entitled to payment therefrom.
B. At each regular meeting of the Borough Council, the Borough
Treasurer, acting as the payroll officer, shall submit for approval or
ratification, as the case may be, the necessary payrolls for the amounts
due the several officers and employees for compensation. The payrolls
shall be considered by the Borough Council in due course and approved
as to total amount due if found to be correct.
C. In the case of error or adjustment in the payroll the Borough Treasurer
shall, and it shall be his duty to see that correction is made, make
proper correction and appropriate record of correction.
D. The position of Payroll Clerk is hereby established. Each payroll check
shall be signed by the Payroll Clerk or Borough Treasurer and
countersigned by the Borough Clerk. All checks shall be drawn on the
payroll account, upon due notice that the payrolls have been approved
by the proper Council committees and by the proper departmental
certifying authorities, and have been approved as to the total amount by
the Mayor and Council.
E. The payrolls shall be drawn as follows:
(1) In advance for all employees whose salaries are on an annual,
quarterly or biweekly basis when such salaries are due and payable
prior to the next regular meeting of the Borough Council.
(2) Up to and including the seventh day prior to the regular meetings
of all employees who are being paid on an hourly basis.
(3) In advance for all employees whose compensation is on an hourly
basis and when the next regular due date is prior to the next
§ 18-1 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 18-2
18:36
Chapter 22
COURT, MUNICIPAL
§ 22-1. Establishment.
There shall be a Municipal Court in the borough as of January 1, 1949,
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 2A:8-1 et seq.3 to be known as the
Municipal Court of the Borough of Old Tappan. The Municipal Court shall
have a seal bearing the impress of the name of the Court.
§ 22-2. Municipal Judge.
§ 22-3. Municipal Court Clerk; Deputy Clerk.5
There shall be a Clerk and Deputy Clerk of the Municipal Court, each of
whom shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of
the Council, for a term of one year commencing January 1 of the year in
which each is appointed. The Clerk and Deputy Clerk shall perform such
functions and duties as shall be prescribed for such officers by law, the rules
applicable to Municipal Courts and by the Municipal Judge. The duties of
the Clerk and Deputy Clerk shall include, but not be limited to:
regular meeting of the Borough Council, provided that such
compensation has been approved by some responsible designated
official and the chairman of the appropriate committee and has
been certified to the Treasurer.
A. There shall be a Municipal Judge appointed by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the Borough Council. The Municipal Judge shall
serve for a term of three years from the date of appointment and until a
successor shall be appointed and qualified.
B. The Municipal Judge shall have and possess the qualifications, and shall
have, possess and exercise all of the functions, duties, powers and
jurisdiction conferred by N.J.S.A. 2A:8,4 or by general law or ordinance.
A. Carrying out the rules, regulations, policies and procedures relating to
the operation of the Court.
B. Interviewing and speaking to prospective complainants; receiving
complaints and dispensing information relating to Court matters.
C. Maintaining the financial records of the Court.
3. Editor's Note: Repealed by L. 1993, c. 293. See now N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1 et seq.
4. Editor's Note: See now N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1 et seq.
5. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 2B:12-10 for current provisions concerning appointment of
Municipal Court Administrator.
§ 18-2 CLAIMS PROCEDURE § 22-3
18:37
§ 22-4. Application fee for representation by Public Defender.
[Amended 5-2-2011 by Ord. No. 1033-11]
A person applying for representation by the Public Defender shall pay an
application fee of $200. The Municipal Court may waive the application
fee, in whole or in part, if the Court determines, in its discretion, that the
application fee represents an unreasonable burden on the person seeking
representation.
Chapter 25
DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 50.
§ 25-1. Authorization.
Except as hereinafter provided, the Borough of Old Tappan, hereinafter
known as "the Borough," shall, upon the request of any present or former
official, employee or appointee of the Borough, provide for indemnification
and legal defense of any civil action brought against said person or persons
arising from an act or omission falling within the scope of their public
duties.
§ 25-2. Exemplary or punitive damages.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 59:10-4, the indemnification and defense provided for
in this chapter shall include exemplary or punitive damages resulting from
the employee's civil violation of state or federal law if, in the opinion of
the Mayor and Council, the acts committed upon which the damages are
based did not constitute actual fraud, actual malice, willful misconduct or
an intentional wrong.
D. Attending Court, taking minutes of the trials and entering them in the
docket; arranging trial calendars; signing Court documents; preparing
and issuing warrants and commitments.
E. Taking and preparing bail bonds, making inquiry as to their sufficiency
and equity; receiving and accounting for fines and costs.
F. Interviewing persons on informal Police Court matters to determine if
there is a basis for formal action and, if necessary, issue summonses
requiring Court appearance in this regard; maintaining and classifying
records and files.
§ 22-3 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 25-3
25:38
§ 25-3. Construal of terms; definitions.
The terms of this chapter and the definitions of "official," "employee" and
"appointee" are to be construed liberally in order to effectuate the purposes
of this chapter, except that these terms shall not mean:
§ 25-4. Civil actions; cross-claims and counterclaims.
§ 25-5. Defense in criminal and other actions.
In any other action or proceeding, including criminal proceedings, the
Borough may provide for the defense of a present or former official,
employee or appointee, if the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Old
Tappan concludes that such representation is in the best interest of the
Borough and that the person to be defended acted or failed to act in accord
with the standards set forth in this chapter.
§ 25-6. Control of representation.
Whenever the Borough provides for the defense of any action set forth
herein and as a condition of such defense, the Borough may assume
exclusive control over the representation of such persons defended and
such person shall cooperate fully with the Borough.
A. Any person who is not a natural person;
B. Any person while providing goods or services of any kind under any
contract with the Borough except an employment contract;
C. Any person while providing legal or engineering services for
compensation unless said person is a full-time employee of the
Borough; and
D. Any person who as a condition of his or her appointment or contract is
required to indemnify and defend the Borough and/or secure insurance.
A. The Borough shall provide for the defense of and indemnify any present
or former official, employee or appointee of the Mayor and Council of
the Borough of Old Tappan who becomes a defendant in a civil action, if
the person or persons involved:
(1) Acted or failed to act in a matter in which the Borough has or had
an interest;
(2) Acted or failed to act in the discharge of a duty imposed or
authorized by law; and
(3) Acted or failed to take action in good faith.
B. For purposes of this chapter, the duty and authority of the Borough to
defend and indemnify shall extend to a cross-claim or counterclaim
against said person.
§ 25-3 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 25-7
25:39
§ 25-7. Counsel.
The Borough may provide for the defense pursuant to this chapter by
authorizing its attorney to act on behalf of the person being defended or by
employing other counsel for this purpose or by asserting the right of the
Borough under any appropriate insurance policy that requires the insurer
to provide defense.
Chapter 27
DEPARTMENTS
§ 25-7 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 25-7
25:40
ARTICLE I
Police Department
[Adopted 5-26-1975 as Sec. 2-10 of the 1975 Code, as amended
through Ord. No. 575-96]
§ 27-1. Establishment. [Amended 3-18-2002 by Ord. No. 781-02;
7-18-2005 by Ord. No. 885-05]
In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118, there is hereby established in
the Borough a Police Department, which shall be known as the "Police
Department of the Borough of Old Tappan."
§ 27-2. Police Committee; appropriate authority. [Amended
7-18-2005 by Ord. No. 885-05]
§ 27-3. Composition.
§ 27-4. Appointment; special officers. [Amended 5-19-2003 by Ord.
No. 822-03]
A. Appointment. The Mayor shall, at the first regular meeting of the
Borough Council in January in each year, appoint from among the
members of the Borough Council a Police Committee and a Police
Commissioner, the latter of whom shall serve as Chairman of the
Committee and who shall serve in such capacity without compensation.
B. Appropriate authority. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118, the
Mayor and Council is hereby designated as the “appropriate authority.”
The appropriate authority shall have general supervisory authority over
the Police Department to ensure the efficient and effective operation
thereof.
A. The Police Department shall consist of one Chief, two Captains, two
Lieutenants, three Sergeants, and as many patrolmen or patrolwomen
and such other employees as the Borough Council may from time to
time deem necessary and proper. [Amended 7-18-2005 by Ord. No.
885-05]
B. Designation of the foregoing members shall not make appointment
thereto at any time mandatory and vacancies therein may occur from
time to time.
A. The members of the Police Department shall be appointed by the
Borough Council and confirmed by a majority vote thereof, at a regular
or special meeting.
B. The Borough Council may employ special officers for a term not
exceeding one year in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.6
6. Editor's Note: Repealed by L. 1985, c. 439. See now N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.8.
§ 27-1 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 27-4
25:41
§ 27-5. Probationary term; promotions other than Chief of Police.
[Amended 11-13-2000 by Ord. No. 734-00]
§ 27-6. Qualifications.
No person shall be appointed as a member of the Police Department unless
he submits satisfactory evidence to the appointing authority that he is:
C. A member of the Borough police force may be assigned as a Detective
by the Police Chief to serve at his discretion.
A. Persons appointed to the Police Department shall serve a probationary
period or term not less than six months nor more than two years and
until such time as the Borough Council resolves that the appointment is
permanent, at which effective date, and not prior thereto, the appointee
shall become a regular member of the Police Department. The Police
Commissioner and the Police Committee shall be responsible for
observing and reporting the progress and qualifications of any
probationary appointee, and the Borough Council shall consider the
recommendations of the Commissioner and Committee in determining
whether or not to resolve that any appointment be made permanent.
The Borough Council shall have the right to terminate the services of
any probationary appointee without conducting a hearing thereon and
may do so by majority vote solely within its judgment and discretion in
the best interests of the Borough.
B. Promotion, other than the Chief of Police, shall be made by a majority
vote of the Borough Council, upon recommendation of the Police
Committee after consultation with the Chief of Police, with due regard
to seniority, experience, evaluations, merit and other qualifications. No
member of the Police Department shall be promoted to or hold any
superior rank until he has served at least three years in the Police
Department, exclusive of probationary time. However, whenever the
Borough Council shall, by a majority vote, determine that the interests
of the Borough security require a waiver of the three-year period, the
same may be waived by resolution. Examinations may be conducted to
assist in determining the qualifications for such promotion. Such
examination shall be selected by the Police Committee. [Amended
7-18-2005 by Ord. No. 885-05]
A. A citizen of the United States and, at the time of application, possesses:
[Amended 11-13-2000 by Ord. No. 734-00; 8-21-2006 by Ord. No.
917-06]
(1) A high school degree or equivalent; and
(2) An associate's degree or 60 completed college credits from an
accredited college or university, or has been honorably discharged
from active duty from a branch of the United States Military.
§ 27-4 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 27-6
25:42
§ 27-7. Chief of Police. [Amended 11-13-2000 by Ord. No. 734-00]
B. Of good mental and bodily health sufficient to satisfy the Board of
Trustees of the Police and Firemens' Retirement System of New Jersey,
and that he is eligible for membership in the retirement system.
C. Able to read, write and speak the English language well and
intelligently.
D. Of good moral character and free from conviction of any crime
constituting an indictable offense, or any crime or offense involving
moral turpitude.
E. Not less than 18 years of age, nor more than 35 years of age, or that he
falls within the provisions of N.J.S.A. 38:23A-2, pertaining to persons
having served in the Armed Forces of the United States.
F. Able to pass the written, oral and physical examination selected by the
Police Committee and as shall be approved by a majority vote of the
Borough Council. Such examination shall be conducted by professional
police officers or persons not in the employ of the Borough of Old
Tappan.
G. Willing to take an oath or affirmation before entering upon the duties of
his office and within ten days after his appointment to support the
Constitution of the United States, the Constitution of the State of New
Jersey, and faithfully, impartially, and justly to perform all the duties of a
member of the Police Department of the Borough according to the best
of his ability and understanding.
H. Willing to serve a probationary period of not less than six months nor
more than two years, during which time he shall be required to attend
an accredited school as recommended by the Borough Council.
A. The Chief of Police shall be the head of the Police Department, and the
Chief shall be directly responsible to the Mayor and Council for the
efficiency and routine day-to-day operations thereof, and the Chief
shall, pursuant to policies established by the Mayor and Council:
(1) Administer and enforce rules and regulations and specific
emergency directives for the disposition and discipline of the Police
Department and its officers and personnel;
(2) Have, exercise, and discharge the functions, powers and duties of
the Police Department;
(3) Prescribe the duties and assignments of all subordinates and other
personnel;
(4) Delegate such of the Chief's authority as the Chief may deem
necessary for the efficient operation of the Police Department to be
exercised under the Chief's direction and supervision; and
§ 27-6 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 27-7
25:43
§ 27-8. Emergency traffic control.
The Chief of Police or, in the Chief's absence, the ranking officer on duty,
is authorized to place emergency traffic control devices at intersections
governed or controlled by traffic lights, traffic signals or other traffic control
devices whenever such lights, signals or devices are rendered impaired or
inoperable. Included among such emergency traffic control devices, by way
of illustration but not limitation, are road flares, portable signs, barricades
and emergency generators. The authority to place emergency traffic control
devices conferred by this subsection is intended to supplement and not to
limit such emergency powers as are conferred upon the Police Department
by law.
§ 27-9. Powers and duties.
(5) Report at least monthly to the Police Commissioner in such form as
shall be prescribed by the Police Commissioner on the operation of
the Police Department during the preceding month, and make such
other reports as may be requested by the police commissioner.
B. Appointment shall be made by a majority vote of the Borough Council,
upon recommendation of the Police Committee after consultation with
those deemed by the Committee to have relevant knowledge, with due
regard to seniority, experience, merit and other qualifications. No
member of the Police Department shall be appointed to or hold the
position of Chief of Police unless he/she holds the rank of Sergeant or
higher. The procedure to be followed for appointing the Chief of Police
shall be established by the Police Committee.
A. The rights, privileges, powers and duties of members of the Police
Department and special officers shall be those prescribed by the laws of
the State of New Jersey and the ordinances and resolutions of the
Borough.
B. Rules and regulations consistent with applicable law and this Article I
shall from time to time be adopted by resolution of the Mayor and
Council to describe:
(1) Duties of the Police Department;
(2) General rules of the Police Department;
(3) Rules of discipline;
(4) Duties of the Chief of Police consistent with § 27-7 hereof;
(5) Duties of a Captain, Lieutenant, Sergeant and patrolman;
(6) Procedure of arrests;
(7) Uniform and equipment;
(8) Leave of absence;
§ 27-7 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 27-9
25:44
§ 27-10. Removal and suspension.
(9) Sickness or sick leave;
(10) Vacations;
(11) Special duties; and
(12) Procedure for the proper enforcement of this article.
A. No person, except during probationary membership or status, shall be
removed from office or employment in any Police Department for
political reasons, or for any other cause than incapacity, misconduct, or
disobedience of rules and regulations established for the government of
the police force and department in the Borough.
B. Except as otherwise provided by law, no permanent member or officer
shall be suspended, removed, fined or reduced in rank from or in office,
employment or position therein, except for just cause as hereinbefore
provided and then only upon a written complaint setting forth the
charge or charges against such member or officer. The complaint shall
be filed in the office of the body, officer or officers having charge of the
department or force wherein the complaint is made and a copy shall be
served upon the member or officer so charged, with notice of a
designated hearing thereon by the proper authorities, which shall not
be less than 15 nor more than 30 days from date of service of the
complaint. A failure to comply with these provisions as to the service of
the complaint shall require a dismissal of the complaint.
C. It is the intent of this section to give every person against whom
charges for any cause may be preferred under this section a fair trial
upon the charges and every reasonable opportunity to make his defense
if he has or chooses to make any and that in the event of failure of
compliance with any provision of this section, such charges shall be
dismissed.
D. The Council shall have the power of subpoena under the Seal of the
Borough and attested by the Borough Clerk to compel the attendance of
witnesses and give testimony or produce evidence, and every person
who neglects to obey such subpoena or to give testimony or to answer
questions as required shall be subject to the penalties provided by law.
E. Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, whenever any police
officer is charged under the law of this state, another state, or the
United States, with an offense, said police officer may be suspended
from performing his duties, with pay, until the case against him is
disposed of at trial, until the complaint is dismissed, or until the
prosecution is terminated, provided that if a grand jury returns an
indictment against the officer, or the officer is charged with an offense
which is a high misdemeanor or which involves moral turpitude or
dishonesty, he may be suspended from his duties, without pay, until the
§ 27-9 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 27-10
25:45
§ 27-11. Salaries; retirement benefit for Chief of Police.
case against him is disposed of at trial, until the complaint is dismissed
or until the prosecution is terminated.
F. If a suspended police officer is found not guilty at trial, the charges are
dismissed or the prosecution is terminated, the officer shall be
reinstated to his position and shall be entitled to recover all pay
withheld during the period of suspension subject to any disciplinary
proceedings or administrative action.
G. If any municipal police officer is suspended with pay and is found guilty
of the charges brought against him, he shall reimburse the municipality
for all pay received by him during the period of his suspension.
H. Any person desiring to make a complaint against any member or
members of the Police Department shall make the complaint in writing
to the Chief of Police. It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police forthwith
to deliver the original charges to the Police Commissioner who is in turn
to refer to the Mayor and Council for its attention. Upon receipt of any
charges against the member of the Department from the Mayor, the
Mayor and Council shall take whatever action is deemed necessary.
I. In the event a person wishes to make a charge against the Chief of
Police, the charges shall be filed with the Police Commissioner who
shall in turn transmit same forthwith to the Mayor and Council for its
attention in accordance with the provisions of this section.
J. Members of the Department serving in a probationary status may be
removed from office or membership without charges or hearing and
solely within the judgment and discretion of the Mayor and Council.
K. When the Borough Council shall, for reasons of economy, decrease the
number of regularly appointed members or policemen in the Borough,
any policeman so removed shall be carried on a special list and if any
new appointments are made to the Department, the policeman so
removed shall be appointed thereto before any other person, as
required by N.J.S.A. 40:47-11.7
A. Salaries. All members of the Police Department and employees shall
receive such compensation as shall be set forth in the Annual Salary
Ordinance of the Borough. [Amended 2-28-2000 by Ord. No.
705-00]
B. Retirement benefit for Chief of Police. The Borough shall provide the
Chief of Police with a lump-sum payment upon the retirement of the
Chief of Police, provided that the Chief of Police has served at least 25
years with the Borough and at least 15 years as Chief of Police of the
Borough. The lump-sum payment shall equal 50% of the base annual
salary of the Chief of Police for the calendar year next preceding the
7. Editor's Note: Repealed by L. 1971, c. 197.
§ 27-10 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 27-11
25:46
§ 27-11.1. Contracted off-duty employment. [Added 7-16-2001 by
Ord. No. 746-01; amended 2-19-2002 by Ord. No. 774-02; 4-21-2008
by Ord. No. 965-08]
date of retirement of the Chief of Police except that, if the Chief of
Police retires at the end of a calendar year, the payment shall equal 50%
of the base annual salary of the Chief of Police at the time of retirement.
A. Purpose. For the convenience of those persons and entities which
utilize the services of off-duty law enforcement officers of the Old
Tappan Police Department and to authorize the outside employment of
Borough police while off duty, the Borough hereby establishes a policy
regarding the use of said officers and police vehicles.
(1) Members of the Police Department shall be permitted to accept
police-related employment for private employers or school districts
only during off-duty hours and at such time as will not interfere
with the efficient performance of regularly scheduled or emergency
duty for the Borough.
(2) Any person or entity wishing to employ off-duty police shall first
obtain the approval of the Chief of Police, which approval shall be
granted if, in the opinion of the Chief, such employment would not
be inconsistent with the efficient functioning and good reputation
of the Police Department and would not unreasonably endanger or
threaten the safety of the officer or officers who are to perform the
work.
(3) In the event that the off-duty employment requires usage of a police
vehicle, the officer shall obtain the written consent of the Chief of
Police, which approval shall be granted if the nature of the work
requires the use of a vehicle, said vehicle is not needed for
performance of regular police functions during that period of time
and the flat usage fee called for herein is agreed to in writing by the
private employer or school district.
B. Escrow accounts.
(1) Except as provided hereinbelow, any person or entity requesting
the services of an off-duty law enforcement officer in the Old
Tappan Police Department shall estimate the number of hours such
law enforcement services are required, which estimate shall be
approved in writing by the Chief of Police, and shall establish an
escrow account with the Borough Treasurer of the Borough by
depositing an amount sufficient to cover the rates of compensation
and administrative fees set forth hereinbelow for the total
estimated hours of service.
(2) If the amount required to be deposited with the Borough pursuant
to Subsection B(1) hereinabove exceeds $20,000, an escrow
deposit of $20,000 shall be required. Said $20,000 shall be
§ 27-11 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 27-11.1
25:47
maintained until such time as the amount required to be deposited
for all remaining services on any given project shall be less than
$20,000, and then such lesser amount shall be required to be
maintained.
(3) Prior to posting any request for services of off-duty law
enforcement officers, the Chief of Police or his designee shall verify
that the balance in the escrow account of the person or entity
requesting services is sufficient to cover the compensation and fees
for the number of hours specified in the request for services. The
Chief of Police shall not post a request for services from any person
or entity unless all fees and compensation required in the manner
described above have been deposited with the Borough Treasurer.
No officer shall provide any such services for more hours than are
specified in the request for services.
(4) In the event the funds in such an escrow account should become
depleted, services of off-duty law enforcement officers shall cease
and requests for further or future services shall not be performed
or posted until additional funds have been deposited in the escrow
account in the manner prescribed above.
(5) The person or entity requesting such services shall be responsible
for ensuring that sufficient funds remain in the escrow account in
order to avoid any interruption of services.
(6) Houses of worship and local public schools shall be exempt from
the requirements for the posting of an escrow deposit.
C. Requests for services. All requests to the Borough for the services of offduty
law enforcement officers in the Old Tappan Police Department for
a period of one week or longer shall be forwarded to the Chief of Police
for posting at least 10 days before such services are required. Any law
enforcement officers, when so employed by the Borough, shall be
treated as employees of the Borough; provided, however, that wages
earned for outside employment shall not be applied toward the pension
benefits of law enforcement officers so employed.
D. Rates of compensation; administrative fee; payment for services. Rates
of compensation for contracting the services of off-duty law
enforcement officers shall be based on a rate equal to that of time and
one-half of the contractual hourly rate for the individual officer being
compensated. An additional fee of 15% of the rate as calculated above is
hereby established to cover administrative costs, overhead, and out-ofpocket
expenses of the Borough, plus a flat rate of $200 per vehicle
used at each site per day.
§ 27-11.1 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 27-11.1
25:48
ARTICLE II
Fire Department
[Adopted 5-26-1975 as Sec. 2-11 of the 1975 Code, as amended
through Ord. No. 564-95]
§ 27-12. Establishment; designation.
§ 27-13. Fire Commissioner or Fire Committee.
§ 27-14. Qualifications. [Amended 12-4-2006 by Ord. No. 927-06]
A. A Fire Department is hereby created and established for the Borough,
to consist of as many engine, hook and ladder, hose and salvage
companies as may, from time to time, be determined by resolution and
adopted at a regular meeting of the Mayor and Borough Council.
B. The companies of the Fire Department shall be known and designated
without reference to their equipment as Company No. One of the Old
Tappan Fire Department, each company adopting a numeral in the
order of its organization.
A. A Fire Commissioner, or a Fire Committee consisting of three members,
shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the
Council. The Fire Commissioner or Committee shall have control of the
Fire Department, subject to the approval of the Mayor and the Council.
B. The Chairperson of the Fire Committee, who shall be appointed by the
Mayor and approved by the Council, shall be entitled to attend the
regular monthly meetings of the fire company and may, at the direction
of the Mayor and Council, act as their deputy. The Chairperson shall
also, at the request of the fire company, act as their representative at
the regular Council meetings.
A. No person shall hereafter become a member of the Fire Department of
the Borough unless he or she:
(1) Shall be more than 18 years of age and less than 40 years of age.
(2) Is a citizen of the United States.
(3) Is of good moral character and free from conviction of any crime
constituting an indictable offense, or any crime or offense involving
moral turpitude.
(4) Served a probationary period of one year.
(5) Shall be physically fit to perform duties of a fire fighter, which shall
be evidenced by a certificate to that effect by a practicing physician
of the State of New Jersey after physical examination for that
purpose.
§ 27-12 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 27-14
25:49
§ 27-15. Officers.
B. A junior firefighter shall be between the age of 16 years and 18 years of
age. A cadet shall be 15 years of age. [Amended 2-16-2010 by Ord.
No. 1003-10]
(1) Junior firefighters and cadets shall meet all of the qualifications in
Subsection A hereof except for the age requirement and the
requirement for a probationary period. In addition, they shall
obtain and submit signed consents from their parents on forms
provided by the Fire Department. They shall be residents of the
Borough of Old Tappan and citizens of the United States.
(2) There shall be a maximum of 10 cadet positions. In the event that
there are less than 10 cadent positions filled by the Borough of Old
Tappan residents, nonresidents residing in any municipality which
has a mutual aid agreement with the Borough of Old Tappan may
become cadets.
(3) Junior firefighters and cadets shall be trained in fire-fighting
techniques, including, but not limited to:
(a) Classroom presentations of the basics of firefighting.
(b) Drills during which junior firefighters and cadets will perform
fire-fighting functions.
(c) Participation at department drills under the guidance of
qualified firemen.
(d) Response to fires and other emergencies in observer status
only.
(e) Hands-on experience in taking-up after a fire or emergency.
(4) Subject to budgetary requirements, the Chief of the Fire
Department may grant a clothing allowance to junior firefighters
and cadets.
A. The Fire Department, as well as each company, shall have power to
choose their officers by ballot and to determine the qualifications of its
members, except as hereinafter set forth and except that no officers or
members shall be installed until after approval by resolution by the
Mayor and Council.
(1) The Chief of the Department and Deputy Chief shall be chosen by
the majority votes by ballot of the members of all the companies of
the Department and shall hold office for one year or until their
successors are chosen. [Amended 10-1-2007 by Ord. No.
957-07]
§ 27-14 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 27-15
25:50
§ 27-16. Duties of Chief and Deputy Chief. [Amended 10-1-2007 by
Ord. No. 957-07]
§ 27-17. Duty requirements. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No.
1111-17]
Every member of any volunteer fire company shall in each year perform at
least 50% of duty to be composed of actual attendance and duty at fires and
(2) The Chief of the Department shall be a resident of the Borough or a
resident of one of the contiguous New Jersey municipalities: River
Vale, Harrington Park, Northvale or Norwood.
(3) Company officers shall be chosen by the majority votes by ballot of
the members of the respective companies, and shall hold office for
one year or until their successors are chosen.
(4) Company officers shall not also be officers in the Fire Department
of another municipality.
B. All officers of the Department shall receive a commission, signed by the
Mayor and attested by the Borough Clerk.
A. The Chief of the Department, or the officer highest in rank in the
Department, shall keep himself/herself informed as to the fire
conditions of the Borough and the conditions of the apparatus and
personnel and report thereon, in writing, to the Mayor and Council at
their regular meetings in January, April, July and October of each year,
together with a report in detail of the service rendered by the
Department during the preceding three months.
B. The Chief of the Department, at fires and at all times on duty, shall have
sole and absolute command of the officers and fire fighters present and
be responsible for their discipline and efficiency.
C. The Deputy Chief shall render such service and perform such duties as
the Chief may require. In the absence of the Chief, the Deputy Chief
shall assume his/her obligations, exercise his/her powers and perform
his/her duties.
D. Authority of the officers while on duty shall be determined by grade. All
officers and fire fighters shall be subordinate to the Chief of the
Department. The first officers on duty at a fire shall exercise command
until his/her superior arrives. If two officers of the same grade meet on
duty, the officer longest in office shall take command. A company
arriving at a fire without an officer shall be commanded by the member
who first arrives at the firehouse.
E. The Chief of the Department, or his designated representative, is
authorized to provide mutual aid services to any community or district
the Fire Chief, or his designated representative, deems necessary.
[Added 8-17-2009 by Ord. No. 991-09]
§ 27-15 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 27-17
25:51
drills. A record shall be kept of such attendance and duty by the Chief of
the Department and reported to the Borough officers annually. Credit for all
service rendered shall be computed from May 27, 1942.
§ 27-18. Exemption certificate.
Exemption certificates shall be issued to any member of any fire company
who shall have served seven years in active duty.
§ 27-19. Equipment.
Apparatus and appliances to be used in the Department for the
extinguishment of fires and for the protection of property exposed to fire, or
water used thereon, shall be such as the Mayor and Council shall from time
to time direct, and shall be purchased and owned by the Borough, but shall
be maintained and used by the Department. The Mayor and Council may
from time to time appropriate sufficient sums for the proper maintenance
and repair of the equipment and apparatus of the Department and of the
maintenance of the firehouses.
§ 27-20. Taking apparatus outside Borough.
No company of the Department shall attend parades or other functions, or
take apparatus outside of the Borough except with the written consent of
the Mayor, or in his absence, with the consent of a majority of the members
of the Borough Council, the permission of the Fire Commissioner, if one has
been appointed or a member of the Fire Committee, if it is in existence.
When such consent is granted, it is with the express understanding that the
fire company shall provide a special detail of its members, which shall hold
themselves in readiness to tender fire duty should the necessity occur while
the fire company is away from the Borough. This provision shall not apply in
the case of an appeal for help at a fire coming from a neighboring Borough.
§ 27-21. Rules and regulations.
Each company shall have the power to adopt bylaws and rules and
regulations for its government not inconsistent with the provisions of this
article. No such bylaws or rules and regulations shall go into effect until
approved by the Mayor and Borough Council.
§ 27-17 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 27-21
25:52
ARTICLE III
Department of Public Works
[Adopted 5-26-1975 as Sec. 2-12 of the 1975 Code, as amended
through Ord. No. 614-97]
§ 27-22. Creation.
There is hereby created a Department of Public Works in and for the
Borough.
§ 27-23. Organization.
§ 27-24. Powers and duties.
A. The Department of Public Works shall be comprised of two separate
divisions as follows:
(1) Public Works Division; and
(2) Golf Course Division.
B. The Public Works Division shall contain the following positions:
(1) Superintendent of Public Works;
(2) Assistant Superintendent of Public Works;
(3) Mechanic; and
(4) Public Works Division maintenance personnel.
C. The Golf Course Division shall contain the following positions:
(1) Superintendent of Golf Course Division;
(2) Foreman of the Golf Course Division;
(3) Golf Course Division maintenance personnel;
(4) Golf Course Division laborers.
A. The Department of Public Works as hereby established shall be subject
to the rules and regulations adopted from time to time by the Mayor
and Council and specifically shall be responsible for the following
duties:
(1) Maintenance and repair of all buildings owned by the Borough.
(2) Maintenance of all parks or playgrounds owned by the Borough.
(3) Maintenance of the Borough's municipally owned golf course.
(4) Maintenance and repair and storage of all machinery and
equipment purchased by the Borough for use by the Department of
Public Works.
§ 27-22 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 27-24
25:53
§ 27-25. Qualifications.
No person shall be appointed as a member of the Department of Public
Works unless he or she is of good mental and physical health. All persons
seeking employment shall undertake a physical examination by a physician
designated by the Borough Administrator. Such examination shall be
administered to assure that the person is of sufficient physical health as
is necessary to discharge the responsibilities of an employee of the
Department of Public Works.
§ 27-26. Superintendent of Public Works.
(5) Maintenance, cleaning and repair of all Borough streets and roads.
(6) Maintenance and repair of all Borough catch basins, storm drains
and drainage easements.
(7) Maintenance and repair of all Borough-owned signs.
(8) Maintenance of all Borough crosswalk and road markings.
(9) Maintenance of all Borough rights-of-way.
(10) Supervision of Borough subcontractors for snow plowing.
(11) Cindering or sanding of roads where and when necessary during
winter months.
(12) Authorize the hiring of additional outside help with the approval of
the Mayor and Council as required.
(13) Be responsible for the servicing of all requests and complaints from
citizens involving Borough facilities under the supervision of the
Department of Public Works.
B. The Golf Course Division generally shall have the powers and duties as
set forth hereinabove as they may pertain to the golf course, its
buildings, grounds and equipment. The Public Works Division generally
shall have the powers and duties as set forth hereinabove except as
they may pertain to the golf course, its buildings, grounds and
equipment.
A. Appointment. There shall be a Superintendent of Public Works
appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the Council for a one-year
term ending on January 1 of the calendar year next following the
appointment. A person holding office, position or employment as fulltime
Superintendent of Public Works who has held office, position or
employment continuously for five years or more shall continue to hold
the office, position or employment, notwithstanding he is serving a fixed
term, during good behavior and efficiency and shall not be removed
therefrom for political or other reasons except for good cause, upon
written charges filed with the Borough Clerk and after a public, fair and
impartial hearing.
§ 27-24 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 27-26
25:54
§ 27-27. Assistant Superintendent of Public Works.
§ 27-28. Superintendent of Golf Course Division.
B. The Superintendent of Public Works shall:
(1) Be a full-time employee at an annual salary established annually by
ordinance of the Mayor and Council; and
(2) Function under the general supervision and direction of the Public
Works Committee of the Borough Council.
C. Duties. The Superintendent of Public Works shall:
(1) Be required to submit a written annual report at the end of each
year to the Mayor and Council setting forth an outline of the work
performed in the year by the Public Works Division, a Public Works
Division budget request for the ensuing year, together with any
general or specific recommendations regarding the performance or
projects of the Public Works Division.
(2) Be required and responsible to confer with and follow any and all
recommendations of the Borough Engineer on work of the Public
Works Division which requires engineering specifications or special
technical knowledge.
(3) Employ such full- and part-time employees as the Council may
approve by resolution, and assign such employees to duties in the
Public Works Division.
(4) Transfer employees of the Department from the Public Works
Division to the Golf Course Division or from the Golf Course
Division to the Public Works Division whenever necessary for the
proper administration of the Department.
A. Appointment. There shall be an Assistant Superintendent of Public
Works appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the Council for a
one-year term ending on January 1 of the calendar year next following
the appointment. The Assistant Superintendent of Public Works shall be
a full-time employee compensated in accordance with the DPW
Collective Bargaining Unit with the Borough of Old Tappan.
B. Duties. The Assistant Superintendent shall perform the duties assigned
to him by the Superintendent of Public Works and shall perform all
duties of the Superintendent of Public Works in his or her absence.
A. Appointment. The Superintendent of the Golf Course Division shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the Council for a one-year
term ending on January 1 of the calendar year next following his or her
appointment.
B. The superintendent of Golf Course Division shall:
§ 27-26 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 27-28
25:55
§ 27-29. Foreman of Golf Course Division.
§ 27-30. Mechanic.
(1) Be a full-time employee at an annual salary established by
ordinance of the Mayor and Council; and
(2) Function under the general supervision and direction of the Public
Works and Recreation and Golf Committees of the Borough
Council.
C. Duties. The Superintendent of Golf Course Division shall:
(1) Be required to submit a written annual report at the end of each
year to the Mayor and Council setting forth an outline of the work
performed in the year by the Golf Course Division, a Golf Course
Division budget request for the ensuing year, together with any
general or specific recommendations regarding the performance or
projects of the Golf Course Division.
(2) Be required and responsible to confer with and follow any and all
recommendations of the Borough Engineer on work of the Golf
Course Division which requires engineering specifications or
special technical knowledge.
(3) Employ such full- and part-time employees as the Council may
approve by resolution, and assign such employees to duties in the
Golf Course Division.
A. Appointment. The Foreman of Golf Course Division shall be appointed
by the Superintendent of Golf Course Division with the consent of the
Mayor and Council for a one-year term on January 1 of the calendar
year next following his or her appointment. The foreman shall be a fulltime
employee at an annual salary established by ordinance of the
Mayor and Council.
B. Duties. The foreman of Golf Course Division shall perform all duties
assigned to him by the superintendent of golf course and shall perform
all duties pertaining to the Old Tappan Municipal Golf Course in the
absence of the superintendent of golf course.
A. Appointment. The mechanic shall be appointed by the Superintendent
of Department of Public Works with the consent of the Mayor and
Council for a one-year term ending on January 1 of the calendar year
next following his or her appointment.
B. Duties. The mechanic shall perform all duties assigned to him by the
Superintendent of Public Works. The mechanic's duties shall be limited
generally to the maintenance and repair of department and Borough
vehicles, equipment and machinery.
§ 27-28 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 27-31
25:56
§ 27-31. Public Works Division maintenance personnel, Golf Course
Division maintenance personnel and Golf Course Division laborers.
§ 27-32. Removal and suspension.
A. Public Works Division maintenance personnel shall perform the duties
assigned by the Superintendent of Public Works or Assistant
Superintendent of Public Works, where appropriate. Duties of Public
Works Division maintenance personnel shall generally not include
maintenance of the Old Tappan Municipal Golf Course except as set
forth hereinbelow.
B. Golf Course Division maintenance personnel and Golf Course Division
laborers shall perform the duties assigned by the Superintendent of the
Golf Course Division or foreman of the Golf Course Division, where
appropriate. Duties of Golf Course Division maintenance personnel and
Golf Course Division laborers shall be limited generally to maintenance
of the Old Tappan Municipal Golf Course except as set forth
hereinbelow.
C. The Superintendent of Public Works may transfer employees of the
Department from the Public Works Division to the Golf Course Division
or from the Golf Course Division to the Public Works Division whenever
necessary for the proper administration of the Department.
A. The term "employee" as used in this section shall mean a full-time,
permanent employee of the Department of Public Works of the Borough
and shall not be deemed to include any person hired by the Borough
under the Comprehensive Employment and Training Act of 1973
(CETA), 29 USCS § 801 et seq., or under any other federal or state grant
program whereby the Borough is directly or indirectly reimbursed for
all or part of the salary paid to such person.
B. No employee of the Department of Public Works, except during
probationary status or except as otherwise hereinafter provided, shall
be removed from office or employment in the Department of Public
Works for political reasons, or for any other cause than incapacity,
misconduct, or disobedience of rules and regulations from time to time
established for the government of the Department of Public Works and
its employees in the Borough.
C. Except as otherwise provided by law, no permanent employee of the
Department of Public Works shall be suspended, removed, fined or
reduced in rank from or in office, employment or position therein,
except for just cause as hereinbefore provided and then only upon a
written complaint setting forth the charge or charges against such
employee. The complaint shall be filed in the office of the
Superintendent of Public Works, and a copy shall be served upon the
employee charged, with notice of a designated hearing thereon by the
proper authorities, which shall not be less than 15 nor more than 30
days from date of service of the complaint. A failure to comply with
§ 27-31 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 27-32
25:57
these provisions as to the service of the complaint shall require a
dismissal of the complaint.
D. It is the intent of this section to give every permanent employee of the
Department of Public Works against whom charges for any cause may
be preferred under this section a fair trial upon the charges and every
reasonable opportunity to make his defense if he has or chooses to
make any, and that in the event of failure to comply with any provision
of this section, such charges shall be dismissed.
E. The Council shall have the power of subpoena under the Seal of the
Borough and attested by the Borough Clerk to compel the attendance of
witnesses and give testimony or produce evidence. Every person who
neglects to obey such subpoena, or to give testimony, or to answer
questions as required shall be subject to the penalties provided by law.
F. Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, whenever any employee
of the Department of Public Works shall be charged under the law of
this state, another state, or the United States, with an offense, such
employee may be suspended from performing his duties, with pay, until
the case against him is disposed of at trial, until the complaint is
dismissed, or until the prosecution is terminated, provided that if a
grand jury returns an indictment against the officer, or the officer is
charged with an offense which is a high misdemeanor or which involves
moral turpitude or dishonesty, he may be suspended from his duties,
without pay, until the case against him is disposed of at trial, until the
complaint is dismissed or until the prosecution is terminated.
G. If a suspended employee is found not guilty at trial, the charges are
dismissed or the prosecution is terminated, he shall be reinstated to his
position and shall be entitled to recover all pay withheld during the
period of suspension subject to any disciplinary proceedings or
administrative action.
H. If any employee of the Department of Public Works is suspended with
pay and is found guilty of the charges brought against him, he shall
reimburse the Borough for all pay received by him during the period of
his suspension.
I. Any person desiring to make a complaint against any employee of the
Department of Public Works shall make the complaint in writing to the
Superintendent of Public Works. It shall be the duty of the
Superintendent forthwith to deliver the original charges to the Public
Works Committee of the Borough Council who shall in turn refer such
charges to the Mayor and Council for its attention. Upon receipt of any
charges against an employee of the Department, the Mayor and Council
shall take whatever action is deemed necessary.
J. In the event a person wishes to make a charge against the
Superintendent of Public Works, the charges shall be filed with the
Public Works Committee of the Borough Council, who shall in turn
§ 27-32 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 27-32
25:58
transmit same forthwith to the Mayor and Council for its attention in
accordance with the provisions of this subsection.
K. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, employees of the
Department serving in a probationary status may be removed from
employment without charges, or hearing and solely with the judgment
and discretion of the Mayor and Council.
L. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, when the Borough
Council shall, within its sole discretion, for budgetary reasons or for
reasons of economy, decrease the number of regularly appointed
employees of the Department of Public Works in the Borough, any
employee may be so removed without charges or hearing. Such person
who is so removed shall be carried on a special list, and if any new
appointments are made to the Department, the person so removed shall
be appointed thereto before any other person.
§ 27-32 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 27-32
25:59
Chapter 30
(RESERVED)
Chapter 32
FIRE POLICE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 27, Art. I. Fire Department — See Ch. 27, Art. II.
§ 32-1. Establishment.
The Old Tappan Fire Police, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 15:8-4, is hereby
established to consist of such number of fire personnel, who have
successfully completed the training of "Fire Police" and are to be governed
by such rules as the Mayor and Council may from time to time designate.
Fire Police are members of the Old Tappan Fire Department and must be
trained firefighters. Fire Police are required to wear fire police badges
issued by the Old Tappan Fire Department.
§ 32-2. Duties.
A. The duties of the Fire Police shall be to assist the Fire Department of
the Borough of Old Tappan in the performance of its duty, by
establishing fire lines, preventing interference with the work of the
firefighter and allowing no one access to pass the fire lines except those
entitled to do so.
B. Other duties.
(1) Other duties may include:
(a) Protection of property and contents.
(b) Establish and maintain fire lines.
(c) Perform such traffic duties as necessary from the fire station to
and at the vicinity of the fire, fire drill, or other emergency call,
until the arrival of a duly authorized police officer.
(d) In the absence of investigating authority, Fire Police shall
investigate all causes of and preserve all evidence pertaining
to questionable fires and turn evidence over to proper
investigating authorities.
(e) Wear the Fire Police badge on the left breast of the outmost
garment while on duty.
§ 27-32 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 32-2
25:60
Chapter 34
(RESERVED)
Chapter 41
INTERLOCAL SERVICES AGREEMENTS
§ 41-1. Bergen County Narcotics Task Force.
§ 41-2. Title I community development activities.
(2) These other duties will be assigned at the incident by the Fire Chief
or the Incident Commander on scene.
A. Findings.
(1) Chapter 208 of the Laws of 1973 permits a municipality to enter
into a contract with another governmental unit to provide services
involving police protection.
(2) The borough has heretofore indicated an intent to enter into such
an agreement with the Bergen County Narcotics Task Force in
order to provide the services of such task force to the Borough of
Old Tappan.
B. Agreement, authorization and execution. There is hereby authorized
the entering into of an agreement between the Borough of Old Tappan
and the Bergen County Prosecutor's Office as agent for the Bergen
County Narcotics Task Force, in accordance with a certain agreement,
copies of which are on file at the office of the Borough Clerk, 247 Old
Tappan Road, Old Tappan, New Jersey and are available for inspection
on weekdays between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
C. The Mayor and the Borough Clerk are authorized and directed to
execute and attest the agreement in the name of the Borough of Old
Tappan.
A. Findings.
(1) Certain federal funds are potentially available to the County of
Bergen under Title I of the Housing and Community Development
Act of 1974, commonly known as the Community Development
Revenue Sharing Act.
(2) It is necessary to establish a legal basis for the County of Bergen
and its people to benefit from this program.
(3) An agreement has been proposed under which the Borough of Old
Tappan and the county, in cooperation with other municipalities,
§ 32-2 INTERLOCAL SERVICES AGREEMENTS § 41-2
41:61
§ 41-3. Bergen County Utilities Authority sewage disposal
agreement.
§ 41-4. Urban County Community Development Block Grant.
The agreement entitled, "Three Year Cooperative Agreement: An
Agreement Superseding the Cooperative Agreement Dated May, 1975, and
Amendments Thereto for the purpose of Inserting a Description of Activities
for the Thirteenth year (July 1, 1987 - June 30, 1988) Urban County
Community Development Block Grant Program," to clarify the planning and
implementation procedures, and to enable the borough to make a three
year irrevocable commitment to participate in the Community Development
Program for the program years 1988, 1989 and 1990 (July 10, 1988 - June
30, 1991) shall be executed by the Mayor and Borough Clerk in accordance
with the provisions of law.
shall establish an Interlocal Service Program pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:8A-1.
(4) It is in the best interest of the borough to enter into such
agreement.
B. Agreement; authorization; execution. The Mayor and Council of the
borough shall enter into an agreement entitled, "Agreement Between
the Borough of Old Tappan and County of Bergen, and Certain
Municipalities Located Therein, for the Establishment of a Cooperative
Means of Conducting Certain Community Development Activities," a
copy of which is attached hereto and shall be executed by the Mayor
and Borough Clerk in accordance with the provisions of law.8
A. Findings. The Borough of Old Tappan has ascertained, and does hereby
determine, that it is situated within the sewer district of the Bergen
County Utilities Authority or is, directly or indirectly, discharging
sewage into rivers or their tributaries in the State of New Jersey and
can advantageously use facilities of the district sewer system of the
Authority, and that it will be economical and in other respects
advantageous to it to have sewage and other wastes treated and
disposed of by the Authority on and pursuant to the terms of the
agreement authorized by this section.
B. Execution of agreement. The borough shall enter into an agreement
with the Bergen County Utilities Authority and various other parties, if
necessary, providing for and relating to the treatment and disposal of
sewage and other wastes and the cost and expense of such treatment
and disposal, on the terms and conditions and substantially in the form
authorized by this section. The Mayor shall be and is hereby authorized
and directed on behalf of the borough to execute such agreement under
the Corporate Seal of the borough, which shall be affixed and attested
to by the Borough Clerk, and to deliver the same.
8. Editor's Note: A copy of the agreement is on file in the Clerk's office.
§ 41-2 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 41-5
41:62
§ 41-5. Housing Authority of Bergen County.
§ 41-6. Enhanced 911 emergency dispatch services.
A. Findings.
(1) It is the considered opinion of the Mayor and Borough Council that
senior citizens of low income in the community are entitled to safe
and sanitary housing accommodations at rentals such persons can
afford.
(2) Such low rental housing accommodations are in extremely short
supply, and overcrowded and congested housing will eventuate
from such a shortage and thereby impair public safety and
economic values.
(3) The shortage of such safe and sanitary housing for low-income
senior citizens cannot be totally relieved through private enterprise
and that, therefore, new and rehabilitated construction of housing
projects and facilities would not be competitive with private
enterprise.
(4) The borough is desirous of having its territorial area included in the
area of operation of the Housing Authority of Bergen County.
B. Agreement; authorization; execution.
(1) The borough desires to participate in the area of operations of the
Housing Authority of Bergen County throughout the territorial
boundary and the jurisdiction of its Mayor and Council for the
purpose of alleviating the shortage of safe and sanitary housing.
(2) The borough does hereby consent to its inclusion in the area of
operation of the Housing Authority of Bergen County.
(3) The borough understands that the Housing Authority of Bergen
County will not make application for new construction in the
borough without the approval of the Borough Council.
(4) The Borough Clerk shall file a certified copy of this section with the
Commissioner of the State Department of Community Affairs and
with the Secretary of the Housing Authority of Bergen County.
A. Findings.
(1) Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:17C-1 et seq., all municipalities in the state
are required to be serviced by E-911 service.
(2) The governing body of the Township of River Vale and the
governing body of the Borough of Old Tappan have found it to be in
the best interests of their respective municipalities to have the
Township of River Vale provide to the Borough of Old Tappan said
§ 41-5 INTERLOCAL SERVICES AGREEMENTS § 41-6
41:63
Chapter 45
LAND USE PROCEDURES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental Commission — See Ch. 9, Art.
VI.
Design Review Committee — See Ch. 30.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 218.
Zoning — See Ch. 255.
E-911 services through a Public Safety Answering Point (PSAP) to
be established in River Vale.
(3) The Township of River Vale has previously provided certain police
services to the Borough of Old Tappan, including dispatching
services, which services are more particularly stated in an
Interlocal Services Agreement dated February 27, 1991, and the
governing body of the Township of River Vale and the governing
body of the Borough of Old Tappan desire to amend and expand this
contractual arrangement so as to permit the Township of River Vale
to provide E-911 services to the Borough of Old Tappan.
(4) N.J.S.A. 40:8A-1 et seq., referred to as the Interlocal Services Act,
authorizes and provides for the execution of interlocal service
agreements between municipalities on certain terms and
conditions.
B. Authorization and execution. The Borough Council hereby approves and
authorizes the Mayor and Borough Clerk to execute an expanded
interlocal services agreement with the Township of River Vale providing
for E-911 service, together with regular dispatching and other police
services as set forth therein, which agreement shall supersede the
aforementioned Interlocal Services Agreement between the Township
of River Vale and the Borough of Old Tappan dated February 27, 1991.
C. A copy of the agreement shall be filed and available for public
inspection in the office of the Borough Clerk and within 10 days of its
introduction, this section shall be published as required by law together
with a notification of the time and place at which said agreement is
available for inspection as required by N.J.S.A. 40:8A-4.
§ 41-6 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 41-6
41:64
ARTICLE I
Planning Board
§ 45-1. Establishment.
There is hereby established a Planning Board of nine members consisting of
the following four classes:
§ 45-2. Terms.
A. Class I. The Mayor or the Mayor's designee.
B. Class II. One of the officials of the Borough other than a member of the
Council, to be appointed by the Mayor. If there is an Environmental
Commission, a member of the Environmental Commission who is also a
member of the Planning Board shall be the Class II Planning Board
member.
C. Class III. A member of the Borough Council to be appointed by it.
D. Class IV. Six other citizens of the Borough to be appointed by the Mayor.
The members of Class IV shall hold no other municipal office, except
that one Class IV member may be a member of the Board of Education.
A member of the Environmental Commission who is also a member of
the Planning Board, as required by law, shall be a Class IV member.
A. The term of the Class I member shall correspond with his/her official
tenure.
B. The terms of the Class II and Class III members shall be for one year or
shall terminate at the completion of their respective terms of office,
whichever occurs first.
C. The term of a Class II or a Class IV member who is also a member of the
Environmental Commission shall be for three years or shall terminate
at the completion of his/her term of office as a member of the
Environmental Commission, whichever occurs first.
D. The term of a Class IV member who is also a member of the Board of
Education shall terminate whenever (s)he is no longer a member of
such body or at the completion of his/her Class IV term, whichever
occurs first.
E. Members of the Planning Board holding office on the effective date of
this chapter shall continue in office until completion of their terms as
provided by law.
F. The term of a Class IV member appointed after the effective date hereof
shall be for a period of four years.
G. All terms shall commence on January 1 of the year in which the
appointment is made.
§ 45-1 INTERLOCAL SERVICES AGREEMENTS § 45-3
41:65
§ 45-3. Alternate members.
§ 45-4. Vacancies.
Vacancies occurring otherwise than by expiration of term, in any class, shall
be filled by appointment, as above provided, for the unexpired term.
§ 45-5. Organization of Board.
The Planning Board shall elect a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson from the
members of Class IV and select a secretary who may be either a member of
the Planning Board or a municipal employee designated by it.
§ 45-6. Planning Board Attorney.
There is hereby created the office of Planning Board Attorney. The Planning
Board may annually appoint, fix the compensation of or agree upon the rate
of compensation of the Planning Board Attorney, who shall be an attorney
other than the Municipal Attorney.
§ 45-7. Experts and staff.
The Planning Board may also employ or contract for the services of experts
and other staff and services as it may deem necessary. The Board shall not
exceed, however, exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by
the Borough Council for its use.
§ 45-8. Powers and duties generally.
The Planning Board shall be authorized to adopt bylaws governing its
procedures. It shall also have the following powers and duties:
A. The position of Alternate Planning Board member is hereby established.
The Mayor shall appoint four alternate Planning Board members, who
shall be Borough residents. Alternate members shall meet the
qualifications for Class IV members. Alternate members shall be
designated at the time of appointment by the Mayor as "Alternate No.
1," "Alternate No. 2, "Alternate No. 3" and "Alternate No. 4." The terms
of the alternate members shall be for two years, except that the terms
of the alternate members shall be such that the term of not more than
two alternate members shall expire in any one year; provided, however,
that in no instance shall the terms of the alternate members first
appointed exceed two years.
B. Alternate members may participate in all matters but may not vote
except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member of any
class. In the event that a choice must be made as to which alternate
member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote before Alternate No. 2,
Alternate No. 2 shall vote before Alternate No: 3 and Alternate No. 3
shall vote before Alternate No. 4.
§ 45-3 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 45-8
41:66
A. To make and adopt, and from time to time amend, a Master Plan for the
physical development of the Borough, including any areas outside its
boundaries, which, in the Board's judgment, bear essential relation to
the planning of the Borough.
B. To administer the provisions of Chapter 218, Subdivision of Land, of
this Code.
C. To participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans
required by state or federal law or regulations.
D. To assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuous planning
process.
E. To prepare annually a program of municipal capital improvement
projected over a term of six years, and amendments thereto, and
recommend same to the Council.
F. To consider and report to the Council, within 35 days after referral, on
any proposed development regulation submitted to it, and to pass upon
other matters specifically referred to it by the Council.
G. To grant conditional uses in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
H. To perform such other advisory duties as are assigned to it by ordinance
or resolution of the Council for the aid and assistance of the Council or
other agencies or officers.
I. To perform such other duties as are assigned to it under Chapter 255,
Zoning.
J. To possess all such powers and perform duties granted to a Board of
Adjustment under the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et
seq., including but not limited to the power to:
(1) Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that
there is error in any order, requirement, decision or refusal wade
by an administrative officer based on or made in the enforcement of
Chapter 255, Zoning.
(2) Hear and decide requests for interpretation of the Zoning Map or
Chapter 255, Zoning, or for decisions upon other special questions
upon which such Board is authorized to pass by any Zoning or
Official Map Ordinance;
(3) Variances.
(a) Where, by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or
shape of a specific piece of property, or by reason of
exceptional topographic conditions or physical features
uniquely affecting a specific piece of property, or by reason of
an extraordinary and exceptional situation uniquely affecting a
§ 45-8 INTERLOCAL SERVICES AGREEMENTS § 45-8
41:67
specific piece of property or the structures lawfully existing
thereon, the strict application of any regulation in Chapter
255, Zoning, would result in peculiar and exceptional practical
difficulties to, or exceptional and undue hardship upon, the
developer of such property, grant, upon an application or an
appeal relating to such property, a variance from such strict
application of such regulation so as to relieve such difficulties
or hardship.
(b) Where, in an application or appeal relating to a specific piece
of property, the purposes of this act would be advanced by a
deviation from requirements of Chapter 255, Zoning, and the
benefits of the deviation would substantially outweigh any
detriment, grant a variance to allow departure from said
regulations; provided, however, that the fact that a proposed
use is an inherently beneficial use shall not be dispositive of a
decision on a variance under this subsection and provided that
no variance from those departures enumerated in Subsection
J(4) of this section shall be granted under this subsection.
(4) In particular cases for special reasons, grant a variance to allow
departure from regulations pursuant to Chapter 255, Zoning, to
permit a use or principal structure in a district restricted against
such use or principal structure; an expansion of a nonconforming
use; deviation from a specification or standard pertaining solely to
a conditional use; an increase in the permitted floor area ratio, if
regulated by Chapter 255, Zoning; an increase in the permitted
density except as applied to the required lot area for a lot or lots for
detached one- or two-dwelling-unit buildings, which lot or lots are
either an isolated undersized lot or lots resulting from a minor
subdivision; or a height of a principal structure which exceeds by
10 feet or 10% the maximum height permitted in the district for a
principal structure. A variance under this subsection shall be
granted only by affirmative vote of at least five members, but the
Class I and the Class III members of the Planning Board shall not
participate in applications for development which involve this type
of relief.
(5) If an application for development requests one or more variances
but not a variance for a purpose enumerated in Subsection J(4) of
this section, the decision on the requested variance or variances
shall be rendered under Subsection J(3) of this section.
(6) No variance or other relief may be granted, including a variance or
other relief involving an inherently beneficial use, without a
showing that such variance or other relief can be granted without
substantial detriment to the public good and will not substantially
impair the intent and the purpose of the zone plan and Chapter
255, Zoning.
§ 45-8 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 45-8
41:68
§ 45-9. Rules and regulations.
The Board shall adopt such rules and regulations, not inconsistent with
any ordinance, as may be necessary to carry into effect the provisions and
purposes of this chapter, Chapter 255, Zoning, or Chapter 218, Subdivision
of Land.
§ 45-10. Advisory Committee.
The Mayor may appoint one or more persons as a Citizens' Advisory
Committee to assist or collaborate with the Planning Board in its duties, but
such person or persons shall have no power to vote or take other action
required by the Planning Board. Such person or persons shall serve at the
pleasure of the Mayor.
K. To grant variances from the requirements of law that no permit shall be
issued for any building or structure in the bed of any street, public
drainageway, flood control basin or public area reserved on the Official
Map. Such variances may be approved only if:
(1) Such variance is approved by a majority of the full authorized
membership of the Board.
(2) Unless a variance is granted, the parcel or parcels of land on which
the mapped street, drainageway, flood control basin or reserved
area is located cannot yield a reasonable return to the owner.
(3) The variance required shall cause the least practicable increase in
the cost of opening the street or shall tend to cause the least
change in the Official Map.
(4) The Board shall impose such reasonable requirements as
conditions for granting such variance as will promote the health,
morals, safety and general welfare of the public.
L. To grant variances from the requirements of law that no permit for the
erection of any building or structure be issued unless the lot abuts a
street giving access to the proposed building or structure. Such a
variance shall be granted only if the enforcement of such requirements
of law would entail practical difficulties or undue hardship or where the
circumstances of the case do not require the building or structure to
adhere to conditions that shall provide adequate access for firefighting
equipment, ambulances and other emergency vehicles necessary for
the protection of health and safety and that shall protect any future
street layout shown on the Official Map or on a general circulation plan
element of the Master Plan.
§ 45-8 INTERLOCAL SERVICES AGREEMENTS § 45-10
41:69

ARTICLE II
Land Use Administrative Officers
§ 45-11. Administrative officers.
§ 45-12. Building Inspector.
The Building Inspector shall:
§ 45-13. Planning Board Clerk.
For all development applications addressed to the Planning Board, the
Planning Board Clerk shall:
A. For purposes of administration and enforcement of this chapter,
Chapter 255, Zoning, and Chapter 218, Subdivision of Land, the
following officers shall be designated as administrative officers:
(1) The Building Inspector.
(2) The Planning Board Clerk.
B. Each such officer shall have the powers and duties hereinafter set forth
in this section.
A. Issue any and all building permits and certificates of use and occupancy
or conditional use permits required by Chapter 255, Zoning, and
Chapter 218, Subdivision of Land, if, as and when the prerequisites set
forth in such ordinances for the issuance of such permits and
certificates have been met.
B. Enforce all provisions of this chapter, Chapter 255, Zoning, and Chapter
218, Subdivision of Land.
A. Receive and file such applications.
B. Make and certify a list from the current tax duplicates of the names and
addresses of the persons to whom the applicant is required to give
notice pursuant to this chapter.
C. Keep and file the minutes and resolutions of the Planning Board.
D. Mail decisions of the Planning Board to the persons entitled by this
chapter to receive such decisions.
E. Arrange for publication of the decisions of the Planning Board.
F. Issue, within 15 days after receipt of a written application therefor,
containing a diagram showing the location of the land to be covered by
the certificate and the name of the owner thereof and accompanied by
the requisite fee, a certificate as to approval of subdivision of land.
§ 45-11 INTERLOCAL SERVICES AGREEMENTS § 45-13
41:71

ARTICLE III
Administration and Enforcement of Land Use Chapters
§ 45-14. Enforcement.
§ 45-15. Building permits.
All building permits shall be issued in accordance with the provisions of the
Borough Code.
§ 45-16. Site plan approval required for issuance of building
permit.
No building permit shall be issued for the construction, alteration or change
in use of an existing building, a conditional use, a use or building permitted
by a variance or a nonconforming use unless a site plan shall have first been
approved by the Planning Board in accordance with the terms of Chapter
218, Subdivision of Land.
§ 45-17. Certificate of use and occupancy.
A. The provisions of this chapter, Chapter 255, Zoning, and Chapter 218,
Subdivision of Land, shall be administered and enforced by the Building
Inspector of the Borough or his/her designated assistant.
B. In no case shall a permit be granted for the construction or alteration of
any building or other structure if the proposed construction, alteration
or use thereof would be in violation of any provisions in such chapters.
It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector, or his/her designated
assistant, to cause any building or other structure, plans or premises to
be inspected or examined and to order, in writing, the remedying of any
conditions found to exist in violation of any provisions of such chapters.
The Building Inspector shall have the right to enter any building or
premises during reasonable daytime hours in the course of his/her
duties.
A. Plans required. Certificates of occupancy shall be issued in accordance
with the procedures set forth in the Building Code, provided that after
completion of new construction on vacant land, set forth in the
construction permit, the owner or applicant for a certificate of
occupancy shall cause to be prepared, signed and sealed by a licensed
professional engineer or land surveyor plans showing:
(1) The location, as built, of all such new construction.
(2) Grades and elevations shall be included.
(3) The location as built of water lines, gas lines and other
underground supply lines for light, power and telephone service
and cable television, if applicable.
§ 45-14 INTERLOCAL SERVICES AGREEMENTS § 45-17
41:73
§ 45-18. Site plan approval required for issuance of certificate of
use and occupancy.
No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any new building, for any
addition or alteration to an existing building, or for any change in use of a
building unless the building and its appurtenances conform in all respects
to an approved site plan or an approved amendment to an approved site
plan.
§ 45-19. Exception. [Amended 5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 772R-02;
5-17-2004 by Ord. No. 847-04]
B. New uses. No building shall be occupied or used unless the certificate
of use and occupancy issued by the Building Inspector shall include a
certification that such building or other structure, or use, is in
conformance with the provisions of this chapter, Chapter 255, Zoning,
and Chapter 218, Subdivision of Land. A certificate of use and
occupancy, once granted, shall continue in effect so long as there is no
change in the kind or nature of such use, regardless if change in
tenancy or occupancy.
C. Existing uses. Upon written request from the owner, tenant, occupant
or purchaser, and the fee of $10, a certificate of use and occupancy for
any building or other structure, or any use thereof, lawfully in existence
at the time of issuance of such certificate shall be issued.
D. Temporary certificate of occupancy. Under such rules and regulations
as may be established by the Building Inspector, a temporary certificate
of occupancy for a part of a building may be issued by him/her.
A. Notwithstanding the provisions of §§ 45-16 and 45-18, no site plan
approval shall be required prior to the issuance of a building permit or a
certificate of occupancy for any building or addition if such building or
addition is used or shall be used solely as a single- or two-family
dwelling, or as an accessory thereto, provided that a site plan has been
filed, with the actual dimensions, radii and angles of the lot to be built
upon, the exact size and location on the lot of the building and
accessory buildings to be erected, the exact size and location of the
sanitary plant, installation of sidewalks, shade trees to be planted, as
required by Chapter 218, Subdivision of Land, and such other
information as may be necessary to determine and provide for the
enforcement of Chapter 255, Zoning. One copy of the plan shall be
returned to the owner when approved by the Building Inspector. Where
a lot is formed from a part of a lot already improved, the separation
shall be effected in such manner as not to impair any of the provisions
of Chapter 255, Zoning, or Chapter 218, Subdivision of Land, whether
related to the then existing improvements or to the proposed new
improvement.
B. Notwithstanding Subsection A above, the site plan for a proposed new
single- or two-family dwelling not part of a subdivision shall also include
§ 45-17 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 45-19
41:74
§ 45-20. Records.
It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to keep a record of all
applications for building permits and certificates of use and occupancy
which (s)he countersigns, together with a notation of all special conditions
involved. The Building Inspector shall file and safely keep copies of all
plans and applications submitted. They shall form a part of the records
of his/her office and shall be available for the use of the Borough Council
and of other officials of the Borough. The Building Inspector shall prepare
monthly reports for the Borough Council summarizing all permits issued
and certificates countersigned, all complaints of violations and the action
taken thereon. A copy of each such report shall be filed with the Borough
Tax Assessor at the same time it is filed with the Borough Council.
§ 45-21. Meetings.
the planting of shade trees and, if the lot in question has frontage on
Orangeburg Road, Central Avenue, DeWolf Road, Old Tappan Road,
Washington Avenue North up to Little Mountain Road, Westwood
Avenue or Cripplebush Road, the installation of sidewalks; except that
the Mayor and Council may, by resolution, permit a contribution to the
Sidewalk Improvement Trust Fund in lieu of installing same. If the lot
in question is not located on one of the foregoing streets, the applicant
shall contribute to the Sidewalk Improvement Trust Fund in lieu of
installing and/or replacing same. Regardless of what street it is located
on, if the lot already has a sidewalk, the applicant shall contribute to the
Sidewalk Improvement Trust fund in lieu of installing and/or replacing
same. [Amended 1-3-2016 by Ord. No. 1090-15]
A. Meetings of the Planning Board shall be scheduled no less often than
once a month, and any meeting so scheduled shall be held as scheduled
unless canceled for lack of applications for development to process.
B. Special meetings may be called by the Chairperson of the Board and
shall be called at the request of any two Board members. Such meetings
shall be held on notice to the members and the public in accordance
with law.
C. No action shall be taken at any meeting without a quorum being
present.
D. All actions shall be taken by majority vote of the members of the Board
present and eligible to vote at the meeting, except as otherwise
required by any provision of this chapter or by law.
E. All meetings shall be open to the public. Notice of all such meetings
shall be given in accordance with the requirements of the Open Public
Meetings Act.9
9. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
§ 45-19 INTERLOCAL SERVICES AGREEMENTS § 45-22
41:75
§ 45-22. Minutes.
Minutes of every meeting shall be kept and shall include the names of the
persons appearing and addressing the Board and of the persons appearing
by attorney, the action taken by the Board, the findings, if any, made by it
and reasons therefor. The minutes shall thereafter be made available for
public inspection during normal business hours at the office of the Borough
Clerk. Any interested party shall have the right to compel production of the
minutes for use as evidence in any legal proceeding concerning the subject
matter of such minutes. Such interested party may be charged a fee for
reproduction of the minutes in accordance with the fee schedule set forth in
§ 45-23.
§ 45-23. Fees. [Amended 5-17-2004 by Ord. No. 850-04]
Fees for the processing of applications filed with the Planning Board shall
be as follows:
A. Minor subdivision: $200.
B. Major subdivision without site plan approval or conditional use
approval:
(1) Preliminary approval: $300 plus $75 per lot for each lot up to five
lots within the proposed subdivision and $50 for each lot in excess
of five within the proposed subdivision.
(2) Final approval: $300.
(3) Combined preliminary and final approval: $600 plus $100 per lot
for each lot up to five lots within the proposed subdivision and $75
for each lot in excess of five lots within the proposed subdivision.
C. Major subdivision requiring site plan approval or conditional use
approval: $300.
D. Site plan review.
(1) Application for preliminary approval only: $1,000.
(2) Amended application for preliminary approval only: $300 for each
and every amendment.
(3) Application for final site plan approval: $750.
(4) Amended final site plan approval: $250 for each and every
amendment.
(5) Application for combined preliminary and final site plan approval:
$1,250.
(6) Amended application for combined preliminary and final site plan
approval: $350 for each and every amendment.
§ 45-22 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 45-23
41:76
(7) Application for minor site plan approval: $200.
E. Conditional use application (applicant satisfies all conditions of
conditional use ordinance and files application with the Planning
Board):
(1) Conditional use application without subdivision or site plan
application: $250.
(2) Conditional use application together with ancillary subdivision or
site plan application: $750 together with filing fees for subdivision
and/or site plan application as provided herein.
F. Conditional use application (applicant does not satisfy all conditions of
conditional use ordinance and files application with the Planning
Board):
(1) Conditional use application without subdivision or site plan
application: $250 together with filing fees for deviation from a
conditional use variance as provided herein.
(2) Conditional use application together with ancillary subdivision or
site plan application: $750 together with filing fees for deviation
from a conditional use variance as provided herein.
G. Variances under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(d) without site plan or subdivision
application:
(1) Use of principal structure in the district restricted against such use
or principal structure (use variance): $750.
(2) Expansion of a nonconforming use: $750.
(3) Density variance: $750.
(4) Height of a principal structure which exceeds by 10 feet or 10% of
the maximum height permitted in district for a principal structure:
$750.
H. Variances under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(c), otherwise known as "bulk
variances": $200 for each variance.
I. Planned residential development and site plan approval in connection
therewith:
(1) Application for PRD approval together with preliminary and/or
preliminary and final site plan approval: $2,500.
(2) Application for amended PRD approval together with amended
preliminary and/or amended preliminary and final site plan
approval: $1,000.
(3) Application for final site plan approval in connection with a PRD:
$1,000.
§ 45-23 INTERLOCAL SERVICES AGREEMENTS § 45-23
41:77
§ 45-24. Professional fees.
(4) Application for amended final site plan approval in connection with
a PRD: $500.
J. Sign variance:
(1) Single-family residential property: $50.
(2) Nonresidential property: $200.
(3) Planned residential development: $300.
(4) Church, public school or public use: no fees.
K. Any other application to the Planning Board not previously specified:
$200 for each application.
L. Conditional use approval without site plan approval:
(1) Engineering escrow: $200.
(2) Planning escrow: $200.
(3) Legal escrow: $200.
A. Escrow deposits for professional fees; procedure. In addition to the
application fees set forth in § 45-23 hereof, the Borough agency shall
require escrow deposits in accordance with the provisions of the fee
and deposit schedule set forth in § 45-25 hereof. The Chief Financial
Officer of the Borough shall make all of the payments to professionals
for services rendered to the Borough or approving authority for review
of applications for development, review and preparation of documents,
inspection of improvements or other purposes under the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. The application review and inspection charges
shall be limited only to professional charges for review of applications,
review and preparation of documents and inspections of developments
under construction and for review by outside consultants when an
application is of a nature beyond the scope of the expertise of the
professionals normally utilized by the Borough. The only cost that shall
be added to any such charges shall be actual out-of-pocket expenses of
such professionals or consultants including normal and typical
expenses incurred in processing applications and inspecting
improvements. No applicant shall be charged for any Borough clerical
or administrative functions, overhead expenses, meeting room charges
or any Borough costs and expenses except as provided for specifically
by statute, nor shall a Borough professional add any such charge to his
or her bill. The applicant's responsibility as to these charges shall be a
continuing one from the initial filing of the application through and
including decision and determination and any post-determination
services as may be reasonably required. Said applicant's responsibility
shall apply whether or not any such decision or determination is
favorable or unfavorable to the applicant.
§ 45-23 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 45-24
41:78
B. Scope of reimbursed services. The Borough shall be entitled to be
reimbursed for the review of applications, both as to completeness and
as to content; for the review and preparation of documents such as, but
not limited to, drafting resolutions, developer's agreements, and
necessary correspondence with applicant or applicant's professionals.
Said services shall include but not be limited to legal, planning and
engineering services and the services of outside consultants when an
application is of a nature beyond the scope of the expertise of those
professionals normally utilized by the Borough.
C. Deposit of escrow funds; refunds. Deposits received from any applicant
in excess of $5,000 shall be held by the Chief Financial Officer in a
special interest-bearing deposit account, and upon receipt of bills from
professionals and approval of said bills as hereinafter provided for, the
Chief Financial Officer may use such funds to pay the bills submitted by
such professionals or experts. The Borough shall not be required to
refund an amount of interest paid on a deposit which does not exceed
$100 for the year. If the amount of interest exceeds $100, the entire
amount shall belong to the applicant and shall be refunded to him by
the Borough annually or at the time the deposit is repaid or applied for
the purposes for which it was deposited, as the case may be, except that
the Borough may retain for administrative expenses a sum equivalent to
no more than 331/3% of that entire amount, which shall be in lieu of all
other administrative and custodial expenses. All sums not actually so
expended shall be refunded to the applicant within 90 days after the
final decisions by the appropriate Borough agency with respect to such
application, upon certification by the Board secretary that such
application has been finally decided.
D. Payments.
(1) Each payment charged to the deposit for review of applications,
review and preparation of documents and inspection of
improvements shall be pursuant to a voucher from the professional
which voucher shall identify the personnel performing the service,
and for each date the services were performed, the hours spent to
one-quarter-hour increments, the hourly rate and the expenses
incurred. All professionals shall submit vouchers to the Chief
Financial Officer of the Borough on a monthly basis in accordance
with the schedules and procedures established by the Chief
Financial Officer. The professional shall send an informational copy
of all vouchers or statements submitted to the Chief Financial
Officer of the Borough simultaneously to the applicant and the
Borough agency for whom said services were performed.
(2) The Chief Financial Officer shall prepare and send to the applicant
a statement which shall include an accounting of funds listing all
deposits, interest earnings, disbursements and the cumulative
balance of the escrow account. This information shall be provided
on a quarterly basis, if monthly charges are $1,000 or less, or on a
monthly basis, if monthly charges exceed $1,000.
§ 45-24 INTERLOCAL SERVICES AGREEMENTS § 45-24
41:79
E. Applicant's continuing obligation to pay fees and escrow deposits.
(1) No developmental application of any type shall be deemed
complete unless and until the required application fee is paid and
the initial escrow deposit required hereunder has been deposited
with the Borough.
(2) If at any time during the processing, review or hearing on a
developmental application, the initial deposit has been expended or
the escrow account or deposit with respect to any such application
contains insufficient funds to enable the Borough or any of its
approving authorities or agencies to perform required application
reviews or improvement inspections, the Chief Financial Officer of
the Borough shall provide the applicant with a notice of the
insufficient escrow or deposit balance, with a copy of said notice to
the Board or agency having jurisdiction over the application.
(3) In order for the review or hearing on the application or the work on
the development to continue, within seven days of receipt of the
notice referred to in Subsection E(2) hereof, the applicant shall
post an additional deposit to its escrow account to be agreed upon
by the Borough or its approving authority and the applicant. In the
interim, any required health and safety inspections shall be made
and charged back against the replenishment of funds. In the event
such additional deposit is not posted within the time required
hereunder, the developmental application may be denied without
prejudice.
(4) No subdivision plat or deed or site plan shall be signed or
approved, nor shall any zoning permit, building permit, certificate
of occupancy or other type of permit be issued with respect to any
application unless and until an applicant has deposited with the
Chief Financial Officer of the Borough sufficient funds to pay the
fees and other charges of all professionals rendering services to the
Borough and/or its Board or agency having jurisdiction of the
application in connection with same.
F. Close out procedure. The following close out procedures shall apply to
all deposits and escrow accounts established under the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. and shall commence after the approving
authority has granted final approval and signed the subdivision plat or
site plan, in the case of application review escrows and deposits, or
after the improvements have been approved in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53, in the case of improvement inspection escrows and
deposits. The applicant shall send written notice by certified mail to the
Chief Financial Officer of the Borough and the approving authority, and
to the relevant Borough professional, that the application or the
improvements, as the case may be, are completed. After receipt of such
notice, the professional shall render a final bill to the Chief Financial
Officer of the Borough within 30 days and shall send a copy
simultaneously to the applicant. The Chief Financial Officer of the
§ 45-24 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 45-24
41:80
Borough shall render a written final accounting to the applicant on the
uses to which the deposit was put within 45 days of receipt of the final
bill. Any balances remaining in the deposit or escrow account including
interest in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.1 shall be refunded to
the developer along with the final accounting.
G. Scope of charges. All professional charges for review of an application
for development, review and preparation of documents or inspections
of improvements shall be reasonable and necessary, given the status
and progress of the application or construction. Review fees shall be
charged only in connection with an application for development
presently pending before the approving authority or upon review of
compliance with the conditions of approval, or review of requests for
modification or amendment made by the applicant. A professional shall
not review items which are subject to approval by any state
governmental agency and not under Borough jurisdiction except to the
extent consultation with a state agency is necessary due to the effect of
state approvals on the subdivision or site plan.
H. Limitation of inspection fees. Inspection fees shall be charged only for
actual work shown on a subdivision or site plan or required by an
approving resolution. Professionals inspecting improvements under
construction shall charge only for inspections that are reasonably
necessary to check the progress and quality of the work, and such
inspections shall be reasonably based on the approved development
plans and documents.
I. Estimate of cost of improvements. The cost of the installation of
improvements for the purposes of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53 shall be estimated
by the Borough Engineer based on documented construction costs for
the public improvements prevailing in the general area of the Borough.
The developer may appeal the Borough Engineer's estimate to the
County Construction Board of Appeals, established pursuant to N.J.S.A.
52:27D-127.
J. Appeals.
(1) An applicant shall notify in writing the governing body with copies
to the Chief Financial Officer, the approving authority and the
professional whenever the applicant disputes the charges made by
a professional for services rendered to the Borough in reviewing
applications for development, review and preparation of
documents, inspection of improvements, or other charges made
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.2. The governing body or its
designee shall within a reasonable time attempt to remediate any
disputed charges. If the matter is not resolved to the satisfaction of
the applicant, the applicant may appeal to the County Construction
Board of Appeals any charge to an escrow account or deposit by
any Borough professional or consultant, or the cost of the
installation of improvements estimated by the Borough Engineer
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4. An applicant or his authorized
§ 45-24 INTERLOCAL SERVICES AGREEMENTS § 45-24
41:81
§ 45-25. Escrow deposits; schedule of fees.
There is hereby established the following schedule of initial deposits
required to be paid by each applicant for development toward reasonably
anticipated Borough expenses for professional services and costs:
agent shall submit the appeal in writing to the County Construction
Board of Appeals. The applicant or his authorized agent shall
simultaneously send a copy of the appeal to the Borough, the
approving authority, and any professional whose charges are the
subject of the appeal. An applicant shall file an appeal within 45
days from receipt of the informational copy of the professional's
voucher required by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.2(c), except that if the
professional has not supplied the applicant with an informational
copy of the voucher, then the applicant shall file his appeal within
60 days from receipt of the Borough statement of activity against
the deposit or escrow account required by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.2(c).
An applicant may file an appeal for an ongoing series of charges
by a professional during a period not exceeding six months to
demonstrate that they present a pattern of excessive or inaccurate
charges. An applicant making use of this provision need not appeal
each charge individually.
(2) Appeals shall be taken in accordance with the rules and procedures
established by the County Construction Board of Appeals.
(3) During the pendency of any appeal, the Borough or approving
authority shall continue to process, hear and decide the application
for development and to inspect the development in the normal
course and shall not withhold, delay or deny reviews, inspections,
signing or subdivision plans or site plans, the reduction or the
release of performance or maintenance guarantees, the issuance of
construction permits or certificates of occupancy, or any other
approval or permit because an appeal has been filed or is pending
under this subsection. The Chief Financial Officer of the Borough
may pay charges out of the appropriate escrow account or deposit
for which an appeal has been filed. If a charge is disallowed after
payment, the Chief Financial Officer of the Borough shall
reimburse the deposit or escrow account in the amount of any such
disallowed charge or refund the amount to the applicant. If a
charge is disallowed after payment to a professional or consultant
who is not an employee of the Borough, the professional or
consultant shall reimburse the Borough in the amount of any such
disallowed charge.
A. Minor subdivision. For each separate lot comprising the proposed
subdivision, if granted:
(1) Engineering escrow: $300 per lot.
(2) Planning escrow: $300 per lot.
§ 45-24 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 45-25
41:82
(3) Legal escrow: $300 per lot.
B. Major subdivision without site plan approval or conditional use
approval:
(1) Preliminary approval.
(a) Engineering escrow: $500 for each lot up to five lots and $250
for each lot in excess of five lots.
(b) Planning escrow: $500 for each lot up to five lots and $250 for
each lot in excess of five lots.
(c) Legal escrow: $500 for each lot up to five lots and $250 for
each lot in excess of five lots.
(2) Final approval.
(a) Engineering escrow: $150 for each proposed lot comprising
the subdivision.
(b) Planning escrow: $150 for each proposed lot comprising the
subdivision.
(c) Legal escrow: $500 for each proposed lot comprising the
subdivision.
C. Major subdivision requiring site plan approval or conditional use
approval. In addition to the escrow deposit for a major subdivision as
required herein, an additional deposit shall be posted in connection
with the site plan and/or conditional use aspect of the application in an
amount as follows:
(1) Engineering escrow: $150 for each 10,000 square feet or part
thereof of the lot area to be developed, together with $500 for
every 2,500 square feet of proposed principal and accessory
buildings and structures or part thereof.
(2) Planning escrow: $150 for each 10,000 square feet or part thereof
of the lot area to be developed, together with $500 for every 2,500
square feet of proposed principal and accessory buildings and
structures or part thereof.
(3) Legal escrow: $150 for each 10,000 square feet or part thereof of
the lot area to be developed, together with $500 for every 2,500
square feet of proposed principal and accessory buildings and
structures or part thereof.
D. Site plan review without conditional use approval:
(1) Preliminary approval.
(a) Engineering escrow: $150 for each 10,000 square feet or part
thereof of the lot area to be developed, together with $500 for
§ 45-25 INTERLOCAL SERVICES AGREEMENTS § 45-25
41:83
every 2,500 square feet of proposed principal and accessory
buildings and structures or part thereof.
(b) Planning escrow: $150 for each 10,000 square feet or part
thereof of the lot area to be developed, together with $500 for
every 2,500 square feet of proposed principal and accessory
buildings and structures or part thereof.
(c) Legal escrow: $150 for each 10,000 square feet or part thereof
of the lot area to be developed, together with $500 for every
2,500 square feet of proposed principal and accessory
buildings and structures or part thereof.
(2) Final approval.
(a) Engineering escrow: $50 for each 10,000 square feet or part
thereof of the lot area to be developed, together with $200 for
every 2,500 square feet of proposed principal and accessory
buildings and structures or part thereof.
(b) Planning escrow: $50 for each 10,000 square feet or part
thereof of the lot area to be developed, together with $200 for
every 2,500 square feet of proposed principal and accessory
buildings and structures or part thereof.
(c) Legal escrow: $100 for each 10,000 square feet or part thereof
of the lot area to be developed, together with $250 for every
2,500 square feet of proposed principal and accessory
buildings and structures or part thereof.
E. Site plan review together with conditional use approval:
(1) Preliminary approval.
(a) Engineering escrow: $200 for each 10,000 square feet or part
thereof of the lot area to be developed, together with $600 for
every 2,500 square feet of proposed principal and accessory
buildings and structures or part thereof; $250 for a site plan
review ancillary to an application for a conditional use
approval for a mobile cellular communications tower.
(b) Planning escrow: $200 for each 10,000 square feet or part
thereof of the lot area to be developed, together with $600 for
every 2,500 square feet of proposed principal and accessory
buildings and structures or part thereof; $250 for a site plan
review ancillary to an application for a conditional use
approval for a mobile cellular communications tower.
(c) Legal escrow: $200 for each 10,000 square feet or part thereof
of the lot area to be developed, together with $600 for every
2,500 square feet of proposed principal and accessory
buildings and structures or part thereof; $250 for a site plan
§ 45-25 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 45-25
41:84
review ancillary to an application for a conditional use
approval for a mobile cellular communications tower.
(2) Final approval.
(a) Engineering escrow: $50 for each 10,000 square feet or part
thereof of the lot area to be developed, together with $200 for
every 2,500 square feet of proposed principal and accessory
buildings and structures or part thereof; $100 for a site plan
review ancillary to an application for a conditional use
approval for a mobile cellular communications tower.
(b) Planning escrow: $50 for each 10,000 square feet or part
thereof of the lot area to be developed, together with $200 for
every 2,500 square feet of proposed principal and accessory
buildings and structures or part thereof; $100 for a site plan
review ancillary to an application for a conditional use
approval for a mobile cellular communications tower.
(c) Legal escrow: $100 for each 10,000 square feet or part thereof
of the lot area to be developed, together with $200 for every
2,500 square feet of proposed principal and accessory
buildings and structures or part thereof; $100 for a site plan
review ancillary to an application for a conditional use
approval for a mobile cellular communications tower.
F. Variances pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(d).
(1) Without site plan or subdivision approval.
(a) Engineering escrow: $1,500.
(b) Planning escrow: $2,000.
(c) Legal escrow: $1,500.
(2) With site plan and/or subdivision approval.
(a) Engineering escrow: $1,500 together with the escrow fees
required for site plan and/or subdivision approval as required
herein.
(b) Planning escrow: $2,000 together with the escrow fees
required for site plan and/or subdivision approval as required
herein.
(c) Legal escrow: $1,500 together with the escrow fees required
for site plan and/or subdivision approval as required herein.
G. Variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(c), otherwise known as "bulk
variances."
(1) Engineering escrow: $750 for the first variance applied for and
$250 for each additional variance.
§ 45-25 INTERLOCAL SERVICES AGREEMENTS § 45-25
41:85
(2) Planning escrow: $750 for the first variance applied for and $250
for each additional variance.
(3) Legal escrow: $750 for the first variance applied for and $250 for
each additional variance.
H. Planned residential development applications together with
preliminary or preliminary and final site plan approval.
(1) Engineering escrow: $50 for each 10,000 square feet of lot area or
part thereof to be developed, together with $100 for every 2,500
square feet of proposed principal and accessory buildings and
structures or part thereof together with the escrow fees required
for site plan and/or subdivision approval as required herein.
(2) Planning escrow: $50 for each 10,000 square feet of lot area or part
thereof to be developed, together with $100 for every 2,500 square
feet of proposed principal and accessory buildings and structures
or part thereof together with the escrow fees required for site plan
and/or subdivision approval as required herein.
(3) Legal escrow: $50 for each 10,000 square feet of lot area or part
thereof to be developed, together with $100 for every 2,500 square
feet of proposed principal and accessory buildings and structures
or part thereof together with the escrow fees required for site plan
and/or subdivision approval as required herein.
I. Variances in connection with signs or fences:
(1) Residential property.
(a) Engineering escrow: $250.
(b) Planning escrow: $250.
(c) Legal escrow: $250.
(2) Commercial property.
(a) Engineering escrow: $500.
(b) Planning escrow: $500.
(c) Legal escrow: $500.
J. Residential variances. For purposes of this chapter, "residential
variances" shall mean bulk variances [N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(c)] on a
residential property consisting of one lot with an existing single-family
residence. The applicant shall post an escrow deposit for legal fees in
the amount of $1,000; provided, however, that the Planning Board may
require additional escrow deposits for legal, planning, engineering or
outside consultants should the Board determine it necessary for the fair
consideration of the application. [Amended 11-15-2004 by Ord. No.
866-04]
§ 45-25 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 45-26
41:86
§ 45-26. Applications.
A. The Planning Board shall, by resolution, prescribe forms for
applications.
B. All applications to the Planning Board shall be filed with the
administrative officer of the Board, and the administrative officer shall
stamp the date of filing thereon.
C. To the extent applicable, in addition to the requirements set forth in
Schedule A annexed hereto, an applicant shall also comply with the
requirements of Chapter 234, Trees, Article II, Tree Preservation and
Removal, the provisions of which are incorporated herein and in
Schedule A by reference as though set forth at length.10
D. An application shall be complete, and shall be referred to as a
"complete application," when:
(1) The prescribed application form fully completed and duly executed
has been filed with the proper administrative officer.
(2) All documents in the requisite number, and in the form prescribed
by this chapter, shall have been filed with the proper administrative
officer.
(3) A certificate from the Tax Collector has been filed with the proper
administrative officer stating whether any taxes or assessments for
local improvements are due or delinquent.
(4) All fees prescribed by this chapter have been paid.
(5) In the event this chapter shall require that the documents be
referred to other persons, or bodies, the affidavit of service thereof
shall have been filed with the proper administrative officer.
(6) The Board, or its designee, shall have certified, within 45 days after
filing thereof with the proper administrative officer, that the
application is complete.
E. An application shall be certified as complete by the administrative
officer of the Board immediately upon its meeting of all requirements
specified in this chapter and shall be deemed complete the day it is so
certified for purposes of the commencement of the time period for
action as provided in this chapter.
F. If an application for development is found to be incomplete, the
applicant shall be notified, in writing, of the deficiencies therein by the
Board or the Board's designee.
G. Development application checklists establish a completion checklist for
development applications filed with the Old Tappan Planning Board in
10.Editor's Note: Schedule A, Developmental Application Checklist, may be found at the end
of this chapter.
§ 45-26 INTERLOCAL SERVICES AGREEMENTS § 45-26
41:87
§ 45-27. Hearings.
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.3. Said checklist would be provided
to each applicant for development and utilized by the Board, or the
Board's designee, in determining completeness.
H. Plans submitted to the Planning Board shall be accompanied by CADgenerated
data files as described below. At a minimum, the initial plan
submission and the final plan submission shall meet these
requirements. The Board, in its discretion, may also require plan
revisions that occur between initial and final submissions to be
submitted in CAD format. A summary of CAD requirements is as
follows: [Added 9-19-2005 by Ord. No. 887-05]
(1) A datum reference of New Jersey North American datum 1993
(1996 adjustment - NAD 83) shall be utilized, unless New Jersey
North American datum 1988 (NAVD 88) is available, in which case
NAVD 88 shall be utilized.
(2) The digital CAD files shall have mapped features and associated
text stored on unique layers.
(3) The digital CAD files shall be saved with a display view matching
the submitted hardcopy prints.
(4) The digital CAD files shall be submitted on compact disk (CD-R).
(5) Acceptable drawing formats include:
(a) Autocad (.dwg), Release 14 or later;
(b) Data Exchange format (.dxf);
(c) Microstation (.dgn); or
(d) ESRI (.shp) or later.
A. Oaths. The officer presiding at a hearing of the Planning Board or such
person as (s)he may designate shall have the power to administer oaths
and issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the
production of relevant evidence, including witnesses and documents
presented by the parties. The provisions of the County and Municipal
Investigations Law11 shall apply to such hearings.
B. Testimony. The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application for
development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the presiding
officer, and the right to cross-examination shall be permitted to all
interested parties through their attorneys, if represented, or directly, if
not represented, subject to the discretion of the presiding officer and to
reasonable limitations as to time and the number of witnesses.
11.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-4 et seq.
§ 45-26 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 45-27
41:88
§ 45-28. Notice requirements for hearing.
Whenever a hearing is required on an application for development pursuant
to this chapter, the applicant shall give notice thereof as follows:
C. Evidence. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the
hearing, but the Board may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly
repetitious evidence.
D. Records. The Board shall provide for the verbatim recording of the
proceedings by either stenographer, mechanical or electronic means.
The Board shall furnish a transcript or duplicate recording in lieu
thereof on request to any interested party at his/her expense; the
charge shall not exceed the maximum permitted by N.J.S.A. 2A:11-15.
Such transcript shall be certified, in writing, by the transcriber to be
accurate.
E. Voting regulation; absence of Board member. When any hearing before
the Planning Board shall carry over two or more meetings, a member of
the Board who was absent for one or more meetings shall be eligible to
vote on the matter upon which the hearing was conducted,
notwithstanding the absence from one or more of the meetings,
provided that such Board member has available a transcript or
recording of the meeting from which (s)he was absent, and certifies, in
writing, to the Board that (s)he has read such transcript or listened to
such recording.
A. Public notice shall be given by publication in the official newspaper of
the Borough at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing.
B. Notice shall be given to owners of all real property as shown on the
current tax duplicate or duplicates located within 200 feet in all
directions of the property which is the subject of such hearing and
whether located within or without the Borough in which the applicant's
land is located. This requirement shall be deemed satisfied in the case
of any condominium owner whose unit has a unit above or below it by
notice to the condominium association, or to the horizontal property
regime in the name of any co-owner who has an apartment above or
below it. Such notice shall be given by serving a copy thereof on the
owner as shown on the current tax duplicate or his/her agent in charge
of the property; or mailing a copy thereof by certified mail to the
property owner at his/her address as shown on the current tax
duplicate. A return receipt shall not be required.
(1) Notice to a partnership owner may be made by service upon any
partner. Notice to a corporate owner may be made by service upon
its president, a vice president, secretary or other person authorized
by appointment or by law to accept service on behalf of the
corporation.
§ 45-27 INTERLOCAL SERVICES AGREEMENTS § 45-28
41:89
(2) Notice to a condominium association, horizontal property regime,
community trust or homeowners' association, because of its
ownership of common elements or areas located within 200 feet of
the property which is the subject of the hearing, may be made in
the same manner as to a corporation without further notice to unit
owners, co-owners or homeowners.
C. Notice of all hearings on applications for development involving
property located within 200 feet of an adjoining municipality shall be
given by personal service or certified mail to the Clerk of such
municipality.
D. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the County
Planning Board of a hearing on an application for development of
property adjacent to an existing county road or proposed road as shown
on the Official County Map or on the County Master Plan, adjoining
other county land or situate within 200 feet of a municipal boundary.
E. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Commissioner of Transportation of a hearing on an application for
development of property adjacent to a state highway.
F. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Director of the Division of State and Regional Planning in the
Department of Community Affairs of a hearing on an application for
development of property which exceeds 150 acres or 500 dwelling
units. Such notice shall include a copy of any maps or documents
required to be on file with the Borough Clerk.
G. All notices hereinabove specified in this chapter shall be given at least
10 days prior to the date fixed for hearing, and the applicant shall file
an affidavit of proof of service with the Board holding the hearing on the
application for development.
H. Any notice made by certified mail as hereinabove required shall be
complete upon mailing.
I. All notices required to be given pursuant to the terms of this chapter,
Chapter 255, Zoning, and Chapter 218, Subdivision of Land, shall state
the date, time and place of the hearing, the nature of the matters to be
considered, the sections of the ordinance from which the application
seeks any relief, identification of the property proposed for
development by street address, if any, or by reference to lot and block
numbers as shown on the current tax duplicate in the Municipal Tax
Assessor's office, the location and times at which any maps and
documents for which approval is sought are available as required by
law.
§ 45-28 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 45-29
41:90
§ 45-29. List of property owners furnished. [Amended 6-16-2003 by
Ord. No. 824-03]
The administrative officer of the Planning Board or his or her designee shall,
within seven days after receipt of a request therefor and upon receipt of
payment of a fee in the amount of the greater of $0.25 per name or $10,
plus an additional fee of $5 for labels, make and certify a list of the current
tax duplicate of names and addresses of owners to whom an applicant is
required to give notice pursuant to this chapter.
§ 45-30. Time.
A. Applications.
(1) The Planning Board shall render its decision no later than 120 days
after the date:
(a) An appeal is taken from the decision of the Building Inspector
or other official or body; or
(b) A complete application has been filed with the Board for relief;
or
(c) On a bifurcated application, that the completed application for
variance approval is filed. The time period for granting or
denying any subsequent approval on such application shall be
as otherwise provided in this chapter.
(2) The Planning Board shall render its decision no later than 45 days
from the filing of a complete application in the following matters:
(a) Minor subdivisions.
(b) Preliminary approval of a major subdivision of 10 or fewer lots
and not involving a conditional use.
(c) Final approval of a major subdivision and not involving a
conditional use.
(d) Preliminary approval of a site plan for 10 acres of land or less
and 10 dwelling units or less, and not involving a conditional
use.
(e) Final approval of a site plan for 10 acres of land or less and 10
dwelling units or less, and not involving a conditional use.
(3) The Planning Board shall render its decision not later than 95 days
from the filing of a complete application in the following matters:
(a) Any subdivision or site plan that involves conditional use and
approval.
§ 45-29 INTERLOCAL SERVICES AGREEMENTS § 45-30
41:91
(b) Preliminary approval of a major subdivision involving more
than 10 lots or of a site plan involving more than 10 acres or
more than 10 dwelling units.
(c) Any subdivision or site plan that involves exercise by the
Planning Board of its power to grant variances or
authorizations pursuant to § 45-8J of this chapter or pursuant
to law.
B. Extension of time. The time within which the Planning Board is required
to act may be extended with the consent of the developer.
C. Failure of the Board to act within time. Failure of the Planning Board to
render its decision within the applicable time period set forth in this
section shall constitute an approval of the application, and, at the
request of the applicant, a certificate shall be issued by the Clerk or his/
her designee, certifying that the Board has failed to act.
D. Expiration of approvals.
(1) Minor subdivision. A minor subdivision approval shall expire 190
days from the date of Planning Board approval unless within such
period a plat in conformity with the approval and with the Map
Filing Law12 or a deed clearly describing the approved subdivision
is filed by the developer with the Bergen County Clerk, the Borough
Engineer and the Borough Tax Assessor.
(2) Major subdivision. Final approval of a major subdivision shall
expire 95 days from the date of signing the plat unless within such
period the plat shall have been duly filed by the developer with the
County Clerk. The Planning Board may, for good cause shown,
extend the period for recording for an additional period not to
exceed 190 days from the date of signing of the plat.
(3) Site plan. Final approval of a site plan shall expire one year from
the date of Planning Board approval, unless within such time period
a building permit is issued to the developer. The Planning Board
may, for good cause shown, extend this one-year period for an
additional period, not to exceed 90 days, upon application by the
developer.
(4) Variance. Any variance granted by the Planning Board permitting
the erection or alteration of any structure or structures, or
permitting a specified use of any premises shall expire unless such
construction or alteration shall have been actually commenced on
each and every structure permitted by such variance, or unless
such permitted use has actually been commenced, within one year
from the date of the determination of the Planning Board, except
that the running of the period of limitation herein provided shall be
tolled from the date of filing an appeal from the decision of the
12.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.
§ 45-30 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 45-30
41:92
§ 45-31. Decisions.
§ 45-32. Publication of decision.
A brief notice of every final decision shall be published in the official
newspaper of the Borough. Such publication shall be arranged by the
administrative office of the Planning Board without separate charge to the
applicant. Such notice shall be sent to the official newspaper for publication
within 10 days of the date of any such decision.
§ 45-33. Appeals to the Council.
Planning Board to the Borough Council, or to a court of competent
jurisdiction, until the termination in any manner of such appeal or
proceeding.
A. All decisions of the Planning Board on an application for development
shall be by written resolution which shall set forth findings of fact and
legal conclusions based thereon.
B. A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the Board within 10 days of the
date of decision to the applicant, or if represented, then to his/her
attorney, without separate charge. A copy of the decision shall also be
mailed to all persons who have requested it and who have paid the fee
prescribed by this chapter. A copy of this decision shall also be filed in
the office of the Borough Clerk, who shall make a copy of such filed
decision available to any interested party upon payment of a fee
calculated in the same manner as those established for copies of other
public documents in the Borough.
C. Any approval or other relief granted by the Planning Board shall be
conditioned upon either the prompt payment of due or delinquent taxes
or assessments, or the making of adequate provision for the payment
thereof in a manner that shall adequately protect the Borough.
A. Any interested party may appeal to the Council any final decision of the
Planning Board approving an application for development pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55-70(d). Such appeal shall be made within 10 days of the
date of publication of such final decision pursuant to § 45-32. The
appeal to the Council shall be made by serving the Borough Clerk in
person or by certified mail, with a notice of appeal specifying the
grounds thereof and the name and address of the appellant and name
and address of his/her attorney, if represented. Such appeal shall be
decided by the Council only upon the record established before the
Planning Board.
B. Notice of the meeting to review the record below shall be given by the
Council by personal service or certified mail, to the appellant, to those
entitled to notice of a decision pursuant to § 45-28 and to the Board
from which the appeal is taken at least 10 days prior to the date of the
meeting. The parties may submit oral and written argument on the
§ 45-30 INTERLOCAL SERVICES AGREEMENTS § 45-33
41:93
record at such meeting, and the Council shall provide for verbatim
recording and transcripts of such meeting pursuant to § 45-27D.
C. The Council shall conclude a review of the record below not later than
95 days from the date of publication of the notice of decision below,
pursuant to § 45-32 of this chapter, unless the applicant consents, in
writing, to an extension of such period. The appellant shall:
(1) Within five days of service of the notice of appeal pursuant to
Subsection A above, arrange for a transcript pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-10 for use by the Council and pay a deposit of $50 or the
estimated cost of such transcription, whichever is less; or
(2) Within 35 days of service of the notice of appeal, submit a
transcript as otherwise arranged to the Borough Clerk. Otherwise,
the appeal may be dismissed for failure to prosecute.
Failure of the Council to hold a hearing and conclude a review of
the record below and to render a decision within such specified
period, without such written consent of the applicant, shall
constitute a decision affirming the action of the Board.
D. The Council may reverse, remand or affirm, wholly or in part, or may
modify the final decision of the Planning Board, as the case may be.
E. The affirmative vote of a majority of the full authorized membership of
the Council shall be necessary to reverse, remand or modify any final
action of the Board.
F. An appeal to the Council shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the
action in respect to which the decision appealed from was made unless
the Planning Board certifies to the Council, after the notice of appeal
shall have been filed with such Board, that by reason of facts stated in
the certificate a stay would, in its opinion, cause imminent peril to life
or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by
an order of the Superior Court on application upon notice to the
Planning Board and on good cause shown.
G. The Council shall mail a copy of the decision to the appellant or if
represented then to his/her attorney, without separate charge, and for a
reasonable charge to any interested party who has requested it, not
later than 10 days after the date of the decision shall be published in the
official newspaper of the Borough. Such publication shall be arranged
by the Borough Clerk, provided that nothing contained herein shall be
construed as preventing the applicant from arranging such publication
if (s)he so desires. The Council may make a reasonable charge for its
publication. The period of time in which an appeal to a court of
competent jurisdiction may be made shall run from the first publication,
whether arranged by the Borough or the applicant.
§ 45-33 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 45-34
41:94
§ 45-34. Conflicts of interest.
No member of the Planning Board shall act on any matter in which (s)he
has either directly or indirectly any personal or financial interest. Whenever
any such member shall disqualify himself/herself from acting on a particular
matter, (s)he shall not continue to sit with the Board on the hearing of such
matter nor participate in any discussion or decision relating thereto.
§ 45-35. Informal review.
A. At the request of a developer, the Planning Board shall grant an
informal review of a concept plan for development for which the
developer intends to prepare and submit an application for
development.
B. The developer shall not be required to submit any fees for such informal
review. The developer shall not be bound by any concept plan for which
review was requested, and the Planning Board shall not be bound by
any such review.
C. A concept plan for development intended for the Planning Board's
informal review shall be in the form of a letter to the Board containing a
brief description of the development proposed. Such letter shall be filed
with the Board secretary not less than five days prior to the meeting at
which the applicant seeks review and discussion of the plan and shall be
accompanied by copies of any informal maps, plats or drawings which
the applicant may wish to use to illustrate the concept.
§ 45-34 INTERLOCAL SERVICES AGREEMENTS § 45-35
41:95

ARTICLE IV
Development Fees
[Amended 4-17-2006 by Ord. No. 903-06; 11-1-2010 by Ord. No.
1022-10]
§ 45-36. Purpose.
§ 45-37. Basic requirements.
§ 45-38. Definitions.
The following terms, as used in this article, shall have the following
meanings:
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development included in the
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and includes, but is not limited to,
an inclusionary development, a municipal construction project or a onehundred-
percent affordable development.
COAH or the COUNCIL — The New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing
established under the Act which has primary jurisdiction for the
A. In Holmdel Builder's Association V. Holmdel Township, 121 N.J. 550
(1990), the New Jersey Supreme Court determined that mandatory
development fees are authorized by the Fair Housing Act of 1985 (the
Act), N.J.S.A. 52:27d-301 et seq., and the State Constitution, subject to
the Council on Affordable Housing's (COAH's) adoption of rules.
B. Pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46, § 8 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.2) and the
Statewide Nonresidential Development Fee Act (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.1
through 8.7), COAH is authorized to adopt and promulgate regulations
necessary for the establishment, implementation, review, monitoring
and enforcement of municipal affordable housing trust funds and
corresponding spending plans. Municipalities that are under the
jurisdiction of the Council or court of competent jurisdiction and have a
COAH-approved spending plan may retain fees collected from
nonresidential development.
C. This article establishes standards for the collection, maintenance, and
expenditure of development fees pursuant to COAH's regulations and in
accordance P.L. 2008, c. 46, §§ 8 and 32-38. Fees collected pursuant to
this article shall be used for the sole purpose of providing low- and
moderate-income housing. This article shall be interpreted within the
framework of COAH's rules on development fees, codified at N.J.A.C.
5:97-8.
A. This article shall not be effective until approved by COAH pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:96-5.1.
B. Old Tappan shall not spend development fees until COAH has approved
a plan for spending such fees in conformance with N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.10
and N.J.A.C. 5:96-5.3.
§ 45-36 INTERLOCAL SERVICES AGREEMENTS § 45-38
41:97
administration of housing obligations in accordance with sound regional
planning consideration in the state.
DEVELOPMENT FEE — Money paid by a developer for the improvement of
property as permitted in N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.3.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any
land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including the
holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — The assessed value of a property divided
by the current average ratio of assessed to true value for the municipality in
which the property is situated, as determined in accordance with Sections
1, 5, and 6 of P.L. 1973, c.123 (N.J.S.A. 54:1-35a through 54:1-35c).
GREEN BUILDING STRATEGIES — Those strategies that minimize the
impact of development on the environment, and enhance the health, safety
and well-being of residents by producing durable, low-maintenance,
resource-efficient housing while making optimum use of existing
infrastructure and community services.
§ 45-39. Residential development fees.
A. Imposed fees.
(1) Within the residential zoning districts, residential developers,
except for developers of the types of development specifically
exempted below, shall pay a fee of 1.5% of the equalized assessed
value for residential development, provided no increased density is
permitted.
(2) When an increase in residential density pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d(5) (known as a "d" variance) has been permitted,
developers may be required to pay a development fee of 6% of the
equalized assessed value for each additional unit that may be
realized. However, if the zoning on a site has changed during the
two-year period preceding the filing of such a variance application,
the base density for the purposes of calculating the bonus
development fee shall be the highest density permitted by right
during the two-year period preceding the filing of the variance
application.
(a) Example: If an approval allows four units to be constructed on
a site that was zoned for two units, the fees could equal 1.5% of
the equalized assessed value on the first two units and 6% of
the equalized assessed value for the two additional units,
provided zoning on the site has not changed during the twoyear
period preceding the filing of such a variance application.
B. Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for residential
development.
§ 45-38 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 45-39
41:98
§ 45-40. Nonresidential development fees.
(1) Affordable housing developments and developments where the
developer has made a payment in lieu of on-site construction of
affordable units shall be exempt from development fees.
(2) Developments that have received preliminary or final site plan
approval prior to the adoption of a municipal development fee
ordinance shall be exempt from development fees, unless the
developer seeks a substantial change in the approval. Where a site
plan approval does not apply, a zoning and/or building permit shall
be synonymous with preliminary or final site plan approval for this
purpose. The fee percentage shall be vested on the date that the
building permit is issued.
(3) Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an existing
structure undergoes a change to a more intense use, is demolished
and replaced, or is expanded, if the expansion is not otherwise
exempt from the development fee requirement. The development
fee shall be calculated on the increase in the equalized assessed
value of the improved structure.
(4) Developers of one or two owner-occupied dwelling units,
residential structures demolished and replaced as a result of a
natural disaster, green buildings, etc., shall be exempt from paying
a development fee.
A. Imposed fees.
(1) Within all zoning districts, nonresidential developers, except for
developers of the types of development specifically exempted, shall
pay a fee equal to 2.5% of the equalized assessed value of the land
and improvements, for all new nonresidential construction on an
unimproved lot or lots.
(2) Nonresidential developers, except for developers of the types of
development specifically exempted, shall also pay a fee equal to
2.5% of the increase in equalized assessed value resulting from any
additions to existing structures to be used for nonresidential
purposes.
(3) Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an existing
structure is demolished and replaced. The development fee of 2.5%
shall be calculated on the difference between the equalized
assessed value of the preexisting land and improvement and the
equalized assessed value of the newly improved structure, i.e., land
and improvement, at the time final certificate of occupancy is
issued. If the calculation required under this section results in a
negative number, the nonresidential development fee shall be zero.
B. Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for
nonresidential development.
§ 45-39 INTERLOCAL SERVICES AGREEMENTS § 45-40
41:99
§ 45-41. Collection procedures.
(1) The nonresidential portion of a mixed-use inclusionary or marketrate
development shall be subject to the development fee of 2.5%,
unless otherwise exempted below.
(2) The fee of 2.5% shall not apply to an increase in equalized assessed
value resulting from alterations, change in use within existing
footprint, reconstruction, renovations and repairs.
(3) Nonresidential developments shall be exempt from the payment of
nonresidential development fees in accordance with the
exemptions required pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46, as specified in the
Form N-RDF, "State of New Jersey Nonresidential Development
Certification/Exemption" form. Any exemption claimed by a
developer shall be substantiated by that developer.
(4) A developer of a nonresidential development exempted from the
nonresidential development fee pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46, shall
be subject to it at such time the basis for the exemption no longer
applies, and shall make the payment of the nonresidential
development fee, in that event, within three years after that event
or after the issuance of the final certificate of occupancy of the
nonresidential development, whichever is later.
(5) If a property which was exempted from the collection of a
nonresidential development fee thereafter ceases to be exempt
from property taxation, the owner of the property shall remit the
fees required pursuant to this section within 45 days of the
termination of the property tax exemption. Unpaid nonresidential
development fees under these circumstances may be enforceable
by Old Tappan as a lien against the real property of the owner.
A. Upon the granting of a preliminary, final or other applicable approval
for a development, the applicable approving authority shall direct its
staff to notify the construction official or designated municipal official
responsible for the issuance of a building permit.
B. For nonresidential developments only, the developer shall also be
provided with a copy of Form N-RDF, "State of New Jersey
Nonresidential Development Certification/Exemption," to be completed
as per the instructions provided. The Developer of a nonresidential
development shall complete Form N-RDF as per the instructions
provided. The construction official shall verify the information
submitted by the nonresidential developer as per the instructions
provided in the Form N-RDF. The tax assessor shall verify exemptions
and prepare estimated and final assessments as per the instructions
provided in Form N-RDF.
C. The construction official responsible for the issuance of a building
permit shall notify the local tax assessor of the issuance of the first
§ 45-40 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 45-41
41:100
building permit for a development which is subject to a development
fee.
D. Within 90 days of receipt of that notice, the municipal tax assessor,
based on the plans filed, shall provide an estimate of the equalized
assessed value of the development.
E. The construction official responsible for the issuance of a final
certificate of occupancy notifies the local assessor of any and all
requests for the scheduling of a final inspection on property which is
subject to a development fee.
F. Within 10 business days of a request for the scheduling of a final
inspection, the municipal assessor shall confirm or modify the
previously estimated equalized assessed value of the improvements of
the development; calculate the development fee; and thereafter notify
the developer of the amount of the fee.
G. Should Old Tappan fail to determine or notify the developer of the
amount of the development fee within 10 business days of the request
for final inspection, the developer may estimate the amount due and
pay that estimated amount consistent with the dispute process set forth
in Subsection b of Section 37 of P.L. 2008, c. 46 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.6).
H. Fifty percent of the development fee shall be collected at the time of
issuance of the building permit. The remaining portion shall be
collected at the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. The developer
shall be responsible for paying the difference between the fee
calculated at building permit and that determined at issuance of
certificate of occupancy.
I. Appeal of development fees.
(1) A developer may challenge residential development fees imposed
by filing a challenge with the County Board of Taxation. Pending a
review and determination by the Board, collected fees shall be
placed in an interest-bearing escrow account by Old Tappan.
Appeals from a determination of the Board may be made to the Tax
Court in accordance with the provisions of the State Tax Uniform
Procedure Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1 et seq., within 90 days after the
date of such determination. Interest earned on amounts escrowed
shall be credited to the prevailing party.
(2) A developer may challenge nonresidential development fees
imposed by filing a challenge with the Director of the Division of
Taxation. Pending a review and determination by the Director,
which shall be made within 45 days of receipt of the challenge,
collected fees shall be placed in an interest-bearing escrow account
by Old Tappan. Appeals from a determination of the Director may
be made to the Tax Court in accordance with the provisions of the
State Tax Uniform Procedure Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1 et seq., within
§ 45-41 INTERLOCAL SERVICES AGREEMENTS § 45-41
41:101
§ 45-42. Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
§ 45-43. Use of funds.
90 days after the date of such determination. Interest earned on
amounts escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing party.
A. There is hereby created a separate, interest-bearing housing trust fund
to be maintained by the Chief Financial Officer for the purpose of
depositing development fees collected from residential and
nonresidential developers and proceeds from the sale of units with
extinguished controls.
B. The following additional funds shall be deposited in the Affordable
Housing Trust Fund and shall at all times be identifiable by source and
amount:
(1) Payments in lieu of on-site construction of affordable units;
(2) Developer contributed funds to make 10% of the adaptable
entrances in a townhouse or other multistory attached
development accessible;
(3) Rental income from municipally operated units;
(4) Repayments from affordable housing program loans;
(5) Recapture funds;
(6) Proceeds from the sale of affordable units; and
(7) Any other funds collected in connection with Old Tappan's
affordable housing program.
C. Within seven days from the opening of the trust fund account, the
Borough of Old Tappan shall provide COAH with written authorization,
in the form of a three-party escrow agreement between the
municipality, the bank, and COAH, to permit COAH to direct the
disbursement of the funds as provided for in N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.13(b).
D. All interest accrued in the housing trust fund shall only be used on
eligible affordable housing activities approved by COAH.
A. The expenditure of all funds shall conform to a spending plan approved
by COAH. Funds deposited in the housing trust fund may be used for
any activity approved by COAH to address the Old Tappan's fair share
obligation and may be set up as a grant or revolving loan program. Such
activities include, but are not limited to: preservation or purchase of
housing for the purpose of maintaining or implementing affordability
controls, rehabilitation, new construction of affordable housing units
and related costs, accessory apartment, market-to-affordable, or
regional housing partnership programs, conversion of existing
nonresidential buildings to create new affordable units, green building
§ 45-41 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 45-43
41:102
strategies designed to be cost saving and in accordance with accepted
national or state standards, purchase of land for affordable housing,
improvement of land to be used for affordable housing, extensions or
improvements of roads and infrastructure to affordable housing sites,
financial assistance designed to increase affordability, administration
necessary for implementation of the Housing Element and Fair Share
Plan, or any other activity as permitted pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.7
through 8.9 and specified in the approved spending plan.
B. Funds shall not be expended to reimburse Old Tappan for past housing
activities.
C. At least 30% of all development fees collected and interest earned shall
be used to provide affordability assistance to low- and moderate-income
households in affordable units included in the municipal Fair Share
Plan. One-third of the affordability assistance portion of development
fees collected shall be used to provide affordability assistance to those
households earning 30% or less of median income by region.
(1) Affordability assistance programs may include down payment
assistance, security deposit assistance, low-interest loans, rental
assistance, assistance with homeowners association or
condominium fees and special assessments, and assistance with
emergency repairs.
(2) Affordability assistance to households earning 30% or less of
median income may include buying down the cost of low or
moderate income units in the municipal Fair Share Plan to make
them affordable to households earning 30% or less of median
income.
(3) Payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site and funds
from the sale of units with extinguished controls shall be exempt
from the affordability assistance requirement.
D. Old Tappan may contract with a private or public entity to administer
any part of its Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, including the
requirement for affordability assistance, in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:96-18.
E. No more than 20% of all revenues collected from development fees,
may be expended on administration, including, but not limited to,
salaries and benefits for municipal employees or consultant fees
necessary to develop or implement a new construction program, a
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and/or an affirmative marketing
program. In the case of a rehabilitation program, no more than 20% of
the revenues collected from development fees shall be expended for
such administrative expenses. Administrative funds may be used for
income qualification of households, monitoring the turnover of sale and
rental units, and compliance with COAH's monitoring requirements.
Legal or other fees related to litigation opposing affordable housing
§ 45-43 INTERLOCAL SERVICES AGREEMENTS § 45-43
41:103
§ 45-44. Monitoring.
§ 45-45. Ongoing collection of fees.
The ability for Old Tappan to impose, collect and expend development
fees shall expire with its substantive certification unless Old Tappan has
filed an adopted Housing Element and Fair Share Plan with COAH, has
petitioned for substantive certification, and has received COAH's approval
of its development fee ordinance. If Old Tappan fails to renew its ability to
impose and collect development fees prior to the expiration of substantive
certification, it may be subject to forfeiture of any or all funds remaining
within its municipal trust fund. Any funds so forfeited shall be deposited
into the "New Jersey Affordable Housing Trust Fund" established pursuant
to Section 20 of P.L. 1985, c. 222 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-320). Old Tappan shall
not impose a residential development fee on a development that receives
preliminary or final site plan approval after the expiration of its substantive
certification or judgment of compliance, nor shall Old Tappan retroactively
impose a development fee on such a development. Old Tappan shall not
expend development fees after the expiration of its substantive certification
or judgment of compliance.
sites or objecting to the Council's regulations and/or action are not
eligible uses of the affordable housing trust fund.
A. Old Tappan shall complete and return to COAH all monitoring forms
included in monitoring requirements related to the collection of
development fees from residential and nonresidential developers,
payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site, funds from the
sale of units with extinguished controls, barrier-free escrow funds,
rental income, repayments from affordable housing program loans, and
any other funds collected in connection with Old Tappan's housing
program, as well as to the expenditure of revenues and implementation
of the plan certified by COAH. All monitoring reports shall be completed
on forms designed by COAH.
§ 45-43 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 45-45
41:104
Chapter 50
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personnel — See Ch. 60.
§ 45-45 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 45-45
50:105

ARTICLE I
Elected Officials
[Adopted 5-26-1975 as Sec. 2-1 of the 1975 Code]
§ 50-1. Enumeration.
The elected officials of the Borough shall consist of a Mayor, six Councilmen,
a Tax Collector and an Assessor.
§ 50-2. Terms of office.
§ 50-3. Resignation and vacancies.
A. The term of office of all elected officers shall begin at noon on January 1
next after their election, except that of the Assessor, which shall begin
on July 1 next following his election.
B. The Mayor shall hold office for four years and until his successor has
qualified. The Councilmen shall hold office for three years and until
their successors have qualified. Their terms shall be arranged so that
the terms of two Councilmen shall expire at the end of each year.
C. The Collector and Assessor shall each hold office for four years, subject
to tenure where applicable.
A. Mayor.
(1) Whenever the Mayor presents to the Council his resignation from
office, the resignation may be accepted by a vote of the Council and
the office of Mayor shall thereupon be deemed vacant.
(2) A vacancy occurring in the office of Mayor, whether by resignation
or otherwise, shall be filled by the Council until the next annual
election and until the election and qualification of a successor. At
the next annual election the person elected to fill the vacancy shall
be elected for the unexpired term only.
B. Other elective offices. All vacancies in other elective offices shall be
filled by nomination by the Mayor and appointment by him with the
advice and consent of the Council, expressed by the vote of a majority of
the members of the Council present at the meeting, provided that at
least three affirmative votes shall be required for such purpose, the
Mayor to have no vote thereon except in the case of a tie.
C. Procedure.
(1) All vacancies occurring in any elective office, except the office of
Assessor, shall be filled by appointment until January 1, and all
vacancies occurring in the office of Assessor shall be filled by
appointment until July 1, following the next annual election and
until the election and qualification of a successor.
§ 50-1 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 50-3
50:107
(2) If a vacancy occurs at so short a period of time before the next
annual election that the office cannot be filled at the election, the
vacancy shall be filled in the same manner as though it had
occurred immediately after the election, and the vacancy shall then
be filled at the next subsequent annual election for the portion of
the term, if any, as may still remain unexpired.
(3) At the next annual election the persons elected to fill the vacancies
shall be elected for the unexpired term only.
§ 50-3 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 50-3
50:108
ARTICLE II
Appointed Officers
[Adopted 5-26-1975 as Sec. 2-2 of the 1975 Code, as amended
through Ord. No. 647-98]
§ 50-4. Enumeration; terms; removal. [Amended 2-19-2008 by Ord.
No. 961-08]
There shall be appointed a Borough Clerk, Borough Treasurer, Borough
Attorney, Borough Engineer and such other officers as the Council may
deem necessary. They shall perform the duties required by law and the
ordinances of the Borough. Other than the Borough Attorney, Borough
Engineer, Borough Administrator and Building Inspector, these officers
shall be residents of the Borough and shall serve at the pleasure of the
Council, except the Clerk, who also shall be exempted from the Borough
residency requirement, the Tax Collector and Tax Assessor, who shall serve
for terms as provided in Chapter 9 of Title 40A of the New Jersey statutes.
No officer shall be removed without being afforded an opportunity to be
heard. Except as otherwise provided by state law or by Borough ordinance,
appointed officers shall hold office for one year and until their successors
have qualified.
§ 50-5. Method of appointment; vacancies.
Except as otherwise provided by the laws of this state, the Mayor shall
nominate and, with the advice and consent of the Council, appoint all
officers directed to be appointed, including the filling of vacancies in all
appointive offices which shall be for the unexpired term only. The Mayor
shall make such nomination within 30 days after the office becomes vacant.
If the Mayor fails to nominate within 30 days or the Council fails to confirm
any nomination made by the Mayor, then after the expiration of 30 days, the
Council shall appoint the officer directed to be appointed. No appointment
shall be made except by the vote of a majority of the members of the Council
present at the meeting, provided that at least three affirmative votes shall
be required for that purpose; the Mayor to have no vote thereon except in
case of a tie.
§ 50-4 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 50-5
50:109

ARTICLE III
Mayor
[Adopted 5-26-1975 as Sec. 2-3 of the 1975 Code]
§ 50-6. Presiding at meetings; voting rights.
The Mayor shall preside over all meetings of the Borough Council but shall
not vote except to give the deciding vote in case of a tie, or except as
otherwise provided by law.
§ 50-7. Powers and duties.
The Mayor shall see that the laws of the state and the ordinances of the
Borough are faithfully executed, and shall recommend to the Council such
measures as he may deem necessary or expedient for the welfare of the
Borough. He shall maintain peace and good order to have the power to
suppress all riots and tumultuous assemblies in the Borough. The Mayor
shall have all the powers granted by the laws of the state and the ordinances
of the Borough.
§ 50-7.1. Marriage and civil union ceremonies; fee. [Added
7-16-2001 by Ord. No. 758-01; amended 5-17-2004 by Ord. No.
850-04; 4-23-2007 by Ord. No. 941-07]
The Mayor is empowered by state law to perform marriage and civil union
ceremonies. The fee to be paid to the Borough for performing marriage and
civil union ceremonies shall be $100.
§ 50-6 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 50-7.1
50:111

ARTICLE IV
Borough Clerk
[Adopted 5-26-1975 as Sec. 2-6 of the 1975 Code]
§ 50-8. Clerk of Council.
The Borough Clerk shall serve as Clerk of the Council. He shall attend all
meetings of the Council and keep the minutes of the proceedings of the
Council. The minutes of each meeting of the Council shall be signed by the
officer presiding at the meeting and by the Clerk.
§ 50-9. Ordinances and resolutions.
§ 50-10. Custodian of records.
The Clerk shall have custody of and safely keep all records, books and
documents of the Borough, except those committed by ordinance to any
other office or transferred thereto by the Mayor and Council. He shall,
upon request and upon the payment of the fees prescribed therefor by the
Council for the use of the Borough furnish a certified copy of any such paper
in his custody under the Corporate Seal of the Borough.
§ 50-11. Registrar of real property.
The Clerk shall maintain a record of all real property which the Borough
may acquire, sell, or lease. The records shall be in such form and contain
such information as the Division of Local Finance in the Community Affairs
of the State of New Jersey shall prescribe. It shall be available for inspection
in the office of the Clerk.
A. The Clerk shall record all ordinances in books to be provided for that
purpose. After each ordinance he shall record and certify the proof of
its publication as required by law. Each ordinance so recorded shall be
signed by the Mayor and the Clerk, who shall attest that it was adopted
on a date stated, and when so signed the recorded copy shall be
deemed to be a public record of the ordinance. Any omission by the
Clerk or the Mayor to record, sign or certify shall not impair or affect
the validity of an ordinance which has been duly adopted.
B. Periodically, as determined by the Council, the Clerk shall compile at
least two copies of all ordinances that have been adopted since the
previous Code or supplement and forward them to a company selected
by the Council to prepare a supplement to the Code.
C. The Clerk shall compile annually, in the order of their adoption, all
resolutions adopted by the Council during the year and shall preserve
them.
§ 50-8 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 50-12
50:113
§ 50-12. Corporate Seal.
The Clerk shall cause the Corporate Seal of the Borough to be affixed to
instruments and writings when authorized by ordinance or resolution of
the Council or when necessary to exemplify any document on record in his
office, or to certify any act or paper which, from the records in his office,
appears to have been a public act of the Borough or a public document.
He shall not affix the Seal or cause or permit it to be affixed to any other
instrument or writing or other paper unless required by law, ordinance or
resolution of the Council.
§ 50-13. Insurance, surety bonds and contracts.
The Clerk, subject to the supervision of the Mayor and Council, shall:
§ 50-14. Administrative rules and regulations; filing.
No rule or general regulations made by any department, officer, agency
or authority of the Borough, except such as relates to the organization
or internal management of the municipal government or a part thereof,
shall take effect until it is filed with the Borough Clerk. The Clerk shall
maintain a current compilation of all such rules and regulations which shall
be available for public inspection in his office during business hours.
§ 50-15. Additional powers and duties.
In addition to such other functions, powers and duties as may be prescribed
by ordinance and subject to the supervision and direction of the Mayor and
Council, the Clerk shall:
A. Be the depository for and custodian of all official surety bonds furnished
by or on account of any officer or employee, except his own bond which
shall be placed in the custody of the Treasurer; all insurance policies
upon or with respect to risks insured for the benefit of the Borough or to
protect it against any claim, demand or liability whatsoever; and all
formal contracts for work, labor, services, supplies, equipment and
materials to which the Borough may be a party.
B. Be the depository for and have custody of all performance bonds
running to the Borough as obligee, or any other form of security given
by any contractor, subdivision developer or other person on account of
work done or to be done in or for the Borough.
C. Have custody of all leases of property owned or rented by the Borough.
D. Report to the Borough Council annually, at such time as the Council
may require, on the coverage, expiration date and premium of each
surety bond and contract of insurance; the nature and terms of
outstanding leases, the rent reserved by each and their respective
expiration dates.
§ 50-12 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 50-15
50:114
A. Perform all the functions required of municipal Clerks by the General
Election Law (Title 19 of the Revised Statutes) and any other law or
ordinance.
B. Administer the provisions of Borough ordinances with reference to the
licensing of occupations and activities for which licenses are required
by law or ordinance to be obtained from the Clerk.
C. Have such other, different and additional functions, powers and duties
as may be prescribed by law or ordinance or delegated to him/her by
the Mayor and Council.
§ 50-15 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 50-15
50:115

ARTICLE V
Deputy Borough Clerk
[Adopted 10-21-2002 by Ord. No. 804-0213]
§ 50-16. Establishment of position; appointment.
In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:9-135, there shall be a Deputy Borough
Clerk appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the Council for a oneyear
term ending on January 1 of the calendar year next following the
appointment.
§ 50-17. Duties.
The Deputy Borough Clerk shall perform the duties assigned to him or
her by the Borough Clerk. During the absence or disability of the Borough
Clerk, the Deputy Borough Clerk shall have all the powers of the Borough
Clerk and shall perform the functions and duties of such office.
13.Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former Arts. V through XV as Arts. VI
through XVI, respectively, and §§ 50-16 through 50-45 as §§ 50-18 through 50-47,
respectively.
§ 50-16 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 50-17
50:117

ARTICLE VI
Chief Financial Officer
[Adopted by Ord. No. 412-89]
§ 50-18. Designation of Treasurer/Collector.
The Borough Treasurer/Borough Tax Collector is hereby designated the
Chief Financial Officer.
§ 50-19. Qualifications.
The Chief Financial Officer shall be qualified in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40A:9-140.1 et seq.
§ 50-20. Responsibilities.
The Chief Financial Officer shall carry out the responsibilities required by
law and the Borough Council.
§ 50-18 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 50-20
50:119

ARTICLE VII
Borough Treasurer
[Adopted 5-26-1975 as Sec. 2-7 of the 1975 Code]
§ 50-21. Designation; term.
Within the Borough there shall be a Borough Treasurer. The Collector, when
so designated by the Council, shall be the Treasurer of the Borough and
(s)he shall serve for a term of one year.
§ 50-22. Deputy Borough Treasurer.
There may be a Deputy Borough Treasurer appointed by the Council for
a term of one year. It shall be the duty of the Deputy Borough Treasurer
generally to aid and assist the Borough Treasurer in the performance his/
her duties in such manner as the Borough Treasurer shall, from time to
time, direct. The Deputy Borough Treasurer shall perform the duties of the
Borough Treasurer in the latter's absence or incapacity.
§ 50-23. Powers and duties.
The Treasurer shall have, perform and exercise all the functions, powers
and duties provided by general law and Borough ordinances. The Treasurer
shall keep and maintain books and records of all financial transaction of
the Borough in accordance with the standards and requirements of the
Division of Local Finance in the Department of Community Affairs of the
State of New Jersey. The Treasurer shall have custody of all public moneys
of the Borough and make monthly reports to the Council of all receipts,
expenditures, commitments and unexpended appropriations. All moneys
received from any source by or on behalf of the Borough or any department,
board, office or agency thereof, except as otherwise provided by Borough
ordinance, shall be paid to the Treasurer who by the next ensuing bank day
after their receipt shall deposit them in the authorized public depository of
the Borough to the credit of the proper account.
§ 50-21 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 50-23
50:121

ARTICLE VIII
Tax Assessor
[Adopted 5-26-1975 as Sec. 2-9 of the 1975 Code]
§ 50-24. Establishment and duties.
There shall be a Tax Assessor of the Borough who shall:
§ 50-25. Qualifications.
On and after July 1, 1971, no person may be an Assessor unless he holds
a Tax Assessor certificate. This requirement shall not apply to anyone who
has served in office continuously from July 1, 1967. A person reelected to
office, after receiving a Tax Assessor certificate, and thereafter serving in
office for four consecutive years, and a person who received a Tax Assessor
certificate on or before June 30, 1969, while actually in office, and having
prior to June 30, 1969, served in office for four consecutive years, shall be
entitled to tenure pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:1-35.31.
A. Have, perform and discharge all the functions, powers and duties
prescribed by law for a municipal assessor.
B. Make assessments for benefits for local improvement and for that
purpose have and exercise the powers and duties of a Board of
Assessment for local improvement as provided by law.
C. Maintain adequate assessment records of each separate parcel of real
property assessed or exempted.
D. Maintain a current Tax Map of the Borough as a public record and
cause to be recorded thereon all changes in ownership or character of
the real property assessed, employing for that purpose the facilities of
other departments as provided by the Code.
E. Report to the Council as to equalization proceedings and other matters
involving the County Tax Board and make recommendations as to action
to be taken in that regard.
§ 50-24 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 50-25
50:123

ARTICLE IX
Borough Attorney
[Adopted 5-26-1975 as Sec. 2-13 of the 1975 Code]
§ 50-26. Appointment; compensation.
The Borough Attorney shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the Council for a term of one year. He shall be an attorney at law
of New Jersey but need not be a resident of the Borough. The Attorney shall
not receive a fixed salary, but shall be paid such retainer as may be agreed
upon and authorized by the Council, plus such fees and charges as shall be
deemed reasonable.
§ 50-27. Powers and duties.
The Attorney shall have such powers and perform such duties as are
provided for the office of Borough Attorney by general law or ordinances
of the Borough. He shall represent the Borough in all judicial and
administrative proceedings in which the municipality or any of its officers or
agencies may be a party or have an interest. He shall give all legal counsel
and advice where required by the Mayor and Council or any member
thereof, and shall in general serve as the legal advisor to the Mayor and
Council on all matters of Borough business. In furtherance of such general
powers and duties, but without limitation thereto, the Borough Attorney
shall:
A. Draft or approve as to form and sufficiency all legal documents,
contracts, deeds, ordinances and resolutions made, executed or
adopted by or on behalf of the Borough.
B. With the approval of the Mayor and Council, conduct appeals from
orders, decisions or judgments affecting any interest of the Borough as
he may in his discretion determine to be necessary or desirable or as
directed by the Mayor and Council.
C. Subject to the approval of the Borough Council, have power to enter
into any agreement, compromise or settlement of any litigation in which
the Borough is involved.
D. Render opinions in writing upon any question of law submitted to him
by the Mayor and Council or any member thereof, with respect to their
official powers and duties, and perform such duties as may be
necessary to provide legal counsel to the Mayor and Council in the
administration of municipal affairs.
E. Supervise and direct the work of such additional Attorneys and
technical and professional assistants as the Council may authorize for
special or regular employment in or for the Borough.
§ 50-26 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 50-27
50:125

ARTICLE X
Borough Prosecutor
[Adopted 5-26-1975 as Sec. 2-13A of the 1975 Code, as amended
through Ord. No. 604-97]
§ 50-28. Creation of office; appointment.
In accordance with P.L. 1996, c. 95, § 14,14 there is hereby created the office
of Borough Prosecutor, an executive office of the Borough. The Prosecutor
shall be nominated by the Mayor, and with the advice and consent of the
Council appointed to office including appointments for an unexpired term
only. The Mayor shall make such nomination within 30 days after the office
of Prosecutor becomes vacant. If the Mayor fails to nominate within 30
days, or the Council fails to confirm any nomination made by the Mayor,
then after the expiration of said 30 days, the Council shall appoint the
Prosecutor. No appointment shall be made except by the vote of a majority
of the members of the Council present at the meeting, provided that at least
three affirmative votes shall be required for such purpose, the Mayor to
have no vote thereon except in case of a tie.
§ 50-29. Duties.
The Attorney shall prosecute, on behalf of the Borough, in the Municipal
Court of the Borough persons charged with violation of municipal
ordinances, rules or regulations and for violation of all state statutes
cognizable therein. He shall advise the members of the Police Department,
at the direction of the Police Commissioner, on the administration of the
body of criminal law.
§ 50-30. Compensation.
He shall receive for his services such compensation as shall be provided by
the Mayor and Council in full compensation for all prosecutorial services.
For any appellate services to the Borough he shall receive such
compensation as may be authorized by the Mayor and Council therefor.
14.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 2B:12-27.
§ 50-28 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 50-30
50:127

ARTICLE XI
Building Inspector
[Adopted 5-26-1975 as Sec. 2-14 of the 1975 Code]
§ 50-31. Creation.
The office of Building Inspector is hereby created, and the executive official
in charge shall be known as the Building Inspector.
§ 50-32. Appointment; powers and duties.
The Building Inspector shall be appointed in such manner and shall have
such power and duties as are provided by law and the Borough Council.
§ 50-31 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 50-32
50:129

ARTICLE XII
Borough Engineer
[Adopted 5-26-1975 as Sec. 2-15 of the 1975 Code]
§ 50-33. Appointment.
There shall be a Borough Engineer who shall be a licensed professional
engineer of the State of New Jersey and who shall be appointed for a term
of one year by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council.
§ 50-34. Duties.
The Borough Engineer shall perform such duties as are prescribed by
general law and ordinance, and in addition shall:
§ 50-35. Documents to be property of Borough; surrender upon
termination of service.
All papers, documents, memoranda, reports and other materials relating to
the administration of engineering duties of the Borough Engineer shall be
the property of the Borough. Upon the termination of his services with the
Borough, the Engineer shall forthwith surrender to any successor all such
property.
A. Prepare or cause to be prepared plans, designs and specifications for
public works and improvements undertaken by the Borough.
B. Provide and maintain surveys, maps, plans, specifications and control
records with respect to public works and facilities owned or operated
by the Borough.
C. Provide technical and engineering advice and assistance to other
Borough departments as needed.
§ 50-33 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 50-35
50:131

ARTICLE XIII
Zoning Officer
[Adopted by Ord. No. 469-91]
§ 50-36. Creation of office; appointment; term.
The office of Zoning Officer of the Borough of Old Tappan is hereby created.
The Zoning Officer shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the Council and shall hold office until January 1 next following
the appointment. Any vacancy in the office shall be filled only for the
unexpired portion of the term.
§ 50-37. Zoning permits.
§ 50-38. Duties.
A. Zoning permits shall hereafter be secured from the Zoning Officer prior
to construction, erection or alteration of any structure or part of a
structure or use of a structure or land. A grant or denial of a zoning
permit shall be obtained prior to the filing of an application for site plan
approval. All requests for zoning permits shall be made in writing by the
owner or his authorized agent and shall include a statement of the use
or intended use and shall be accompanied by a plan of the plot showing
therein the exact size, shape and location of all proposed structures and
such other information as may be necessary to provide for the
enforcement of this chapter. The zoning permits shall be granted or
denied within 20 days from the date that a written application is filed
with the Zoning Officer.
B. A building permit issued in accordance with the Building Code of the
Borough pursuant to the provisions thereof shall be issued only after or
coincident with the issuance of a zoning permit certifying that the
application is in compliance with all provisions of Chapter 255, Zoning,
or approved variance therefrom.
A. The Zoning Officer shall be the chief enforcing officer of the provisions
of Chapter 255, Zoning.
B. Records. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to keep a record of all
applications for zoning permits issued, together with a notation of all
special conditions involved. He shall file and safely keep copies of all
plans submitted, and the same shall form a part of the records of his
office and shall be available for the use of the Borough Council and of
other officials of the Borough.
C. The Zoning Officer shall prepare a bimonthly report for the Borough
Council summarizing for the period since his last previous report all
zoning permits issued by him and all complaints of violations and the
action taken by him consequent thereon. A copy of each such report
shall be filed with the Borough Tax Assessor at the same time it is filed
with the Borough Council.
§ 50-36 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 50-39
50:133
§ 50-39. Salary.
The annual salary for the position of Zoning Officer in the Borough of Old
Tappan shall be determined from time to time by the Borough Council and
shall be paid in accordance with the provision of the Salary Ordinance of
the Borough of Old Tappan.
§ 50-39 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 50-39
50:134
ARTICLE XIV
Borough Administrator
[Adopted by Ord. No. 494-92]
§ 50-40. Position established; duties.
There shall be a Borough Administrator to assist the Mayor and Council,
whose function shall be to provide a liaison between the governing body and
the various departments, bodies and other officials of the Borough of Old
Tappan under the supervision and control of the Mayor and Council and to
fulfill such other duties as shall be specifically assigned by said Mayor and
Council from time to time.
§ 50-41. Appointment; term of office.
The Borough Administrator shall be appointed by the Mayor with advice and
consent of the Borough Council for the term of one year, beginning January
1 of each year.
§ 50-42. Qualifications for appointment.
The Borough Administrator shall be appointed on the basis of executive and
administrative abilities and qualifications with special regard to training
and experience in government affairs, as set forth by the Mayor and
Council.
§ 50-43. General duties. [Amended 2-19-2008 by Ord. No. 961-08]
The duties of the Borough Administrator shall be such that they shall
not infringe upon the duties, rights and powers of other Borough officers
designated by statute or by Borough ordinance. The Borough Administrator
shall be responsible to the Mayor and Council for the proper and efficient
administration of the Borough affairs.
§ 50-40 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 50-43
50:135

ARTICLE XV
Computer Resource Person
[Adopted by Ord. No. 598-96]
§ 50-44. Creation of position; appointment.
There is hereby created the office of computer resource person. The
computer resource person shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice
and consent of the Council. The term of office shall be one year.
§ 50-45. Duties.
The computer resource person shall administer the Borough's program for
providing Internet access to Borough residents.
§ 50-44 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 50-45
50:137

ARTICLE XVI
Deputy Zoning Officer
[Adopted 1-24-2000 by Ord. No. 701-00]
§ 50-46. Creation of office; appointment; term.
The office of Deputy Zoning Officer of the Borough of Old Tappan is hereby
created. The Deputy Zoning Officer shall be appointed by the Mayor with
the advice and consent of the Council and shall hold office for one year and
until a successor is qualified.
§ 50-47. Duties.
The Deputy Zoning Officer shall perform the duties assigned by him or her
by the Zoning Officer and shall perform all duties of the Zoning Officer in
his or her absence.
§ 50-46 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 50-47
50:139

ARTICLE XVII
Defense and Indemnification
[Adopted 3-18-2003 by Ord. No. 816-03]
§ 50-48. Indemnification of officers and employees.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 59:10-4, as same may be amended from time to time,
the Borough of Old Tappan does hereby authorize indemnification of any
person holding public office, position or employment, elective or appointive,
hereinafter referred to as the "employee."
§ 50-49. Defense of actions.
The Borough of Old Tappan shall, upon request, provide for the defense
of any action, suit or proceeding, commenced or threatened, whether civil,
criminal, administrative or investigative, including a cross action
counterclaim or cross complaint, against any employee on account of any
act or omission in the scope of his employment and shall defray all costs
of defending such action, including reasonable counsel fees and expenses,
together with costs of appeal, if any, provided that the act or the failure to
act does not arise out of actual fraud, willful misconduct or actual malice. At
the Borough's option, the Borough may, in lieu of providing for the defense
of an action, suit or proceeding, reimburse the employee for the employee's
costs of defending an action, suit or proceeding.
§ 50-50. Payment of claims.
The Borough shall indemnify and save harmless each employee from
financial loss resulting from any action described in this article, including
claims, losses, expenses, judgments, fines, attorney fees, court costs and
expert or technical witness fees and any amount paid in settlement thereof,
and actually and reasonably incurred in connection therewith, to the extent
permitted by law. Expenses thus incurred may be paid in advance of final
disposition of the action. Nothing herein shall authorize the Borough to
pay for punitive or exemplary damages or damages resulting from the
commission of a crime.
§ 50-51. Counsel; insurance.
The Borough may employ legal counsel and expert or technical personnel to
provide a defense, pursuant to this article, and may purchase appropriate
insurance as protection against any liability arising under this article.
§ 50-52. Notice of suit.
An employee shall not be entitled to indemnification or the cost of defense
under this chapter unless, within 10 days of the time such employee is
served with any summons, order to show cause, complaint, process, notice,
demand or pleading, he delivers the same or a copy thereof to the Borough
Clerk, whereupon it shall be the duty of the Borough Clerk to forthwith
§ 50-48 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 50-52
50:141
notify the Mayor and Borough Attorney thereof, provided that such time
period may be extended for cause by the affirmative vote of a majority of
the full membership of the governing body.
§ 50-53. Cooperation by employee.
An employee requesting defense of any action or claiming indemnification
under this article shall cooperate fully and in good faith with the Borough
and with any attorneys, adjusters, investigators or expert or technical
personnel engaged for this purpose, in the preparation and presentation of
a defense to such action or the settlement or other disposition thereof. If
such employee shall neglect, fail or refuse to cooperate as aforesaid, the
Borough Council, after hearing on 10 days' written notice to the employee
and for cause, may declare all rights created under this article for the
benefit of such employee to be forfeited and terminated by the affirmative
vote of a majority of the full membership of the governing body.
§ 50-52 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 50-53
50:142
ARTICLE XVIII
Purchasing Agent
[Adopted 3-18-2003 by Ord. No. 817-03]
§ 50-54. Creation of office; appointment; term.
The office of Purchasing Agent of the Borough of Old Tappan is hereby
created. The Purchasing Agent shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the Council and shall hold office for one year and until
a successor is qualified.
§ 50-55. Duties.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq., the Purchasing Agent shall have
the authority, responsibility, and accountability as contracting agent for
the Borough for the purchasing activity of the Borough, to prepare public
advertising for bids and to receive bids for the provision or performance of
goods or services on behalf of the Borough, and to conduct any activities as
may be necessary or appropriate to the purchasing function of the Borough.
§ 50-54 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 50-55
50:143

ARTICLE XIX
Criminal History Background Checks
[Adopted 6-18-2007 by Ord. No. 949-07]
§ 50-56. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORD BACKGROUND CHECK — A determination
of whether a person has a criminal record by cross-referencing that
person’s name and fingerprints with those on file with the Federal Bureau of
Investigation, Identification Division, and the State Bureau of Identification
in the Division of State Police.
DEPARTMENT — The Borough of Old Tappan Police Department.
NONPROFIT YOUTH-SERVING ORGANIZATION or ORGANIZATION — A
corporation, association or other organization established pursuant to Title
15 or 15A of the New Jersey Statutes, or other law of this state, but
excluding public and nonpublic schools, and which provides recreational,
cultural, charitable, social or other activities or services for persons
younger than 18 years of age, and is exempt from federal income taxes.
§ 50-57. Request for background check; costs.
§ 50-58. Conditions under which person is disqualified from service.
A person may be disqualified from serving as an employee or volunteer of a
nonprofit youth-serving organization if that person’s criminal history record
background check reveals a record of conviction of any of the following
crimes and offenses:
A. The Borough requires that all employees and volunteers of a nonprofit
youth-serving organization request, through the Department, that the
State Bureau of Identification in the Division of State Police conduct a
criminal history record background check on each prospective and
current employees or volunteers of the organization.
B. The Division of State Police shall inform the Department whether the
person’s criminal history record background check reveals a conviction
of a disqualifying crime or offense as specified in § 50-58 of this article.
C. The Borough shall conduct a criminal history record background check
only upon receipt of the written consent to the check from the
prospective or current employee or volunteer.
D. The Borough shall bear the costs associated with conducting criminal
history background checks.
A. In New Jersey, any crime or disorderly persons offense:
(1) Involving danger to the person, meaning those crimes and
disorderly persons offenses set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1 et seq.,
§ 50-56 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 50-58
50:145
§ 50-59. Submissions; exchange of background check information.
§ 50-60. Limitations on access to criminal history record
information.
N.J.S.A. 2C:12-1 et seq., N.J.S.A. 2C:13-1 et seq., N.J.S.A. 2C:14-1 et
seq., or N.J.S.A. 2C:15-1 et seq.
(2) Against the family, children or incompetents, meaning those crimes
and disorderly persons offenses set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:14-1 et seq.
(3) Involving theft as set forth in Chapter 20 of Title 2C of the New
Jersey Statutes.
(4) Involving any controlled dangerous substance or controlled
substance analog as set forth in Chapter 35 of Title 2C of the New
Jersey Statutes, except Paragraph (1) of Subsection a. of N.J.S.A.
2C:35-10.
B. In any other state or jurisdiction, conduct which, if committed in New
Jersey, would constitute any of the crimes or disorderly persons
offenses described in Subsection A of this section.
A. Prospective or current employees and volunteers of nonprofit youthserving
organizations shall submit their name, address, fingerprints
and written consent to the organization for the criminal history record
background check to be performed. The organization shall submit this
documentation to the Old Tappan Chief of Police, who shall coordinate
the background check.
B. The Department shall act as a clearinghouse for the collection and
dissemination of information obtained as a result of conducting criminal
history record background checks pursuant to this article.
A. Access to criminal history record information for non-criminal-justice
purposes, including licensing and employment, is restricted to
authorized personnel of the nonprofit youth-serving organization, on a
need-to-know basis, as authorized by federal or state statute, rule or
regulation, executive order, administrative code, local ordinance or
resolution regarding obtaining and dissemination of criminal history
record information obtained under this article.
B. Such persons or organizations shall limit their use of criminal history
record information solely to the authorized purpose for which it was
obtained, and criminal history record information furnished shall not be
disseminated to persons or organizations not authorized to receive the
records for authorized purposes. Use of this record shall be limited
solely to the authorized purpose for which it was given and it shall not
be disseminated to any unauthorized persons. This record shall be
destroyed immediately after it has served its intended and authorized
purpose. Any person violating federal or state regulations governing
§ 50-58 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 50-60
50:146
§ 50-61. Challenges to accuracy of reports.
If this criminal history record may disqualify an applicant for any purpose,
the person making the determination shall provide the applicant with an
opportunity to complete and challenge the accuracy of the information
contained in the criminal history record. The applicant shall be afforded a
reasonable period of time to correct and complete this record. A person is
not presumed guilty of any charges or arrests for which there are no final
dispositions indicated on the record.
access to criminal history record information may be subject to criminal
and/or civil penalties.
§ 50-60 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 50-61
50:147
Chapter 53
OPEN SPACE ADVISORY COMMITTEE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Open space recommendations by
Environmental Commission — See Ch. 9,
§ 9-18.
Open space design standards — See Ch. 218.
Zoning — See Ch. 255.
§ 53-1. Establishment.
There is hereby established the Open Space Advisory Committee of the
Borough of Old Tappan, hereinafter referred to as the "Committee."
§ 53-2. Membership; term. [Amended 11-15-2004 by Ord. No.
867-04]
§ 53-3. Organization.
The Committee shall organize annually and from its members shall elect a
Chairperson who shall preside over all meetings, and a Vice Chairperson.
A. The Committee shall consist of seven members appointed by the Mayor,
with the advice and consent of the Council. Members shall be appointed
for a term of two years, except that the terms of four of the initially
appointed members shall expire on December 31, 2000, and the terms
of the remaining three initially appointed members shall expire on
December 31, 2001. [Amended 12-18-2006 by Ord. No. 928-06]
B. The position of alternate member of the Committee is hereby
established. The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Council,
shall appoint two alternate members to the Committee. Alternate
members shall be designated at the time of appointment by the Mayor
as “Alternate No. 1” and “Alternate No. 2.” The terms of alternate
members shall be for two years, except that the terms of the alternate
members first appointed shall be two years for Alternate No. 1 and one
year for Alternate No. 2, so that the term of not more than one alternate
member shall expire in any one year. A vacancy occurring otherwise
than by expiration of term shall be filled by the Mayor for the unexpired
term only.
C. Alternate members may participate in all matters but may not vote
except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member of any
class. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular member may
vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a choice must be
made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote
first.
§ 50-61 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 53-4
53:148
§ 53-4. Compensation.
No member of the Committee shall receive compensation for his or her
service.
§ 53-5. Purpose and duties.
Chapter 56
ORDINANCES
§ 56-1. Procedure for passage; vote required.
Borough ordinances shall be prepared by the Borough Attorney and
submitted in writing at a meeting of the Council and passed at a subsequent
meeting. No ordinance shall be finally passed except by the vote of a
majority of the members of the Council present at the meeting, provided
that at least three affirmative votes are required for such purpose, the
Mayor to have no vote except in the case of a tie.
§ 56-2. Publication.
No ordinance shall be considered for final adoption until it has been
advertised as required by law. The Clerk shall be responsible for arranging
for the advertising of proposed ordinances.
A. Borough voters, at the November 2, 1999, general election, approved a
referendum establishing an Open Space Trust Fund which is to be
funded through the collection of local property taxes in an amount of
$0.01 per $100 of assessed value for a period of five years. It is
anticipated that the total amount that this tax will yield will be
approximately $70,000 per year. These funds are designated for the
purchase of open space so as to preserve such land as open space and
to keep it in its natural state and, if no open space is available for
purchase, then the moneys shall be used for such other recreation,
conservation, farmland preservation or historic preservation purposes
as may be permitted by law, to be determined following a public
hearing.
B. The Committee shall make recommendations to the Mayor and Council
for the use of the Open Space Trust Fund moneys. The Committee shall
have the responsibility of reviewing suggestions from all sources,
including the public, the Planning Board, the Environmental
Commission, and the Mayor and Council, regarding the use of the Open
Space Trust Funds, and make recommendations to the Mayor Council
for the expenditure of such funds consistent with the Borough
referendum.
C. The Committee shall maintain minutes of its deliberations and shall
report to the Mayor and Council the results of its ongoing activities and
determinations on a regular basis.
§ 53-4 ORDINANCES § 56-3
56:149
§ 56-3. Presentation to Mayor; veto.
§ 56-4. Passage over veto; vote required.
If 2/3 of all the Councilmen, at the next meeting as aforesaid or at any
subsequent meeting to which they postpone such reconsideration, vote to
pass the ordinance or the vetoed part over the veto of the Mayor, the
ordinance shall take effect.
Chapter 60
PERSONNEL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 50.
A. Within five days after its passage, Sundays excepted, every ordinance
passed by the Council shall be presented to the Mayor by the Clerk,
whose report shall be conclusive evidence that the ordinance has been
so presented.
B. If the Mayor approves an ordinance, he shall sign it within five days
after he receives it, Sundays excepted, and file it with the Clerk. If the
Mayor does not approve an ordinance, he shall return it within five days
after he receives it, Sundays excepted, with his objections in writing, to
the Clerk. At its next meeting, the Council shall cause the objections to
be entered at length on its minutes and proceed to reconsider the
ordinance. If an ordinance contains more than one distinct section,
clause or item, the Mayor may approve one or more and veto the rest.
§ 56-3 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 56-4
56:150
ARTICLE I
Medical Benefits for Department Heads
[Adopted by Ord. No. 486-92, as amended through Ord. No. 491-92]
§ 60-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words or terms shall have the following
meanings:
DEPARTMENT HEADS — The Borough Clerk, the Borough Chief Financial
Officer/Treasurer, the Borough Chief of Police, the Borough Superintendent
of the Department of Public Works, and the Golf Course Superintendent.
MEDICAL BENEFITS — Such medical and/or dental insurance coverage as
is provided by the borough to the employees of the department of which the
department head had supervised.
§ 60-2. Extent of medical benefits.
Department heads with 25 years of continuous full-time service to the
borough shall, upon retirement, continue to receive medical benefits from
the borough including, where applicable, medical benefits for the spouse
of the department head, until said department head attains the age of 65.
In the event that the department head dies prior to he or she attaining the
age of 65, the borough shall continue to provide medical benefits, where
applicable, to the spouse of the deceased department head, until such time
as the department head would have attained the age of 65.
§ 60-1 ORDINANCES § 60-2
56:151

ARTICLE II
Defined Contribution Retirement Program
[Adopted 4-20-2009 by Ord. No. 985-09]
§ 60-3. Positions eligible for participation.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 43:15C-2, employees filling the following positions after
July 1, 2007, who are not members of the Public Employees Retirement
System, are deemed to be eligible for and shall participate in the Defined
Contribution Retirement Program:
§ 60-4. Positions exempt from participation.
Individuals serving in the following positions are exempt from Defined
Contribution Retirement Program membership, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
43:15C-2:
§ 60-5. Legislative authority.
This chapter shall be implemented, construed and subject to the aforesaid
Chapter 92 of the Laws of 2007 (N.J.S.A. 43:15C-1 et seq.), as amended from
time to time, and any regulations or guidance documents from the Local
Finance Board or the Division of Pensions and Benefits.
§ 60-6. Filing withstate.
A copy of this chapter shall be filed with the Director of the Division of
Pension and Benefits of the New Jersey Department of the Treasury.
A. Municipal Administrator;
B. Department heads;
C. Municipal Attorney;
D. Municipal Prosecutor;
E. Municipal Court Judge;
F. Municipal Engineer;
A. Chief Financial Officer/Tax Collector;
B. Construction Code Official;
C. Tax Assessor;
D. Registered Municipal Clerk;
E. Licensed Uniform Subcode Inspectors;
F. Principal Public Works Manager.
§ 60-3 ORDINANCES § 60-6
56:153
Chapter 68
SENIOR CITIZENS ADVISORY COMMITTEE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing for senior citizens — See Ch. 41,
§ 41-5.
Senior citizen golf course fees — See Ch. 119.
Senior citizen accessory dwelling units — See
Ch. 255, Art. XII.
§ 68-1. Establishment.
There is hereby established the Senior Citizens Advisory Committee of the
Borough of Old Tappan, hereinafter referred to as the "Committee."
§ 68-2. Membership; term.
The Committee shall consist of 15 members appointed by the Mayor, with
the advice and consent of the Council. Members shall be appointed for a
term of two years except that the terms of seven of the initially appointed
members shall expire on December 31, 1996, and the terms of the
remaining eight initially appointed members shall expire on December 31,
1997.
§ 68-3. Organization.
The Committee shall organize annually and from its members shall elect a
Chairperson who shall preside over all meetings.
§ 68-4. Compensation.
No member of the Committee shall receive compensation for his or her
service.
§ 68-5. Purpose and duties.
The purpose of the Committee shall be to investigate, report on, and make
recommendations to the Mayor and Council concerning problems and
matters of general concern to senior citizens who reside in the borough.
Chapter 72
SHADE TREE ADVISORY COMMITTEE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Trees — See Ch. 234.
§ 60-6 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 68-5
68:154
§ 72-1. Establishment.
There is hereby created in and for the borough a Shade Tree Advisory
Committee to be known as the Shade Tree Advisory Committee of the
Borough of Old Tappan.
§ 72-2. Purpose.
The Shade Tree Advisory Committee shall make recommendations to the
Mayor and Council for the regulation, control, planting, care and
preservation of shade and ornamental trees and shrubbery along the rightof-
way of all streets and highways within the borough and upon all parks
and public places, except federal, state, or county parks.
§ 72-3. Appointment; membership; vacancies; organization.
[Amended 11-27-2000 by Ord. No. 735-00]
§ 72-4. Powers and duties.
A. The Shade Tree Advisory Committee shall consist of five members who
shall be residents or full-time employees of the borough, one of whom
may be a member of the Planning Board. The members of the Advisory
Committee shall be appointed by the Mayor with approval of the
Council for five-year terms to serve without salary on a staggered basis.
B. Any vacancy occurring for any reason shall be filled for the unexpired
term by appointment of the Mayor.
C. The Shade Tree Advisory Committee shall organize annually and from
its members elect a Chairman, Vice Chairman and Secretary.
A. The duties of the Shade Tree Advisory Committee shall be to make
recommendations for the enforcement of the provisions of Chapter 218,
Subdivision and Site Plan Review, concerning all forms of shade tree
matters, to make recommendations for the enforcement of the
provisions of Chapter 234, Trees, to inspect and recommend the
designation of trees to be kept on major subdivisions and to advise the
Mayor and Council on all matters concerning shade trees and the
planting of shrubbery and trees on all public property and parks.
B. The duties more specifically stated shall include but not necessarily be
limited to the following:
(1) Before final release of other bonds guaranteeing the planting of
shade trees, the Advisory Committee shall recommend the
designation on each plot in the subdivision along the street right-ofway
the location of shade trees to be planted.
§ 68-5 SHADE TREE ADVISORY COMMITTEE § 72-4
72:155
Chapter 75
ARTS AND ENTERTAINMENT COMMITTEE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Meeting attendance — See Ch. 1, Art. IV. Parks and recreational facilities — See Ch.
179.
§ 75-1. Establishment. [Amended 5-7-2012 by Ord. No. 1046-1215]
There is hereby established the Arts and Entertainment Committee of the
Borough of Old Tappan, hereinafter referred to as the “Committee.”
§ 75-2. Membership; term. [Amended 12-18-2006 by Ord. No.
928-06]
The Committee shall consist of seven members. The Mayor shall appoint
all the members of the Committee, with the advice and consent of the
Council, and shall designate one of such members to serve as Chairperson
and presiding officer of the Committee. Members shall be appointed for a
term of three years, except that the terms of three of the initially appointed
members shall expire on December 31, 2004, the terms of two of the
initially appointed members shall expire on December 31, 2005, and the
terms of the remaining two initially appointed members shall expire on
December 31, 2006.
§ 75-3. Alternate members.
(2) To make recommendations for the regulation and control of the use
of the ground surrounding such trees so far as may be necessary
for the proper growth and protection.
(3) To make recommendations for the care of shade trees, ornamental
trees, shrubbery, including planting, trimming, and spraying, which
may hereafter be planted on any street right-of-way or upon any
park of public land.
C. No member of the Advisory Committee shall act or take part in any
action which would benefit his or her person.
A. The Mayor shall appoint two alternate members to the Committee.
Alternate members shall be designated at the time of appointment by
the Mayor as “Alternate No. 1” and “Alternate No. 2.” The terms of the
alternate members shall be for two years, except that the term of one of
the initially appointed members shall expire on December 31, 2004.
15.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the retitling of this chapter from "Social
and Cultural Affairs Committee" to "Arts and Entertainment Committee."
§ 72-4 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 75-3
72:156
§ 75-4. Compensation.
No member of the Committee shall receive compensation for his or her
service.
§ 75-5. Purpose and duties.
The Committee shall plan, develop and implement recreational activities,
programs, parades, events and such other activities as may be approved
from time to time by the Mayor and Council, but not including athletic
or sporting events, which shall be under the jurisdiction of the Recreation
Commission.
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 82
ALARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licensing — See Ch. 158.
§ 82-1. Definitions.
The terms as used herein are defined as follows:
ALARM SYSTEM — Any device or series of devices or mechanisms, or
alarms, whose purpose is the giving of visual, audible or electronic warning,
or combination thereof, beyond the property on which the alarm system is
located, of an emergency, such as burglary, intrusion, fire, smoke, or like
perils.
DIAL ALARMS — A pre-recorded alarm device which uses the public
telephone facility to transmit a message to a designated telephone line
number in the borough police headquarters or a centralized police desk.
FALSE ALARM — A transmitted signal, message or warning which is
stimulated or activated by causes other than burglary, intrusion, fire, smoke
or like perils.
PERMITTEE — Any person, business or other entity holding a permit to
operate an alarm system.
B. Alternate members may participate in all matters but may not vote
except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member of any
class. In the event that a choice must be made as to which alternate
member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote.
§ 75-3 ALARMS § 82-2
82:157
§ 82-2. Permit required; application information.
Any person, business or other entity wishing to install an alarm system or
dial alarm within the borough shall make application to the Chief of Police
for a permit. The Chief of Police shall issue a permit upon receipt of an
application form providing the following information:
§ 82-3. Registration.
A person, business or other entity who shall install, operate or maintain
an alarm system or dial alarm, or any person who shall purchase, lease or
acquire a business or residence in which an alarm system or dial alarm is
operating, is required to register the alarm system or dial alarm with the
Chief of Police as follows:
§ 82-4. Dial alarms; compliance of existing systems; maintenance.
A. The name and address of the applicant.
B. A description of the alarm system or dial alarm to be installed.
C. Name, address and telephone number of a person, other than the
applicant, who can provide access in the event of a malfunction during
the permittee's absence.
A. The alarm system of each permittee shall be deemed registered at such
time as the permit therefor is issued.
B. In successive years following the issuance of a permit, an alarm system
or dial alarm shall be deemed registered when the annual fee is
remitted to the borough.
C. Alarm systems or dial alarms installed prior to the adoption of this
chapter must be registered with the Chief of Police within 30 days of the
effective date of this chapter.
A. Special number. All dial alarms shall be coded to dial a special unlisted
telephone number which shall be provided by the Chief of Police. No
dial alarm shall be coded to dial the public telephone number of the
Police Department.
B. Additional fee. The owner of each dial alarm system shall pay to the
borough an additional annual fee as provided in § 82-6 to cover the cost
of registration and testing and to amortize the special unlisted
telephone line or lines required and any ancillary tape devices
necessitated by these systems.
C. Compliance; penalties. If any person has a dial alarm in existence at the
time of the adoption of this chapter, he shall have 30 days in which to
reprogram the equipment to comply with the terms of this chapter and
in which to pay the annual fee. Any person failing to comply herewith
shall be liable to penalty upon conviction in the Municipal Court in an
amount not greater than $100. If any dial alarm shall hereafter be found
§ 82-2 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 82-4
82:158
§ 82-5. False alarm penalties; revocation of permit. [Amended
9-7-2004 by Ord. No. 859-04; 12-19-2005 by Ord. No. 901-05]
§ 82-6. Fees. [Amended 5-17-2004 by Ord. No. 850-04]
Each applicant for a permit shall pay a fee of $20 annually. Said permit fee
shall be payable by January 1 of each year to the Borough of Old Tappan.
The permit fee is for the purpose of defraying additional expenses incurred
as the result of private alarm systems.
§ 82-7. Violations and penalties.
For any and all violations of this chapter, not otherwise specifically provided
for herein, upon conviction in a court of competent jurisdiction, a convicted
offender shall be liable for a penalty of not less than $100, nor more than
$500, or imprisonment for up to 90 days in the county jail, or both. Each
violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate offense.
Chapter 85
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
to be dialing the publicly listed telephone number for police
headquarters, rather than the unlisted number reserved for dial alarms,
the permittee shall be sent a notice, in writing, by the Chief of Police
requiring compliance with the terms of this chapter. If the permittee
shall fail within 30 days after receipt of such notice to comply, he shall
be liable for a penalty, upon conviction in the Municipal Court, in an
amount of not less than $50 nor more than $100. [Amended 9-7-2004
by Ord. No. 859-04]
D. Maintenance. All components of dial alarms shall be maintained by the
permittee in a sound manner. If the permittee fails to comply with the
operational requirements of this chapter, the Chief of Police shall notify
the permittee that such device be disconnected until such time as
compliance with such requirements is established, and the permittee
shall discontinue the same.
A. In the event of a false alarm, the Chief of Police, Fire Chief or Fire
Marshal shall cause an investigation to be made and keep a record of
such false alarms on file. For the first alarm at a given location in any
calendar year, a warning shall be issued to the permittee. For the
second such false alarm in the same calendar year, there shall be a
penalty of $50. For the third such false alarm in the same calendar year,
there shall be a penalty of $100. For the fourth and each subsequent
false alarm in the same calendar year, there shall be a penalty of $200.
B. If the investigation of the Chief of Police, Fire Chief or Fire Marshal
discloses continued failure of the permittee to take remedial steps after
the fifth false alarm in the same calendar year, the Borough shall revoke
the permit and require disconnection of the alarm system or dial alarm.
§ 82-4 ALARMS § 82-7
82:159

ARTICLE I
Alcoholic Beverage Control
[Adopted 5-26-1975 as Ch. V of the 1975 Code, as amended through
Ord. No. 610-97]
§ 85-1. Purpose.
This article is enacted to regulate the sale and transportation of alcoholic
beverages in the Borough of Old Tappan in accordance with the provisions
of an Act of the Legislature of the State of New Jersey entitled "An Act
Concerning Alcoholic Beverages," comprising Chapter 436 of the Laws of
1933, its supplements and amendments, and also comprising N.J.S.A. 33:1-1
et seq., and in accordance with the rules and regulations of the State
Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 85-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, words and phrases herein shall have the
same meanings as in N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq., and the rules and regulations of
the State Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 85-3. Licenses.
A. Laws applicable. All applicants for licenses, all licenses issued and all
proceedings under this article shall be in accordance with the act, rules
and regulations referred to in § 85-1, and all other applicable laws of
the State of New Jersey or the United States.
B. Issuing authority. All licenses required by this article shall be issued by
the Borough Council, which shall also administer the provisions of this
article.
C. License required. No person shall sell or distribute alcoholic beverages
within the Borough without having obtained a license in accordance
with the act referred to in § 85-1 and the provisions of this article.
D. License fees. The annual license fees for the sale or distribution of
alcoholic beverages in the Borough of Old Tappan shall be as follows:
[Amended 5-8-2000 by Ord. No. 719-00; 7-16-2001 by Ord. No.
758-01; 6-3-2002 by Ord. No. 791-02; 6-16-2003 by Ord. No.
824-03; 5-17-2004 by Ord. No. 850-04; 5-16-2005 by Ord. No.
883-05; 6-19-2006 by Ord. No. 914-06; 3-19-2007 by Ord. No.
932-07; 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. 1027-11]
Class of License Annual License Fee
Plenary retail consumption
license
$2,400
Plenary retail distribution
license
$1,200
Club license $75
§ 85-1 ALARMS § 85-4
82:161
§ 85-4. Restrictions on hours and days of sale.
§ 85-5. Revocation of license.
A. Hours of sale. No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, delivered or served
to or consumed in any licensed premises on any day between the hours
of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m., except Sundays and New Year's Day each
year as hereinafter provided.
B. Sundays. Provisions of Subsection A shall not apply on Sundays. On
Sundays, no alcoholic beverages may be sold, served, delivered to or
consumed in the licensed premises between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and
10:00 a.m. Premises may be open at 9:00 a.m. for any lawful purpose
other than the sale, service or delivery, or consumption of alcoholic
beverages. [Amended 11-2-2015 by Ord. No. 1089-15]
C. New Year's Day.
(1) Provisions of Subsection A shall not apply on January 1. On that day
no alcoholic beverages may be sold, served, delivered to or
consumed in the licensed premises between the hours of 4:00 a.m.
and 8:00 a.m., unless January 1 is a Sunday in which case no
alcoholic beverages may be sold, served, delivered to or consumed
in the licensed premises between the hours of 4:00 a.m. and 12:00
noon.
(2) During the aforementioned hours in Subsections A through C, the
licensed premises shall be closed to all persons except the licensee,
his/her employees and officers authorized to enforce Borough,
state and federal laws and regulations relating to alcoholic
beverages.
A. Any license issued under this article may be suspended or revoked for
violation of any of the provisions of this article or any provisions of any
applicable statute or any of the rules or regulations of the State
Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
B. Proceedings for suspension or revocation shall be in accordance with
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 33:1-31 by service of a five-day notice of
charges preferred against the licensee and affording a reasonable
opportunity for hearing.
C. Suspension or revocation of a license shall be in addition to any other
penalty which may be imposed for a violation of this article.
§ 85-4 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 85-5
82:162
ARTICLE II
Underage Drinking on Public or Private Property
[Adopted 12-18-2000 by Ord. No. 737-00]
§ 85-6. Underage drinking prohibited; penalty.
Any person under the legal age to purchase alcoholic beverages who
knowingly possesses or consumes any alcoholic beverage in or on any
school property, public conveyance, public place or place of public assembly
or on private property shall be in violation of this article. Upon conviction,
such underage person shall be subject to a fine of $250 for a first offense
and $350 for any subsequent offense; perform community service for a
period not to exceed 180 days; at the discretion of the court, have a New
Jersey driving privilege suspended or postponed for six months; and, if
considered necessary by the court, be referred to an alcohol treatment
program at the defendant's expense.
§ 85-7. Exceptions.
This article shall not apply to persons under the legal age to purchase
alcoholic beverages who possess or consume alcoholic beverages on private
property in the presence of and with the permission of the parent or legal
guardian of said person, provided that said guardian is of the legal age to
purchase alcoholic beverages, or if alcoholic beverage is being consumed in
any religious observance, ceremony, or rite. The article shall not apply to
possession of an alcoholic beverage by an underage person employed by an
alcoholic beverage licensee in the course of performing employment duties.
§ 85-6 ALARMS § 85-7
82:163

ARTICLE III
Consumption or Possession in Open Container on Public or Private
Property
[Adopted 10-17-2005 by Ord. No. 894-05]
§ 85-8. Definitions.
The following term as used in this article is defined as follows:
QUASI-PUBLIC PLACE — Any mall, store, parking lot, theater or other place
of public assembly to which the public is generally invited or permitted to
enter with or without paying any consideration therefore.
§ 85-9. Consumption in public places prohibited.
No person shall consume or possess in any opened container any alcoholic
beverage as defined by N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 in or upon:
§ 85-10. Exceptions.
A. Any public street, sidewalk, mall, public parking place, park (whether
devoted to active or passive use), playground or recreational area, or
any other public place or quasi-public place.
B. Property owned by the federal, state or county government, or other
public entity, such as the Board of Education.
C. Buildings, structures, stadium or other improvements situated on lands
enumerated in Subsections A and B above; provided, however, that in
the case of property owned by the Board of Education of the Borough of
Old Tappan, the restrictions contained herein shall not be applicable to
school buildings, including portable classrooms, whether or not those
spaces are used for educational, administrative or other use; but the
provision shall be applicable to field houses, sheds, athletic stadiums,
tennis courts or general improvements.
D. Any public conveyance.
E. Any private motor vehicle while the same is in motion or parked in any
public street, public parking lot or quasi-public place.
F. Any private property, not his or her own, without the express
permission of the owner or other person having authority to grant such
permission.
A. Notwithstanding the provisions contained in § 85-9, the Mayor and
Council may, by resolution, permit the possession or consumption of
alcoholic beverages in a designated park, playground or recreational
area, or other public place at a designated time or times, in connection
with any purpose or events which have been authorized by the Mayor
and Borough Council.
§ 85-8 ALARMS § 85-10
82:165
§ 85-11. Permit application from Borough Clerk.
Application for a permit to consume alcoholic beverages in a public park,
playground, recreational area or other public place shall be made to the
Borough Clerk, who, upon receipt thereof, shall transmit a copy to the Chief
of Police and to the Recreation Director.
§ 85-12. Licensed premises exempt.
Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the possession or
consumption of alcoholic beverages within or upon premises duly licensed
for the consumption of alcoholic beverages.
§ 85-13. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be liable to
the penalty set forth in Chapter 1, Article III of the Code.
B. In the event the use of alcoholic beverages is anticipated on premises
described in Subsection B of § 85-9, the provisions of Subsection A of
§ 85-10 shall not be exercised by the Mayor and Council, but shall be
exercised at the discretion of the public agencies or entities owning
that property; provided, however, that the public agency transmits a
copy of its permit, when issued, for distribution to the Borough Clerk.
Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit or limit the rights of
the Board of Education to permit the possession or consumption of
alcoholic beverages in buildings or on grounds within its control in
conjunction with any activities sponsored or sanctioned by the Board of
Education, and nothing shall be deemed to abrogate any rulings of the
Commissioner of Education of the State of New Jersey, the Board of
Education of the Borough of Old Tappan or other cognizant authority
relating to the issue of search and seizure or entry into school buildings,
student lockers or the like.
§ 85-10 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 85-13
82:166
Chapter 88
AMUSEMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licensing — See Ch. 158.
§ 88-1. License required.
A. No person, unless duly licensed in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter, shall have, keep, own, maintain or use within the limits of
the borough any:
(1) Billiard or pool rooms;
(2) Bowling alleys;
(3) Swimming pools;
(4) Camps or camping grounds;
(5) Picnic grounds;
(6) Amusement parks and rides;
(7) Gymnasiums; health spas or recreational centers;
(8) Music boxes;
(9) Hurdy gurdies;
(10) Juke boxes;
(11) Calliope;
(12) Pin ball machine;
(13) Electronic skill game;
(14) Automatic amusement device (other than juke boxes);
(15) Public address systems; or
(16) Any other places or devices where or by which the amusement or
recreation of the public is carried on or accomplished as a business
or for profit of any kind to the owner, lessee or possessor thereof.
B. This chapter shall also include parking areas operated in conjunction
with swimming pools, although the swimming pools may be outside the
boundaries of the borough.
§ 85-13 AMUSEMENTS § 88-2
88:167
§ 88-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ELECTRONIC SKILL GAMES AND AUTOMATIC AMUSEMENT DEVICE —
Any automatic mechanical or electronic amusement device, game or device
of skill or entertainment which is or are operated or set in motion by the
deposit therein of any coin or coins, tokens or slugs of the like thereof,
purchased for cash, and including video-type games or machines or similar
devices that use a display screen for points, lines or dots of light that can be
manipulated or simulate games or other types of entertainment. Excluded
from this definition are music vending machines commonly known as "juke
boxes."
§ 88-3. Application information.
Any person desiring to obtain a license to conduct any of the businesses
mentioned in § 88-1 or devices for the purpose of business shall present to
the Borough Clerk an application form containing, in addition to information
set forth in § 158-2, the following:
§ 88-4. Investigations; approval.
A. A resume of the past business experiences of applicant for the last five
years.
B. In the case of items in Subsections A(12), (13) and (14) as set forth in
§ 88-1:
(1) Number and type of machines sought to be licensed.
(2) Location where each such machine, game or device is to be
situated, to be shown on a detailed scale drawing showing all exits
and windows, scale to be one inch equals four feet.
(3) Name and address of the person from whom each such machine,
game or device is to be purchased, rented or otherwise obtained.
(4) Description of each such machine, game or device sought to be
licensed including for each the name of the manufacturer, model
number and serial number.
A. Upon receiving the application, the Borough Clerk shall in turn submit
same to the Mayor and Council, the Chief of Police and the Chief of the
Fire Prevention Bureau.
B. The Chief of Police, or his designee, shall make an investigation of the
premises and the applicant to determine the truth of the facts set forth
in the application. The Chief of the Fire Prevention Bureau, or his
designee, shall inspect the premises to determine whether the premises
comply with existing fire regulations of the borough and State of New
Jersey. The Chief of Police and the Chief of the Fire Prevention Bureau
§ 88-2 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 88-4
88:168
§ 88-5. Fees; exemption for nonprofit corporations.
shall, upon completion of their inspection, attach to the application
their reports in writing.
C. Upon receipt of the application and inspection reports, the Mayor and
Council shall proceed to consider the same and, after having satisfied
themselves as to public safety hazards, fire hazards, the safety of the
structure where the licensed activity is to be conducted and sanitary
conveniences, shall either approve or disapprove the issuance of the
license to the applicant.
D. The Mayor and Council may request of an applicant additional
information supplementing the information set forth in the application
and either the applicant or the Mayor and Council may request that a
hearing be held within 30 days of the filing of a complete application.
E. If the application is approved, the Mayor and Council shall authorize
the Borough Clerk to issue the necessary license upon the receipt of the
license fee or fees as herein provided.
A. The annual license fees shall be as follows:
(1) Poolrooms, billiard parlors and other places of business wherein
pool or billiard tables are made available to the public for play:
$100 per table.
(2) Bowling alleys: $25 per alley.
(3) Swimming pools, including tables on surrounding grounds for
patrons: $400 each.
(4) Picnic grounds: $25 each.
(5) Camps or camping grounds: $300 each.
(6) Gymnasiums, health spas and recreational centers: $500.
(7) Music or juke boxes: $10 each.
(8) Calliopes, hurdy-gurdies: $10 each.
(9) Amusement rides: $50 each; Amusement park: $1,000.
(10) Electronic skill game or automatic amusement device, pinball
machine: $250 per machine, game or device. In the event that the
premises where such machine, game or device is to be located is
open for seasonal use only, the fee for each such machine, game or
device shall be $150 per season per machine, game or device,
provided that such season shall be six months or less in duration.
(11) Public address systems: $5 each.
§ 88-4 AMUSEMENTS § 88-5
88:169
§ 88-6. Posting of license and sketch plan.
§ 88-7. Inspection; rules and regulations; hours; location and
exposure restrictions.
(12) A parking area operated in conjunction with a swimming pool when
the swimming pool is not within the jurisdiction of the borough:
$400.
B. Nonprofit, charitable or religious corporations shall be exempt from
payment of the fees set forth herein, but such organizations shall
remain subject to all other provisions of this chapter.
A. A license granted pursuant to this chapter shall:
(1) Be posted in a conspicuous place at the location for which the
license was granted.
(2) State the name and address of the licensee.
(3) State the manufacturer, model number and serial number, if any,
for each and every pinball machine, electronic skill game or
automatic amusement device for which the license was issued. In
the event any such machine, game or device shall become
inoperable and be replaced by the licensee, the licensee shall so
advise the Borough Clerk, who shall issue without cost an amended
license containing the name of the manufacturer, model number
and serial number of such replacement machine, game or device.
B. The sketch showing the machine location shall be posted next to the
license, in the case of a pinball machine, electronic skill game or
automatic amusement device.
A. The place where the business is carried on, or if indoors, the entire
interior of the room or place in which the business is conducted, shall
be open to full public inspection at all times by the Chief of Police or
other public officer and shall be under the control and regulation of the
Borough Council.
B. The Borough Council is hereby authorized by motion or resolution to
make, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations in respect to each
business which shall make for maintenance and order in the borough,
all of which shall be considered part of the license theretofore or
thereafter granted. Each license and licensee shall be subject to the
rules and regulations as though in each license mentioned. The rules or
regulations shall cover such subjects as opening and closing hours,
special permission for tournaments, the number of persons who
congregate in each licensed place, and other regulations not in direct
conflict with the provisions of this chapter.
C. No pool hall, billiard parlor or other place of business wherein two or
more pool or billiard tables are made available to the public for play
§ 88-5 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 88-7
88:170
§ 88-8. Revocation; nonrenewal; hearing.
A license may be revoked or not renewed by the Borough Council by
reason of the violation of the terms of the license, this chapter or the rules
and regulations promulgated thereunder, the violation of any municipal
ordinance, state or federal statute, or falsification in applying for a license,
or for any cause set forth in § 158-9. The licensed person shall be granted
a hearing by the Borough Council as provided in §§ 158-10 and 158-11 of
Chapter 158, Licensing, the Code of the Borough of Old Tappan. A license
may be suspended for not more than two weeks by the issuing officer
without a hearing.
§ 88-9. Enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Police Department.
shall remain open on Sunday, or after the hour of 10:00 p.m. on secular
days.
D. No more than three pinball machines, electronic skill games, or
automatic amusement devices, or any combination of same, shall be
located in any one location, or place of business. Each pinball machine,
electronic skill game or automatic amusement device shall:
(1) Be located at least five feet from the entranceway to the premises
in which located and placed so that it does not obstruct or interfere
with the free and unfettered passage of patrons or users of the
premises.
(2) Have an unobstructed area of five feet in front of such machine,
game or device wherein users of same may use, watch or wait to
use same and wherein patrons of the premises may safely pass. Any
machine game or device placed or located adjacent to any aisle or
passageway shall be placed or located so as to provide for at least a
five-foot unobstructed aisle or passageway. Machines, games or
devices may be placed side by side, back to back, or along a wall or
walls, provided that the five-foot limitations set forth hereinabove
are observed.
(3) Be placed so as not to expose the back thereof to a window.
(4) Only be used or operated during the hours of operation of the
premises in which located.
(5) Be located at least 500 feet from any school or church.
§ 88-7 AMUSEMENTS § 88-9
88:171
Chapter 91
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise created by animals and birds — See Ch.
170, § 170-2.
Animals in parks — See Ch. 179.
Housing of animals — See Ch. 255, § 255-40.
Animals and poultry — See Ch. 265.
Kennel and other fees — See Ch. 282.
§ 88-9 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 88-9
88:172
ARTICLE I
Pet Waste16
[Adopted 9-19-2005 by Ord. No. 888-05]
§ 91-1. Purpose.
This article establishes requirements for the proper disposal of pet solid
waste in the Borough, so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and
to prescribe penalties for failure to comply.
§ 91-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
IMMEDIATE — At once, without delay.
OWNER/KEEPER — Any person who shall possess, maintain, house or
harbor any pet or otherwise have custody of any pet, whether or not the
owner of such pet.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PET — A domesticated animal (other than a disability assistance animal)
kept for amusement or companionship.
PET SOLID WASTE — Waste matter expelled from the bowels of the pet;
excrement.
PROPER DISPOSAL — Placement in a designated waste receptacle, or other
suitable container, and discarded in a refuse container which is regularly
emptied by the refuse collector; or disposal into a system designed to
convey domestic sewage for proper treatment and disposal.
§ 91-3. Requirement for disposal.
All pet owners and keepers are required to immediately and properly
dispose of their pet's solid waste deposited on any property, public or
private, not owned or possessed by that person.
16.Editor's Note: Former Art. I, Keeping of Animals, adopted 5-26-1975 as Sec. 3-6 of the
1975 Code, as amended 9-17-2002 by Ord. No. 801-02 and 5-17-2004 by Ord. No. 850-04,
was repealed 10-18-2004 by Ord. No. 863-04.
§ 91-1 AMUSEMENTS § 91-4
88:173
§ 91-4. Exemptions.
Any owner or keeper who requires the use of a disability assistance animal
shall be exempt from the provisions of this article while such animal is being
used for that purpose.
§ 91-5. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Police Department and
the Board of Health.
§ 91-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $100.
§ 91-7. (Reserved)
§ 91-8. (Reserved)
§ 91-9. (Reserved)
§ 91-4 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 91-9
88:174
ARTICLE II
Licensing of Dogs and Cats
[Adopted 5-26-1975 as Ch. VI of the 1975 Code]
§ 91-10. Definitions.
The following words and terms shall have the meanings herein indicated for
the purposes of this chapter:
ANIMAL — Dog or cat.
ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY — Any person or agency designated or
certified by the State of New Jersey to enforce the provisions of this article.
CAT — Any member of the domestic feline species; male, female or
neutered.
CAT OF LICENSING AGE — Any cat which has attained the age of seven
months, or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
CATTERY — Any room or group of rooms, cage or exhibition pen, not part
of a kennel, wherein cats for sale are kept or displayed.
DOG — Any dog, bitch or spayed bitch.
DOG OF LICENSING AGE — Any dog which has attained the age of seven
months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
KEEPER — Any person exercising control over a dog or permitting a dog to
remain on premises under his/her control.
KENNEL — Any establishment wherein or whereon the business of
boarding or selling dogs or breeding dogs for sale is carried on, except a pet
shop.
LICENSING AUTHORITY — The agency or department of the Borough
of Old Tappan, or any designated representative thereof, charged with
administering the issuance and/or revocation of permits and licenses under
the provisions of this article.
NEUTERED — The rendering of an animal permanently incapable of
reproduction, as certified by a licensed veterinarian.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of an animal, includes every
person having a right of property or custody in such animal and every
person who has such animal in his/her keeping, or who harbors or maintains
an animal or knowingly permits it to remain on or about any premises
occupied by that person.
PET SHOP — Any room or group of rooms, cage or exhibition pen, not part
of a kennel, wherein dogs for sale are kept or displayed.
POUND — An establishment for the confinement of dogs seized either under
the provisions of this article or otherwise.
SHELTER — Any establishment where dogs are received, housed and
distributed without charge.
§ 91-10 AMUSEMENTS § 91-10
88:175
VICIOUS DOG — Any dog which has been declared by a Municipal Judge to
be a vicious dog or which has attacked or bitten any human being on more
than three separate occasions within a period of a year, or which habitually
attacks other dogs or domestic animals.
§ 91-11. Licensing provisions.
A. License, when required. Licenses shall be required for the following
animals of licensing age:
(1) Dogs.
(a) Any dog owned or kept within the Borough by a resident of the
Borough on the first day of February of any calendar year.
(b) Any dog acquired by any person during the course of any
calendar year and kept within the Borough for more than 10
days after acquisition.
(c) Any dog attaining licensing age during the course of the
calendar year.
(d) Any unlicensed dog brought into the Borough by any person
and kept within the Borough for more than 10 days.
(e) Any dog licensed by another state brought into the Borough by
any person and kept within the Borough for more than 90 days.
(2) Cats.
(a) Cats must have a license number displayed. Any person who
shall own, keep or harbor a cat of licensing age shall annually
apply for and procure from the Borough Clerk, or other official
designated by the Borough Council thereof to license cats in
the Borough, a license and official registration tag with license
number, or a registration sleeve for each cat so owned, kept or
harbored.
(b) Time for applying for license. The owner of any newly acquired
cat of licensing age, or of any cat which attains licensing age,
shall make application for license tag or sleeve for such cat
within 10 days after such acquisition or age attainment. This
requirement will not apply to a nonresident keeping a cat
within the Borough for no longer than 90 days.
(c) Cats brought into jurisdiction.
[1] Any person who shall bring, or cause to be brought into the
Borough, any cat licensed in another state for the current
year and bearing registration tag or sleeve, and shall keep
the same or permit the same to be kept within the Borough
for a period of more than 90 days, shall immediately apply
for a license and registration tag or sleeve for such cat.
§ 91-10 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 91-11
88:176
[2] Any resident who shall bring or cause to be brought into
the Borough any unlicensed cat, and shall keep same or
permit same to be kept within the Borough for a period of
more than 10 days, shall immediately apply for a license
and registration tag or sleeve for each such cat.
(3) Cat licensed in another municipality. Only one license and
registration tag or sleeve shall be required in the licensing year for
any cat in the Borough. Any valid license tag issued by a New
Jersey municipality shall be accepted by the Borough as evidence of
compliance with this article.
(4) Display of license. Each owner shall place upon such licensed cat a
collar or other device with the license number securely fastened or
displayed thereto. Acceptable methods of displaying license
numbers shall include, but are not limited to, breakaway or elastic
collars. License tags or sleeves are not transferable.
B. Application for license. Each application for a license under this article
shall give the following information:
(1) A general description of the animal sought to be licensed, including
breed, sex, age, color and markings, and whether such animal is of
a long- or short-haired variety.
(2) Name, street and post office address of the owner or keeper of such
animal.
C. Application for license, when made. Applications for licenses and
registration tags for dogs which are required to be licensed by the
provisions of Subsection A(1)(a) above, should be made before the first
day of March of each calendar year. In all cases, the application for
license should be made within 10 days of the day upon which the dog or
cat in question first becomes subject to the provisions of this article.
[Amended 12-5-2011 by Ord. No. 1040-11]
D. Licenses and tags.
(1) Dogs. Registration numbers shall be issued in the order in which
applications are received.
(2) Cats. License forms and official tags or sleeves shall be furnished
by the Borough and shall be numbered serially, and shall bear the
year of issuance and the name of the Borough.
E. License record.
(1) Dogs. The information on all applications under this article and the
registration number issued to each licensed dog shall be preserved
for a period of three years by the Health Department. In addition, it
shall forward similar information to the State Department of Health
each month on forms furnished by the Department.
§ 91-11 AMUSEMENTS § 91-11
88:177
(2) Cats. The information on the application and the registration
number issued for the cat shall be preserved for a period of three
years by the Borough Clerk or other local official designated to
license cats in the Borough.
F. Fees. [Amended 5-8-2000 by Ord. No. 719-00; 3-19-2007 by Ord.
No. 932-07]
(1) Dogs. The person applying for a license shall pay a fee of $12 for
each dog to be licensed, which includes the sum of $1.20 for the
State of New Jersey registration fee for each license issued. There
shall be an additional fee of $3 for each dog not neutered or spayed.
Persons who fail to obtain a license within the time period specified
in this article shall be subject to a delinquent fee of $5 for the first
month that the person fails to obtain a license and an additional
delinquent fee of $2 for each additional month that the person fails
to obtain a license. Renewal fees shall be the same as for the
original license.
(2) Cats. The person applying for a license shall pay a fee of $12 for
each cat to be licensed. There shall be an additional fee of $3 for
each cat not neutered or spayed. Persons who fail to obtain a
license within the time period specified in this article shall be
subject to a delinquent fee of $5 for the first month that the person
fails to obtain a license and an additional delinquent fee of $2 for
each additional month that the person fails to obtain a license.
Renewal fees shall be the same as for the original license.
(3) Disposition of dog and cat licensing fees. Dog and cat licensing fees
and other moneys collected or received under the provisions of this
article shall be forwarded to the Borough Treasurer, and shall be
placed in the dog and cat revenue account.
G. Expiration date. [Amended 12-5-2011 by Ord. No. 1040-11]
(1) Dogs. Each dog license, registration tag or sleeve, and renewal
thereof, shall expire on the last day of February of each calendar
year.
(2) Cats. Each cat license, registration tag or sleeve, and renewal
thereof, shall expire on the last day of February of each calendar
year.
H. Rabies inoculation.
(1) Dogs. Each application for a dog license shall be accompanied by a
certificate of inoculation against rabies pursuant to the provisions
contained in § 91-19, otherwise no license and registration tag for
the dog in question shall be issued.
(2) Evidence of inoculation with rabies vaccine or certification of
exemption required for license. The Borough Clerk or other official
§ 91-11 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 91-11
88:178
designated by the Borough Council of the Borough to license cats
therein shall not grant any such license and official registration tag
or sleeve for any cat, unless the owner thereof provides evidence
that the cat to be licensed and registered has been inoculated
with a rabies vaccine of a type approved by and administered
in accordance with the recommendations of the United States
Department of Agriculture and the United States Department of
Human Services, or has been certified exempt as provided in
Subsection H(3)(d) below.
(3) Provisions relating to rabies vaccination of cats.
(a) Vaccination and license requirements. No person shall own,
keep, harbor or maintain any cat over seven months of age
within the Borough unless such cat is vaccinated and licensed.
The provisions of this subsection do not apply to cats held in a
cattery or those held by a state or federal licensed research
facility, a veterinary establishment where cats are received or
kept for diagnostic, medical, surgical or other treatments, or
licensed animal shelters, pounds, kennels or pet shops.
(b) Vaccination. All cats shall be vaccinated against rabies by a
licensed veterinarian in accordance with the latest
"Compendium of Animal Rabies Vaccines and
Recommendations for Immunization," published by the
National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians,
except as provided for in Subsection H(3)(d) below.
(c) Vaccination certificate. A certificate of vaccination shall be
issued to the owner of each animal vaccinated on a form
recommended by the state.
(d) Exemptions. Any cat may be exempted from the requirements
of such vaccination for a specified period of time by the local
Board of Health, upon presentation of a veterinarian's
certificate stating that because of an infirmity or other physical
condition, or regimen of therapy, the inoculation of such cat
shall be deemed inadvisable.
I. Exceptions. The provisions of this article shall not apply to any dog
licensed under § 91-12 of this article. Dogs used as guides for blind
persons and commonly known as "Seeing Eye dogs" shall be licensed in
the same manner as other dogs, except that the owner or keeper shall
not be required to pay any fee.
J. Loss of license. If a license tag or sleeve has been misplaced or lost, the
Borough Clerk may issue a duplicate license and/or registration sleeve
for that particular animal at a fee of $3.
K. Proof of licensing. Proof of licensing shall be produced by any person
owning, keeping, maintaining or harboring a cat, upon the request of
§ 91-11 AMUSEMENTS § 91-11
88:179
§ 91-12. Pet shops, kennels, shelters and pounds.
any health official, police officer, animal control officer or other
authorized person.
A. License required. Any person who keeps or operates or proposes to
establish a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall apply to the Health
Officer for a license entitling him/her to keep or operate such
establishment. Any person holding such license shall not be required to
secure individual licenses for dogs owned by such licensee and kept at
such establishments; such licenses shall not be transferable to another
owner or different premises.
B. Application information. The application shall contain the following
information:
(1) The name and permanent and local address of the applicant.
(2) The street address where the establishment is located, or proposed
to be located, together with a general description of the premises.
(3) The purposes for which it is to be maintained.
(4) The maximum number of dogs to be accommodated by such
establishment at any one time.
C. License term. All licenses issued for a kennel, pet shop, shelter or
pound shall state the purpose for which the establishment is maintained
and all such licenses shall expire on the last day of January of each year.
D. License fees. The annual license fees for kennel and pet shop licenses
shall be as follows:
(1) Kennel accommodating 10 or fewer dogs: $25.
(2) Kennel accommodating more than 10 dogs: $50.
(3) Pet shop: $15. [Amended 5-17-2004 by Ord. No. 850-04]
(4) Shelter or pound: no fee.
E. Compliance with state regulations.
(1) All licenses issued for a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall be
subject to revocation by the Health Department on
recommendation of the State Department of Health for failure to
comply with the rules and regulations of state law, after the owner
has been afforded a hearing by either the State Department of
Health or the Health Department.
(2) Any person holding a license to establish, keep or operate a kennel,
pet shop, shelter or pound shall comply with all Borough
ordinances and the rules and regulations promulgated by the State
Department of Health governing the sanitary conduct and
§ 91-11 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 91-12
88:180
§ 91-13. Disposition of fees.
§ 91-14. Dog canvass.
An annual canvass shall be made of all dogs owned, kept or harbored within
the limits of the Borough, and the results thereof shall be reported to the
State Department of Health setting forth in separate columns the names
and addresses of persons owning, keeping or harboring dogs, the number
of licensed dogs owned, kept or harbored by each person, together with
the registration number of each dog; the number of unlicensed dogs owned,
kept or harbored by each person, together with a complete description of
each unlicensed dog.
operation of kennels, pet shops, shelters and pounds, the
preservation of sanitation therein and the prevention of the spread
of rabies and other diseases of dogs within and from such
establishments.
F. Reports to State Health Department. The Health Officer shall forward
to the State Department of Health a list of all kennels, pet shops,
shelters and pounds licensed within 30 days after the licenses therefor
are issued, which list shall include the name and address of the licensee
and the kind of license issued.
G. Control of dogs off premises. No dog kept in a kennel, pet shop, shelter
or pound shall be permitted off such premises, except on leash or in a
crate or other safe control.
A. License fees and other moneys collected or received under the
provisions of this article, except the registration tag fees, shall be
forwarded to the Borough Treasurer within 30 days after collection or
receipt, and shall be placed in a special account separate from any of
the other accounts of the Borough and shall be used for the following
purposes only: collecting, keeping and disposing of dogs liable to
seizure under this article; local prevention and control of rabies;
providing anti-rabies treatment under the direction of the Health
Officer for any person known or suspected to have been exposed to
rabies; all other purposes prescribed by the Statutes of New Jersey
governing the subject, and for administering the provisions of this
article. Any unexpended balance remaining in such special account
shall be retained therein until the end of the third fiscal year following
and may be used for any of the purposes set forth in this article. At the
end of the third fiscal year following, and at the end of each fiscal year
thereafter, there shall be transferred from such special account to the
general funds of the Borough any amount then in such account which is
in excess of the total amount paid into the special account during the
last two fiscal years next preceding.
B. The registration tag fee of $0.50 for each dog shall be forwarded within
30 days after collection to the State Department of Health.
§ 91-12 AMUSEMENTS § 91-15
88:181
§ 91-15. Vicious dogs.
§ 91-16. Impounding and destruction of certain dogs.
A. Complaint; investigation; report. It shall be the duty of the Health
Department to receive and investigate complaints against dogs. If it is
deemed by the Health Officer on evidence submitted that a dog is
vicious, as defined in § 91-10, the Health Officer shall report his
findings in writing to the Municipal Judge.
B. Notice; hearing. The Municipal Judge shall notify in writing the owner
or keeper of an allegedly vicious dog that a complaint has been made
and require such person to appear before him at a stated time and place
for a hearing. The Judge shall conduct the hearing in the same manner
as he would conduct the trial of a criminal case. If the Judge decides
that the dog complained of is a vicious dog, he shall so notify the owner
or keeper of the dog.
C. Control of vicious dogs. No person owning or keeping a dog which has
been determined to be a vicious dog shall permit such dog to be off the
property of the owner or keeper without being securely muzzled and
secured by a leash no longer than six feet.
A. Causes for impounding. The Health Officer or other authorized official
shall take into custody and impound, or cause to be taken into custody
and impounded, any of the following dogs:
(1) Any unlicensed dog running at large in violation of the provisions of
this article.
(2) Any dog off the premises of the owner of or the person keeping or
harboring such dog which the Health Officer or his agent has
reason to believe is a stray dog.
(3) Any dog off premises of the owner of or the person keeping or
harboring such dog without a current registration tag on its collar.
(4) Any female dog in season off the premises of the owner of or the
person keeping or harboring such dog.
(5) Any dog which has been determined to be a vicious dog as provided
in § 91-15 that is unmuzzled or running at large, provided that the
dog may be seized by the Health Officer or other authorized official,
and provided further that if the dog cannot be seized with safety, it
may be killed.
B. Access to premises. Any officer or agent authorized or empowered to
perform any duty under this article is hereby authorized to go upon any
premises to seize for impounding any dog which he may lawfully seize
and impound when such officer is in immediate pursuit of such dog,
except upon the premises of the owner of the dog if the owner is
present and forbids same.
§ 91-15 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 91-16
88:182
§ 91-17. Regulations.
No person shall own, keep or harbor a dog in the Borough except in
compliance with the provisions of this article and the following regulations:
C. Notice of seizure.
(1) If any dog so impounded or seized wears a registration tag, collar
or harness having inscribed thereon or attached thereto the name
and address of any person or the owner of, or the person keeping or
harboring the dog is known, the Health Officer shall immediately
serve on the person whose address is given on the collar, or on the
person owning, keeping or harboring the dog, a notice in writing
stating that the dog has been seized and will be liable to be
disposed of or destroyed if not claimed within seven days after
service of the notice.
(2) A notice under this subsection may be served either by delivering it
to the person on whom it is to be served, or by leaving it at the
person's usual or last known place of abode, or at the address given
on the collar, or by forwarding it by mail in a prepaid letter
addressed to that person at his usual or last known place of abode,
or to the address given on the collar.
D. Disposition of unclaimed dogs. The Health Officer or his agent is
authorized and empowered to cause the destruction of any unclaimed
dog, in as humane a manner as possible, under any of the following
contingencies:
(1) When any dog so seized has not been claimed by the person
owning, keeping or harboring such dog within seven days after
notice or within seven days of the dog's detention when notice has
not been or cannot be given, as set forth in the previous subsection.
(2) If the person owning, keeping or harboring any dog so seized has
not claimed the dog and has not paid any required penalty.
A. Wearing of registration. All dogs for which licenses are required by the
provisions of this article to be licensed shall wear a collar or harness
with the registration tag for such dog securely fastened thereto.
B. Use of registration tags. No person, except an officer in the
performance of his duties, shall remove a registration tag from the
collar of any dog without the consent of the owner, nor shall any person
attach a registration tag to a dog for which it was not issued.
C. Interference with official duties. No person shall hinder, molest or
interfere with anyone authorized or empowered to perform any duty
under this article.
D. Disturbing the peace. No person shall own, keep, harbor or maintain
any dog which habitually barks or cries between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
§ 91-16 AMUSEMENTS § 91-17
88:183
§ 91-18. Dog bites.
Where it has been determined by a physician that a person has been bitten
by a dog, such individual, or his parent or guardian if he is a minor, shall
immediately notify the police or the Health Officer. When the owner or
keeper of any dog shall be notified by the Health Officer that the dog has
bitten any individual or individuals, the owner or keeper of the dog must
comply with the following procedures:
§ 91-19. Rabies control.
and 6:00 a.m., or which by frequent barking disturbs the peace and
quiet of the neighborhood and creates a nuisance thereby.
E. Running at large in public places. No person owning, keeping or
harboring any dog shall suffer or permit it to run at large upon the
public streets or in any public park or in any public building, or in any
other public place or on another's property without permission of the
property's owner.
F. Leashing of dogs. No person owning, keeping or harboring any dog
shall suffer or permit it to be upon the public streets or in any of the
public places of the Borough unless such dog is accompanied by a
person over the age of 12 years and is securely confined and controlled
by an adequate leash not more than six feet long.
G. Property damage. No person owning, keeping or harboring a dog, shall
permit or suffer it to do any injury, or to do any damage to any lawn,
shrubbery, flowers, grounds or property.
H. Bringing dogs on certain premises. No person shall keep, permit to be
kept, bring or permit any dog to be brought in or into any store or other
building or portion thereof, which members of the public at large are
invited or expected to enter and frequent. Nothing in this article shall
be deemed to prohibit the keeping or bringing of any dog on, in or into
the premises of his owner.17
A. Have the dog kept in quarantine in the owner's home or at a kennel at
the owner's expense, for a period of 10 days. Any symptoms denoting
rabies or any unusual behavior must be immediately reported to the
Health Officer.
B. At the end of 10 days have the dog examined by the Health Officer.
A. Mandatory inoculation. Except as otherwise provided in Subsection D
hereof, no person shall own, harbor or keep any dog within the
municipal limits of the Borough which is not inoculated against rabies.
17.Editor's Note: Editor’s Note: Former Subsection I, Commission of nuisance prohibited,
which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 9-19-2005 by Ord. No. 888-05.
See now Article I, Pet Waste.
§ 91-17 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 91-19
88:184
§ 91-20. Enforcement.
The Police Commissioner of the Borough shall cause the provisions of this
article to be enforced as therein provided.
§ 91-21. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or who fails or refuses to comply with any of the
provisions of this article shall be subject to a fine of not less than $25 nor
more than $75 for each offense.
B. Periods of inoculation. A dog shall be inoculated against rabies once
each year and within nine months prior to the date set for procurement
of the dog license required in § 91-11A, provided, that if the Flury chick
embryo vaccine is used, the inoculation against rabies may be
performed every three years. The inoculation shall be made by a duly
licensed veterinarian of the State of New Jersey, or by such other
person permitted by law to make same and approved by the department
of health of the city. The vaccine must be of a type approved by the
United States Bureau of Animal Industry or by the United States Public
Health Service.
C. Rabies tag and certificate. Any person who shall own, keep or harbor a
dog within the municipal limits of the Borough shall possess a
certificate, both indicating that such dog has been inoculated against
rabies and setting forth the date of such inoculation. The certificate of
inoculation shall be exhibited to the Health Officer when application for
a dog license is made. The certificate shall also be produced by any
person owning, keeping, or harboring a dog within the municipal limits
of the city upon the request of any Department of Health official or
member of the Police Department.
D. Exceptions. This article shall not apply to:
(1) Dogs which have not attained the age of seven months;
(2) Dogs which do not possess a permanent set of teeth;
(3) Any dog which the Department of Health, for a specified period of
time, declares exempt upon presentation of a certificate from a
veterinarian stating that, because of an infirmity or other physical
condition, the inoculation of such dog shall be deemed inadvisable
for a specified period of time;
(4) Dogs in veterinarian hospitals or pet shows, dogs in transient or
dogs brought into the Borough temporarily for the sole purpose of
showing in dog shows or exhibitions; or
(5) Any dog inoculated at the Health Department animal rabies clinic.
§ 91-19 AMUSEMENTS § 91-21
88:185

ARTICLE III
Wildlife Feeding
[Adopted 9-19-2005 by Ord. No. 889-05]
§ 91-22. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the feeding of unconfined wildlife in
any public park or on any other property owned or operated by the Borough,
so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties
for failure to comply.
§ 91-23. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
FEED — To give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any edible
material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing wildlife.
Feeding does not include baiting in the legal taking of fish and/or game.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
WILDLIFE — All animals that are neither human nor domesticated.
§ 91-24. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall feed, in any public park or on any other property owned
or operated by the Borough, any wildlife, excluding confined wildlife (for
example, wildlife confined in zoos, parks or rehabilitation centers, or
unconfined wildlife at environmental education centers), and except as
may be permitted by New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
regulations.
§ 91-25. Enforcement.
§ 91-26. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $100.
A. This article shall be enforced by the Police Department.
B. Any person found to be in violation of this article shall be ordered to
cease the feeding immediately.
§ 91-22 AMUSEMENTS § 91-26
88:187
Chapter 94
BAMBOO
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 97.
Fertilizer — See Ch. 120.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 190.
Trees — See Ch. 234.
Yard waste — See Ch. 250.
Zoning — See Ch. 255.
Weed control — See Ch. 306.
§ 94-1. Purpose.
This chapter is adopted to control the planting, cultivating or growing of
bamboo in the Borough of Old Tappan; and to require barriers to prevent
the spread of existing bamboo into other areas of the Borough.
§ 94-2. Planting, growing or cultivating restricted.
Subject to certain exemptions set forth in this chapter, no persons, or other
property owners or others in possession or control of real property or
tenants shall plant, cultivate or cause to grow bamboo on any lot or parcel of
land within the Borough of Old Tappan, subject to the following exceptions:
§ 94-3. Exemptions.
This chapter shall not apply to any landowner or possessor who, prior to
the effective date of this chapter, has planted or caused to grow bamboo
on any property within the Borough limits unless the Code Enforcement
Officer determines that any portion of such bamboo has been allowed to
grow upon, extend roots across, or extend branches, stalks or leaves over
any public way or any private property not owned by or in the possession of
such landowner, tenant, or any possessor of said land.
A. The root system of such bamboo plants is entirely contained within an
aboveground level planter, barrel, or other vessel of such design,
material and location so as to entirely prevent the spread or growth of
the bamboo plant's root system beyond the container in which it is
planted; and
B. Whether planted or growing in a container, as described herein, all
bamboo plants shall be located, trimmed and maintained so that no part
of the plant shall be closer than 10 feet to any property line or right-ofway.
§ 91-26 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 94-4
88:188
§ 94-4. Complaint notice; order for removal and compliance.
Whenever a complaint is received by the Borough regarding the
encroachment of any bamboo plant or root, or whenever the Borough
determines that there is an encroachment of bamboo plants or roots onto
the property of another, the Borough, through its delegated official, shall
forward a notice of violation to the alleged offending person, property
owner, or other in possession of such property (hereinafter the "violator"),
which notice shall be substantially as follows:
§ 94-5. Repealer.
All ordinances of the Borough of Old Tappan which are inconsistent with
the provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of such
inconsistency.
§ 94-6. Violations and penalties.
A. The notice shall be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested,
properly addressed and with sufficient postage, and also by first class
mail. Notice by certified mail shall be deemed served on the date of
personal delivery, or the date the certified mail is marked "refused" or
"unclaimed" or otherwise undeliverable by the United States Post
Office.
B. The notice shall specify the nature of the violation.
C. The notice shall state that the violation must be cured within 30 days
from the date of the received or returned mailing.
D. The notice shall state specifically what must be done by the violator to
correct the violation.
A. Any violator determined by any court of competent jurisdiction to have
violated this chapter shall be subject to pay a fine of not less than $25
per day, nor more than $100 per day, for each day the violation exists
after the date for cure as set forth in the notice. Each day of a
continuing violation shall constitute a separate offense, for which an
additional fine can be levied. The per-day fine will be in addition to a
penalty for failure to comply with the Bamboo Ordinance. This fine can
be up $1,000.
B. If the violation is not remedied within the time set forth in the aforesaid
notice, the Borough is hereby authorized, but not obligated, to remove
or have removed any encroaching bamboo and to take all reasonable
steps to eradicate the regrowth of the bamboo on the public rights-ofway,
including sidewalks, and to restore such land to its normal
condition, prior to such removal and eradication.
C. The Borough's cost of the corrective action together with any civil
penalties, legal fees and other costs shall be recoverable from the
violator.
§ 94-4 AMUSEMENTS § 94-7
88:189
§ 94-7. Severability.
If any section, subsection, clause or phrase of this chapter is for any reason
held to be unconstitutional or invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction,
such decision shall not affect the remaining portion of this chapter.
Chapter 97
BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dumping — See Ch. 209, Art. I. Weed control — See Ch. 306.
§ 97-1. Duties of owners and tenants.
It shall be the duty of the owner, tenant or person in possession of any lands
in the borough to maintain their property so as not to create a nuisance
to the neighboring properties and to keep the lands free of brush, weeds,
dead and dying trees, stumps, roots, noxious growth, filth, garbage, trash
and debris, where the same are inimical to the preservation of public health,
safety or general welfare of the borough, or which may constitute a fire
hazard. Lawns shall be maintained so as no grass or weeds shall exceed
eight inches in height.
§ 97-2. Complaint; notice to remove offensive condition;
reinspection.
After an investigation of any complaint of a resident, officer or employee of
the Borough relative to a violation of this chapter, or upon his own motion,
the Code Official shall make a written notice of the conditions complained of
to the property owner. If the reported conditions are found to exist, the Code
Official or designee will notify the owner, tenant or person in possession of
the lands complained of in writing, either personally or by registered mail,
to remove such brush, weeds, dead or dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious
growth, filth, garbage, trash, or other debris, within 10 days after receipt of
the notice. The Code Official shall reinspect the lands in question after the
ten-day period expires and if the conditions still exist the Code Official will
issue a summons and report in writing to the Borough Council at its next
regular meeting whether the condition complained of has been abated or
remedied.
§ 97-3. Removal by Borough; costs to become lien.
If the owner, tenant or person in possession of the lands in question fails
to abate the condition complained of within 10 days after receipt of notice,
the Building Inspector shall cause the condition complained of to be abated
and shall certify the cost to the Borough Council, who shall examine the
certificate and if it is correct cause the cost as shown thereon to be charged
§ 94-7 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 97-3
88:190
against the lands. The amount so charged shall become a lien upon the
lands and shall be added to and become a part of the taxes next to be
assessed and levied upon the lands, shall bear interest at the same rate as
taxes, and shall be collected and enforced by the same officer and in the
same manner as taxes. Costs shall be in addition to any penalties imposed
for any violation of this chapter.
Chapter 100
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use procedures — See Ch. 45.
Building Inspector — See Ch. 50, Art. XI.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 131.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 135.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 173.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 218.
§ 97-3 AMUSEMENTS § 97-3
88:191

ARTICLE I
Administration
[Adopted 5-26-1975 as Sec. 11-1 of the 1975 Code, as amended
through Ord. No. 638-98]
§ 100-1. Uniform Construction Code Enforcing Agency.
§ 100-2. (Reserved)18
§ 100-3. Permit fees.
A. Establishment; chief administrator. There is hereby established in the
Borough a State Uniform Construction Code enforcing agency to be
known as the "Uniform Construction Code Enforcing Agency of the
Borough of Old Tappan," consisting of a construction code official,
building subcode official, plumbing subcode official, electrical subcode
official, fire protection subcode official and such other subcode officials
for such additional subcodes as the Commissioner of the Department of
Community Affairs, State of New Jersey, shall hereafter adopt as part of
the State Uniform Construction Code. The construction code official
shall be the chief administrator of the enforcing agency.
B. Official positions. Each official position created in Subsection A above
shall be filled by a person qualified for such position pursuant to N.J.S.A.
52:27D-119 et seq., as amended, and N.J.A.C. 5:23, provided that, in
lieu of any particular subcode official, an on-site inspection agency may
be retained by contract pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23. More than one such
official position may be held by the same person, provided that such
person is qualified pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23 to hold each such position.
C. Public business at one location. The public shall have the right to do
business with the enforcing agency at one office location, except for
emergencies and unforeseen or unavoidable circumstances.
A. Construction permit. The fee for a construction permit shall be the sum
of all subcode fees as set forth in Subsection A(1) through (15) below
and shall include the required plan review fee set forth herein in
Subsection B hereof and the required certificate fee set forth in
Subsection C hereof, and the New Jersey training surcharge fee as set
forth in § 100-5. The minimum construction permit fee for any subcode
or combination of subcode shall be as indicated below. [Amended
7-16-2001 by Ord. No. 758-01; 6-16-2003 by Ord. No. 824-03;
12-7-2009 by Ord. No. 997-09; 9-19-2011 by Ord. No. 1037-11]
(1) For new construction, all use groups (based on cubic footage):
$0.07 per cubic foot.
18.Editor's Note: Former § 100-2, Construction Board of Appeals, was repealed 3-19-2007 by
Ord. No. 935-07.
§ 100-1 AMUSEMENTS § 100-3
88:193
(2) State fees: $0.00371 per cubic foot; $1.90 per $1,000 of value of
construction. [Amended 7-20-2015 by Ord. No. 1082-15]
(3) Renovations, alterations, repairs, minor work:
(a) Twenty-five dollars per $1,000 cost (or fraction thereof).
(b) Minimum fee: $65.
(4) Certificates of occupancy fees.
(a) Residential: 10% of permit fee, minimum $100.
(b) Nonresidential: 15% of permit fee, minimum $250.
(c) Change of use: $200.
(d) Certificate of continued occupancy: $100.
(e) TCO: $100 first 30 days; $75 each additional 30 days.
(5) Variations.
(a) Residential: $100.
(b) Nonresidential: $250.
(6) Swimming pools.
(a) Aboveground: $100.
(b) In-ground: $25 per $1,000 of cost of construction, $100
minimum.
(7) Demolition.
(a) Residential: $150.
(b) Nonresidential: $500.
(c) Structural tower: $200.
(d) Accessory to R-3/R-5: $40.
(8) Signs: $100 each.
(9) Asbestos and/or lead abatement.
(a) Asbestos abatement: $150.
(b) Lead abatement: $250.
(c) Asbestos certificate: $100.
(d) Lead ccl: $75.
(10) Plumbing subcode fees.
§ 100-3 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 100-3
88:194
(a) Fixtures and appliances connected to the plumbing system.
[1] Water closet/bidet/urinals: $25 each.
[2] Bathtubs: $25 each.
[3] Lavatory/sink: $25 each.
[4] Shower/floor drain: $25 each.
[5] Washing machine: $25 each.
[6] Dishwasher residential: $50 each.
[7] Commercial dishwasher: $100 each.
[8] Hot-water heater, residential: $60 each.
[9] Hot-water heater industrial/commercial: $100 each.
[10] Hose bibs: $30 each.
[11]Water cooler: $30 each.
[12] Garbage disposal: $30 each.
[13] Indirect connection: $30 each.
[14] Vent stack: $20 each.
[15] Drinking fountains: $25 each.
[16] Gas piping residential: $50 each.
[17] Gas piping industrial/commercial: $125 each.
(b) Special devices.
[1] Grease traps: $100 each.
[2] Oil separators: $100 each.
[3] Water-cooled air conditioners: $100 each.
[4] Refrigeration units: $100 each.
[5] Water utility connection: $100 each.
[6] Sewer utility connection: $100 each.
[7] Backflow preventers: $75 each.
[8] Backflow preventers (commercial): $100 each with ports.
[9] Steam boilers, residential: $75 each.
[10] Steam boilers, commercial/industrial: $125 each.
§ 100-3 AMUSEMENTS § 100-3
88:195
[11] Hot-water boilers: $75 each.
[12] Gas connection: $50 per.
[13] Active solar systems: $50 each.
[14] Sewer pumps, residential: $75 each.
[15] Sewer pumps, commercial/industrial: $125 each.
[16] Interceptors, residential: $75 each.
[17] Interceptors commercial/industrial: $125 each.
[18] Fuel-oil piping: $50 each.
[19] Medical gas piping: $100 per station.
[20] Condensate lines: $25 each.
[21] Storm drain line systems: $75.
(c) Minimum fee: $80.
(11) Electrical subcode fees.
(a) Electrical fixtures and devices.
[1] Switching outlets, lighting outlets.
[a] Receptacles, one to 25: $65.
[b] Each additional 25 outlets: $50.
(b) Electrical devices/generators/transformers.
[1] Two KW to 10 KW: $30 each.
[2] Over 10 KW and less than or equal to 45 KW: $90 each.
[3] Over 45 KW and less than or equal to 112.5 KW: $250
each.
[4] Over 112.5 KW: $500 each.
(c) Motors.
[1] Two hp up to 10 hp: $25 each.
[2] Over 10 hp and less than or equal to 50 hp: $75 each.
[3] Over 50 hp and less than or equal to 100 hp: $100 each.
[4] Over 100 hp: $500 each.
(d) Service panel/service entrance subpanels.
[1] Less than or equal to 200 amps: $100.
§ 100-3 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 100-3
88:196
[2] Greater than 200 amps and less than or equal to 1,000
amps: $250.
[3] Greater than 1,000 amps: $750.
(e) Swimming pool bonding: $100.
(f) Swimming pool lights: $50.
(g) Minimum fee: $90.
(12) Fire protection fees.
(a) Sprinklers.
[1] One to 20 heads: $100.
[2] Twenty-one to 100 heads: $200.
[3] One hundred one to 200 heads: $300.
[4] Two hundred one to 400 heads: $600.
[5] Four hundred one to 1,000 heads: $750.
[6] Over 1,000 heads: $900.
(b) Heat/smoke detectors.
[1] One to 12 detectors: $125.
[2] Each additional five: $35.
(c) Each standpipe: $300.
(d) Each independent pre-engineered system: $150.
(e) Each kitchen exhaust system: $100.
(f) Each gas- or oil-fired appliance: $75.
(g) Hot-tar kettle roof: $75.
(h) Fireplace/wood stoves: $75 each.
(i) Emergency lights/exit signs: $10 each.
(j) Minimum fee: $80.
(13) Elevator fees.
(a) Each elevator installed: $260.
(b) Elevators, escalators and moving walks requiring
reinspections every six months: $65.
(c) Dumbwaiters requiring reinspections every 12 months: $50.
§ 100-3 AMUSEMENTS § 100-3
88:197
(d) Five-year inspections and witnessing of text on elevators:
$175.
(14) Storage tanks/installation/removal.
(a) Capacity up to 2,000 gallons: $100.
(b) Two thousand and over: $500.
(15) Items not covered: Any items not covered in the above fee schedule
shall be charged as per N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.20 of the New Jersey
Uniform Construction Code.
B. The plan review fees, by outside agency, shall be 20% of the amount to
be charged for a construction permit. Plan review fees are not
refundable.
C. Certificate fee schedule shall be: [Amended 6-16-2003 by Ord. No.
824-03]
(1) Certificate of occupancy (C.O.) indicating that construction
authorized by a construction permit is completed in accordance to
the approved plans and the Uniform Construction Code
regulations. Prepayment at time of issuing the construction permit
is required, and the fee shall be 10% of the total cost of the
construction permit, provided that the minimum C.O. fees shall be
$100. [Amended 12-7-2009 by Ord. No. 997-09]
(2) Initial temporary certificate of occupancy (T.C.O.): N/C.
(3) Additional certificate of occupancy or temporary certificate of
occupancy: $100 each.
(4) Certificate of continued occupancy (C.C.O.): [Amended
12-19-2005 by Ord. No. 900-05]
(a) Residential: $50 if the C.C.O. inspection is scheduled 10 or
more days prior to the anticipated closing date.
(b) Commercial: $100 if the C.C.O. inspection is scheduled 10 or
more days prior to the anticipated closing date.
(c) In addition to the fees set forth in this subsection for a C.C.O.,
there shall be an additional fee of $25 if the C.C.O. inspection is
scheduled more than four days but less than 10 days prior to
the anticipated closing date, or an additional fee of $100 if the
C.C.O. inspection is scheduled less than four days prior to the
anticipated closing date.
(5) Certificate of approval which is required for the following
equipment: elevator, moving stairway, mechanical equipment,
refrigeration, air-conditioning or ventilating apparatus, plumbing,
gas piping, electrical wiring, heating systems, or other equipment
§ 100-3 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 100-3
88:198
specifically controlled by the New Jersey Administrative Code.
Prepayment is required at time of issuance: $25.
(6) Letter of certification which is the end result of an inspection
process either confirming or denying in whole or part any provision
of the Uniform Construction Code: $20.
(7) Zoning permit application fee: $40. [Added 12-7-2009 by Ord.
No. 997-0919]
D. Reinstatement of a lapsed construction permit shall be as follows:
[Amended 12-7-2009 by Ord. No. 997-09]
(1) Recalculation of the construction permit shall be required utilizing
the most current fee schedule applied to all work which is to be
performed.
(2) The reinstatement fee shall be 20% of the recalculated value of all
work which is to be performed.
(3) There shall be a minimum reinstatement fee of $20.
E. Annual construction permit. The fee for an annual construction permit
shall be paid annually. This fee shall be based on the assessed property
value of the facility. The fee shall be in the amount of $1 per $10,000 of
assessed property value with a minimum permit fee of $100 and a
maximum permit fee of $1,000. An annual construction permit shall
become null and void on its anniversary date, one year after issuance.
F. Cash bond for renovations, alterations or repairs. The Construction
Code Official shall collect a cash bond in all cases where renovations,
alterations or repairs are made to existing structures and in the case of
additions to existing structures. The cash bond shall be in the amount of
$500 for renovations, alterations, repairs or additions which cost, in the
estimation of the Construction Code Official, shall equal or exceed
$5,000. The cash bond shall be in the amount of $200 for renovations,
alterations, repairs or additions which cost, in the estimation of the
Construction Code Official, shall be less than $5,000. Upon the
completion of such renovations, alterations, repairs or additions, and
the Construction Code Official and the appropriate subcode officials
having inspected the same and found them to be satisfactory, the cash
bond, without interest, shall be returned to the applicant.
G. Cash bond for new construction; exception. The Construction Code
Official shall collect a cash bond in all cases where an applicant
requests a permit for a new construction. The cash bond shall be in the
amount of $500 for new construction which cost, in the estimation of
the Construction Code Official, shall equal or exceed $5,000. The cash
bond shall be in the amount of $200 for new construction which cost, in
19.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection C(6), regarding letter of
completion (minor work) and renumbered former Subsection C(7) as Subsection C(6).
§ 100-3 AMUSEMENTS § 100-3
88:199
§ 100-4. Biannual report recommending fee schedule.
The Construction Official shall, with the advice of the subcode officials,
prepare and submit to the Mayor and Council biannually a report
recommending a fee schedule based on the operating expenses of the
agency and other expenses of the municipality fairly attributable to the
enforcement of the State Uniform Construction Code Act.
§ 100-5. Surcharge fee.
In order to provide for the training, certification and technical support
programs required by the Uniform Construction Code Act and regulations,
the enforcing agency shall collect in addition to the fees specified
hereinbefore, a surcharge fee of $0.0006 per cubic foot of volume of new
construction and additions. Such surcharge fee shall be remitted to the
Bureau of Housing Inspection, Department of Community Affairs, on a
quarterly basis for the fiscal quarter ending September 30, December 31,
March 31 and June 30, and not later than one month next succeeding
the end of the quarter for which it is due. In the fiscal year in which the
the estimation of the Construction Code Official, shall be less than
$5,000. The applicant shall, during the course of such construction,
regularly clean up all debris and dirt from the streets, sidewalks and
curbing abutting the property for which the construction permit was
issued. Upon the completion of such new construction, and the
Construction Code Official and the appropriate subcode officials having
inspected the same and found it to be satisfactory and the Construction
Code Official and appropriate subcode officials having also determined
that any and all damages to the streets, sidewalks and curbing abutting
the property for which the permit was issued have been repaired and
all debris and dirt deposited thereon have been properly cleaned, the
cash bond, without interest, shall be returned to the applicant. The
provisions of this subsection shall not apply to the developer who
has executed a developer's agreement pursuant to Chapter 218,
Subdivision and Site Plan Review, Article IX, and who has posted
performance guaranties pursuant to Chapter 218, Article VIII, of this
Code.
H. Additional administrative fee. In addition to the foregoing fees, there
shall be an additional fee for the following permits and certificates:
[Added 8-16-2004 by Ord. No. 852-04; amended 5-16-2005 by
Ord. No. 883-05]
(1) Building subcode permit: $10.
(2) Electrical subcode permit: $10.
(3) Plumbing subcode permit: $10.
(4) Fire protection subcode permit: $10.
(5) Certificate of occupancy: $20.
§ 100-3 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 100-5
88:200
regulations first become effective, such fees shall be collected and remitted
for the third and fourth quarters only.
§ 100-6. Report to Bureau of Housing Inspection.
The enforcing agency shall report annually at the end of each fiscal year
to the Bureau of Housing Inspection, and not later than July 31, the total
amount of the surcharge fee collected in the fiscal year. In the fiscal year
in which the regulations first become effective, such report shall be for the
third and fourth quarters only.
§ 100-7. Biannual report evaluating fire limits.
The construction code official shall prepare and submit to the Mayor and
Council biannually a report evaluating the delineation of the fire limits
to be established pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23. This report shall indicate the
recommendations of the construction code official, the building subcode
official and the fire subcode official regarding those areas which should be
designated as within fire limits, with the reasons therefor.
§ 100-8. Waiver of fees for construction promoting accessibility for
disabled persons.
No person shall be charged a construction permit surcharge fee or
enforcing agency fee for any construction, reconstruction, alteration or
improvement designed and undertaken solely to promote accessibility by
disabled persons to an existing public or private structure or any of the
facilities contained therein.
§ 100-5 AMUSEMENTS § 100-8
88:201

ARTICLE II
Housing
[Adopted 5-26-1975 as Sec. 11-2 of the 1975 Code, as amended
through Ord. No. 451-91]
§ 100-9. Adoption of standards.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.1, the Housing Code of the BOCA Code, 1970
edition, is hereby accepted, adopted and established in and for the Borough
of Old Tappan as a standard governing supplied utilities and facilities and
other physical things and conditions essential to making dwellings safe,
sanitary and fit for human habitation or occupancy or use and governing the
conditions of dwellings. A copy of the BOCA Housing Code, 1970 edition, is
annexed to this article and incorporated as if fully set forth at length herein,
and three copies of the same have been placed on file in the office of the
Borough Clerk and will remain on file for the use and examination of the
public.
§ 100-10. Title.
This article, together with the BOCA Housing Code, shall be known as the
"Housing Code of the Borough of Old Tappan, Bergen County, New Jersey,"
and they are hereinafter referred to as "this code."
§ 100-11. Applicability.
The provisions of this code shall apply in all buildings and structures that
are specifically provided for in the BOCA Housing Code, but not limited
thereto.
§ 100-12. Administration.
The Building Inspector or, in his/her absence or incapacity, the Assistant
Building Inspector of the Borough be and hereby is designated as the officer
to exercise the powers described within this section, and (s)he shall serve
in such capacity without any additional salary. The Building Inspector is
hereby authorized and empowered to exercise such powers as may be
necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and
provisions of this section, including the following, in addition to any others
herein granted:
A. To investigate the dwelling conditions in the Borough in order to
determine which dwellings therein are unfit for human habitation.
B. To administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence.
C. To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations,
provided that such shall be made in such manner as to cause the least
possible inconvenience to the persons in possession.
§ 100-9 AMUSEMENTS § 100-13
88:203
§ 100-13. Inspections.
A. Authorization. The Building Inspector is hereby authorized and directed
to make inspections to determine the condition of dwellings, dwelling
units, rooming units, and premises located within the Borough in order
that s(he) may perform the duty of safeguarding the health and safety of
the occupants of dwellings and of the general public. For the purpose of
making such inspections, the Building Inspector is hereby authorized to
enter, examine and survey at all reasonable times all dwellings,
dwelling units and premises.
B. Duty of owner or occupant. The owner or occupant of every dwelling or
dwelling unit, or the person in charge thereof, shall give the Building
Inspector, upon proper identification, free access to such dwelling,
dwelling unit and its premises at all reasonable times for the purpose of
such inspection, examination and survey. Every occupant of a dwelling
or dwelling unit shall give the owner thereof, or his/her agent or
employee, access to any part of such dwelling or dwelling unit or its
premises at all reasonable times for the purpose of making such repairs
or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with the provisions
of this section or with any lawful rule or regulation adopted or any
lawful order issued pursuant to the provisions of this section.
C. Search warrant. The Building Inspector may, upon affidavit, apply to the
Municipal Judge for a search warrant setting forth factually the actual
conditions and circumstances that provide a reasonable basis for
believing that a nuisance or violation of this section exists on the
premises, and if the Municipal Judge is satisfied as to the matter set
forth in the affidavit, (s)he shall authorize the issuance of a search
warrant permitting access to and inspection of that part of the premises
on which the nuisance or violation may exist.
§ 100-13 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 100-13
88:204
ARTICLE III
Certificate of Continued Occupancy
[Added 8-16-2004 by Ord. No. 857-04]
§ 100-14. Certificate of continued occupancy upon change of
ownership or tenancy.20
Upon a change in occupancy or ownership of a building, the occupant or
seller of a building shall obtain a certificate of continued occupancy from
the Building Inspector for the building which shall certify that the purpose
for which the building or land is used is in conformance with the uses
permitted and all other requirements under Chapter 255, Zoning, for the
zone in which the building is located have been met. For a change of
ownership, such a certificate of continued occupancy shall be obtained prior
to the closing on a building. The requirements of this section shall apply to
both residential and commercial buildings.
20.Editor's Note: This § 100-14 was formerly included in Art. II, Housing, but was relocated
to this article by Ord. No. 857-04.
§ 100-14 AMUSEMENTS § 100-14
88:205

ARTICLE IV
Unfit Dwellings
[Adopted 5-26-1975 as Sec. 11-3 of the 1975 Code]
§ 100-15. Determination of unfitness.
For the purpose of this article, the Building Inspector may determine that a
dwelling is unfit for human habitation if (s)he finds that conditions exist in
such dwelling which are dangerous or injurious to the health or safety of the
occupants of such dwelling, the occupants of neighboring dwellings or other
residents of the Borough. Such conditions may include, without limiting the
generality of the foregoing, defects therein increasing the hazards of fire,
accident or other calamities, lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary
facilities, dilapidation, disrepair, structural defects or uncleanliness.
§ 100-16. Petition to determine unfitness.
Whenever a petition is filed with the Borough Clerk by a public authority,
as defined in N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.4, or by at least five residents of the Borough
charging that any dwelling is unfit for human habitation as herein defined,
or whenever it appears to the Building Inspector on his/her own motion that
any dwelling is unfit for human habitation, as herein defined, (s)he shall, if
his/her preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue
and cause to be served upon the owner of and parties in interest in such
dwelling a complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing a
notice as provided by this article.
§ 100-17. Notice of violation.
Whenever the Building Inspector determines that there has been a violation
or that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a
violation of any provision of this article or of any rule or regulation adopted
pursuant thereto, (s)he shall serve notice by complaint of such violation or
alleged violation upon the person or persons responsible therefor.
§ 100-18. Service of complaint.
A. Such notice shall be in writing and shall contain a notice that a hearing
will be held at a place therein fixed not less than 10 days nor more than
30 days after the serving of the complaint.
B. The owner and parties in interest shall be given the right to file an
answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give
testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint.
C. The rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law shall not be controlling
in hearings before the Building Inspector or his/her designated agent.
A. Complaints made by the Building Inspector pursuant to this article shall
be served upon the owner and parties in interest, or the operator or the
occupant, or any persons, as the case may require, either personally or
§ 100-15 AMUSEMENTS § 100-18
88:207
§ 100-19. Hearing.
§ 100-20. Actions following hearing.
After hearing, the Building Inspector shall make such order as is pertinent,
depending upon his/her findings. A copy of the proceedings at such hearing,
including the findings and decision of the Building Inspector, shall be filed
in the office of the Borough Clerk.
§ 100-21. Order determining unfitness.
If after such complaint and hearing the Building Inspector determines that
the dwelling under consideration is unfit for human habitation, as herein
defined, (s)he shall state in writing his/her findings of fact and serve upon
the owner thereof and parties in interest an order requiring the repair,
alteration, improvement, vacation or demolition of the building to be made
within a reasonable time, which time shall be set forth in the order.
by leaving a copy thereof at their usual place of abode; by registered
or certified mail, return receipt requested, to their last known address;
or by any other method authorized or required under the laws of this
state.
B. If the whereabouts of such persons is unknown and the same cannot be
ascertained by the Building Inspector, the serving of such complaint
upon such persons may be made by publishing the same once each
week for two successive weeks in a newspaper printed and published in
the Borough. A copy of such complaint shall be posted in a conspicuous
place on the premises affected by the complaint, and a copy of such
complaint shall be posted in the office of the Borough Clerk.
A. At any hearing held in accordance with this article, the owner, tenant or
occupant shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show cause
why such complaint should be modified or withdrawn.
B. The Building Inspector shall have the power to administer oaths and
affirmations in connection with the conductance of any such hearing.
A. Upon failure of the owner or parties in interest to comply with such
order, the Building Inspector may cause such building to be repaired,
altered or improved, or to be vacated and closed or demolished, and the
Building Inspector may cause to be posted on the entrance to the
building a placard with the following words: "This building is unfit for
human habitation or occupancy or use; the use or occupation of this
building is prohibited and unlawful."
B. If the owner or parties in interest fail to comply with any order to
remove or demolish the building, the Building Inspector may cause
such building to be removed or demolished or may contract for the
removal or demolition thereof after advertisement of and receipt of bids
therefor.
§ 100-18 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 100-21
88:208
§ 100-22. Emergencies.
Whenever the Building Inspector finds that an emergency exists which
requires immediate action to protect the public health or safety, (s)he may
without notice or hearing issue an order reciting the existence of such
an emergency and requiring that such action be taken as the Building
Inspector deems necessary to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding the
other provisions of this article, such order shall be effective immediately.
Any person to whom such order is directed shall comply therewith
immediately, but upon petition to the Building Inspector shall be afforded
a hearing as soon as possible. After such hearing, depending upon his/her
findings as to whether the provisions of this article and of the rules and
regulations adopted pursuant thereto have been complied with, the Building
Inspector shall continue such order in effect or modify or revoke it.
C. The amount of the costs of filing legal papers, fees for expert witnesses,
search fees and advertising charges incurred in the course of any
proceeding taken under this section shall be determined in favor of the
municipality.
D. The cost of such repairs, alterations or improvements, or vacating and
closing or removal or demolition, if any, or the amount of the balance
thereof remaining after deduction of the sum, if any, realized from the
sale of materials derived from such building or from any contract for
removal or demolition thereof shall be a municipal lien against the real
property upon which such cost was incurred.
(1) If the building is removed or demolished by the Building Inspector,
(s)he shall sell the materials of such building. There shall be
credited against the cost of the removal or demolition thereof the
proceeds of any sale of such materials or any sum derived from any
contract for the removal or demolition of the building. If there are
no such credits or if the sum total of such costs exceeds the total of
such credits, a detailed statement of the aforesaid costs and the
amount so due shall be filed with the Municipal Tax Assessor or
other custodian of the records of tax liens, and a copy thereof shall
be forthwith forwarded to the owner by registered mail. If the total
of the credits exceeds such costs, the balance remaining shall be
deposited in the Superior Court by the Borough and shall be
secured in such manner as may be directed by the Court and shall
be disbursed according to the order or judgment of the Court to the
person found to be entitled thereto, by final order or judgment of
such Court, provided that nothing in this subsection shall be
construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the
municipality to define and declare nuisances and to cause their
removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise.
(2) Any owner or party in interest may, within 60 days from the date of
the filing of the lien certificate, proceed in a summary manner in
the Superior Court to contest the reasonableness of the amount or
the accuracy of the costs set forth in the municipal lien certificate.
§ 100-21 AMUSEMENTS § 100-23
88:209
§ 100-23. Enforcement.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to abrogate or impair the power
of the Borough or any officer or department to enforce any provisions of its
ordinances or regulations, or to prevent or punish violations thereof, and
the powers conferred by this article shall be in addition and supplemental
to the powers conferred upon the Borough by any other law or ordinance.
§ 100-23 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 100-23
88:210
ARTICLE V
Hours of Construction21
[Adopted by Ord. No. 549-95]
§ 100-24. Hours during which work may take place. [Amended
4-18-2005 by Ord. No. 882-05; 7-24-2006 by Ord. No. 916-06[
The carrying on of excavation, demolition, construction or alteration work
shall be permitted between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. Monday
through Friday, except federal holidays, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
6:00 p.m. on Saturday and shall be prohibited at all other times, including
but not limited to the entire day on Sunday and federal holidays. The
carrying on of construction, repair or alteration work by a homeowner on
his own dwelling or property shall be permitted between the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 9:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.
and 7:00 p.m. on Saturday, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
on Sunday and federal holidays and shall be prohibited at all other times.
In case of urgent necessity or in the interest of public health or safety, the
Superintendent of Public Works or the Chief of Police may grant a permit for
excavation, demolition, construction, repair or alteration work for a period
not to exceed three days, by the terms of which permit such work may
be carried on between 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or on Sundays or federal
holidays.
21.Editor's Note: Former Sec. 11-4, Fences, previously codified herein and containing
portions of Ord. Nos. 415-89, 420-89 and 484-92, was renumbered as Sec. 14-16 by Ord.
No. 548-95. See now Ch. 255, Zoning, Art. XV.
§ 100-24 AMUSEMENTS § 100-24
88:211

ARTICLE VI
Fire Insurance Claims
[Adopted 4-16-2001 by Ord. No. 747-01]
§ 100-25. Payment of municipal liens from insurance payments.
Any insurance company authorized to issue fire insurance policies in the
State of New Jersey on real properties located within the Borough of Old
Tappan is prohibited from paying to a claimant any claim in excess of $2,500
for fire damages on any real property located within the Borough of Old
Tappan pursuant to any fire insurance policy issued or renewed after the
final adoption of this article and after filing of same with the New Jersey
State Commissioner of Insurance, until such time as anticipated demolition
cost and all taxes and assessments and all other municipal liens or charges
due and payable to the Borough of Old Tappan appearing on the official
certificate of search shall have been paid by the owner of such real property
or by the insurance company.
§ 100-26. Responsibilities of claimant and owner.
It shall be the responsibility of the claimant to inform his or her insurance
carrier of its inability to accept payment pursuant to this article absent
the satisfaction of all official liens as assessed to the subject property. The
owner has an additional responsibility not to accept payment absent the
satisfaction of all obligation to the Borough referred to herein.
§ 100-25 AMUSEMENTS § 100-26
88:213
Chapter 111
CURFEW
§ 111-1. Halloween.
No child, 16 years of age or under, may be present on the streets of the
Borough of Old Tappan after 8:00 p.m. on the nights of October 30 and
October 31, unless accompanied by a parent, guardian or other adult.
Chapter 119
FEES
§ 100-26 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 111-1
111:214
ARTICLE I
Fees for Public Documents
[Adopted 5-8-2000 by Ord. No. 719-00; amended in its entirety
11-18-2002 by Ord. No. 807-0222]
§ 119-1. Policy.
It is hereby declared to be the public policy of this Borough to recognize
the public's general right to know pursuant to the Open Public Records
Act (N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq.). All "government records," as that term is
defined by N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1.1, shall be subject to inspection by the public
unless exempt under the statute or other regulation, common law practice,
executive order of the Governor, Rules of Court, federal law or judicial
decision.
§ 119-2. Custodian of records; records request form.
§ 119-3. Inspection and copying of public records.
A. Except as provided in Subsection B of this section, in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1.1, the Borough Clerk is the custodian of records. The
Borough Clerk shall adopt a form for the use of any person who
requests access to a record, and such form shall contain all of the
information required by N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5f.
B. The Borough Clerk may designate the Chief of Police as custodian of
police records so as to facilitate the process of providing access to
police records.
A. Any person seeking to inspect, examine or copy a public record of the
Borough shall make application in writing to the Borough Clerk, during
regular business hours, on the form provided. All requests for public
records shall be as specific as possible, including the type of record and
date created, if known.
B. The Borough Clerk shall promptly comply with a request to inspect,
examine, copy or provide a copy of a government record. If the Borough
Clerk is unable to comply with a request for access, he or she shall
indicate on the request form the specific basis for such inability to
comply and shall promptly return it to the requestor. The Borough Clerk
shall sign and date the form and provide the requestor with a copy
thereof.
C. In those instances where the nature of the request or the record itself
leads the Borough Clerk to doubt whether or not the record is a
"government record" as defined by law or is a record exempt from
disclosure, the Borough Clerk shall request an opinion from the
Borough Attorney. A copy of the request form shall be forwarded to the
22.Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former §§ 119-3 and 119-4 as §§ 119-8 and
119-9, respectively.
§ 119-1 CURFEW § 119-3
111:215
§ 119-4. Time limits for compliance.
Unless a shorter time period is otherwise provided by statute, regulation
or executive order, the Borough Clerk shall grant access to a government
record or deny a request for access to a record as soon as possible, but not
later than seven business days after receiving the request, provided that the
record is currently available and not in storage or archived. In the event
that the Borough Clerk fails to respond within seven business days after
receiving a request, the failure to respond shall be deemed a denial of the
request, unless the requestor has elected not to provide a name, address
or telephone number, or other means of contacting the requestor. If the
requestor has elected not to provide a name, address, or telephone number,
or other means of contacting the requestor, the Borough Clerk shall not
be required to respond until the requestor reappears before the custodian
seeking a response to the original request. If the government record is in
storage or archived, the requestor shall be so advised within seven business
days after the Borough Clerk receives the request. The requestor shall be
advised by the Borough Clerk when the record can be made available. If the
record is not made available by that time, access shall be deemed denied.
§ 119-5. Posting of appeals procedure.
The Borough Clerk shall post on the Borough's public bulletin board a
statement that sets forth in clear, concise and specific terms the right to
appeal a denial of or failure to provide access to a government record and
the procedure by which an appeal may be filed.
Borough Attorney, who, after review and investigation, shall issue an
opinion and note such opinion on the request form and promptly return
it to the Borough Clerk.
D. If any part of a particular record is exempt from public access pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq., the Borough Clerk shall delete, redact or
excise from a copy of the record that portion which is exempt from
access and shall promptly permit access to the remainder of the record.
E. If the record requested is temporarily unavailable because it is in use or
in storage, the Borough Clerk shall so advise the requestor and shall
make arrangements to make a copy of the record available.
F. If a request for access to a government record would substantially
disrupt Borough operations, the Borough Clerk may deny access to the
record after attempting to reach a reasonable solution with the
requestor that accommodates the interests of the requestor and the
Borough.
G. As required by N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5e, immediate access shall be granted for
access to budgets, bills, vouchers, contracts (including collective
negotiations agreements and individual employment contracts), and
public salary and overtime information.
§ 119-3 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 119-6
111:216
§ 119-6. Viewing of government records; removal prohibited.
§ 119-7. Procedures and fees for purchasing copies of public
records. [Amended 6-16-2003 by Ord. No. 824-03; 5-17-2004 by Ord.
No. 850-04; 8-16-2004 by Ord. No. 852-04; 12-20-2004 by Ord. No.
871-04; 3-19-2007 by Ord. No. 932-07; 5-21-2007 by Ord. No.
945-07; 12-6-2010 by Ord. No. 1024-10]
Copies of records may be purchased for the fee prescribed by law or
regulation. If a fee is not prescribed by law or regulation, the fee shall be
the actual cost of duplicating the record; provided, however, that where the
actual cost for duplication of a record exceeds the rates below, the actual
cost shall be imposed:
A. Upon the approval of a request to view, inspect, examine or copy a
record, the record and the requestor shall remain in the presence of the
Borough Clerk or his or her authorized representative at all times.
Under no circumstances shall any government record be removed from
the office where it is normally kept unless accompanied by the
custodian or his or her authorized representative.
B. In the event that the nature of a request to view records requires that
the Borough Clerk or other municipal employee observe or monitor
such viewing for a period of time exceeding one hour, the requestor
shall be responsible for reimbursing the municipality for time spent by
the Borough Clerk or other employee.
A. Paper documents.
Page Type Fee
Letter-size page or smaller (8 1/2
inches by 11 inches)
$0.05/page
Legal-size page or larger (8 1/2 inches
by 14 inches)
$0.07/page
(1) If the municipality can demonstrate that the actual costs for
duplication of a government record exceeds the foregoing rates, it
shall be permitted to change the actual costs of duplicating the
record.
B. Odd-sized paper documents, maps and miscellaneous documents:
Document Fee
Zoning Map $1
Street Map $0.07/page
Drug-Free School Zone Map Actual cost of reproduction
Site plan Actual cost of reproduction
Subdivision plat Actual cost of reproduction
Tax Maps Actual cost of reproduction
§ 119-6 CURFEW § 119-7
111:217
Document Fee
Engineering plans Actual cost of reproduction
Duplicate tax bill $5 for first copy; $25 for
second copy
Certified copy of vital statistics record $15/copy
List of property owners within 200 feet $10
C. Preprinted documents.
Document Fee
Land use pamphlet Actual cost of reproduction
Master plan Actual cost of reproduction
D. Police records.
(1) Police accident reports: same as Subsection A above, if requested
and picked up in person.
(2) Police accident reports, when copies are requested other than in
person, a fee, in addition to the fee set forth in Subsection A above,
of up to $5 may be added to cover administrative costs.
(3) Typed statements: $15 for the first two pages and $5 for each
additional page.
(4) Photographs: actual cost of reproducing.
(5) Fingerprints: Each individual set of fingerprints consisting of one
to three cards taken for the benefit of other than law enforcement
or governmental agencies: $1 per set. In the event any one order
requests the fingerprinting of more than 10 individual sets at any
one sitting: $0.50 per set in excess of 10.
E. Electronic records:
(1) Copy of videotape: $2 each; cost determined from office supply
book.
(2) Copy of electronic document or database: Actual cost of
reproduction.
(a) Compact disks: $1 each; cost determined from office supply
book.
(3) Electronic transmission of tax records (once per week): $500
annually.
F. A special service charge shall be imposed, in addition to the actual cost
of duplicating the record, where the nature, format, manner of collation
or volume of printed matter is such that it cannot be reproduced by
ordinary document-copying equipment in ordinary business size or
§ 119-7 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 119-7
111:218
where such record involves an extraordinary expenditure of time and
effort to accommodate the request. The requestor shall have the
opportunity to review and object to the special service charge prior to
it being incurred.
G. Conversion of records from one format to another: Actual cost of
reproduction.
H. Applicable postage shall be added for any and all records requested by
mail.
I. A deposit shall be paid prior to filling any request where it is estimated
that the information requested will cost in excess of $5 to reproduce.
The amount of the deposit shall equal the total estimated cost of filling
the request.
J. Tax lien redemption calculations:
(1) For any party entitled to redeem a tax sale certificate pursuant to
N.J.S.A 54:5-54, the tax collector shall provide two free calculations
per calendar year; thereafter, $50 for each subsequent calculation
requested of the tax collector. Request shall be made in writing to
the tax collector.
(2) For a lienholder, $50 per calculation pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-97.1.
Request must specify date to be used for the calculation.
§ 119-7 CURFEW § 119-7
111:219

ARTICLE II
Golf Course Fees
[Adopted 12-4-2017 by Ord. No. 1118-1723]
§ 119-8. Fees, rents and other charges.
Fees are not refundable. Full payment must be paid on or before March 1.
The following are the fees, rents and other charges for admission to and use
of the Old Tappan Golf Course for the 2018 season:
A. Nonresident. (greens fee included). [Amended 2-4-2019 by Ord. No.
1139-19]
Fee
Husband and wife $4,000
Husband and wife/senior (age 62 and older) $3,700
Single, full $2,700
Single full (under 35) $2,000
Single full (under 30) $1,400
Single, full/senior (age 62 and older) $2,500
Single, weekdays only; no holidays or
weekends
$2,200
Single, weekdays only; no holidays or
weekends/senior
$1,950
Juniors, ages 12 to 22 (restricted to 18 holes
of golf per day; may not play before 3:30
p.m. on weekends, holidays and Tuesdays)
$700
Juniors, ages 8 to 11 (restricted to 18 holes
of golf per day; must be accompanied by an
adult who is a paid member; may not play
before 3:30 p.m. on weekends, holidays and
Tuesdays)
$700
Single weekday plus Saturday/Sunday
twilight (after 3:00 p.m.)
$2,450
Senior (age 62 and older) single weekday
plus Saturday/Sunday twilight (after 3:00
p.m.)
$2,200
Family membership - Husband and wife plus
two juniors (ages 8 to 22) or single full
member and three juniors (ages 8 to 22).
Each additional junior (ages 8 to 22) is an
additional $350
$4,450
23.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. II, Golf Course Fees, adopted
2-21-2017 by Ord. No. 1107-17.
§ 119-8 CURFEW § 119-8
111:221
Fee
Starter membership $100
College student (June to August only) $250
NOTE: Credit card convenience fee for membership only, add 2.5%
B. Resident (greens fee included). The term "Resident" shall include
residents of Woodcliff Lake who present satisfactory proof of residency,
for so long as a shared service agreement exists between Old Tappan
and Woodcliff Lake. [Amended 2-4-2019 by Ord. No. 1139-19]
Fee
Husband and wife $2,150
Husband and wife, senior citizen (62 or
older)
$1,700
Single, full $1,600
Single full (under 35) $1,200
Single full (under 30) $800
Single, full, senior citizen (62 or older) $1,300
Single, weekdays only, no holidays $1,200
Single, weekdays only, senior citizens (62 or
older), no holidays
$800
Single, weekdays plus Saturday/Sunday
twilight (after 3:00 p.m.)
$1,375
Single, weekdays only, senior (age 62 and
older), plus Saturday/Sunday twilight (after
3:00 p.m.)
$950
Family membership - Husband and wife plus
two juniors (8 to 22) or single full member
plus three juniors (8 to 22). Each additional
junior (8 to 22) is an additional $350
$3,000
Junior, ages 12 to 22 (restricted to 18 holes
of golf per day; may not play before 3:30
p.m. on weekends, holidays and Tuesdays)
$700
Junior, ages 8 to 11 (restricted to 18 holes of
golf per day; must be accompanied by an
adult who is paid member; may not play
before 3:30 p.m. on weekends, holidays and
Tuesdays)
$700
College student (June to August only) $250
Starter membership $100
NOTE: Credit card convenience fee for membership only, add 2.5%.
§ 119-8 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 119-8
111:222
C. Other fees.
Fees
Eighteen-hole, weekday $45
Weekends and holidays $60 (nonresident)
$50 (resident)
Weekday, senior rate $25
Nine-hole weekday $30
Nine-hole weekends and holidays $40
D. Golf cart.
Fees
18 holes $40
9 holes $20
E. Incentive. Starting September 1 each year, a new member prepaying
30% of the next year's fee may commence play for the balance of the
current season upon payment of the same. Payment of the balance shall
be due March 1 before resuming play in the next year. One time only.
F. Corporate membership: $4,000. Open to businesses only; weekday
only; up to four designated corporate members of the business. Guest
fees apply. Must call for tee time. No drop-ins. Corporate members will
be given identification cards for each member identifying corporate
name and corporate member's name. A fee for each card applies. A
corporate member must accompany guests. No more than three guests
may play with each corporate member. Call 201-767-1199 to obtain tee
time. [Amended 2-4-2019 by Ord. No. 1139-19]
G. Active-duty military. Any resident in active military service may play for
free upon presenting satisfactory proof thereof.
H. Special rates. [Added 2-4-2019 by Ord. No. 1139-19]
Fees
1st year member Over 40 (single) $2,000 (nonresident)
$1,000 (resident)
1st year member Over 40 (couple) $3,000 (nonresident)
$1,400 (resident)
Town business owners pay resident rates
§ 119-8 CURFEW § 119-8
111:223

ARTICLE III
Recreation Program Fees
[Adopted 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 1112-1724]
§ 119-9. Registration fees.
The following are the registration fees for the Borough's recreation
programs. The fee range shown are for the 2017 to 2020 calendar years.
The Recreation Commission shall set the registration fees for each of the
calendar years 2017 through 2020 in an amount not to exceed the amount
shown.
A. Baseball/Softball.
(1) Registration fees for baseball-recreation:
Program Fee
T-ball $44 to $55
Pee Wee $55 to $70
Minor $77 to $90
Majors $77 to $90
Knickerbocker $110 to $130
Late fee $25
(2) Registration fees for softball-recreation:
Program Fee
Freshman $44 to $55
Sophomore $60.50 to $75
Junior $60.50 to $75
Senior $60.50 to $75
Late fee $25
(3) Family discounts for recreation only: $10 per child after third child
has paid in full. [Amended 3-4-2019 by Ord. No. 1141-19]
(4) Winter clinics, all grades: $125 to $250 per child. [Amended
3-4-2019 by Ord. No. 1141-19]
(5) Registration fees for travel baseball, all grades: $300 to $400 per
child/per season (spring, summer or fall). [Amended 3-4-2019 by
Ord. No. 1141-19]
B. Soccer. Registration fees for soccer:
24.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. III, Recreation Program Fees,
adopted 1-20-2015 by Ord. No. 1076-15, as amended.
§ 119-9 CURFEW § 119-9
111:225
Season Grade Fee
Fall/Winter PreK to 2nd $120 to $145
Fall only 3rd to 8th $75 to $100
Winter only 3rd to 8th $95 to $120
Fall/Winter 3rd to 8th $135 to $160
Winter Only 9th $120 to $145
Late fee $25
C. Basketball.
(1) Registration fees for basketball/winter-recreation:
Season Winter Fee
K to 2nd Grade $80 to $120
3rd to 8th Grade $100 to $140
Winter/Summer $155
Late fee $25
(2) Registration fees for basketball/winter travel: [Amended
11-19-2018 by Ord. No. 1136-18]
Grade Fee
2nd to 8th $200 to $230 registration fee
2nd to 8th $150 to $250 per child coach fee if
needed
(3) Pre-season travel tournament play: $50 to 100
(4) Registration fees for basketball/summer:
Season Summer Fee
3rd to 8th Grade $75 to $150
Winter/Summer $155
Late fee $25
D. Flag football. Registration fees for Flag Football:
Grade Fee
Kindergarten $50 to $80
1st to 2nd $85 to $110
Late fee None
E. Summer Camp. [Amended 3-4-2019 by Ord. No. 1141-19]
(1) Registration fees for Summer Camp:
§ 119-9 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 119-9
111:226
Grade Fee
K to 7th $75 to $125
Late fee $25
(2) Registration fee for Town camp outside vendor:
Grade Fee
K to 7th $100 to $200 per week
(3) Registration for Camp excursion:
Grade Fee
K to 7th $25 to $100 per excursion
(4) Before care/after care:
Grade Fee
K to 7th $7.50 to $10 per hour
F. Fees paid to officials.
(1) Fees for officials/soccer-outdoor/indoor/PVISL:
Team Fee
Number of
Referees Per Game
1st to 2nd Grade $40 to $60 per home
game
2
3rd to 8th Grade $90 to $120 per
game
2-3
3rd to 8th Grade
(playoffs)
$70 to $100 per
home
3
U10 to U12 $60 to $80 per game 2
U14 to U16 $60 to $100 per
game
2
(2) Fees for officials/basketball-league games:
Team Fee
Number of
Referees Per Game
3rd to 6th Grade $42.50 to $51 1
7th to 8th Grade $37.50 to $45 2
3rd to 8th Grade $55 to $75 Referee for single
game in a day
Assignor $250 to $500 per
season
(3) Fees for officials/basketball-internal games:
§ 119-9 CURFEW § 119-9
111:227
Official Fee
Referee $15 to $18 per game
Assignor $45 to $55 per month
Clockkeeper $13 to $20 per game
Scorekeeper $13 to $20 per game
(4) Fees for officials/baseball-softball:
Game Fee
All grades $57 to $70 each umpire
Assignor $250 to $375 each per baseball
and softball season
G. Additional clinics/programs, all grades: $25 to $75.
H. Arts and entertainment.
(1) Townwide garage sale fee: $20 per household.
(2) Art in the Park: $20 per space.
I. Halloween.
(1) Haunted house: $5 to $20 per person.
§ 119-9 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 119-9
111:228
ARTICLE IV
Fire Inspection Reports and Pictures25
[Adopted 1-19-2010 by Ord. No. 1001-10]
§ 119-10. Fee.
Anyone requesting a copy of any fire inspection report and/or pictures shall
pay a fee to the Borough of $30.
25.Editor's Note: Former Art. IV, Fees for Use of Borough Facilities, adopted 2-18-2003 by
Ord. No. 814-03, was repealed 5-16-2005 by Ord. No. 883-05.
§ 119-10 CURFEW § 119-10
111:229

ARTICLE V
Environmental Commission — Community Garden Fees
[Adopted 5-21-2018 by Ord. No. 1127-18]
§ 119-11. Plot fee.
Plot Fee
Twelve feet by 10 feet $25
§ 119-11 CURFEW § 119-11
111:231
Chapter 120
FERTILIZER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 97.
Soil removal — See Ch. 205.
Storm sewers — See Ch. 212.
Stormwater control — See Ch. 213.
Trees — See Ch. 234.
Yard waste — See Ch. 250.
Weed control — See Ch. 306.
§ 120-1. Definitions; word usage.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrase, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
BUFFER — The land area, 25 feet in width, adjacent to any water body.
COMMERCIAL FARM — A farm management unit producing agricultural or
horticultural products worth $2,500 or more annually.
FERTILIZER — A fertilizer material, mixed fertilizer or any other substance
containing one or more recognized plant nutrients, which is used for its
plant nutrient content, which is designed for use or claimed to have value in
promoting plant growth, and which is sold, offered for sale or intended for
sale.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer of
material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water. This term shall
be used to include any highway, street, sidewalk, parking lot, driveway or
other material that prevents infiltration of water into the soil.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PHOSPHORUS FERTILIZER — Any fertilizer that contains phosphorus,
expressed as P2O5, with guaranteed analysis of greater than zero; except
that it shall not be considered to include animal (including human) or
vegetable manures, agricultural liming minerals, or wood ashes that have
not been amended to increase their nutrient content.
SOILS TEST — A technical analysis of soil conducted by an accredited
soil-testing laboratory following the protocol for such a test established by
Rutgers Cooperative Research and Extension.
§ 119-11 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 120-1
111:232
WATER BODY — A surface water feature, such as a lake, river, stream,
creek, pond, lagoon, bay or estuary.
§ 120-2. Prohibited conduct.
No person may do any of the following:
§ 120-3. Phosphorus fertilizer application.
No person may do the following:
§ 120-4. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Police Department and the
Department of Public Works of the Borough of Old Tappan.
A. Apply fertilizer when a runoff-producing rainfall is occurring or
predicted and/or when soils are saturated and a potential for fertilizer
movement off site exists.
B. Apply fertilizer to an impervious surface. Fertilizer inadvertently
applied to an impervious surface must be swept or blown back into the
target surface or returned to either its original or another appropriate
container for reuse.
C. Apply fertilizer within the buffer of any water body.
D. Apply fertilizer prior to March 1 and after October 31 of any year.
A. Apply phosphorus fertilizer in outdoor areas except as demonstrated to
be needed for the specific soils and target vegetation in accordance
with a soil test and the associated annual fertilizer recommendation
issued by Rutgers Cooperative Research and Extension.
B. Exceptions:
(1) Application of phosphorus fertilizer needed for:
(a) Establishing vegetation for the first time, such as after land
disturbance, provided the application is in accordance with the
requirements established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq. and implementing rules.
(b) Reestablished or repairing a turf area.
(2) Application of phosphorus fertilizer that delivers liquid or granular
fertilizer under the soils surface, directly to the feeder roots.
(3) Application of phosphorus fertilizer to residential container
plantings, flowerbeds or vegetable gardens.
§ 120-1 CURFEW § 120-5
111:233
§ 120-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) found to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall
be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.
Chapter 122
FILLING STATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Storage of fuel oil — See Ch. 138. Licensing — See Ch. 158.
§ 122-1. Definition.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FILLING STATION — Any building, structure, or premises, enclosure or
other place within the borough where a container or containers, tank or
tanks, whether portable or stationary, and containing either carbon
bisulphite, gasoline, naphtha, benzole, hydrocarbon (gas drips), liquefied
petroleum gas, acetone, kerosene, turpentine, or other inflammable liquids,
having a flash point below 165º F., are kept or located for the purpose
of selling, offering for sale, or distributing any such liquids from such
containers, tank or tanks, provided that the provisions of this chapter shall
not apply to any place where such inflammable liquids are kept or sold for
medicinal or household purposes.
§ 122-2. License required.
No person shall manage, conduct, operate or carry on the business of a
filling station without first having obtained a license therefor, as hereinafter
provided. All gasoline pumps, tanks or other containers for which permits
or licenses have been heretofore granted shall be and become subject to
the terms of this chapter and amendments thereto, and persons to whom
licenses have been granted shall forthwith apply for a license under the
terms and provisions of this chapter.
§ 122-3. Transfer of license.
No license granted under the provisions of this chapter shall be assigned
or transferred to any other person, nor shall any such license authorize any
person other than the licensee named therein to do business or act under
such license, except after written application similar to the application for
license and approval in writing by the Borough Council.
§ 120-5 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 122-4
122:234
§ 122-4. Change of location.
No license issued under the provision of this chapter shall authorize the
maintenance of the business of a filling station at any but the location
specified therein.
§ 122-5. License application information.
All applications for licenses shall contain the following information:
§ 122-6. Review of application; issuance of license.
The license application shall be reviewed by the Building Inspector and an
officer of the Fire Prevention Bureau. The former official shall certify on
the application as to its compliance with municipal regulations regarding
zoning, building and other ordinances, and the latter officer shall certify
as to its compliance with the municipal fire prevention regulations. An
applicant whose petition for a license has been rejected by one or both of
these officials may appeal to the Borough Council, which may reverse the
rejection by approving the application if the facts disclosed at the appeal
hearing reveal compliance with the municipal ordinances and regulations.
Following approval of the application, the license shall be issued by the
Borough Clerk.
§ 122-7. Fees; applications for renewal.
A. Specification of the location of the building and premises.
B. The written consent of the owner or owners of the land whereon such
station is proposed to be built or operated.
C. A statement of the size of the tank or tanks and the quantity of gasoline
to be stored therein.
D. The type and construction of the tank or tanks and the material of which
the tank or tanks are to be constructed.
E. The minimum depth of the top of the tank or tanks below the ground
where the tank is placed.
F. The method of extracting gasoline from the tank.
G. A statement of the dimensions of the building and the material, in
relation to fireproof qualities, to be used.
A. No license shall be granted except upon payment of a license fee at the
annual rate of $25 per pump, payable on January 1 of each year, with
application indicating the number of pumps on the premises and other
details as described in § 122-5. [Amended 5-17-2004 by Ord. No.
850-04]
B. Applications for renewals shall be available at the office of the Borough
Clerk.
§ 122-4 FILLING STATIONS § 122-8
122:235
§ 122-8. Restrictions on location near certain buildings.
These restrictions are included in the provisions of Chapter 255, Zoning.
§ 122-9. Driveway and approach restrictions.
The following restrictions shall be observed in reviewing applications for
licenses which shall be granted contingent upon their observance by the
applicant:
§ 122-10. Setback restrictions.
No gas tank or filling station shall be constructed on the curb of any street
in the borough. Any further construction of a tank or filling station shall
be at such distance from the curbline of the street as to require any one
procuring gas or oil from such tank or station to leave the street and enter
upon the property where the gas tank or station is erected.
§ 122-11. Construction of tanks.
A. Driveways into the plot, on which the station is to be maintained, shall
possess a maximum width of 20 feet.
B. Adjacent building lines shall be approached not nearer than 2 1/2 feet
by any driveway.
A. Tanks shall be riveted, welded or brazed, and shall be soldered, caulked
or otherwise made tight in a mechanical and workmanlike manner and,
if to be used with a pressure discharge system, shall safely sustain a
hydrostatic test at least double the pressure to which the tank may be
subjected. Tanks shall be covered with asphaltum or other nonrusting
paint or coating. All pipe connections shall be made through flanges or
metal reinforcements securely riveted, welded or bolted to the tank and
shall be made thoroughly tight. Tanks shall be constructed entirely of
metal, including top, sides and bottom; all openings shall be gastight,
except breather vents, which shall be screened.
B. Not more than 25 gallons of gasoline, except such quantities as may be
contained in tanks or cars, known as rolling tanks, shall be permitted in
any public place.
C. All gasoline, in excess of the amount above specified, shall be kept in
tanks of approved design, buried so that the tops of the tanks shall be at
least three feet below the surface of the ground. Tanks to be buried in
such locations as may be approved by the Fire Prevention Bureau not
less than six feet from any building except upon special permission in
writing, but no tanks shall be permitted under any shed or building.
D. All such underground tanks are to rest upon a bed or cradle of concrete
at least six inches thick and all such underground tanks are to be
covered by a concrete pad at least six inches thick at the ground
surface. No individual tank of a capacity greater than 5,000 gallons
§ 122-8 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 122-11
122:236
§ 122-12. Gasoline gauging or vending devices.
§ 122-13. Fire prevention measures.
shall be buried. Two or more tanks may be installed; however, the total
gallonage of such tanks may not exceed 20,000 gallons. Separate tanks
may be connected by pipes if such tanks are separated by a wall of
concrete not less than two feet in thickness or a wall of earth not less
than four feet in thickness.
A. All gasoline gauging or vending devices shall be of approved type and
substantially secured to a concrete or masonry foundation suitably
located and of proper design and dimensions normally to prevent any
portion of a motor vehicle from colliding with the device.
B. Systems wherein continuous pressure is maintained on the gasoline
storage tank in connection with gasoline gauging or vending devices
shall be prohibited.
C. The use of aboveground gasoline storage tanks in connection with
gasoline gauging or vending devices shall be prohibited.
D. Devices which discharge by gravity shall be so designed that it is
impossible to retain in the gauging compartment materially more than
10 gallons of liquid, and so that it is not possible to lock the device
without draining the gauging compartment.
A. Provision shall be made by grading driveway, raising door sills, or some
equally effective means, to prevent gasoline spills from flowing into the
interior of station buildings.
B. Electric motors and other spark-emitting devices, when provided, shall
be installed in a well-ventilated room where no flammable liquids are
stored or handled unless such devices are approved by the Chief of the
Fire Department for use in explosive atmosphere.
C. Drainage from crankcases shall be kept in suitable closed metal
containers.
D. "No Smoking" signs and "Stop Motor While Filling" signs shall be
prominently posted to be readily visible at points where gasoline is
handled.
E. Where flammable liquids are kept, used or handled, dry sand, ashes,
chemical extinguishers or other extinguishing devices or materials shall
be directed by the Fire Prevention Bureau. A reasonable quantity of
loose noncombustible absorbents, such as sand or ashes, shall be kept
convenient for use in case of oil leakage or overflow.
§ 122-11 FILLING STATIONS § 122-14
122:237
§ 122-14. Inspections.
Each filling station shall be conducted and maintained in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter. Each filling station shall be inspected at least
three times every year by an officer of the Fire Prevention Bureau. It shall
be the duty of the person making such inspection to see that the premises
are maintained in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and other
ordinances of the borough, to see that there is no dangerous accumulation
of waste or other combustible material on the premises and to report to the
Fire Prevention Bureau any violation which may be discovered during such
inspection.
§ 122-15. Revocation of license.
Any license issued shall be revocable by the Borough Council after hearing
and good cause shown, upon 15 days' notice in writing to be given the
licensee either by serving such notice upon him personally, or his surety, or
by leaving it at the place of business of such licensee.
§ 122-16. Exception.
The provisions as to location, restrictions as to plot, setback from street,
and pump and tank installation shall not apply to any filling station in
operation prior to February 25, 1957.
§ 122-17. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-7-2004 by Ord. No.
859-04]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, pay a penalty of not more than $100 for each violation, and in
default of payment be imprisoned for not more than 10 days in the county
jail, in the discretion of the court.
Chapter 125
FILMING
§ 125-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FILMING — The taking of still or motion pictures, either on film or
videotape or similar recording medium, for commercial or educational
purposes intended for viewing on television, in theaters or for institutional
uses. The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to include the
filming of news stories within the Borough of Old Tappan.
MAJOR MOTION PICTURE —
Any film which is financed and/or distributed by a major motion picture
studio, including but not limited to the following:
A.
§ 122-14 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 125-1
125:238
PUBLIC LANDS — Any and every public street, highway, sidewalk, square,
public park or playground or any other public place within the borough
which is within the jurisdiction and control of the Borough of Old Tappan.
TELEVISION SERIES — A series of programs or shows to be aired on
television by any television station or studio.[Added by Ord. No. 730-00]
§ 125-2. Permit required.
§ 125-3. Issuance of permits.
(1) Universal Pictures;
Warner Brothers, including New Line Cinema, Castle Rock Cinema
and Turner Production Company;
(2)
(3) Paramount;
(4) 20th Century Fox;
(5) Columbia/Tri-Star;
(6) Disney; and
(7) MGM — United Artists; or
B. Any film for which the budget is at least $5,000,000.
A. No person or organization shall film or permit filming within the
Borough of Old Tappan without first having obtained a permit from the
Borough Clerk, which permit shall set forth the approved location of
such filming and the approved duration of such filming by specific
reference to day or dates. No permit shall authorize filming for more
than three consecutive days in any one location, and in no event shall
filming at one location within the borough exceed a total of six days in
any one calendar year, regardless of the number of permits utilized in
reaching this six-day maximum. This six-day limitation may be extended
only if the filming requested constitutes a major motion picture or
television series. Said permit must be readily available for inspection by
borough officials at all times at the site of the filming. [Amended by
Ord. No. 730-00]
B. All permits shall be applied for from the Borough Clerk during normal
business hours. Applications for such permits shall be in a form
approved by the Borough Clerk and be accompanied by a permit fee in
the amount set forth hereinbelow.
C. If a permit is issued and, due to inclement weather or other good cause,
filming does not in fact take place on the dates specified, the Borough
Clerk may, at the request of the applicant, issue a new permit for
filming on other dates subject to full compliance with all other
provisions of this chapter. No additional fee shall be paid for this
permit.
§ 125-1 FILMING § 125-3
125:239
A. No permit will be issued by the Borough Clerk unless applied for at
least five days prior to the requested shooting date; provided, however,
that the Borough Clerk may waive the five-day period if, in the Borough
Clerk's judgment, the applicant has obtained all related approvals and
adjacent property owners or tenants do not need to be notified.
B. No permit shall be issued for filming upon public lands unless the
applicant shall provide the borough with satisfactory proof of the
following:
(1) Certificate of insurance specifically naming the Borough of Old
Tappan as an additional insured, providing general liability, bodily
injury and property damage coverage with minimum limits of
liability not less than $1,000,000 combined single limit. Said
certificate shall state that "the issuing company shall mail 30 days'
written notice to the certificate holder named, certified mail return
receipt."
(2) An agreement, in writing, whereby the applicant agrees to
indemnify and save harmless the Borough of Old Tappan from any
and all liability, expense, claim or damages resulting from the use
of public lands.
(3) The posting of a cash or surety bond of $500 in favor of the borough
to insure that the location utilized will be left after filming in a
satisfactory condition, free of debris, rubbish and equipment, and
that due observance of all ordinances, laws and regulations will be
followed. Within seven days of the completion of the filming, the
borough will return the bond if there has been no damage to public
property or public expense caused by the filming.
(4) The hiring of an off-duty Old Tappan police officer for the times
indicated on the permit.
C. The holder of the permit shall take all reasonable steps to minimize
interference with the passage of pedestrians and traffic over public
lands and shall comply with all lawful directives issued by the Old
Tappan Police Department with respect thereto.
D. The holder of a permit shall conduct filming in such a manner as to
minimize the inconvenience or discomfort to adjoining property owners
attributable to such filming and shall, to the extent practicable, abate
noise and park vehicles associated with such filming off the public
streets. The holder shall avoid any interference with previously
scheduled activities upon public lands and limit, to the extent possible,
any interference with normal public activities on such public lands.
Where the applicant's production activity, by reason of location or
otherwise, will directly involve and/or affect any businesses, merchants
or residents, these parties shall be given written notice of the filming at
least three days prior to the requested shooting date and be informed
that objections may be filed with the Borough Clerk, said objections to
form a part of applicant's application and be considered in the review of
§ 125-3 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 125-3
125:240
the same. Proof of service of notification to adjacent owners shall
be submitted to the Borough Clerk within two days of the requested
shooting date.
E. Filming in residential zones shall be permitted Monday through Friday
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., provided that all requests
for night scenes shall be approved in the permit to be granted in
accordance with the provisions of Subsection H hereinbelow. The setup,
production and breakdown required by all filming shall be included in
the hours as set forth herein.
F. The Borough Clerk may refuse to issue a permit whenever the Borough
Clerk determines, on the basis of objective facts and after a review of
the application and a report thereon by the Police Department and by
other borough agencies involved with the proposed filming site, that
filming at the location and/or the time set forth in the application would
violate any law or ordinance or would unreasonably interfere with the
use and enjoyment of adjoining properties, unreasonably impede the
free flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic or otherwise endanger the
public's health, safety or welfare. Further, the borough reserves the
right to require one or more on-site patrolmen in situations where the
proposed production may impede the proper flow of traffic, the cost of
said patrolman to be borne by the applicant as a cost of production.
Where existing electrical power lines are to be utilized by the
production, an on-site licensed electrician may be similarly required if
the production company does not have a licensed electrician on staff.
G. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Borough Clerk denying or
revoking a permit or a person requesting relief pursuant to Subsection
F may appeal to the Mayor and Council. A written notice of appeal
setting forth the reasons for the appeal shall be filed with the Borough
Clerk. An appeal from the decision of the Borough Clerk shall be filed
within 10 days of the Borough Clerk's decision. The Mayor and Council
shall set the matter down for a hearing within 30 days of the day on
which the notice of appeal was filed. The decision of the Mayor and
Council shall be in the form of a resolution supporting or reversing the
decision of the Borough Clerk at the first regularly scheduled public
meeting of the Mayor and Council after the hearing on the appeal,
unless the appellant agrees in writing to a later date for the decision.
H. The Borough Clerk may authorize filming other than during the hours
herein described. In determining whether to allow an extension of time
under this subsection, the Borough Clerk shall consider the following
factors:
(1) Traffic congestion at the location caused by vehicles to be parked
on the public streets;
(2) Applicant's ability to remove film-related vehicles off the public
streets;
§ 125-3 FILMING § 125-3
125:241
§ 125-4. Fees. [Amended by Ord. No. 730-00]
The schedule of fees for the issuance of permits authorized by this chapter
is as follows:
(3) When the applicant is requesting restrictions on the use of public
streets or public parking during the course of the filming;
(4) Nature of the film shoot itself, e.g., indoor or outdoors, day or
night; and
(5) Prior experience of the film company/applicant with the borough, if
any.
I. Copies of the approved permit shall be sent to the Police and Fire
Departments before filming takes place and to the New Jersey Film
Commission. The applicant shall permit the Fire Prevention Bureau or
other borough inspectors to inspect the site and the equipment to be
used. The applicant shall comply with all safety instructions issued by
the Fire Prevention Bureau or other borough inspectors.
J. In addition to any other fees or costs mentioned in this chapter, the
applicant shall reimburse the borough for any lost revenue that the
borough was prevented from earning because of filming.
K. Special regulations for major motion pictures and television series.
[Amended by Ord. No. 730-00]
(1) When filming is requested with respect to a major motion picture or
television series, the duration of such filming shall not exceed six
consecutive days in duration.
(2) Any days necessary to be used for setup and preparation for a
major motion picture or television series filming may, in discretion
of the Borough Clerk, be counted as a filming day where setup is
anticipated to involve one or more of the factors set forth in
Subsection H hereinabove.
A. Basic filming permit: $100. Where an applicant requests a waiver of the
provision of Subsection A of § 125-3 requiring expedited processing of
the permit application, the basic filming permit shall be $150.
[Amended 5-17-2004 by Ord. No. 850-04]
B. Daily filming fee payable in addition to the basic filming permit: $500
per day.
C. Daily filming fee payable for major motion picture or television series:
$1,500 per day.
D. Filming permit for nonprofit applicants filming for educational
purposes (no daily rate required): $25.
§ 125-3 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 125-5
125:242
§ 125-5. Violations and penalties.
Where the owner of the premises is not the applicant for a permit required
by this chapter, both the owner and the applicant shall each be liable
for violations hereof. Any persons violating this chapter or these rules
and regulations, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not
exceeding $1,000 per day or by imprisonment in the county jail for a
term not exceeding 90 days, or both. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 131
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 27, Art. II.
Alarms — See Ch. 82.
Building construction — See Ch. 100.
Filling stations — See Ch. 122.
Storage of fuel oil — See Ch. 138.
§ 131-1. Adoption of standards; definitions.
§ 131-2. Bureau of Fire Prevention.
A. Adoption; local enforcement. The New Jersey Uniform Fire Code,
consisting of the BOCA Basic/National Fire Prevention Code 1996,
including all subsequent revisions and amendments thereto, as
modified by N.J.A.C. 5:70-3.2, shall be locally enforced in the Borough of
Old Tappan.
B. Public record. Copies of the aforementioned code shall be filed in the
office of the Borough Clerk.
C. Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall
have the definitions as set forth hereinafter:
FIRE INSPECTOR — The person working under the direction of the
Fire Official/Fire Marshal who is certified by the Commissioner of
the Department of Community Affairs and appointed or designated
to enforce the Code by the appointing authority of a local enforcing
agency.
FIRE OFFICIAL/FIRE MARSHAL — The person certified by the
Commissioner of the Department of Community Affairs and appointed
or designated to direct the enforcement of the code by the appointing
authority. This term shall also include "Fire Marshal" where the Fire
Official has been appointed pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:71-3.2.
LOCAL ENFORCING AGENCY — The Bureau of Fire Prevention
established pursuant to § 131-2A hereinafter.
§ 125-5 FILMING § 131-2
125:243
A. Establishment. There is hereby established a Bureau of Fire Prevention
in the Borough of Old Tappan which shall be operated under the
supervision of the Fire Official/Fire Marshal. The New Jersey Uniform
Fire Code shall be enforced by the Bureau of Fire Prevention as herein
provided.
B. Fire Official/Fire Marshal. The Fire Official/Fire Marshal shall be in
charge of the Bureau and shall be appointed by the Mayor and Council.
C. Duties. The Bureau is hereby designated as the local enforcing agency
of the code and shall enforce the code in all buildings, structures and
premises within the established boundaries of the Borough, other than
owner-occupied one- and two-family dwellings, including the periodic
inspections of life-hazard uses on behalf of the Commissioner of
Community Affairs. The Bureau shall also collect all fees for registration
of non-life-hazard uses and permits as set forth in the code and § 131-5.
D. Appointments; term of office; removal.
(1) Fire Official/Fire Marshal. The person in direct charge of the
supervision of the Bureau shall be appointed in accordance with
the provisions of Subsection D. The Fire Official/Fire Marshal shall
meet the following qualifications in order to be appointed:
(a) He or she shall hold a valid certification as a New Jersey Fire
Official.
(b) He or she shall have at least three years' experience as a
certified fire inspector.
(2) Inspectors and employees. Such inspectors and other employees as
may be necessary to carry out the duties and responsibilities of the
Bureau shall be appointed by the Mayor and Council upon the
recommendation of the Fire Official/Fire Marshal. Any inspector
employed by the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall be certified
pursuant to the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code.
(3) Term of office. The Fire Official/Fire Marshal and all employees of
the Bureau shall be appointed for a term of two years commencing
on January 1 of the year of appointment.
(4) Removal from office.
(a) No Fire Official/Fire Marshal, paid inspector or other paid
employee shall be removed from office or employment for
political reasons or for any other cause than incapacity,
misconduct, suspension and/or revocation of certification as a
Fire Official or disobedience of the rules and regulations
established for the government of the Bureau of Fire
Prevention.
[1] Except as otherwise provided by law, no Fire Official/Fire
Marshal, paid inspector or employee shall be suspended,
§ 131-2 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 131-2
125:244
removed, fined or reduced in rank from or in office,
employment or position therein except for just causes
hereinbefore provided and then only upon a written
complaint setting forth the charge or charges against such
a paid inspector or employee. The complaint shall be filed
in the office of the Fire Official/Fire Marshal, except that
a complaint filed against the Fire Official/Fire Marshal
shall be filed in the office of the Borough Clerk. A copy of
the complaint shall be served upon the Fire Official/Fire
Marshal, paid inspector or employee charged, with notice
of a designated hearing thereon by the Mayor and Council,
which shall be not less than 15 nor more than 30 days from
the date of service of the complaint. A failure to comply
with these provisions as to the service of the complaint
shall require a dismissal of the complaint.
[2] It is the intent of this section to give every person against
whom charges for any cause may be preferred under this
section a fair trial upon the charges and every reasonable
opportunity to make his defense if he has or chooses to
make any, and in the event of failure of compliance with
any provisions of this section, such charges shall be
dismissed.
(b) The Council shall have the power of subpoena under the Seal
of the Borough and attested by the Borough Clerk to compel
the attendance of witnesses and give testimony or produce
evidence, and every person who neglects to obey such
subpoena or to give testimony or to answer questions as
required shall be subject to the penalties as provided by law.
(c) Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, whenever any
Fire Official/Fire Marshal, paid inspector or employee is
charged under the law of this state, another state or the United
States with an offense, said Fire Official/Fire Marshal, paid
inspector or employee may be suspended from performing his
duties, with pay, until the case against him is disposed of at
trial, until the complaint is dismissed or until the prosecution is
terminated, provided that, if a grand jury returns an indictment
against the Fire Official/Fire Marshal, paid inspector or
employee or the Fire Official/Fire Marshal, paid inspector or
employee is charged with an offense which is a crime of the
fourth degree or higher, or which involves moral turpitude or
dishonesty, he may be suspended from his duties, without pay,
until the case against him is disposed of at trial, until the
complaint is dismissed or until the prosecution is terminated. If
a suspended Fire Official/Fire Marshal, inspector or employee
is found not guilty at trial, the charges are dismissed or the
prosecution is terminated, the Fire Official/Fire Marshal,
inspector or employee shall be reinstated to his position and
§ 131-2 FILMING § 131-2
125:245
§ 131-3. Reports.
A report of the Bureau shall be made annually and transmitted to the Mayor
and Council. It shall contain all proceedings under the code, with such
statistics as the Fire Official/Fire Marshal may wish to include.
§ 131-4. Appeals.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-124 and N.J.S.A. 52:27D-198, any person
aggrieved by any ruling, action, or notice of the Bureau of Fire Prevention
shall have the right to appeal same to the Construction Board of Appeals
of the Borough of Old Tappan. Such an appeal shall be prosecuted in the
manner provided by N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.19 et seq.
§ 131-5. Additional required inspections and fees.
shall be entitled to recover all pay withheld during the period
of suspension subject to any disciplinary proceedings or
administrative actions.
(d) Any person desiring to make a complaint against any paid
inspector or employee of the Bureau shall make the complaint
in writing to the Fire Official/Fire Marshal. It shall be the duty
of the Fire Official/Fire Marshal to forthwith deliver the
original charges to the Borough Clerk, who in turn shall refer
such charges to the Mayor and Council for its attention and
action. Upon receipt of any charges against a paid inspector or
employee of the Bureau, the Mayor and Council shall take
whatever action is deemed necessary.
(e) In the event that a person wishes to make a charge against the
Fire Official/Fire Marshal, the charges shall be filed with the
Borough Clerk, who shall in turn transmit the same forthwith
to the Mayor and Council for its attention and action in
accordance with the provisions of this subsection.
A. In addition to the fees and inspections of life-hazard uses pursuant to
the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code, the additional inspections and fees
relative to the non-life-hazard uses as set forth hereinabove shall be
required annually. Fees shall be billed out in January and due no later
than 60 days from the issuance if the bill, with a late charge of 1/2 of the
original fee.
B. Any and all business and commercial retail or other premises for which
provision is not made for a permit under the code. The fees charged for
inspections conducted pursuant to this section shall be: [Amended
12-7-2009 by Ord. No. 996-09]
(1) Class A: up to 3,000 square feet: $65.
(2) Class B: 3,001 to 5,000 square feet: $100.
§ 131-2 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 131-5
125:246
§ 131-6. Fire lanes and fire zones; fine.
(3) Class C: 5,001 to 10,000 square feet: $180.
(4) Class D: more than 10,000 square feet: $250.
(5) Class E: multifamily units, per dwelling unit: $45.
C. The application fee for a certificate of smoke detector compliance as
required by N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.3 shall be $75. [Amended 12-7-2009 by
Ord. No. 996-09]
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish a procedure to
define fire lanes and to establish and provide adequate and safe ingress
and egress for emergency vehicles and provide certain penalties for the
unlawful parking therein.
B. Fire lanes and fire zones.
(1) Required. The Fire Official/Fire Marshal may require and designate
public or private fire lanes and fire zones as deemed necessary for
the efficient and effective operation of fire apparatus.
(2) Width. Fire lanes shall have a minimum width of 20 feet. Fire zone
size shall be determined by the Fire Official/Fire Marshal.
[Amended 12-7-2009 by Ord. No. 996-09]
C. Designation of fire lanes and fire zones.
(1) Markings. The fire lanes and zones established by Subsection B
shall be striped and lettered in yellow either "No Parking Fire
Lane" or "No Parking Fire Zone" on the paved surface. The size of
the fire lane or zone and the details of the lines and lettering shall
be determined by the Police Chief and the Fire Official/Fire
Marshal of the Borough.
(2) Posting. The fire lanes or fire zones shall be appropriately posted
with metal signs indicating "No Parking Fire Lane" or "No Parking
Fire Zone." The signs shall further indicate the size and dimensions
of the fire lanes or zones wherever deemed necessary by the Police
Chief and the Fire Official/Fire Marshal. The signs shall be of such
design, quality and lettering as required by New Jersey statutes
governing same. The Police Chief and Fire Official/Fire Marshal of
the Borough shall determine the number and placement of signs
and shall approve the design, quality and lettering.
(3) Cost. The owner of the property shall, at his/her expense, cause the
proper creation of the fire lanes or zones, including the striping,
lettering and installation of signs.
D. Parking.
§ 131-5 FILMING § 131-6
125:247
§ 131-7. Sprinkler connection lights.
Any existing red light which gives notice of a Fire Department sprinkler
connection shall be illuminated at all times.
§ 131-8. Notification of Fire Department required in certain
circumstances.
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person, firm, corporation,
owner, tenant or person responsible for a given structure or premises to fail
to immediately notify the Fire Department and immediately evacuate the
entire structure when and if the following conditions are present:
§ 131-9. Blocking and use of fire hydrants; fine.
(1) Parking prohibited. No person shall at any time park a motor
vehicle or in any other manner obstruct any driveway or area
designated as a fire lane or zone pursuant to this section.
(2) Penalties. Unless another penalty is expressly provided for by New
Jersey statutes, any person convicted of a violation of this
Subsection D shall be subject to a fine of not less than $75 nor more
than $250. In addition, the Police Department shall have the
authority to cause any vehicle found in violation of this Subsection
D to be towed and stored at the expense of the owner of the vehicle.
[Amended 9-7-2004 by Ord. No. 859-04; 12-7-2009 by Ord.
No. 996-09]
E. Enforcement. The Police Department, concurrently with the Fire
Prevention Bureau, shall have jurisdiction for enforcing this section.
A. The fire alarm is activated.
B. There is smoke in the structure.
C. An explosion has occurred.
D. There is a fire in the structure.
E. Any fire protection system (sprinklers, etc.) is activated.
F. Whenever a hazardous or flammable material is spilled, leaked or
exposed and has the potential to endanger the occupants on the
premises.
G. Upon the order of the Chief of the Fire Department or the Incident
Commander of the scene.
A. Unlawful to block. It shall be unlawful to block, obstruct, obscure, or
damage any hydrant, Fire Department connection, or hydrant locator
wands that are located on public or private streets and access lanes or
on private property. A four-foot radius from any hydrant or Fire
§ 131-6 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 131-9
125:248
§ 131-10. Violations and penalties.
Department connection must be kept clear of any objects. "Objects" are
defined as, but not limited to:
(1) Mailboxes.
(2) Vehicles.
(3) Brush or large plants.
(4) Fences or walls.
(5) Garbage.
(6) Leaf piles or other debris.
B. Use of fire hydrants. A person shall not use or operate any fire hydrant
intended for use of the Fire Department unless such person secures
written permission from United Water, the Fire Official/Fire Marshal, or
the Fire Chief. This section shall not apply to the use of such hydrants
by a person employed by United Water, the Borough of Old Tappan, the
County of Bergen, or the State of New Jersey.
C. Penalty. Unless another penalty is expressly provided for by New Jersey
statutes, any person convicted of a violation of § 131-9 shall be subject
to a fine of not less than $100. Each day that the owner, tenant or
occupant fails to satisfy the obligation of this section shall constitute a
separate violation.
A. Except for violations that are subject to the enforcement proceedings
under the Uniform Fire Code, any person who shall violate any of the
provisions of the code hereby adopted or fail to comply therewith, or
who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or
who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or
plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit
issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who
shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by a
court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein, shall
severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance,
respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not
more than $1,000 or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or
both such fine and imprisonment.
B. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the
violation or permit it to continue, and all such persons shall be required
to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable
time, and, when not otherwise specified, each 10 days that prohibited
conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense.
C. The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the
enforced removal of prohibited conditions.
§ 131-9 FILMING § 131-10
125:249
Chapter 135
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 100.
Sanitary sewers — See Ch. 198.
Soil removal — See Ch. 205.
Subdivision and site plan review — See Ch.
218.
Zoning — See Ch. 255.
§ 135-1. Statutory authorization.
This chapter is enacted in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et seq., which
delegates the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations
designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its
citizenry.
§ 135-2. Findings of fact.
§ 135-3. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
A. The flood hazard areas of the borough are subject to periodic
inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety, and general welfare.
B. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and velocities
and, when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other areas. Uses
that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise protected
from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
A. Protect human life and health;
B. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood-control projects;
C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding
and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
§ 131-10 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 135-3
135:250
§ 135-4. Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
§ 135-5. Word usage and definitions.
E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas
mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, and bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard;
F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
G. Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
H. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
A. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
B. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
C. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers which help accommodate or channel
floodwaters;
D. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage; and
E. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
A. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in
common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPEAL — A request for a review of the Construction Official's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a
variance.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain
within a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of
flooding in any given year.
§ 135-3 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 135-5
135:251
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is part of the structural support of the
building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse
under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the
elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures,
mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations, or storage of equipment or materials located within the
area of special flood hazard.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A non-basement building built, in the case of
a building in an area of special flood hazard, to have the top of the
elevated floor or, in the case of a building in a coastal high hazard
area, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member
of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means of
piling, columns (post and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of
the water and adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural
integrity of the building during a flood up to the magnitude of the
base flood. In an area of special flood hazard, "elevated building"
also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation
perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded
movement of floodwaters.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which
the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided in
which the Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles,
as well as the Flood Boundary/Floodway Map and the water surface
elevation of the base flood.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial
or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow
of inland or tidal waters and/or the unusual and rapid accumulation or
runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special
purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance
and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power.
The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination
thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage
prevention and reduction.
§ 135-5 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 135-5
135:252
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the
base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
more than 0.2 foot.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure usable
solely for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an
area other than a basement is not considered a building's lowest floor
provided that such enclosure is not built so to render the structure in
violation of other applicable non-elevation design requirements.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain regulation
adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to
such structures.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvements and
means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual
start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit
date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or
footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any
work beyond the stage of excavation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings or piers, or foundations or the
erection of temporary forms, nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds, not occupied
as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
(1)
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
(2)
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by
the Secretary of the Interior; or
(3)
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either by an approved state program as determined by the
Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior
in states without approved programs.
(4)
§ 135-5 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 135-5
135:253
§ 135-6. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the borough.
§ 135-7. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
[Amended 9-19-2005 by Ord. No. 892-05]
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance
Administration in a scientific and engineering report titled "Flood Insurance
Study of Bergen County," with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map
Panels 94, 111, 113, 114, 182, and 201 of 332, dated September 30, 2005,
are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter.
The Flood Insurance Study is on file with the Construction Official.
§ 135-8. Violations and penalties.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration
of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether
or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, or a gas or liquid storage
tank, that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its beforedamaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of
the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which
exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter
which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be
prohibited by this chapter.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code
enforcement officer and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
(1)
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an
historic structure.
(2)
§ 135-5 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 135-8
135:254
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined
not more than $500 or imprisoned for not more than 10 days, or both, for
each violation and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in
the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the borough from taking
such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
§ 135-9. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
and any other ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 135-10. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
§ 135-11. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
§ 135-12. Development permit.
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development
begins within any area of special flood hazard established in § 135-7.
Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by
the Borough Clerk and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate
drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations
of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of
materials, and drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing.
Specifically, the following information is required:
A. Considered as minimum requirements;
B. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
A. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural
causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of
special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free
from flooding or flood damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the borough, any
officer or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance Administration for
any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any
administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 135-8 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 135-12
135:255
§ 135-13. Administration.
The Construction Official is hereby appointed to administer and implement
this chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in
accordance with its provisions.
§ 135-14. Duties of Construction Official.
Duties of the Construction Official shall include, but not be limited to:
A. Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all structures;
B. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been
floodproofed;
C. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that
floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the
floodproofing criteria in § 135-16B(2); and
D. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
A. Permit review. The Construction Official shall:
(1) Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
(2) Review all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
(3) Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway and assure that the
encroachment provisions of § 135-16C(1) are met.
B. Use of other base flood and floodway data. When base flood elevation
and floodway data has not been provided in accordance with § 135-7,
the Construction Official shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any
base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or
other source, in order to administer § 135-16B.
C. Information to be obtained and maintained. The Construction Official
shall:
(1) Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures and whether or not the structure
contains a basement.
(2) For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(a) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level); and
§ 135-12 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 135-14
135:256
§ 135-15. Variance procedure.
(b) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in
§ 135-12C.
(3) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
D. Alteration of watercourses. The Construction Official shall:
(1) Notify adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency
prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit
evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance
Administration.
(2) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying
capacity is not diminished.
E. Interpretation of FIRM boundaries. The Construction Official shall
make interpretations, where needed, as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where
there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual
field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary
shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as
provided in § 135-15.
A. Appeal to Mayor and Council.
(1) The Mayor and Council shall hear and decide appeals and requests
for variances from the requirements of this chapter.
(2) The Mayor and Council shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the Construction Official in the
enforcement or administration of this chapter.
(3) Those aggrieved by the decision of the Mayor and Council, or any
taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of New
Jersey.
(4) In passing upon such applications, the Mayor and Council shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
§ 135-14 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 135-15
135:257
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan and floodplain management program of that area;
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
(k) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and
streets and bridges.
(5) Upon consideration of the factors of Subsection D(4) of this section,
the Mayor and Council may attach such conditions to the granting
of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this
chapter.
(6) The Borough Clerk shall maintain the records of all appeal actions,
including technical information, and report any variances to the
Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
B. Conditions for variances.
(1) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or
less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, provided the
items in Subsection A(4)(a) through (j) have been fully considered.
As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical
justification required for issuing the variance increases.
(2) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
§ 135-15 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 135-15
135:258
§ 135-16. Provisions for flood hazard reduction.
designation as an historic structure and the variance is the
minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design
of the structure.
(3) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
(4) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
(5) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
or extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud
on or victimization of the public as identified in Subsection A(4)
or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(6) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
A. General standards. In all areas of special flood hazard the following
standards are required:
(1) Anchoring. All new construction and substantial improvements
shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement of the structure.
(2) Construction materials and methods.
(a) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to
flood damage.
(b) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
(3) Utilities.
§ 135-15 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 135-16
135:259
(a) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters
into the system;
(b) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters
into the systems and discharge from the systems into
floodwaters;
(c) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during
flooding; and
(d) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
(4) Subdivision proposals.
(a) All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage;
(b) All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems
located and constructed to minimize flood damage;
(c) All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage
provided to reduce exposure to flood damage; and
(d) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed developments which contain at
least 50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).
(5) Enclosure openings. For all new construction and substantial
improvements, fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are
usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in
an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding
shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces
on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters.
Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or
exceed the following minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding shall be provided.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
§ 135-16 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 135-16
135:260
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
covering or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
B. Specific standards. In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood
elevation data has been provided as set forth in § 135-7 or in § 135-14B,
the following standards are required:
(1) Residential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest
floor, including basement, elevated to or above base flood
elevation.
(2) Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential
structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated to the level of the base flood elevation or:
(a) Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure
is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water;
(b) Have structural components capable of restricting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
(c) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the design and methods of construction are in accordance
with accepted standards of practice for meeting the applicable
provisions of this subsection. Such certification shall be
provided to the official as set forth in § 135-14C(2).
C. Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in
§ 135-7 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an
extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry
debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following
provisions apply:
(1) Encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development, shall be prohibited unless a
technical evaluation demonstrates that encroachment shall not
result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the
base flood discharge.
(2) If Subsection C(1) is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of this § 135-16.
(3) In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation
data has been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined
with all other existing and anticipated development, shall not
§ 135-16 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 135-16
135:261
Chapter 138
FUEL OIL, STORAGE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licensing — See Ch. 158. Fees for installation of fuel storage
tanks — See Ch. 100.
§ 138-1. Licenses required.
No person shall construct or maintain commercial fuel oil tanks within the
limits of the borough without obtaining a license therefor.
§ 138-2. Issuance of license.
A license may be issued by the Borough Clerk after due application on forms
provided and upon written approval of the Chief of the Fire Department.
§ 138-3. Fee. [Amended 5-17-2004 by Ord. No. 850-04]
The annual license fee shall be $75 for each storage tank up to a capacity of
10,000 gallons. An additional fee of $10 will be required for each additional
1,000 gallons of capacity.
§ 138-4. Adoption of standards by reference.
All of the provision of the chapter entitled, "Storage Tanks," of Part 9,
entitled "Flammable Liquids" of the suggested Fire Prevention Ordinance
recommended by the National Board of Fire Underwriters are hereby
incorporated in this chapter as if set forth at length.
§ 138-5. Purpose.
This chapter is enacted for the purpose of regulation and the production of
revenue.
Chapter 142
GAMES OF CHANCE
§ 142-1. Conduct of games on Sunday.
Games of chance, as defined in the Raffles Licensing Law, N.J.S.A. 5:8-50 et
seq., and in N.J.A.C. 47:13, may hereafter be conducted on Sunday in the
increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than 2/
10 of a foot at any point.
§ 135-16 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 142-1
138:262
Borough by any organization holding a valid license to do so duly issued by
the Borough pursuant to and in compliance with such statutes and code.
§ 142-2. Raffle and bingo licensing. [Added 11-20-2006 by Ord. No.
923-06]
The Borough Clerk is hereby authorized to approve the granting of raffle
and bingo licenses to be held in the Borough.
Chapter 146
GOLF COURSE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Golf Course Commission — See Ch. 9, Art. V. Golf course fees — See Ch. 119, Art. II.
§ 146-1. Trespassing prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon any portion of the Old
Tappan Municipal Golf Course when the golf course has been closed by the
Golf Course Commission.
§ 146-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates the provisions of § 146-1 shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to a fine of $100.
Chapter 151
HUNTING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Weapons in parks — See Ch. 179.
§ 151-1. Use of firearms prohibited.
Except as otherwise provided by law, the use of firearms anywhere in the
borough is hereby prohibited.
§ 151-2. Hunting of birds and fowl prohibited.
No person shall at any time, within the boundaries of the borough, hunt for,
take, kill or pursue with a gun or any firearms of any kind or character or
with a bow and arrow, any game, wild bird, animal or fowl.
§ 142-1 GOLF COURSE § 151-3
146:263
§ 151-3. Discharge of firearms for hunting purposes prohibited.
No person shall, for the purpose of hunting, taking or killing any game,
wild bird, animal or fowl, discharge any firearm at any place within the
boundaries of the borough.
§ 151-4. Skeet shooting and target practice permits.
No person shall, within the boundaries of the borough, engage in skeet
shooting, trap shooting, turkey shooting, etc., or other forms of target
practice with firearms unless upon application first being made to the
Mayor and Borough Council which may permit the shooting in areas
designated by it.
§ 151-5. Exception for law enforcement and military personnel.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to regulate the use of firearms
by members of a law enforcement body or the military forces of the State
of New Jersey or the United States when in the lawful discharge of their
duties.
Chapter 158
LICENSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 85, Art. II.
Amusements — See Ch. 88.
Filling stations — See Ch. 122.
Storage of fuel oil — See Ch. 138.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 182.
Precious metals and gems — See Ch. 188.
Trailer camps — See Ch. 231.
§ 158-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a uniform set of procedures for
administering the issuance, renewal and revocation of all licenses issued
by the municipality, except alcoholic beverage licenses, dog licenses, and
taxicab licenses.26
§ 158-2. Application information.
All applications for licenses shall be accompanied by the required fee and
shall be made to the Borough Clerk, upon form provided by him, and shall
be sworn and subscribed to by the applicant, and shall contain the following
information:
26.Editor's Note: See Ch. 85, Alcoholic Beverages, Art. I, Alcoholic Beverage Control; Ch. 91,
Animals, Art. II, Licensing of Dogs and Cats.
§ 151-3 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 158-2
158:264
§ 158-3. Investigation; issuance of license; appeals.
A. Name and permanent and local address of the applicant. If the
applicant is a corporation, the name and address of its registered agent.
If the applicant is not the owner, lessee or operator of the premises
where the licensed activity is to be carried on, then the applicant shall
supply the name and address of the owner, lessee or operator of such
premises, and the application shall also be signed by such owner, lessee
or operator.
B. Name under which the place of business is being conducted or
operated, and if the licensed activity is to be carried on at a fixed
location, the address and a description of the premises.
C. If a vehicle is to be used, its description including the license number.
D. The days of the week and the hours of the day during which the licensed
activity will be conducted.
E. A description of the nature of the business and the goods, property or
services to be sold or supplied.
F. A statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted of any
crime or the violation of any municipal ordinance, other than traffic
offenses, and, if so, the date and place of conviction, the nature of the
offense, and the punishment or penalty imposed.
G. Appropriate evidence as to the good character and business
responsibility of the applicant so that an investigator may properly
evaluate his character and responsibility.
H. The applicant shall be fingerprinted if the Chief of Police determines
that fingerprints are necessary for proper identification. Fingerprint
records shall be immediately processed for classification and
identification.
I. Applications by partnerships shall be signed by all partners with the
information required by this section supplied in detail as to each
partner, and applications of corporations shall have attached individual
statements containing all of the information required by this section
relating to each employee or agent who shall engage in the licensed
activity, and shall be signed by each employee or agent.
J. Any other information which the Mayor and Council may deem
reasonably necessary for the full protection of the interest of the public
in the application.
A. Each application shall be referred to the Chief of Police or a police
officer designated by him, who shall immediately institute whatever
investigation of the applicant's business responsibility, moral character
and ability to properly conduct the licensed activity as he considers
necessary for the protection of the public. He shall communicate his
§ 158-2 LICENSING § 158-3
158:265
§ 158-4. Contents of license.
Licenses shall be in a form which the Council shall prescribe by resolution
and shall contain the following information:
§ 158-5. Records of licenses issued.
The Borough Clerk shall keep a record of all licenses issued under this
chapter. The record shall be in a form prescribed by resolution of the
Council and shall contain the same information as is required by § 158-4 to
be contained in the license. It shall also indicate the amount of the fee paid
for the licenses, the date upon which payment was received, the date of the
issuance of the license, whether the license is a new license or a renewal,
and any other information which the Mayor and Council may, by resolution,
require.
findings in writing to the Borough Clerk within a reasonable time after
the application has been filed.
B. If the investigator decides that the applicant's character, ability or
business responsibility are unsatisfactory, or the products, services or
activity are not free from fraud, he shall disapprove of the application in
writing, with appropriate explanatory remarks, and the Clerk shall
refuse to issue the license and shall so notify the applicant. Otherwise,
the Borough Clerk shall issue the license immediately, provided the
required license fees have been paid except in cases where approval of
the Mayor and Council is required.
C. In the case of an application for a solicitors, peddlers, or canvassers
license, the license may be issued immediately subject to the
investigation.
D. In the event of the refusal of the issuance of a license, the applicant may
appeal to the Council for hearing. The appeal must be filed, in writing,
with the Borough Clerk within 14 days after notification of the refusal.
The Council shall hold its hearing within 10 days thereafter. The
decision of the Council shall be final.
A. The name and address of the licensee.
B. The number and type of the license and the nature of the licensed
activity.
C. The address at which the licensed activity is conducted, if the activity is
carried on at a fixed location.
D. If the licensed activity is conducted from a vehicle, the make, model and
license number of the vehicle.
E. The expiration date of the license.
F. Any other appropriate information which the Mayor and Council may,
by resolution, require.
§ 158-3 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 158-6
158:266
§ 158-6. Display of license.
When the licensed activity is conducted at a fixed location, or from a vehicle,
the license shall be prominently displayed at the location or on the vehicle.
In all other cases the licensee shall have the license in his possession at
all times and shall display it upon the request of any police officer or any
person with whom he is doing business.
§ 158-7. Transfer of license; transfer fee.
Every license shall apply only to the person to whom it was issued and shall
not be transferable to another person. Licenses may be transferred from
place to place, in cases where the licensed activity is conducted at a fixed
location, but only with the approval, by resolution, of the Council. The fee
for the transfer of a license from place to place shall be $5.
§ 158-8. Expiration date; renewal; proration of fees.
§ 158-9. License revocation.
A. Except where expressly provided otherwise, all licenses shall expire on
December 31 of the year of issue at 12:00 midnight local time.
Applications for the renewal of licenses shall be made not later than
December 1 of the year of issue.
B. When an application for a license is made during the course of any
calendar year, the fee shall be prorated to the nearest month. Any
period of time greater than 1/2 a month shall be considered as a full
month for this purpose.
A. Any license or permit issued by the borough may be revoked by the
Council after notice and a hearing for any of the following causes:
(1) Fraud or misrepresentation in any application for a permit or
license.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or other dishonesty in the conduct of the
licensed activity.
(3) A violation of any provision of the Code of the Borough of Old
Tappan.
(4) Conviction of the licensee for any felony or high misdemeanor or a
misdemeanor or disorderly person's offense involving moral
turpitude.
(5) Conduct of the licensed activity whether by the licensee himself or
his agents or employees in an unlawful manner or in a manner that
constitutes a breach of the peace or a menace to the public health,
safety or general welfare.
B. Whenever a license has been issued immediately upon an application,
pending the results of the investigation provided for by this chapter, the
§ 158-6 LICENSING § 158-9
158:267
§ 158-10. Notice of hearing for revocation of license.
Notice of a hearing for the revocation of a license or permit shall be given
in writing by the Borough Clerk. The notice shall specifically set forth the
grounds upon which the proposed revocation is based and the time and
place of the hearing. It shall be served by mailing a copy to the licensee at
his last known address by certified mail, return receipt requested, at least
five days prior to the date set for hearing.
§ 158-11. Hearing; determination.
At the hearing the licensee shall have the right to appear and be heard, to
be represented by an attorney, to present witnesses in his own behalf, to
cross-examine opposing witnesses and to have a permanent record made of
the proceedings at his own expense. The Council shall revoke or suspend
the license if it is satisfied by a preponderance of the evidence that the
licensee is guilty of the acts charged.
§ 158-12. Reinstatement of revoked licenses.
The Council may issue another license to a person whose license has been
revoked or denied as provided in this chapter if after hearing it is satisfied
by clear and convincing evidence that the acts which led to the revocation
or denial will not occur again; otherwise, no person whose license has been
revoked or denied, nor any person acting for him/her, directly or indirectly,
shall be issued another license to carry on the same activity.
§ 158-13. Power to make rules and regulations.
The Council may, by resolution, make rules and regulations which interpret
or amplify any provisions of this chapter or for the purpose of administering
the provisions of this chapter or making them more effective. No regulation
shall be inconsistent with or alter or amend any provisions of this chapter,
and no regulation shall impose any requirement which is in addition to or
greater than the requirements that are expressly or by implication imposed
by any provisions of this chapter.
§ 158-14. Issuance; payment of property tax.
No license or permit shall be issued with respect to any business or activity,
or to any property where the business or activity for which the license
or permit is sought is situated, unless there shall have first been paid
all delinquent property taxes and assessments for which such property is
liable.
§ 158-15. Suspension for nonpayment of property tax.
license may be summarily revoked if the result of the investigation
would have resulted in denial of the application.
§ 158-9 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 158-15
158:268
§ 158-16. Reinstatement upon payment of tax.
The license or permit shall be restored upon payment of the delinquent
tax or assessment, together with interest accrued and penalties imposed
thereon.
§ 158-17. Exception.
Sections 158-14 through 158-16 shall not apply to alcoholic beverage
licenses or permits issued pursuant to Title 33 of the New Jersey Statutes.
Chapter 160
LIGHTING NUISANCES
§ 160-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FOOTCANDLE — The amount of light from one candle at one foot from the
source of the light.
GLARE — Any artificial light which shines with a strong, steady or dazzling
light.
LAND — Comprehending not only buildings but the ground, soil or earth as
commonly understood.
STRUCTURE — A dwelling, barn, pole or elevated object or a building or
other structured improvement on any premises of such physical size as to be
capable of having attached thereto or incorporated thereon, on the exterior,
artificial lighting by means of electrical, gas or other luminescent fixtures.
§ 160-2. Restrictions on light sources facing neighboring property.
A. The borough shall suspend any previously issued license or permit at
such time as a tax or an assessment levied upon the property whereon
the licensee or permittee conducts its business or activity shall have
remained unpaid for more than three consecutive quarters.
A. No artificial lighting shall shine directly upon any neighboring property
or be so established that it shall shine directly upon any neighboring
property or shall shine directly on or into any room or rooms, porches
or patios of any neighboring property, nor shall any artificial lighting be
maintained or operated from any structure or land in such a manner as
to be a nuisance or an annoyance to neighboring properties or as to
interfere with the physical comfort of the occupants of neighboring
properties.
B. Lights directly facing a neighboring property shall be shielded.
§ 158-15 LIGHTING NUISANCES § 160-2
160:269
§ 160-3. Enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Construction Official.
§ 160-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not
less than $200 nor more than $1,000, as determined in the discretion of
the Municipal Court Judge. The continuation of such violation for each
successive day shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 161
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Solid waste — See Ch. 209.
§ 161-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTHORIZED PRIVATE RECEPTACLE — A litter storage or collection
receptacle approved by the borough.
GARBAGE — Animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
LITTER — Any refuse, garbage, rubbish, paper wrappings, cans, leaves,
wood, glass or any substance and material which might affect the health
and welfare of the public or render the streets or public places unsightly.
PARK — A park, playground, recreation center or any other public area
owned or used by the borough or local authorized governmental agencies
and devoted to active or passive recreation.
PRIVATE PREMISES — Any dwelling, house, building or other structure
designated or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes,
C. No sources of light shall be maintained or operated in connection with
any building or land in any manner or by any process or method which
transmits an objectionable glare on neighboring property.
D. In no instance will any glare be permitted if such glare originates from a
light source facing any dwelling unit.
E. The light intensity from illumination of any kind at any given location
along the property line from which the light originates shall not exceed
0.6 footcandle.
§ 160-2 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 161-1
161:270
whether inhabited or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall include
any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps or vestibule, belonging or
appurtenant to such dwelling house, building or other structure.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any or all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other
public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and
buildings.
REFUSE — All solid waste, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street
cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles and solid market and
industrial wastes.
RUBBISH — Solid waste consisting of both combustible and
noncombustible wastes such as paper, wrappings, cigars, cigarettes,
cardboard, tin cans, scrap metals, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass,
bedding, crockery and similar materials.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or drawn upon a street or highway.
§ 161-2. Litter in public places; permit requirements.
No person shall throw or deposit any litter in or upon any public street,
sidewalk or other public place, except that litter may be deposited in public
receptacles, authorized private receptacles or in official borough dump sites
after acquiring a permit from the Board of Health.
A. No permit shall be issued unless the applicant therefor shall furnish
satisfactory evidence to the Board of Health that (s)he has given five
days prior written notice to the owners or other persons in actual or
legal possession of all abutting premises, advising them of the date
upon which the application will be made.
B. The Board of Health may, in its discretion, withhold the granting of the
permit until all of the interested parties have been heard and may
impose special conditions and regulations in connection with each
application as may be necessary to preserve the public health. If, in the
opinion of the Board of Health, the granting of the application is
deemed to be detrimental or harmful to the public health, then the
Board may deny the application, in which event no permit shall be
granted.
C. Litter receptacles and their servicing shall be required at the following
public places which exist in the borough:
(1) Pedestrian walkways, shopping malls and shopping centers.
(2) Active retail commercially zoned areas, such that at a minimum
there shall be no single linear quarter mile without a receptacle.
(3) Buildings held out for use by the public, including schools,
government buildings and railroad and bus stations.
(4) Parks.
§ 161-1 LITTERING § 161-2
161:271
§ 161-3. Sweeping litter into gutters prohibited.
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public
place the accumulation of any litter from any building or lot or from any
public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying
property shall keep the sidewalk in front of the property free of litter. This
provision shall not apply to those periods of time fixed by the borough for
the collection of litter.
§ 161-4. Litter thrown from vehicles.
No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit
litter upon any street, public place or upon private property.
§ 161-5. Transporting loads causing litter.
No person shall load, drive or move any truck or other vehicle unless the
vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load, contents or litter
from being blown or deposited upon any street or other public place.
(5) Drive-in restaurants.
(6) All street vendor locations.
(7) Self-service refreshment areas.
(8) Construction sites.
(9) Gasoline service station islands.
(10) Parking lots.
(11) Campgrounds and trailer parks.
(12) Marinas, boat moorage and fueling stations and boat launching
areas.
(13) Public and private piers operated for public use.
(14) Beaches and bathing areas.
(15) At special events to which the public is invited, including sporting
events, parades, carnivals, circuses and festivals. The proprietors
of these places or the sponsors of these events shall be responsible
for providing and servicing the receptacles such that adequate
containerization is available.
D. This section shall not affect nor prohibit any person from depositing
refuse or garbage which may result from the actual use or occupancy of
the person actually living or residing on property in the borough.
§ 161-2 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 161-6
161:272
§ 161-6. Litter in parks, lakes or streams.
No person shall throw or deposit any litter in any fountain, stream, river,
skating rink or any other body of water in a park or recreation area or
elsewhere in the borough.
§ 161-7. Litter on private property.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied or vacant private
property, whether owned by such person or not, provided that the owner or
person in control of the property may maintain private receptacles for the
collection of litter.
§ 161-8. Responsibility for litter in quasi-public places.
The owner, agent, lessee, tenant, occupant or other person who manages or
controls a building or lot shall be jointly or severally responsible for keeping
the sidewalk, flagging, curbstone and the air shafts, areaways, backyards,
courts, parking lots and alleys free from litter.
§ 161-9. Compost heap.
This chapter shall not be construed to prevent the keeping of organic matter
used for the purpose of fertilizing soil and commonly known as a "compost
heap," provided that the compost heap complies with the requirements and
regulations of the Regional Board of Health and the Board of Health of the
borough.
Chapter 165
(RESERVED)
Chapter 166
(RESERVED)
Chapter 170
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Barking dogs — See Ch. 91.
Offensive noise emanating from use of
property — See Ch. 218, § 218-34.
Operation of off-road vehicles — See Ch. 245.
Keeping of noisy animals — See Ch. 265.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 287.
§ 161-6 (RESERVED) § 170-1
165:273
§ 170-1. Noise prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for a person to make, continue or cause to be made or
continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which does
or is likely to annoy, disturb, injure or endanger the comfort, repose, health,
peace or safety of others.
§ 170-2. Definition of noise.
A. Without intending to limit the generality of § 170-1, the following acts
are hereby declared to be examples of loud, disturbing and unnecessary
noise in violation of this chapter.
(1) Radios, televisions, phonographs. The playing, use or operation of
any radio receiving set, television, musical instrument, phonograph
or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of
sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of
neighboring inhabitants or with louder volume than is necessary
for convenient hearing for persons who are in the room, vehicle or
chamber in which the machine or device is operated and who are
voluntary listeners. The operation of such a set, instrument,
phonograph, machine or device between the hours of 11:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m., so that it is clearly audible at a distance of 25 feet
from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be
prima facie evidence of a violation of this section.
(2) Yelling, shouting. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on
the public streets, particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m., or at any time or place, which annoys or disturbs the
quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, dwelling, hotel,
motel or other type of residence or of any persons in the vicinity.
(3) Animals, birds. The keeping of animals or birds which, by causing
frequent or long-continued noise, disturbs the comfort or repose of
any person in the vicinity, but nothing herein contained is intended
to apply to a dog pound or kennel licensed in accordance with
Chapter 91 of the Code of the Borough of Old Tappan.
(4) Horns. The sounding of a horn or warning device on an automobile,
motorcycle, bus or other vehicle except when required by law, or
when necessary to give timely warning of the approach of the
vehicle, or as a warning of impending danger to persons driving
other vehicles or to persons on the street. No person shall sound a
horn or warning device on an automobile, motorcycle, bus or other
vehicle which emits an unreasonably loud or harsh sound, or for an
unnecessary or unreasonable period of time.
(5) Exhaust. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of a steam
engine, stationary internal combustion engine or motor vehicle,
except through a muffler or other device which will effectively
prevent loud or explosive noises.
§ 170-1 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 170-2
166:274
§ 170-3. Exceptions.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to apply to:
(6) Defect in vehicle or load. The use of an automobile, motorcycle or
vehicle so out of repair or so loaded that it creates loud and
unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise.
(7) Racing of motors. The racing of any motor of any vehicle in a
manner other than that needed for normal operation of the vehicle.
(8) Construction or repair. The carrying on of excavation, demolition,
construction or alteration work shall be permitted between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, except
federal holidays, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on
Saturday, and shall be prohibited at all other times, including but
not limited to the entire day on Sunday and federal holidays. The
carrying on of construction repair or alteration work by a
homeowner on his own dwelling or property shall be permitted
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. Monday through
Friday, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on Saturday,
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on Sunday and
federal holidays and shall be prohibited at all other times. In case of
urgent necessity or in the interest of public health or safety, the
Superintendent of Public Works or the Chief of Police may grant a
permit for excavation, demolition, construction, repair or alteration
work for a period not to exceed three days, by the terms of which
permit such work may be carried on between 8:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m. or on Sundays or federal holidays. [Amended 7-24-2006 by
Ord. No. 916-06]
(9) Schools, courts, churches, hospitals. The creation of excessive
noise on a street adjacent to a school, institution of learning,
church or court while in use or adjacent to a hospital, which
unreasonably interferes with the working of the institution or
which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital, provided
that conspicuous signs are displayed in such a street indicating that
it is a school, hospital or court street.
(10) Landscapers. The use of gas-powered equipment, including leaf
blowers, lawn mowers, edgers and other gas-powered landscaping
equipment shall only be permitted on weekdays from 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m. and on Saturdays from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., and shall
be prohibited at all other times, including on Sundays and federal
holidays. [Added 4-2-2018 by Ord. No. 1126-18]
B. The above enumeration is intended to give typical illustrations of
prohibited noise and shall not be construed as exclusive.
A. The use of bells, chimes or sound amplifiers by churches engaged in
church activities.
§ 170-2 (RESERVED) § 170-3
166:275
§ 170-4. Sound trucks.
Chapter 173
NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision and site plan review — See Ch.
218.
§ 173-1. Numbering required.
All dwelling houses, stores or other buildings erected within the borough
shall be numbered in conformity with the street numbers on the tax and
assessment maps of the borough filed in the office of the Tax Assessor of the
borough.
§ 173-2. Determination of number; notice.
B. Activities of borough departments in the performance of their duties,
drills or public demonstrations.
C. Activities in public parks, playgrounds or public buildings under
permission or authority of borough officials.
D. The playing by a band or orchestra in a hall or building or in the open
air where duly authorized.
A. Sound trucks may be operated in accordance with the following
regulations upon the issuance of a permit by the Borough Council for
each occasion and each location:
(1) Sound trucks shall not be operated in residential zones in the
borough before 9:00 a.m. and after 7:00 p.m.
(2) Sound trucks shall not be operated in commercial zones in the
borough before 9:00 a.m. and after 9:00 p.m.
(3) Moving sound trucks shall keep to the extreme right-hand side of
the road and shall proceed at a speed of not less than 10 miles per
hour.
(4) Stationary sound trucks are prohibited in all residential zones in
the borough, but may be operated in commercial zones during the
hours referred to above.
B. For the purposes of this section "residential zones" shall mean the
zones so designated in Chapter 255, Zoning, and "commercial zones"
shall mean and include all parts of the borough other than residential
zones.
§ 170-3 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 173-2
173:276
§ 173-3. Subdivision numbering.
§ 173-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-7-2004 by Ord. No.
859-04]
The owner or occupant of any building who shall not comply with the
provision of § 173-3B within three months of notice of the number assigned
to such building shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $100
at the discretion of the Municipal Judge.
Chapter 175
OBSCENE MATERIALS
§ 175-1. Definitions.
The following words and terms shall have the meanings herein indicated for
the purposes of this chapter:
OBSCENE MATERIAL — Any description, narrative account, display,
depiction of a specified anatomical area or specified sexual activity
A. Upon application by the owner of any property in the borough to the Tax
Assessor, the Tax Assessor shall furnish that owner with the correct
number of the property.
B. The owner of any dwelling house, store or other building incorrectly,
improperly or insufficiently numbered shall be notified, in writing, by
the Tax Assessor, or such other person so designated by the Borough
Council, to change or replace the incorrect or improper number, or to
affix a number where one is lacking, within 10 days after the date of the
notice.
A. New numbering. Upon any subdivision or resubdivision of land in the
borough resulting in a lot or lots other than those numbered on the tax
and assessment maps and records, the Tax Assessor shall, within 30
days after final approval thereof, assign a number to each lot resulting
from the subdivision or resubdivision, which shall be in proper
numerical sequence in relation to the number assigned to other lots
fronting on the same street, and (s)he shall record the number upon the
map and notify the owner of the property of the number so assigned.
B. Display of numbers. The number assigned to each building shall be
displayed by the owner or occupant on the front of the building or in the
front yard of the lot on which the same stands in numerals of such size
not less than three inches in height and so located as to be clearly
visible to persons passing by the premises on the abutting street.
C. Certificate of occupancy. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for
occupancy of any building hereafter erected or enlarged unless the
provisions of the foregoing subsection shall have been complied with.
§ 173-2 OBSCENE MATERIALS § 175-1
175:277
contained in, or consisting of, a picture or other representation, publication,
sound recording, live performance, film, or video, which, by means of
posing, composition, format or animated sensual details, emits sensuality
with sufficient impact to concentrate prurient interest on the area or
activity.
RETAILER — Any person who operates a store, newsstand, booth,
concession, or similar business with unimpeded access for persons under
18 years old, who is in the business of making sales or rentals of periodicals,
other publications, films or video, at retail.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREA: —
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY —
§ 175-2. Display by retailer of obscene material.
It shall be a petty disorderly persons offense for a retailer to display or
permit to be displayed at his business premises any obscene material at a
height of less than five feet or without a blinder or other covering placed or
printed on the front of the material displayed. Public display of the obscene
material shall constitute presumptive evidence that the retailer knowingly
made or permitted the display.
Chapter 179
PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 91.
Golf courses — See Ch. 146.
Littering — See Ch. 161.
Noise — See Ch. 170.
Less than completely or opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttock or female breasts below a point immediately above the
top of the areola; or
A.
B. Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if covered.
A. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; or
Any act of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or deviate sexual
intercourse; or
B.
Fondling or other erotic touching of covered or uncovered human
genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast.
C.
§ 175-1 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 175-2
175:278
ARTICLE I
General Regulations27
§ 179-1. Use. [Amended 11-18-2002 by Ord. No. 808-02; 8-18-2003
by Ord. No. 825-03; 1-20-2009 by Ord. No. 979-09]
Such parks and facilities shall be for public use. Such use shall be subject
to such reasonable rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the
Recreation Commission and approved by the Mayor and Council.
§ 179-2. Damage.
No person shall cut, injure, deface, remove or disturb any tree, shrub,
building, fence, bench or other structure, apparatus or property; or pick, cut
or remove any shrub, bush or flower; or mark or write upon any building,
fence, bench or other structure.
§ 179-3. Fires.
No person shall make or kindle an open fire except in a fireplace area with
a permit.
§ 179-4. Animals; violations and penalties. [Amended 11-9-2001 by
Ord. No. 766-01]
A. No person shall bring any dog or dogs into any Borough park unless
said dog is restrained at all times by an adequate collar and leash not
exceeding six feet in length and kept under the control of a competent
person; and, further, said dogs are allowed only on park pathways. Dogs
are strictly prohibited from playground and recreational areas within
the park.
B. No dog shall be allowed to engage in loud howling or barking in an
excessive manner to unreasonably disturb the comfort or repose of any
person in a Borough park or recreational area.
C. No dog shall cause any damage or destruction to any property
designated as a Borough park or recreational area.
D. No dog shall be allowed to bite, chase or harass any person in such a
manner as to cause bodily harm or injury.
E. Any person bringing any dog into any Borough park will be responsible
for the cleanup of any feces of his or her dog and shall dispose of the
feces properly.
F. Animals may be permitted in Borough parks and recreational facilities
for special Borough-sponsored events such as Town Day for
entertainment or educational purposes, provided prior written approval
27.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 825-03, adopted 8-18-2003, provided for the redesignation of
Ch. 179, § § 179-1 through 179-18, as Ch. 179, Art. I, General Regulations, § § 179-1 -
179-18.
§ 179-1 OBSCENE MATERIALS § 179-4
175:279
§ 179-5. Weapons.
No person shall carry firearms of any description, or throw stones or other
missiles on fields or skating rinks.
§ 179-6. Sales.
No person shall sell, offer or solicit for sale, any goods or merchandise
without a permit.
§ 179-7. Alcohol.
No alcoholic beverages in any form shall be carried onto or consumed on
any park or recreation facility without a permit.
§ 179-8. Hours.
No person may remain, stay or loiter in a park between the hours of 8:00
p.m. to 8:00 a.m. This may be waived for special recreational activities.
§ 179-9. Entertainment.
No entertainment or exhibition shall be given in any park except under the
direction or by permission of the Recreation Commission.
§ 179-10. Trespass.
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon any portion of parks or
recreational facilities or grounds in disregard of signs or posted notices
forbidding same.
§ 179-11. Motor vehicles and bicycles.
All motor vehicles and bicycles shall park or stand only in areas so
designated. Bicycles, cars and other motorized vehicles are not permitted
on the fields unless authorized.
is obtained from the Borough Administrator. It is intended that animals
for the entertainment or education of children be permitted for special
Borough-sponsored events, provided that the animals do not endanger
the public health or safety.
G. Except as provided herein, no animal shall be ridden, led or let loose in
Borough parks and recreational facilities.
H. Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of
$250.
§ 179-4 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 179-12
175:280
§ 179-12. Speed limit.
Vehicles entering or passing through parks or recreation facilities are
limited to a speed of 10 miles per hour and must remain on driveways.
§ 179-13. Distribution or posting of circulars.
No person without authorization shall distribute any circulars, cards or
written matter or post, paste or affix any placards, notice or signs within the
park.
§ 179-14. Sports.
Playing baseball or any other sport or activity is prohibited except in areas
expressly set aside for these activities.
§ 179-15. Bow and arrows.
No person may use a bow and arrows in parks or recreation facilities.
§ 179-16. Snowmobiles and minibikes.
Minibikes and snowmobiles are not allowed in park areas.
§ 179-17. Loudspeakers.
Loudspeakers or any amplification equipment is prohibited without a
permit.
§ 179-18. Glass.
No bottles or glass containers are permitted.
§ 179-12 OBSCENE MATERIALS § 179-18
175:281

ARTICLE II
Facilities Usage Policy
[Added 8-18-2003 by Ord. No. 825-03]
§ 179-19. Purpose.
The Borough’s facilities belong to the community. Prudent use and
management of Borough facilities, provided such use does not interfere
with the operations of the Borough, allows the community to benefit more
broadly from the use of its own property. This policy applies to the use
of rooms in Borough structures for meetings or cultural activities, use of
playing fields, posting signs or hanging banners on Borough property, and
all other uses of Borough facilities.
§ 179-20. Request in writing. [Amended 10-20-2003 by Ord. No.
831-2003]
The Mayor and Council will permit the use of Borough facilities when such
permission has been requested in writing and has been approved by the
Borough Administrator. In the event the Borough Administrator deems it
advisable, any application may be submitted to the Mayor and Council for
action.
§ 179-21. Consideration of request.
The Borough Administrator or the Mayor and Council may refuse to grant
permission for the use of a Borough facility whenever in their judgment
use of the facility would not be in the public’s interest. By way of example,
but without limitation, the Borough Administrator or the Mayor and Council
may refuse to grant permission for the use of athletic fields when such use
would endanger the public’s safety or cause damage to the fields.
§ 179-22. Smoking; alcoholic beverages; compliance with law, rules
and regulations.
Smoking is prohibited at all times in any Borough building, except as may be
permitted in the designated area of the golf course clubhouse in accordance
with the rules and regulations of the golf course. No one may bring alcoholic
beverages onto any Borough property except as may be permitted in the
golf course clubhouse, or as otherwise permitted by law. All facility use shall
comply with state and local fire, health, safety, and policy regulations. Use
of the golf course clubhouse shall comply with the rules and regulations
of the golf course, as approved by the Mayor and Council. Use of the
Borough’s recreational facilities shall comply with the rules and regulations
of the Recreation Commission, as approved by the Mayor and Council.
§ 179-23. Certificate of insurance; hold harmless agreement.
Each person or organization that wishes to use any Borough facility must
provide the Borough Administrator with a certificate of insurance and sign
§ 179-19 OBSCENE MATERIALS § 179-23
175:283
a hold harmless form provided by the Borough at least one week prior to
the scheduled usage of the Borough’s facilities. The certificate of insurance
shall specifically name the Borough of Old Tappan as an additional insured
and provide general liability, bodily injury and property damage coverage
with minimum limits of liability not less than $1,000,000 combined single
limit. Any group serving alcoholic beverages (in connection with the use of
the golf course clubhouse) must provide a certificate showing at least $1
million liability coverage from a company with an A.M. Best rating no less
than A minus 7. Users shall be responsible for damage to equipment and/or
to the facilities.
§ 179-24. Use of golf course facilities.
In addition to the requirements set forth herein, use of the golf course or
the golf course clubhouse shall be subject to the approval of the Borough’s
Golf Course Commission and policies, rules and regulations for the use of
the golf course facilities as approved by the Golf Course Commission.
§ 179-25. Fees; costs. [Amended 10-20-2003 by Ord. No. 831-03]
A. The following fees shall be for the use of Borough facilities: [Amended
7-24-2006 by Ord. No. 915-06; 3-19-2007 by Ord. No. 934-07]
(1) Use of athletic fields:
(a) Borough-sponsored events: no fee.
(b) Athletic groups under the Borough's Recreation Commission:
no fee.
(c) Athletic groups for which the Borough provides liability
insurance: no fee.
(d) Athletic groups from the Borough's elementary schools or
Northern Valley Regional High School Old Tappan: no fee.
(e) Athletic groups, such as club teams, not under the Borough's
Recreation Commission: $25 per day per field with a minimum
of $250 and a maximum of $500 per athletic group for any
three-month period.
(f) For-profit corporations and businesses: $250 per day per field.
(g) Nonprofit, religious, charitable or educational organizations or
institutions: $100 per day per field for reserved exclusive use
of the fields; except that there shall be no fee for such
organizations or institutions for unreserved nonexclusive use
of the fields, provided that the Recreation Director is informed
of dates and times of intended usage, and provided further that
the Recreation Director shall have discretion to deny such use.
(h) Borough residents for family events: no fee.
§ 179-23 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 179-25
175:284
§ 179-26. Authority to close fields.
The Chief of Police or his designee and the Superintendent of Public Works
or his designee shall have the authority to close athletic fields whenever, in
his or her judgment, the use of the fields would endanger the public’s safety
or would cause damage to the fields. In addition to any other remedy, the
Mayor and Council may deny the future privilege of using the Borough’s
fields to any person or organization using a field that has been closed by the
Chief of Police or the Superintendent of Public Works.
§ 179-27. Scheduling of athletic fields.
The Recreation Director shall have the responsibility for scheduling the
use of the Borough’s athletic facilities, with discretion to give scheduling
priority to athletic groups under the Borough’s Recreation Commission.
(2) Security deposit for use of fieldhouse, pavilion, refreshments,
kitchens, and/or toilets: $250.
B. The use of Borough facilities for activities related to Borough
operations shall be without cost to the users and/or applicants except
that the users and/or applicants shall be responsible for any extra
materials, police fees, or impact fees as noted above. All applicants and/
or users granted the use of facilities shall pay the scheduled fee
therefor in advance and said fee shall be nonrefundable. Applicants
and/or users shall also assume the cost of such additional staff services
required.
§ 179-25 OBSCENE MATERIALS § 179-27
175:285

ARTICLE III
(Reserved)28
§ 179-28. through § 179-31. (Reserved)
28.Editor's Note: Former Art. III, Smoking Prohibited in Recreation Areas, added 7-19-2004
by Ord. No. 856-04, was repealed 9-2-2014 by Ord. No. 1074-14. See now Ch. 202, Art. II.
§ 179-28 OBSCENE MATERIALS § 179-28
175:287

ARTICLE IV
Skateboard Park
[Added 1-20-2009 by Ord. No. 979-09]
§ 179-32. Use regulations.
No person shall be permitted to use the skateboard park unless said person
is a resident of the Borough of Old Tappan or the Township of Rivervale and
has obtained a permit from either municipality in compliance with the rules
and regulations governing the use of the skateboard park.
§ 179-33. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
A. This article be enforced by any officer of the Borough of Old Tappan,
including the Recreation Commission and the Police Department. It
shall be the duty of such officer to investigate any reported violation.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine, the amount of which shall be within
the discretion of and shall be fixed by the Municipal Court but which, in
no case, shall be greater than $1,000. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
§ 179-32 OBSCENE MATERIALS § 179-33
175:289
Chapter 182
(RESERVED)
[Former Chapter 182, Peddling and Soliciting, adopted 5-26-1975 as
Section 4-2 of the 1975 Code, as amended, was repealed 7-16-2018
by Ord. No. 1129-18.]
Chapter 185
POLITICAL FUNDRAISING
§ 185-1. Findings and purpose.
Political contributions have a profound impact on government
decisionmaking. Our laws in New Jersey do not presently ban solicitation or
acceptance of contributions by public office holders and employees while on
public property or by use of public facilities. A conflict may arise between
the business of political fundraising and the business of government in
Borough Hall, and this may cause a distraction from the people's business.
The most appropriate method to prevent this conflict and to ensure the
integrity of government decisions is the prohibition of political fundraising
on or by use of the Borough Hall. It is accordingly found and determined
that the paramount public interest in a clean and accountable government
requires the prohibition of political fundraising on or by use of the Borough
Hall.
§ 185-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CANDIDATE — Any individual seeking election to a public office of the
federal government, state, county, municipality, school district or political
organization at an election.
CONTRIBUTION — Includes all loans and transfers of money or other thing
of value to or by any candidate, elected official or political organization and
all pledges or other commitments or assumptions of liability to make any
such transfer. Contributions shall be deemed to have been made upon the
date when such commitment is made or liability assumed.
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Old Tappan and any officer, department,
board, commission, or agency thereof.
MUNICIPAL OFFICIAL, EMPLOYEE AND APPOINTEE — Any person
holding elective municipal office or holding an appointed position in the
municipal government, or in any agency, commission, board, or office
thereof, whether the position is full-time or part-time, compensated or
uncompensated, and any employee of the municipal government, or in any
agency, commission, board, or office thereof, whether the position is fulltime
or part-time.
§ 179-33 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 185-2
185:290
POLITICAL ORGANIZATION — Any two or more persons acting jointly, or
any corporation, partnership or any other incorporated or unincorporated
association which is organized to or does aid or promote the nomination,
election or defeat of any candidate or candidates for federal, state, county,
municipal or school board office. "Political organization" includes, but is not
limited to, organizations otherwise defined as "political committee," "joint
candidates committee," and "legislative leadership committee."
SOLICIT — To seek by oral or written communication a contribution as the
same is defined herein.
§ 185-3. Prohibition against soliciting or accepting political
contributions on Borough Hall property.
No municipal official, employee or appointee may solicit, commit to pay,
or receive payment of or a commitment to pay any contribution for any
candidate, elected official or political organization while in or on the
property of the Borough Hall.
§ 185-4. Prohibited forms of fundraising.
Prohibited forms of fundraising shall include but are not limited to:
§ 185-5. Reporting requirements.
It shall be the responsibility of any employee or appointed or elected official
who observes any prohibited forms of fundraising to report such conduct to
the borough prosecutor and the Borough Clerk, who shall report the same
to the governing body.
§ 185-6. Whistleblower provision.
It shall be unlawful for any employee, elected official or appointee to be
dismissed, reprimanded, retaliated against or otherwise intimidated for
complying with the reporting requirements mandated by this chapter.
A. Soliciting or accepting contributions using Borough Hall telephones,
fax machines or computers.
B. Soliciting or accepting contributions using personal telephones while
on the property of the Borough Hall.
C. Soliciting or accepting contributions through the use of publicly owned
computers or privately owned personal computers while on the
property of the Borough Hall.
D. Sending correspondence from Borough Hall or by use of borough
services, equipment or postage.
E. Face-to-face soliciting of an individual or an owner or representative of
a business entity while on the property of the Borough Hall.
§ 185-2 POLITICAL FUNDRAISING § 185-7
185:291
§ 185-7. Violations and penalties.
Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days or a fine not exceeding $1,000, or
both.
Chapter 188
PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licensing — See Ch. 158.
§ 188-1. Definitions.
The following definition shall apply to this chapter:
DEALER IN PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS — A person in the business of
purchasing, offering to purchase, swapping, offering to swap, accepting for
consignment, selling, offering to sell, hypothecating or otherwise dealing in
or trading used or secondhand gold, silver or other precious metals, used or
secondhand precious gems and jewelry including, but not limited to, articles
made therefrom, coins, with or without numismatic value, used jewelry of
all descriptions, sterling silver, silver plate, semiprecious gems or watches,
other than as a consumer buying the same in a normal commercial manner
or as an incidental seller of such items so acquired.
§ 188-2. License required.
No dealers in precious metals and gems shall engage in such business until
a license to do so has been obtained from the Chief of Police.
§ 188-3. Application information; fee.
A. The license application shall be on a form approved by the Chief of
Police and shall contain at least the following information:
(1) The name and address of the person, firm or corporation
conducting said business;
(2) If a corporation, the names and addresses of all officers and
stockholders of said corporation; and
(3) The location at which said business will be conducted and the hours
of operation.
B. The applicant shall pay a license fee to the Borough Clerk in the amount
of $100. [Amended 7-16-2001 by Ord. No. 758-01; 5-17-2004 by
Ord. No. 850-04]
§ 185-7 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 188-4
188:292
§ 188-4. Record of items purchased or received.
Every dealer in precious metals and gems shall maintain a legible and
complete record of each item purchased or received by the dealer including
the date and time acquired, a description of the article including weight
and any inscriptions, and the price paid therefor, together with the name,
residence address, occupation, date of birth, social security number, and
telephone number of the person from whom the dealer received the item.
The records shall be on forms approved by the Borough Police Department
and shall be available for inspection by the Borough Police Department at
all times.
§ 188-5. Availability of records.
Every dealer in precious metals and gems shall deliver to the Chief of
Police the description of all items purchased or sold, within 48 hours of the
completion of the transaction on forms prescribed by the Chief of Police.
§ 188-6. Disposition and storage of merchandise.
No dealer in precious metals and gems shall sell, melt, change the form
of, remove from the premises or otherwise dispose of any article bought
or received by the dealer in the borough within seven business days. Any
dealer wishing to store his merchandise other than on the premises where
he is engaged in business may make application to the Chief of Police for
permission to remove the same from the dealer's premises to the alternate
designated location; provided, however, that said location is in the borough.
§ 188-7. Violations and penalties.
A. It shall be a violation of this chapter to transact any business to which
the chapter refers without first having obtained the license as herein
required or to fail to adhere to the recordkeeping and reporting
requirements hereof. It shall be a separate and distinct violation of this
chapter for each article and each transaction which shall be omitted
from the required reports.
B. The initial offense under this chapter shall be punishable by
imprisonment for a term of not more than 180 days or a fine of not less
than $100 nor more than $500, or both. Any subsequent offense, shall,
in addition to the foregoing penalties, result in the revocation of the
dealer's permit by the Mayor and Council.
§ 188-4 PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS § 188-7
188:293
Chapter 190
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 91.
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 97.
Building construction — See Ch. 100.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 131.
Littering — See Ch. 161.
Solid waste — See Ch. 209.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 239.
Animals and poultry — See Ch. 265.
Public Health Nuisances — See Ch. 287.
Solid waste — See Ch. 296.
§ 190-1. Findings; Purpose.
§ 190-2. Definitions and word usage.
A. The Borough of Old Tappan hereby finds that certain unsafe, unsanitary,
undesirable, and unhealthy conditions exist at various properties in the
Borough.
B. The public health, safety and welfare make it desirous to terminate
unsafe, unsanitary, undesirable, and unhealthy conditions and to
prevent other similar conditions from arising in the future on any
properties in the Borough.
C. The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety and welfare
of the residents of the Borough by establishing minimum standards
governing the maintenance, appearance and condition of properties; to
fix certain responsibilities and duties upon owners and operators; to
authorize and establish procedures for the inspection of properties; and
to fix penalties for violations of this chapter.
D. This chapter is hereby declared to be remedial, and it is intended that
this chapter be liberally construed to effectuate the purposes as stated
herein.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A building, as defined herein, the
structural walls of which are not in direct contact with the structural
walls of the principal building, and is customarily incidental and
subordinate to the principal use or building and located on the same
lot with such principal building.[Amended 12-15-2003 by Ord. No.
836-03]
§ 188-7 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 190-2
190:294
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof supported by columns or by
walls and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons,
animals or chattels.
EXTERIOR PREMISES — Those portions of a building or structure
which are exposed to public view or are visible from adjoining and
adjacent lots, including all outside surfaces and appurtenances thereto
and the open land space of any premises outside any building or
structure erected thereon.
INFESTATION — The presence of or within a premises of any insects,
rodents or other pests that present a safety hazard.
LITTER or RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid wastes, consisting of both
combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as, but not limited to,
paper wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings,
leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, auto parts, appliances,
construction debris or similar materials.
NUISANCE — Any public or private condition that would constitute a
nuisance according to the laws of the state or Borough ordinance, and
specifically including, but not limited to, the following:
OCCUPANT — Any person or persons, including the owner, in actual
possession of and using a building or an occupancy unit in the building.
Any physical condition or occupancy of any premises or its
appurtenances considered an attractive nuisance to children,
including but not limited to abandoned wells, shafts, basements,
excavations or unsafe fences or structures.
(1)
Any premises that has unsanitary or defective sewerage or
plumbing facilities.
(2)
(3) Any premises designated as unsafe for human habitation.
Any premises that is considered to be a fire hazard or is unsafe or
unsecured so as to endanger life, limb or property.
(4)
Any premises from which the plumbing, heating or facilities
required by code have been removed, or from which utilities have
been disconnected, destroyed or removed or rendered ineffective,
or the required precautions against trespassers have not been
provided.
(5)
(6) Any premises that is unsanitary or littered with litter or rubbish.
Any structure that is in a state of dilapidation or decay; faulty
construction; overcrowded; has excessive storage or is vacant or
abandoned; damaged by fire to the extent so as not to provide
shelter; in danger of collapse or failure; or dangerous to anyone on
or near the premises.
(7)
§ 190-2 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 190-2
190:295
§ 190-3. Maintenance of properties.
OPERATOR — Any person who has charge, care or control of a dwelling
or premises, or a part thereof, whether with or without the knowledge
and consent of the owner.
OWNER — Any person or persons or other entity who shall have legal
or equitable title to any premises or part thereof, with or without
accompanying actual possession thereof, or who shall have charge, care
or control of any lot, premises, building, structure or part thereof, as
owner or agent of the owner, or a fiduciary, including but not limited
to testamentary heirs, fiduciaries, trustees, receivers, guardians of an
estate or of another, administrators or as mortgagees in possession.
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel, including the buildings or structures
thereon, if any.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, including,
but not limited to, litter, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals,
abandoned automobiles and parts thereof and solid market and
industrial wastes.
B. All terms and words used in this chapter shall be deemed and construed
to include any other number, singular or plural, and other gender,
masculine, feminine or neuter, as the context or sense of any paragraph
or clause herein may require.
A. Maintenance of exterior premises. The front and side yards shall be
kept free of litter, and all areas of the exterior premises shall be kept
free of nuisances and hazards to the safety of tenants, occupants,
pedestrians and other persons having access to the premises and free
of unsanitary conditions, and any of the foregoing shall be promptly
removed and abated. The word "hazards" shall include, but not be
limited to, the following:
(1) Refuse.
(2) Dead and dying trees and other natural growth which, by reason of
rotting or deteriorating conditions or storm damage, are or may be
dangerous to persons in the vicinity thereof.
(3) Loose overhanging and projecting objects which, by reason of
location above ground level, constitute dangers to persons in the
vicinity thereof.
(4) Holes, mounds, excavations, breaks, projections, obstructions and
excretions of pets and other animals on paths, sidewalks, walks,
driveways, parking lots and parking areas and other parts of the
exterior of the premises which are accessible to and used by
persons having access to such premises.
(5) Grass/weeds. All premises and exterior property shall be
maintained free from weeds or lawn growth in excess of 10 inches,
§ 190-2 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 190-3
190:296
§ 190-4. Administration and enforcement.
except that this requirement shall not apply to areas of natural
growth that are not ordinarily maintained, such as, without
limitation, areas containing wetlands or marshes, or densely
wooded areas. All noxious weeds shall be prohibited.
B. Exterior condition.
(1) Signs. All signs, including the structural and supporting
components thereof, and all light stanchions and poles shall be
maintained so as to not constitute a nuisance or a safety hazard.
(2) Awnings. Any awning and its accompanying structural members
shall be maintained so as to not constitute a safety hazard.
C. General sanitation and safety.
(1) No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant
property within the Borough, whether owned by such a person or
not.
(2) Rubbish and garbage shall be placed or kept on the property within
the building located thereon or not nearer to the street line than
the face of the building, except that garbage or other items that
may be picked up may be placed at the curb on the night before the
scheduled pickup.
D. Storage of vehicles, boats, and machinery. All persons shall comply with
the provisions of Chapter 239 of the Code, entitled "Vehicles,
Abandoned." It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator or occupant of
lands in the Borough to store, place, keep, park or accumulate upon
such lands any boats or machinery or vehicle parts in need of repair so
as not to be readily operated under their own power, requiring
substantial repairs or not currently licensed or not being currently
used.
A. Interpretation.
(1) In any case where the provisions of this chapter impose a stricter or
higher standard than set forth in any other ordinance or regulation
of the Borough or under the laws or regulations of the State of New
Jersey or any of its agencies, then standards set forth herein shall
prevail, but if the provisions of this chapter impose a lower or less
standard than any other regulation or ordinance of the Borough or
of the laws or regulations of the State of New Jersey or any of its
agencies, then the higher standard contained in any such other
ordinance, regulation or law shall prevail.
(2) Compliance with this chapter shall not constitute a defense against
a violation of any ordinance of the Borough applicable to any
structure or premises, nor shall any one act of compliance
§ 190-3 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 190-4
190:297
constitute a defense against any subsequent or other violation of
this chapter.
B. Enforcement officers. The Zoning Officer, Construction Official, Health
Officer, Fire Official and the police of the Borough of Old Tappan are
hereby designated as the public officers to exercise the powers
prescribed by this chapter and are hereby designated as enforcement
officers.
C. Enforcement procedures. Whenever the enforcement officer
determines that there is or has been a violation of any provisions of this
chapter, he or she shall give notice of such violation to the person or
persons or entities responsible therefor under this chapter. Such notice
shall be in writing and shall include a concise statement of the reasons
for issuance. Such notice shall be deemed properly and sufficiently
served if a copy thereof is sent by registered or certified mail to the last
known address of the person or entity upon which the same is served,
as shown by the current tax records of the Borough; or a copy thereof
handed to said person or persons; or a copy thereof left at the usual
place of abode or office of said person or entities. Notice shall be given
as aforesaid, within or without the Borough. The notice shall also state
that, unless the violation is abated, removed, cured or prevented within
10 days of the date of service of such notice (exclusive of the date of
service), a summons shall be issued for such violations. The
enforcement officer may, at the time he issued the notice, extend the
period for compliance with the violation stated in the notice for a period
in excess of the aforesaid 10 days if, in his or her judgment, the
abatement, removal, prevention, cessation of or cure of the condition
violated cannot reasonably be affected within the ten-day period. In the
event the violation is not abated, removed, cured, prevented or
otherwise fully remedied within said ten-day period or within such
extended period as set forth in the notice pursuant to this subsection, a
summons shall then be issued against the person, persons, entity or
entities so notified.
D. Responsibilities of owners, operators and occupants. Owners, operators
and occupants shall have all the duties and responsibilities as
prescribed in this chapter and shall not be relieved from any such
duties and responsibilities nor be entitled to defend against any charge
of violation thereof by reason of the fact that another party may also be
responsible therefor and in violation thereof. Responsibilities of
owners, operators and occupants shall not be altered or affected by any
agreement or contract by and between any of the them or between
them and other parties.
E. Emergency conditions. Whenever the enforcement officer finds that an
emergency condition in violation of this chapter exists, which condition
requires immediate attention in order to protect the public health or
safety, he or she may issue an order by service of notice as set forth
above reciting the existence of such an emergency condition and
requiring that such action be taken by the violator as soon as it is
§ 190-4 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 190-4
190:298
§ 190-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not
less than $100 nor more than $1,000, by imprisonment for a term not to
exceed 90 days or by community service of not more than 90 days, or any
combination of fine, imprisonment and community service as determined
in the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge. The continuation of such
violation for each successive day shall constitute a separate offense.
reasonably necessary to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding any
other provisions of this chapter, such order shall be effective
immediately.
F. Failure to comply; abatement by Borough. Where the abatement of any
condition as described herein, correction of a defect in the premises or
work necessary to place the premises in a proper condition, so as to
conform to this chapter or any other ordinance of the Borough or
applicable laws of the State of New Jersey, shall not have been
completed within the period required by the notice from the
enforcement officer, the enforcement officer shall present a report of
work proposed to be done to accomplish the foregoing to the Mayor and
Council with an estimate of the cost, along with a summary of the
proceedings undertaken by the enforcement officer to secure
compliance, including notices served upon the occupants, owners, or
operators, as the case may be. The Mayor and Council may thereupon,
by resolution, authorize the abatement of the nuisance or the correction
of the defect or work necessary to place the premises in proper
condition and in compliance with this chapter. The enforcement officer
may thereafter cause the work to be performed in accordance with the
resolution at Borough expense, not to exceed the amount specified in
the resolution, and shall, upon completion thereof, submit a report of
the moneys expended and costs to the Mayor and Council. After a
review of the report, the Mayor and Council may approve the expenses
and costs, whereupon the same shall become a lien against the
premises, collectible as provided by law. A copy of the resolution
approving the expenses and costs shall be certified by the Borough
Clerk and filed with the Tax Collector of the Borough, who shall be
responsible for the collection, and a copy of the report and resolution
shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner.
G. Applicability to zoning. Nothing contained in this chapter or any
requirement of compliance herewith shall be deemed to alter, impair or
affect the application of Chapter 255, Zoning, or any other provisions of
the Borough's ordinances.
§ 190-4 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 190-5
190:299
Chapter 194
RETAIL BUSINESSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 170.
§ 190-5 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 190-5
194:300
ARTICLE I
Hours of Operation
[Adopted by Ord. No. 395-87]
§ 194-1. Findings.
§ 194-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
RETAIL BUSINESS — Any business which holds itself out to the general
public for the sale at retail of goods or services.
§ 194-3. Closing hours. [Amended 10-1-2007 by Ord. No. 955-07]
Every retail business located within the Borough, excluding restaurants,
pharmacies, nighttime recreational centers and businesses regulated by
the New Jersey Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control, shall be closed to
the public, and business with the public therein shall be and is hereby
prohibited, between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m., except
that fitness centers shall be closed to the public, and business with the
public therein shall be and is hereby prohibited, between the hours of 12:00
midnight and 5:00 a.m.
A. The Mayor and Council have found that undesirable noise,
inconvenience and disturbance is caused by retail businesses remaining
open late at night.
B. The Mayor and Council deem it to be in the best interests of the
residents of the Borough of Old Tappan and in furtherance of their
health, safety and welfare, for retail businesses to cease the conduct of
their businesses at a reasonable hour.
§ 194-1 RETAIL BUSINESSES § 194-3
194:301
Chapter 198
SANITARY SEWERS
§ 198-1. Determination.
In accordance with L. 1991, c. 53 § 1 (N.J.S.A. 40A:26A-1 et seq.), it is
hereby determined that the public health, safety and welfare can best be
assured by the acquisition, construction or operation of sewerage facilities
by the Borough.
§ 198-2. Powers of Mayor and Council.
The Mayor and Council are authorized and empowered:
A. To acquire, construct, improve, extend, enlarge or reconstruct and
finance sewerage facilities, and to operate, manage and control all or
part of these facilities and all properties relating thereto;
B. To issue bonds of the Borough to pay all or part of the cost of the
purchase, construction, improvement, extension, enlargement or
reconstruction of sewerage facilities;
C. To receive and accept from the federal or state government, or any
agency or instrumentality thereof, grants or loans for, or in aid of, the
planning, purchase, construction, improvement, extension,
enlargement or reconstruction, or financing of sewerage facilities, and
to receive and accept from any source, contribution of money, property,
labor or other things of value to be held, used and applied only for the
purposes for which the grants or loans and contributions are made;
D. To acquire in the name of the Borough by gift, purchase, or by the
exercise of the right of eminent domain, lands and rights and interests
therein, including lands under water and riparian rights, and personal
property as may be deemed necessary for acquisition, construction,
improvement, extension, enlargement or reconstruction, or for the
efficient operation of any facilities acquired or constructed under the
provisions of this chapter and to hold and dispose of all real personal
property so acquired;
E. To make and enter into all contracts and agreements necessary or
incidental to the performance of the Borough's duties and the extension
of powers authorized under this act, and to employ engineers,
superintendents, managers, attorneys, financial or other consultants or
experts, and other employees and agents as may be deemed necessary,
and to fix their compensation;
F. Subject to the provisions and restrictions set forth in the ordinance or
resolution authorizing or securing any bonds issued under the
provisions of this chapter, to enter into contracts with the federal or
state government, or any agency or instrumentality thereof, or with any
§ 194-3 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 198-2
194:302
§ 198-3. Connection to sanitary sewer system.
other local unit, private corporation, copartnership, association or
individual providing for, or relating to, sewerage services which
contracts may provide for the furnishing of sewerage facility services
either by or to the local unit or units, or the joint construction or
operation of sewerage facilities;
G. To fix and collect rates, fees, rents and other charges in accordance
with the Borough's ordinances;
H. To prevent toxic pollutants from entering the sewerage system;
I. To exercise any other powers necessary or incidental to the effectuation
of the general purpose of this chapter.
A. Definitions. The following words and terms shall have the meanings
herein indicated for the purposes of this section:
THE INDEX — The Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage Earners and
Clerical Workers for New York - Northeastern New Jersey.
CONSTRUCTION COSTS — The documented costs incurred by the
property owner for construction within the Borough's right-of-way as
a result of the sewer connection, together with fees paid to other
municipalities to connect to sewers in other municipalities, if any, and
fees paid to other property owners to connect to sewers owned by other
property owners, if any. The construction costs incurred by the property
owner shall be reviewed and approved by the Borough Engineer.
B. Application. Single-family residential property owners desirous of
connecting to the Borough's sanitary sewer system shall complete an
application as provided by the Borough Clerk.
C. Sewer connection fee. Except as may be otherwise provided by
ordinance, the fee for connecting to the Borough's sanitary sewer
facilities shall be calculated as follows:
(1) Where sanitary sewer facilities are installed by the special benefit
assessment process, there shall be no sewer connection fee.
However, each property owner benefited thereby shall be
responsible for its proportionate share of the cost of the sewer
improvement in accordance with statute.
(2) Where sanitary sewer facilities are not installed by the special
benefit assessment process and property owners connect to
sanitary sewer facilities which had previously been installed and
assessed in accordance with the special benefit process, the fee for
persons applying for a sewer connection permit in 1997 or 1998
shall equal the average assessment for the sewer improvement into
which the property owner is connecting as determined by the
Borough Engineer minus construction costs. For subsequent years,
the fee shall equal the average assessment for the sewer
§ 198-2 RETAIL BUSINESSES § 198-3
194:303
improvement into which the property owner is connecting as
determined by the Borough Engineer plus a percentage equal to
the percentage increase in the average index for the year from
the year in which the special benefit assessment was assessed
to the year next preceding the year in which the property owner
applies for a sewer connection permit minus construction costs. In
the event the cost of construction exceeds the average assessment
for the sewer improvement into which the property owner is
connecting as increased by the percentage increase in the index,
then there shall be no sewer connection fee.
(3) For property owners connecting directly to sanitary sewer facilities
in adjoining municipalities, the fee shall be as set forth in an
agreement between the Borough and the adjoining municipality. In
the event such a property owner subsequently connects to the
Borough's sanitary sewer system, then the property owner shall be
responsible for payment of a sewer connection fee calculated in
accordance with the applicable subsection of this § 198-3, or, if the
subsequent connection is in accordance with a special benefit
assessment, then the property owner may be responsible for its
proportionate share of the cost of the sewer improvement in
accordance with statute.
(4) For property owners fronting on streets and roads wherein any
portion of the sewer improvement has been installed and for whom
a clean-out has been installed in accordance with Ordinance No.
409-89, the connection fee for the years 1997 and 1998 shall be in
an amount as set forth in the resolution of the Mayor and Council
adopted on November 24, 1997, a copy of which is annexed hereto
and incorporated by reference herein.29 For subsequent years, for
property owners other than single-family residential property
owners, the sewer connection fee shall be as set forth in the
November 24, 1997, resolution plus a percentage equal to the
percentage increase in the average index between 1997 and the
year next preceding the year in which the property owner applies
for a sewer connection permit. Single-family residential property
owners shall pay a sewer connection fee of $2,000 as set forth in
Ordinance No. 409-89 and shall not be subject to such indexed
increase.
(5) For all other property owners, the sewer connection fee shall be
$12,000 for the years 1997 and 1998 minus construction costs. For
subsequent years, the sewer connection fee shall be $12,000 plus a
percentage equal to the percentage increase in the average index
between the year in which the special benefit assessment was
assessed and the year next preceding the year in which the
property owner applies for a sewer connection permit minus
construction costs. In the event the cost of construction exceeds
29.Editor's Note: The resolution referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
Borough Clerk attached to Ord. No. 625-98.
§ 198-3 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 198-3
194:304
§ 198-4. Sewer service charges. [Amended 7-24-2000 by Ord. No.
725-00; 11-18-2002 by Ord. No. 806-02; 12-1-2003 by Ord. No.
837-03; 3-1-2004 by Ord. No. 841-04; 4-17-2006 by Ord. No. 906-06;
4-23-2007 by Ord. No. 940-07; 2-16-2010 by Ord. No. 1005-10;
4-17-2017 by Ord. No. 1114-17; 1-2-2018 by Ord. No. 1119-17]
the average assessment for the sewer improvement into which
the property owner is connecting as increased by the percentage
increase in the index, then there shall be no sewer connection fee.
D. Payment of fees. Sewer connection fees shall be paid to the Borough
Clerk prior to the issuance of a building permit.
E. Bond. A cash bond in the amount of $500 shall be paid to the Borough
Clerk prior to the issuance of a building permit for a sewer connection.
In lieu of a cash bond of $500, the contractor performing the sewer
connection may post a bond in the amount of $10,000 in a form
satisfactory to the Borough Attorney. The ten-thousand-dollar bond will
secure the performance by the contractor of all sewer connections
within the Borough. Upon completion of the sewer connection, the
applicant must submit a certification from the Health Officer stating
that all septic tanks, seepage pits, dry well or cesspools have been
emptied of wastes, and removed or filled completely with gravel or
sand. Upon submission of the certification from the Health Officer and
inspection and approval of the sewer connection by the Construction
Code Official, the cash bond shall be returned to the applicant. If a bond
is posted by the contractor in lieu of the five-hundred-dollar cash bond
as provided hereinabove, then, upon request by the contractor and
approval of the request by the Health Officer and Construction Code
Official, the bond shall be returned to the contractor.
F. Other fees. The sewer connection fee shall be in addition to any
building permit fee for other fees or assessments that may be required
by statute or ordinance.
A. Effective January 1, 2018, the following schedule of sewer service
charges shall be charged to residents utilizing sanitary sewers for the
use, operation and maintenance of the sanitary sewer system in the
Borough:
(1) One-family dwelling, townhouse, condominium and other
multifamily uses: $651 per unit per year.
(2) One-family dwelling, townhouse, condominium and other
multifamily uses, one or more of owners of property is age 65 years
or more: $494 per unit per year. Property owner must provide proof
of age required by the Tax Collector and property must be primary
residence.
(3) One-family dwelling, townhouse, condominium and other
multifamily uses, property owner is eligible for real property tax
§ 198-3 RETAIL BUSINESSES § 198-4
194:305
§ 198-5. Harmful substances.
deduction as qualified New Jersey resident, senior citizen, disabled
person or surviving spouse and property must be primary
residence: $310 per unit per year. For purposes of determining
eligibility property owner must be eligible for real property tax
deduction in accordance with N.J.S.A.54:4-840 et seq. In order to
be eligible for said property tax deduction, the property owner
shall:
(a) Be a resident of the Borough;
(b) Have anticipated annual income combined with spouse not
exceeding $10,000 after a permitted exclusion of social
security benefits or federal government retirement disability
pension, or state, county, municipal government or their
political subdivisions and agencies retirement disability
pension; and
(c) Be a senior or disabled citizen or surviving spouse defined as:
[1] Age 65 or more years as of December 31 of the prior year;
or
[2] Permanently and totally disabled and unable to be
gainfully employed as of December 31 of the prior year; or
[3] Surviving spouse as of October 1 of the prior year and not
remarried.
(4) Nonresidential and all other uses: an amount to be calculated by
the Mayor and Council based on the user's actual water
consumption for the prior year multiplied by a rate as determined
by the Mayor and Council. The rate shall be based on the revenue
required to meet the amount appropriated by the Borough for the
use, operation and maintenance of the sanitary sewer system. The
rate shall be $0.76 per 100 gallons of water consumed by the user
during the year prior to the imposition of the sewer charge. If the
Borough is unable to determine the amount of water consumed by
the sewer user during the year prior to the imposition of the charge
the sewer charge may be based on an estimate of water usage as
determined by the Borough Engineer.
B. Payment; interest; lien. The sewer service charge shall be assessed on a
semiannual basis. The rate of interest on delinquent charges shall be as
provided by law. Liens for unpaid sewer service charges and interest
shall be enforceable in the manner provided for real property tax liens
in Chapter 5 of Title 54 of the Revised Statutes.
A. Prohibited substances. It shall be unlawful to permit or cause the flow
of any of the following substances into the sanitary sewer system of the
Borough:
§ 198-4 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 198-5
194:306
(1) Any grease, fatty material, offal, or garbage;
(2) Any stone dust, sand, dirt, gravel, sawdust, metal filings, broken
glass, or any material which may cause or create an obstruction in
the sewer;
(3) Gasoline, benzine, fuel oil, or any petroleum products or volatile
liquids; or
(4) Milk or any liquid milk waste products in quantities in excess of 10
gallons during each twenty-four-hour period.
B. Chemicals. It shall be unlawful to cause or permit to flow into the
sanitary sewer system any cyanide, phenols or any other chemical or
substance which interferes with or prevents the functioning of the
sanitary sewer system.
C. Interception. Every building or premises where any commercial or
industrial operations are conducted or permitted which result in the
discharge into the sanitary sewer system of the Borough of any of the
products, waste products or other substances in the manner and to the
extent prohibited in this chapter, including but not limited to
restaurants, shall be equipped with an adequate and suitable catch
basin, grease trap, filter or other interceptor, installed in such a manner
that the products, waste products, or other substances herein set forth
will not flow into or be discharged into the sanitary system. All new
commercial or industrial construction or alterations or reconstruction
of existing sewerage facilities must necessarily comply with applicable
building and health codes for the installation of facilities required by
this section. It shall be unlawful to permit the flow of waste from such
building or premises into the sanitary sewer system unless such
interceptor is installed and in good working order.
D. Other prohibited discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged any stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff, yard drainage,
yard fountain, pond overflow or any substance other than sanitary
sewage into the sanitary collection system. No roof runoff, sump pump,
swimming pool discharge or surface water drainage shall be connected
to the sanitary sewer system, and no building shall be constructed nor
shall any existing buildings be hereafter altered in such a manner that
the roof drainage or any other source of discharge or drainage other
than sanitary sewage shall connect with the sanitary sewer system
inside or outside the building. [Added 12-20-2004 by Ord. No.
872-04]
E. Right of inspection. Every property owner that discharges into the
Borough's sanitary sewer system shall allow the Borough's
Construction Official or Borough Engineer to inspect the property and
any buildings thereon to confirm that there is no sump pump or other
prohibited discharges into the sanitary sewer system. Any person
refusing to allow their property to be inspected in accordance with this
§ 198-5 RETAIL BUSINESSES § 198-5
194:307
§ 198-6. Sewer connections by licensed plumbers; exception.
Any connection to the Borough's sanitary sewer system shall be performed
by a licensed plumber except as provided hereinbelow. The licensed
plumber and the applicant property owner shall execute the application for
a building permit for a sewer connection. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a
property owner may perform the connection to the sanitary sewer system
for his or her own property and, in that event, the applicant property owner
shall execute the application for a building permit for the sewer connection.
§ 198-7. Installation of dry sewer line; bond; violations and
penalties. [Added 7-15-2002 by Ord. No. 795-02]
Chapter 202
SMOKING
subsection shall be in violation of this section. [Added 12-20-2004 by
Ord. No. 872-04]
F. Violations and penalties. For any and all violations of this section, upon
conviction in a court of competent jurisdiction, a convicted offender
shall be liable for a penalty of not less than $100, nor more than $1,000,
or imprisonment for up to 90 days in the county jail, or both. Each
violation of this section shall be considered a separate offense. [Added
12-20-2004 by Ord. No. 872-04]
A. There may be circumstances when a property owner makes application
to install a sewer connection but has no present intention to connect to
the sanitary sewer system. For purposes of this chapter, this shall be
deemed to be an application for installation of a dry sewer line. In such
circumstances, the property owner shall be required at the time
application for a sewer connection permit is made to post a bond of
$500, which may be in cash or such other form as may be acceptable to
the Borough Attorney. Said bond shall be returned to the property
owner upon connection to the sanitary sewer system.
B. A property owner who installs a dry sewer line shall permit access to
the premises served by the sewer line by the Construction Official on a
regular basis to inspect the sanitary sewer connection to check whether
the line has been connected to the sanitary sewer system.
C. If a property owner who has installed a dry sewer line subsequently
connects to the sanitary sewer system, he shall notify the Construction
Official immediately upon making such connection.
D. A violation of Subsections B and C of this section shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punishable by a fine of up to $100. Each and every day in
which a violation exists shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 198-5 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 198-7
194:308
ARTICLE I
Tobacco Restrictions in School Zones
[Adopted 3-19-2007 by Ord. No. 936-07]
§ 202-1. Purpose.
To promote the health and safety of the youth of the Borough by prohibiting
the use of tobacco products by individuals under the age of 18 on or within
1,000 feet of a school within the Borough.
§ 202-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MINORS — Any person under the age of 18.
SCHOOL ZONE — Any and all properties owned by or leased to a public
or private elementary, middle or secondary educational institution within
the Borough which is used for school purposes, and shall include public
lands or public rights-of-way within a radius of 1,000 feet of such school
property. School zone shall not include private property where there is no
public right-of-way which may fall within 1,000 feet of such school property.
TOBACCO PRODUCT — Any product made from the tobacco plant for the
purpose of smoking, chewing, inhaling or other personal use, including, but
not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, and chewing tobacco
in any form.
§ 202-3. Prohibited use by minors.
It shall be unlawful for minors to use, or to possess in plain public view, any
tobacco product within a school zone within the Borough.
§ 202-4. Violations and penalties.
Unless otherwise provided by law, statute or ordinance, any person violating
any of the provisions of this article, upon conviction thereof and in the
discretion of the municipal court judge, shall pay a penalty of not less than
$25, and not more than $100 for each offense. In addition, penalties for
repeat violations under this article, not to include the first offense, may be in
the form of community service, not to exceed 15 hours for a second offense
and not to exceed 30 hours for any subsequent offense.
§ 202-1 RETAIL BUSINESSES § 202-4
194:309

ARTICLE II
Smoking In and Upon Public Buildings, Public Properties and
Public Parks and Recreational Facilities
[Adopted 9-2-2014 by Ord. No. 1074-14]
§ 202-5. Recitals.
The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Old Tappan hereby find and
determine that:
A. The smoking of tobacco products is a major contributor to indoor air
pollution and breathing secondhand smoke is a cause of disease to
nonsmokers;
B. Reliable studies have shown that environmental tobacco smoke is a
cause of cardiovascular disease in nonsmokers and that breathing
environmental tobacco smoke is a significant health hazard for
children, the elderly, and individuals with cardiovascular disease,
impaired respiratory function and asthma;
C. The United States Department of Environmental Protection Agency
(USEPA) has designated secondhand smoke as a Class A carcinogen as
well as a significant cause of respiratory problems in children;
D. The U.S. Surgeon General has found that the active smoking of tobacco
products and the passive inhalation of environmental tobacco smoke
are the most prevalent causes of preventable death, disease and
disability;
E. The U.S. Surgeon General has found that separating smokers from
nonsmokers within the same air space does not eliminate the exposure
of nonsmokers to environmental tobacco smoke;
F. The State of New Jersey has acknowledged that careless smoking is the
leading cause of death from fire;
G. Smoking leads to the inevitable discard of tobacco products and a
source of litter by those who fail to properly dispose of cigar, cigarette,
pipe or other combustible tobacco products in any manner or in any
form;
H. The State Legislature has deemed the control of smoking to be a
necessary and proper exercise of municipal authority pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et seq., 40:48-2, et seq., 26:3D-46 et seq.30 and
2C:33-13 for the preservation of public health, safety and welfare of the
community.
30.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 26:3D-46 to 26:3D-54 were repealed by L.2005, c. 383, § 11,
effective 4-15-2006.
§ 202-5 RETAIL BUSINESSES § 202-6
194:311
§ 202-6. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMON AREA — The walkways, parking areas, driveways, lawns, yards,
gardens of any public building and all accessory structures, improvements
or appurtenances used for the management, operation or maintenance of
the public building.
PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES — All public parks, pools, golf
courses (except that smoking shall not be prohibited on the outside deck
of the Clubhouse of the Old Tappan Golf Course), playgrounds, ball fields,
publicly owned or leased by the Borough of Old Tappan and all property
owned or leased by the Borough of Old Tappan upon which the public is
invited or upon which the public is permitted and where individuals gather
for recreational activities, including all areas adjacent to such facilities,
including, but not limited to, any parking area, driveway or drive aisle.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, cooperative association, private
corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee or any
other legal entity.
PUBLIC BUILDING — Any building, structure, facility or complex used by
the general public, or to which the general public is invited, including
appurtenant parking areas, which is owned, leased, operated or under the
ownership or control of the Borough of Old Tappan or the Old Tappan Board
of Education.
§ 202-7. Smoking prohibited; exceptions.
A. Except as otherwise provided herein, smoking shall be prohibited in the
following places:
(1) Every room, chamber, lobby, hallway, restroom, plaza, and other
common area in and upon any public building;
(2) Within a thirty-five-foot radius of any entrance or exit area of any
public building where smoke may enter the air people breathe
through such entrances, exits, windows or ventilation systems;
(3) Any vehicles owned and/or leased, in part or entirely, by the
Borough of Old Tappan;
(4) On or in any parks and recreation facilities.
B. This prohibition on smoking shall not apply to individuals in privately
owned vehicles, provided that all debris is retained within the vehicle,
nor shall it apply to the deck outside the Clubhouse at the Old Tappan
Golf Course.
§ 202-6 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 202-8
194:312
§ 202-8. Signs.
"Smoking" or "no smoking" signs, as appropriate, or the international "no
smoking" symbol (a picture of a burning cigarette inside a red circle with
a red bar across it) shall be clearly and conspicuously posted by the owner,
operator, manager, employer or such other person in control of every public
building where smoking is controlled by this article. The color of such
signs, when not of the international type, shall have letters that are distinct,
contrasting to the background and easily read. Letters shall have a
minimum height of 3/4 of an inch and should be posted in English and such
other languages as the governing body approves. The "no smoking" signs
shall be posted, at a minimum, on every doorway which provides an entry
to the building. The "smoking" signs shall be posted only in those areas so
designated by the governing body provided by this article.
§ 202-9. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforceable by a police officer,
employee or elected official of the Borough of Old Tappan, as well as by any
other individual who observes a violation. Any person seeking to enforce
the provisions of this article shall be authorized to file a complaint in the
Municipal Court of the Borough of Old Tappan.
§ 202-10. Violations and penalties.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any area where smoking
is prohibited under this article.
B. Unless a greater fine is permitted under N.J.S.A. 26:3D-56 et seq. for
smoking in specific areas defined therein, in which case such higher
level of fine shall be utilized, any person who smokes in an area in
which smoking is prohibited shall be subject to a maximum fine of $200
for the first offense, $400 for the second offense and $750 for a third or
subsequent offense.
C. Any person found guilty of defacing, tampering with or removing "no
smoking" or "smoking" signs which are required by this article shall be
guilty of a disorderly persons offense and subject to a maximum fine of
$500, plus the cost of replacing the sign.
D. Any juvenile adjudicated to have violated the provisions of this article
shall be subject to such penalties, fines or other discipline as may be
imposed upon an adult pursuant to this article.
§ 202-8 RETAIL BUSINESSES § 202-10
194:313
Chapter 205
SOIL REMOVAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 135. Subdivision of land — See Ch. 218.
§ 205-1. Findings.
The Mayor and Borough Council find that the unregulated and uncontrolled
disturbance, redistribution, filling, excavation and removal of soil has
resulted in conditions detrimental to the public safety, health and general
welfare, substantially hampering and deterring the efforts of the Borough
to effectuate the general purpose of municipal planning.
§ 205-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EARTH — The layer of soil immediately beneath the topsoil and above rock.
FILL — Material consisting solely of earth, rock, gravel, quarry process
or sand. All other materials are excluded. Excluded materials include, but
are not limited to, muck, peat, timber, debris, stumps and roots of trees,
demolished structures, construction or any other refuse. Further, no such
excluded material shall have been reprocessed so as to conform to the
definition of fill herein provided.
MOVE — To dig; to excavate; to remove; to import; to export; to deposit; to
place; to dump; to fill; to backfill; to deliver; to grade, regrade or level; to
rough grade or fine grade; to level, relocate or otherwise alter or change the
location or contour; to transport; to supply; to extract or to shift the location
of tree stumps. This term shall not be constructed to include plowing,
spading, cultivating, harrowing or disking of soil or any other operation
usually and ordinarily associated with the tilling of soil for agricultural or
horticultural purposes.
MUCK — Soft silt or clay, high in organic content, which is usually found in
swampy areas.
PEAT — Soil composed principally of partially decomposed vegetable
matter.
REDISTRIBUTION — Any change or alteration in the grade of any property.
ROCK — Stones and rocks, but not boulders which for the purposes of this
chapter are detached and rounded or worn pieces of rock or stone, the
greatest side of which is no less than six inches.
SOIL — Any earth, sand, clay, loam, gravel, humus, rock or dirt, without
regard to the presence or absence therein of organic matter.
§ 202-10 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 205-2
194:314
TOPSOIL — Soil that in its natural state constitutes the top layer of earth
on any land in the Borough and is composed of 2% or more, by weight, of
organic matter, and having the ability to support vegetation.
§ 205-3. Permit required; notice of application.
§ 205-4. Application information. [Amended 5-7-2001 by Ord. No.
756-01]
Applications shall be made on a form to be obtained from the Borough Clerk
and said application shall require the following:
A. No person, company, firm, corporation or entity shall excavate, remove
or move, or cause, allow, permit or suffer to be removed or moved, any
soil from, onto, in or upon any lot or right-of-way in the Borough unless
and until a permit therefor shall have been first obtained as provided
herein. This section shall apply only to the disturbance, excavation or
distribution of soil or fill when the disturbance, excavation or
redistribution of soil or fill exceeds 100 cubic yards of such soil or fill, or
when the said disturbance, excavation or redistribution results in a
change in the lot contours of greater than three inches. This section
shall also apply to any development or improvement that results in an
increase in impervious area of 150 square feet or more on an individual
tax lot. Stormwater retention facilities (i.e., seepage pits or other
devices) shall be required for any development or improvement that
results in an increase in impervious area of 150 square feet or more.
[Amended 10-1-2012 by Ord. No. 1051-12]
B. In addition to the soil movement permit required from the Borough,
additional permits or approvals may be required, including but not
limited to, approval from the Bergen County Soil Conservation District,
and freshwater wetlands and stream encroachment approvals from the
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
C. The applicant shall provide notice to all owners of property adjoining
the property for which a soil permit is sought by sending such property
owners notice of the application which specifically describes the soil
movement activity and advises that the application will be forwarded to
the Borough Engineer for report to the Mayor and Council within 15
days of the submission of the application. Such notice shall be sent by
certified mail within three business days of the applicant's submission
of the soil moving permit application.
D. The Borough shall have first option to receive any soil removed from a
site or building lot at no cost to the Borough and to designate the
placement of the soil within the Borough. [Added 5-7-2001 by Ord.
No. 756-01]
A. The name and address of the owner of the land.
§ 205-2 RETAIL BUSINESSES § 205-4
194:315
B. Lot and block numbers of the lands as shown on the current Tax Map of
the Borough.
C. A plot plan prepared by a professional engineer licensed to practice in
the State of New Jersey showing the following:
(1) Present contour lines and the proposed future contour lines
resulting from the intended disturbance, excavation or
redistribution of soil or fill.
(2) The grades resulting from the intended disturbance, excavation or
redistribution of soil or fill in relation to the topography of the
premises.
(3) The existing elevations on adjoining properties measured at a point
25 feet from the property lines of the property that is the subject of
the application or as otherwise directed by the Borough Engineer.
(4) Present and proposed cross sections in a form acceptable to the
Borough Engineer to verify the quantities of soil to be moved.
(5) Within the area of proposed disturbance, every living deciduous or
coniferous tree which has attained a height of at least 25 feet or a
diameter measured at a point on the tree four feet above the
ground of at least eight inches.
(6) The location of any existing and proposed structures and swimming
pools, if any.
(7) The location of any existing and proposed basements of structures
and dry wells, if any.
(8) Soil erosion and sediment control details in accordance with the
"Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey."
(9) The proposed location for soil or fill to be stored on the property
during construction, if any. When a soil moving permit is required
in accordance with Subsection A of § 205-3 of this chapter, the
Borough Engineer may waive one or more of the plot plan
requirements set forth in Subsection C of this § 205-4, provided
that the soil moving permit is for less than 250 cubic yards, and
provided further that the Borough Engineer deems that such
requirements to be waived are not necessary for the protection of
the public health, safety and general welfare based on the
considerations set forth in Subsection A of § 205-5.
D. The proposed dates of the commencement and completion of the work.
E. If the property was the subject of a development application before the
Borough Planning Board or Board of Adjustment, a copy of the
approved site plan.
F. Reason for removing or adding the soil or fill.
§ 205-4 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 205-4
194:316
§ 205-5. Consideration of application.
G. Type and quantity of soil or fill to be removed or added.
H. An engineer's estimate of the cost of the work to be performed.
I. A detailed statement explaining soil stabilization techniques to be
provided such as stabilization with haybales, swales, berms, walls and/
or revegetation.
J. Present and proposed surface water drainage and the means of control
of same.
K. Daily starting and finishing time during which machines are to be
operated consistent § 170-2A(8) of Chapter 170, Noise, of the Code of
the Borough of Old Tappan.
L. Fee, escrow deposits and bond requirements as set forth in §§ 205-7
and 205-8 of this chapter.
M. A map of the routes to be used by the vehicles in delivering and
removing equipment and material to and from the site, in importing
and/or exporting soil, and in accessing or leaving the site before export
and after import operations, including all streets and roads within the
Borough to be used in conjunction with soil movement operations.
N. A list of all prior soil movement activities, if any, including dates of
applications, detailed description of soil movement activity, and
disposition of applications.
O. Proof of service of notice on adjoining properties as required by § 205-3
hereinabove.
P. Such other pertinent data as the Borough Engineer may deem
necessary.
A. The written application made to the Borough Clerk shall be sent to the
Borough Engineer for review and recommendation to the Mayor and
Council within 15 days. In considering and reviewing the application,
the Borough Engineer shall be guided by, and take into consideration,
the public health, safety and general welfare, and particular
consideration shall be given to the following:
(1) Soil erosion by water and wind.
(2) Drainage including the construction of drainage structures, i.e.,
catch basins, pipes, seepage pits, etc., to mitigate adverse impacts
upon neighboring property owners.
(3) Soil fertility.
(4) Lateral support slopes and grades of abutting streets and lands.
(5) Land values and uses.
§ 205-4 RETAIL BUSINESSES § 205-5
194:317
§ 205-6. Soil importation.
(6) Impact on floodplain areas, if any.
(7) Preservation of trees.
(8) Consistency with an approved site plan for the property, if any.
(9) Any other factors relevant to the coordinated, adjusted and
harmonious development of the Borough.
B. If after considering the above factors the Borough Engineer determines
that the proposed disturbance, removal or redistribution of soil or fill
will not create conditions inimical to the public health, welfare and
safety, and will not result in the creation of any sharp declivities, pits of
depressions, soil erosion or fertility problems, depressed land values,
nor create any drainage, sewerage problems or other conditions of
danger, he shall recommend the approval of the application. The Mayor
and Council shall thereafter act on such application within 30 days of
receipt of the written report of the Borough Engineer. In accordance
with the standards above, no soil disturbance application will be
approved unless the disturbance of the soil is to be done as a part of a
plan to properly develop the lands of the application.
C. Upon approval of the application by the Mayor and Council, payment of
the fees and filing of the bond required by this chapter, the Borough
Clerk shall issue a soil disturbance permit. Notice of the grant or denial
of the application shall be given to the applicant within 45 days after
the application is filed.
D. In those instances where the Borough Engineer feels it is appropriate,
he may refer any application for soil movement to the Planning Board
for review and approval. [Amended 2-19-2002 by Ord. No. 773-02]
A. No person, company, firm, corporation or entity shall import fill
material in quantities of 50 cubic yards or more (for the entire project)
to any site within the Borough without first having filed a registration
and disclosure statement with the Borough Engineer, which shall
contain the following information:
(1) Identity of the source property of the fill material to be imported.
(2) Full name and address of the owner of the source property of the
fill material to be imported.
(3) Certification that the fill material is free from contamination and
information and documentation to support the certification
including such reports or sampling results deemed necessary by
the Borough Engineer to support said certification.
(4) Basis and/or reasons the fill material became available (i.e.,
pipeline excavation or tank removal excavation) and whether the
§ 205-5 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 205-6
194:318
§ 205-7. Fee; escrow for engineering and legal fees.
source property is contaminated or suspected of being
contaminated with hazardous substances or hazardous wastes.
(5) Nature, kind and composition of the fill material to be imported,
including any reports or sampling results conducted on the fill
material or material located in the area from which the fill material
is obtained.
(6) Quantity of fill material to be imported.
(7) Full name and address of the contract hauler of the fill material.
(8) Location of the property within the Borough on which the fill
material is to be deposited, and the full name and address of the
owner of said property.
(9) Such other information and data deemed necessary by the Borough
Engineer.
B. The Borough Engineer shall review all registration and disclosure
statements. If, in the opinion of the Borough Engineer, following a
physical examination and/or sampling and analysis of the fill material,
the presence of fill material is harmful, dangerous, toxic or hazardous
to the public, the Borough Engineer shall so notify the owner of the
property where the fill material is being deposited, and all fill material
importation activities shall cease immediately, and any fill material
already imported shall be removed in accordance with the directions of
the Borough Engineer. In determining whether fill material is harmful,
dangerous, toxic or hazardous to the public, the Borough Engineer shall
rely on standards established by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection. The number and types of samples required
to be collected and analyzed in order to assess the fill material shall be
at the sole discretion of the Borough Engineer based upon a review of
all information in the registration and disclosure statement. Upon such
notification, the owner shall establish an escrow deposit with the
Borough in an amount deemed sufficient by the Borough Engineer to
cover the estimated costs of the physical examination and/or sampling
and analysis.
A. At the time of application for the soil disturbance permit, the fee to be
paid by the applicant shall be computed at the rate of $0.10 per cubic
yard, multiplied by the number of cubic yards to be disturbed as stated
in the application and certified on the topographical map. In addition,
the applicant shall be required to pay any and all costs incurred by the
Borough for engineering surveys and reports, inspection fees and legal
fees.
B. The minimum fee for the grant of a soil disturbance permit shall be
$175. [Amended 5-17-2004 by Ord. No. 850-04]
§ 205-6 RETAIL BUSINESSES § 205-7
194:319
§ 205-8. Bond.
Before any permit for soil removal shall be granted or issued, the owner
or applicant shall file with the Mayor and Council a bond in form and with
surety acceptable to the Borough and in such amount as, in the opinion of
the Borough Engineer, shall be sufficient to insure the faithful performance
of the work to be undertaken pursuant to the permission granted by the
Mayor and Council pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. All bonds shall
conditioned as follows:
§ 205-9. Regulations concerning conduct of excavation.
Disturbance, excavation or redisturbance of soil or fill conducted under a
permit issued under this chapter shall be in accordance with the following
regulations:
C. In the event of denial of the soil disturbance application, the fee paid by
the applicant shall be refunded, except that all moneys and costs
incurred by the Borough for engineering surveys and reports,
inspection fees and legal fees shall be retained, and the balance
remaining shall be refunded to the applicant, together with a statement
of the costs and expenses incurred by the Borough in the processing of
the application.
D. In addition to the application fee and in addition to any escrow deposits
for professional fees required by the Borough under the provisions of
Chapter 45 of the Code of the Borough of Old Tappan, the applicant
shall pay the fees as set forth herein below as an initial deposit toward
reasonably anticipated Borough expenses for professional services and
costs. The initial escrow deposits for engineering and legal fees to be
paid by the applicant shall be as follows: [Amended 10-1-2012 by
Ord. No. 1051-12]
(1) For proposed new dwellings, including lots where an existing home
has been or is to be razed, and/or additions to dwellings where the
additional footprint exceeds 50% of the original building footprints:
$500.
(2) For all other applications: $300.
(3) In the event the initial escrow deposit is exhausted, the applicant
shall post an additional escrow deposit in an amount as determined
by the Borough Engineer based on the Borough Engineer’s
estimate of additional professional fees to be incurred.
A. That the permittee will complete the work authorized by the permit in
conformance with the terms of the permit and the provisions of this
chapter on or before the date of completion set forth in the application.
B. That the permittee will repair any public street, structure or land which
may be damaged as a result of the work authorized by the permit.
§ 205-7 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 205-9
194:320
§ 205-10. Enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Borough Engineer.
§ 205-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-7-2001 by Ord. No.
756-01]
Chapter 209
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 161.
Recycling facilities — See Ch. 218, § 218-45.
Solid Waste Code — See Ch. 296.
A. Operations shall be conducted so that there shall be no sharp
declivities, pits or depressions.
B. Lands shall be graded so as to conform the approved contour lines and
grades and shall be cleared of debris.
C. The top layer of soil, to a depth of six inches, shall not be removed from
the premises without the prior written approval of the Borough
Engineer, but shall be set aside and respread over the premises and
stabilized with seeding and planting when the remainder of the soil has
been removed.
D. Adequate measures shall be taken to prevent erosion or the depositing
of soil on surrounding lands, streets or Borough facilities.
E. All of the work described in this chapter shall be performed between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on any working day.
F. No soil movement shall be allowed which shall cause damage to
adjacent properties.
A. Failure to obtain the permit required hereunder, failure to complete the
work in accordance with the plans or the conditions of approval, or
within the time specified for completion, or other violations of this
chapter shall be punishable in accordance with the provisions of Article
III, General Penalty, of Chapter 1, General Provisions, of the Code of the
Borough of Old Tappan. Each and every day in which a violation exists
shall constitute a separate violation.
B. In addition to the foregoing, upon conviction of a violation of the
provisions of § 205-6 hereof pertaining to soil importation, the
maximum penalty shall be one or more of the following: a fine not
exceeding $5,000 for each and every offense or imprisonment in the
county jail for not more than 90 days. Each and every day in which a
violation exists shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 205-9 RETAIL BUSINESSES § 205-11
194:321

ARTICLE I
Dumping
[Adopted 5-26-1975 as Sec. 3-5 of the 1975 Code]
§ 209-1. Accumulation on public and private land prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to throw, dump, cast or deposit paper, paper products,
bottles, tin cans, containers, brush, weeds, dead or dying trees, tree roots,
stumps, obnoxious growth, filth, garbage, trash, dirt, stones or other
product of excavation, unused, discarded or waste materials, or any other
debris in or upon any public place, or to accumulate or to permit or suffer
the accumulation thereof upon any private lands within the borough.
§ 209-2. Exceptions.
This article shall not be construed to prevent dumping of permitted
materials in the borough disposal area or the placing of such materials
for pickup by an authorized scavenger or any authorized contractor or
employee of the borough or the Board of Health.
§ 209-3. Depositing snow and ice on roads after plowing.
No person shall throw, put or place snow, ice or slush upon the traveled
portion of any borough road after such road has been plowed.
§ 209-1 RETAIL BUSINESSES § 209-3
194:323

ARTICLE II
Recycling
[Adopted by Ord. No. 403-88, as amended through Ord. No. 515-94]
§ 209-4. Findings.
§ 209-5. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALUMINUM CANS — A lightweight, silver-white, metallic element which is
used to make beverage cans.
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS — Source-separated
nonputrescible recyclable material generated from the construction,
alteration, repair, maintenance and/or demolition of structures. This
material shall include concrete, bricks, block, ferrous and nonferrous scrap,
asphalt, asphalt shingles, recyclable wood scrap, and any other recyclable
material generated from the construction, alteration, repair, maintenance
and/or demolition of a structure or structures.
CORRUGATED CARDBOARD — Cardboard of the type used to make
cardboard boxes, cartons, pasteboard and similar corrugated and kraft
paper material.
FERROUS SCRAP — All metal scrap containing steel and/or cast iron.
GLASS — All products made from silica or sand, soda ash and limestone
which are transparent or translucent and used for packaging or bottling of
various matter and all other materials commonly known as glass; excluding,
however, blue and flat glass, commonly known as window glass.
GRASS — Green herbage sending up spike-like shoots or blades.
HIGH-GRADE PAPER — White typing and ledger paper, white note pad
paper, copier paper, carbonless computer printout, Manila tab cards and file
folders.
HOUSEHOLD-GENERATED BATTERIES — Any type of button, coin,
cylindrical, rectangular or other shaped, enclosed device or sealed
container consisting of a combination of two or more voltaic or galvanic
cells, electrically connected to produce electric energy, composed of lead,
lithium, manganese, mercury, mercuric oxide, silver oxide, cadmium, zinc,
A. The conservation of recyclable materials is an important national and
local concern.
B. Conservation of recyclable materials is necessary to improve our
environment.
C. The Mayor and Council deem it to be in the best interests of the
residents of the Borough of Old Tappan to establish a recycling program
which provides for the collection of certain recyclable materials.
§ 209-4 RETAIL BUSINESSES § 209-5
194:325
copper or other metals, or any combination thereof, and designed for
household use, including any alkaline, manganese, lithium, mercuric oxide,
silver oxide, zinc-air or zinc-carbon battery, nickel-cadmium rechargeable
battery or sealed lead rechargeable battery.
LEAVES — Those materials naturally formed from trees and bushes that are
suitable for composting and mulching purposes.
MIXED PAPER — A mixture of all types of paper including, but not limited
to, corrugated, high-grade paper, newspaper, magazines, telephone
directories, wrapping paper, box board, books, grocery bags and junk mail.
NEWSPAPER — Paper of the type commonly referred to as "newsprint"
and distributed at stated intervals, usually daily or weekly, having printed
thereon news and opinions and containing advertisements and other
matters of public interest. Expressly excluded, however, are all magazines
or similar periodicals as well as all other paper periodicals of any nature
whatsoever.
RECYCLING CENTER — Any facility designed and operated solely for
receiving, storing, processing and transferring source-separated
nonputrescible or source-separated commingled nonputrescible metal,
glass, paper, plastic containers and corrugated and other cardboard or
other recyclable materials approved by the Department of Public Works.
REGULATIONS — Such rules, implementations, dates, schedules of times
and such other requirements promulgated by the Recycling Coordinator in
conjunction with the Superintendent of the Department of Public Works and
approved by the Mayor and Council as may be necessary to carry out the
purposes and objectives of this article.
SOLID WASTE — All garbage and rubbish normally produced by the
occupants of commercial, industrial and residential property and disposed
of by private or public pickup.
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Recyclable materials,
including, but not limited to, aluminum cans, construction and demolition
debris, corrugated cardboard, ferrous scrap, glass, grass, high-grade paper,
household-generated batteries, leaves, mixed paper, newspaper, tin cans,
used motor oil and white goods, which are kept separate and apart from
residential, commercial and institutional solid waste by the generator
thereof for the purposes of collection, disposition and recycling.
TIN CANS — Cans made of steel or tin. The most common are tin-plated
steel cans which contain food.
WHITE GOODS — Domestic or household bulky items, including washing
machines, dryers, refrigerators, stoves, water heaters, dishwashers and
household appliances, of primarily ferrous metal.
§ 209-6. Recycling Coordinator.
A. The position of Recycling Coordinator is hereby created and established
within the Borough of Old Tappan.
§ 209-5 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 209-6
194:326
§ 209-7. Responsibilities of property owners and occupants.
[Amended 7-20-2009 by Ord. No. 990-09]
§ 209-8. Separation and placement in containers.
B. The Recycling Coordinator shall be appointed by the Borough Council
for a term of one year, expiring December 31 of each year. The term of
the person first appointed as Recycling Coordinator shall expire as of
the next annual reorganization meeting following his/her appointment.
A. All persons who are owners, lessees or occupants of residential
property in the Borough shall separate aluminum cans, glass beverage
containers (clear, green and brown), grass, household-generated
batteries, leaves, newspaper, corrugated cardboard, mixed paper, Type
1 and Type 2 plastic containers, construction and demolition debris
(concrete, tree parts, nonferrous and ferrous metals and asphalt, where
practical)
B. Commercial and institutional owners, lessees and occupants shall
separate the same recyclable materials as residents and, in addition,
high-grade paper.
C. The procedures for pickup, collection and recycling of these sourceseparated
recyclable materials shall be specified in the regulations
promulgated pursuant to this article.
A. Aluminum cans and tin cans, separately, shall be reasonably rinsed and
secured in suitable reusable containers supplied by the owner, lessee or
occupant.
B. Glass shall be separated and reasonably rinsed, and metal caps shall be
removed. This glass shall be contained in suitable reusable containers
supplied by the owner, lessee or occupant. Containers constructed of
paper or cardboard materials or plastic bags shall be deemed not
suitable for this purpose, but reusable wood, metal or plastic containers
shall be deemed suitable.
C. (Reserved)31
D. Newspapers shall be bundled in units not to exceed 12 inches in height.
Bundles may be placed in paper bags or string tied or in such a manner
designated by the regulations promulgated by this article. Such bundles
shall not be contained in plastic bags.
E. White goods shall not be placed at the curb for collection unless special
arrangements have first been made with the Superintendent of the
Department of Public Works.
31.Editor's Note: Editor’s Note: Former Subsection C, regarding the placement and collection
of leaves, was repealed 9-19-2005 by Ord. No. 890-05. See now Ch. 250, Yard Waste.
§ 209-6 RETAIL BUSINESSES § 209-8
194:327
§ 209-9. Pickup and collection.
The Recycling Coordinator, in conjunction with the Superintendent of the
Department of Public Works, shall promulgate reasonable regulations
establishing the commencement dates for mandatory separation of
recyclable materials and the manner, dates and times for the collection of
same in accordance with the terms of this article. Any such regulations
promulgated by the Recycling Coordinator, in conjunction with the
Superintendent of the Department of Public Works, shall be approved by
the Mayor and Council and may be changed, modified, repealed or amended
in whole or in part by the Mayor and Council. A copy of such regulations
promulgated by the Recycling Coordinator, in conjunction with the
Superintendent of the Department of Public Works, as approved, modified
or amended, shall be available for public inspection at the office of the
Borough Clerk during regular office hours. Recyclable materials may be
delivered to a recycling center in accordance with such published
regulations.
§ 209-10. Used motor oil.
It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of used motor oil in any
manner other than through an authorized used oil collection site. On and
after the enactment of this article, and in accordance with existing state
regulations, N.J.S.A. 14A:3-11,32 all service stations and motor vehicle
reinspection stations with used oil holding tanks shall accept up to five
gallons at a time of used motor oil from individuals changing oil from cars,
lawn mowers or motorcycles. Residents may also deliver used motor oil to a
recycling center.
§ 209-11. Ownership of recyclables after placement at curb.
From the time recyclable materials are placed at the curb by the owner,
lessee or occupant for collection by the borough such recyclable materials
shall become the property of the borough. It shall be a violation of this
article for any person not authorized by the borough to collect or pick up,
or cause to be collected or picked up, any such recyclable materials for
any purpose whatsoever once the same has been placed at the curb. Any
and each such collection in violation hereof from one or more premises
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense punishable as hereinafter
provided.
F. For pickup of a refrigerator, freezer, air conditioner or dehumidifier, the
owner, lessee or occupant shall fill out a request on a form to be
supplied by the Borough Clerk and pay such fees at the time as may
reimburse the borough for the cost to the borough for disposing of the
refrigerator, freezer, air conditioner or dehumidifier.
32.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.36.
§ 209-8 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 209-12
194:328
§ 209-12. Mixing of recyclables with other solid waste prohibited.
No person shall collect, transport or dispose of solid waste to landfill or
incineration which contains source-separated recyclable materials.
§ 209-13. Collection of recyclables by authorized groups.
No provision herein shall be construed to prohibit groups or individuals
who shall be authorized by the Superintendent of the Department of Public
Works from collecting or picking up recyclable materials at curbside or
otherwise in such a manner and under such terms and conditions as shall
be prescribed by the Superintendent. No such collection or pickup shall
conflict or interfere with pickup and collection by the borough and its duly
authorized agent(s).
§ 209-14. Enforcement.
The Recycling Coordinator, the Police Department and the Department
of Public Works are each hereby authorized and directed to enforce this
article.
§ 209-15. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article or the regulations
issued pursuant hereto following a maximum of two warnings, shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than $25 nor more than
$500.
§ 209-12 RETAIL BUSINESSES § 209-15
194:329

ARTICLE III
Collection
[Adopted by Ord. No. 500-93, as amended through Ord. No. 541-95]
§ 209-16. Definitions.
The following words for the purpose of this article shall have the following
meanings:
REGULAR SOLID WASTE COLLECTION SERVICE — The scheduled pickup
and removal of solid waste from residential, commercial or institutional
premises located within the boundaries of the borough at least once a week.
RESPONSIBLE SOLID WASTE GENERATOR — Any property owner, tenant
or occupant of any single-family dwelling or multiple dwelling, or the owner
of any commercial or institutional building or structure located within the
boundaries of the borough, who generates solid waste at those premises.
SOLID WASTE — Garbage, refuse, and other discarded materials resulting
from industrial, commercial and agricultural operations, and from domestic
and community activities, and shall include all other waste materials
including liquids, except for solid animal and vegetable wastes collected by
swine producers licensed by the State Department of Agriculture to collect,
prepare and feed such wastes to swine on their own farms. Solid waste
that is reduced to compost on the property of the solid waste generator or
recycled shall not be included in this definition of "solid waste," provided
that, where solid waste is reduced to compost, the compost does not emit a
noxious odor or otherwise become a detriment to the public health. 33
SOLID WASTE COLLECTION — The activity related to pickup and
transportation of solid waste from its source or location to a solid waste
facility or other destination.
SOLID WASTE CONTAINER — A receptacle, container or bag suitable for
the depositing of solid waste.
SOLID WASTE FACILITIES — The plants, structures and other real and
personal property acquired, constructed or operated or to be acquired,
constructed or operated by any person pursuant to the provisions of any
statute, including transfer stations, incinerators, resource recovery
facilities, sanitary landfill facilities or other plants for the disposal of solid
waste, and all vehicles, equipment and other real and personal property and
rights therein and appurtenances necessary or useful and convenient for
the collection or disposal of solid waste in a sanitary manner.
§ 209-17. Contracting for collection services.
In the case of single-family residential housing, multifamily residential
housing, commercial and institutional buildings and structures located
within the borough, each responsible solid waste generator, if he or she
has not already done so, shall enter into a contract for regular solid waste
33.Editor's Note: See Ch. 161, Littering, § 161-9.
§ 209-16 RETAIL BUSINESSES § 209-17
194:331
collection service with any person lawfully providing private solid waste
collection services within the borough.
§ 209-18. Containers for waste deposit in multiple dwellings.
In addition to the foregoing, it shall be the responsibility of the owner of a
multiple dwelling to provide a sufficient number of appropriate solid waste
containers for the deposit of nonrecyclable waste materials to be disposed
of as solid waste.
§ 209-19. Exemptions.
A. The requirements of this article shall not apply to solid waste
generators who transport the solid waste which is generated at his or
her residential premises directly to the solid waste facility utilized by
the borough for disposal. A solid waste generator who is transporting
the solid waste which is generated at his or her residential premises
directly to the solid waste facility utilized by the borough for disposal
shall furnish proof that the responsible solid waste generator is
transporting the solid waste which is generated at his or her residential
premises directly to the solid waste facility utilized by the borough for
disposal to the Borough Clerk at least once every 12 months. In order to
fulfill the requirements of this section, the responsible solid waste
generator may include the proof of service with the municipal tax
payment mailed to the Borough Tax Collector.
B. Persons who do not generate solid waste at his or her residential
premises such as one who recycles and/or composts all of his or her
solid waste shall not be subject to the requirements of this article.
§ 209-17 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 209-19
194:332
Chapter 212
STORM SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sanitary sewers — See Ch. 198. Individual sewage disposal systems — See Ch.
293.
§ 209-19 STORM SEWERS § 209-19
212:333

ARTICLE I
Improper Disposal of Waste
§ 212-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the spilling, dumping or disposal
of materials other than stormwater to the municipal separate storm sewer
system (MS4) operated by the Borough, so as to protect public health,
safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 212-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough or other public body and
is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 212-3. Prohibited conduct.
The spilling, dumping or disposal of materials other than stormwater,
including but not limited to the blowing or disposal of leaves or grass
clippings, into the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the
Borough is prohibited. The spilling, dumping or disposal of materials other
than stormwater in such a manner as to cause the discharge of pollutants
to the municipal separate storm sewer system is also prohibited.
§ 212-4. Exceptions to prohibition.
The following activities are not prohibited by this article:
A. Waterline flushing and discharges from potable water sources;
B. Uncontaminated groundwater (e.g., infiltration, crawl space or
basement sump pumps, foundation or footing drains, rising
groundwaters);
§ 212-1 STORM SEWERS § 212-4
212:335
§ 212-5. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department and the Department
of Public Works.
§ 212-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000.
C. Air-conditioning condensate (excluding contact and noncontact cooling
water);
D. Irrigation water (including landscape and lawn watering runoff);
E. Flows from springs, riparian habitats and wetlands, water reservoir
discharges and diverted stream flows;
F. Residential car washing water and residential swimming pool
discharges;
G. Sidewalk, driveway and street wash water;
H. Flows from fire-fighting activities; and,
I. Flows from rinsing of the following equipment with clean water:
(1) Equipment.
(a) Beach maintenance equipment immediately following their use
for their intended purposes; and
(b) Equipment used in the application of salt and de-icing
materials immediately following salt and de-icing material
applications. Prior to rinsing with clean water, all residual salt
and de-icing materials must be removed from equipment and
vehicles to the maximum extent practicable using dry cleaning
methods (e.g., shoveling and sweeping). Recovered materials
are to be returned to storage for reuse or properly discarded.
(2) Rinsing of equipment as noted in the above situation is limited to
exterior, undercarriage and exposed parts and does not apply to
engines or other enclosed machinery.
§ 212-4 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 212-6
212:336
ARTICLE II
Illicit Connections
§ 212-7. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit illicit connections to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Borough, so as to protect
public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure
to comply.
§ 212-8. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. The definitions below
are the same as or based on corresponding definitions in the New Jersey
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules, N.J.A.C. 7:14A-1.2.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Waste and wastewater from humans or household
operations.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any physical or nonphysical connection that
discharges domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water, process wastewater
or other industrial waste (other than stormwater) to the municipal separate
storm sewer system operated by the Borough, unless that discharge is
authorized under a NJPDES permit other than the Tier A Municipal
Stormwater General Permit (NJPDES Permit Number NJ0141852).
Nonphysical connections may include, but are not limited to, leaks, flows or
overflows into the municipal separate storm sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Nondomestic waste, including, but not limited to,
those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b) or (c) of the Federal
Clean Water Act [33 U.S.C. § 1317(a), (b), or (c)].
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough or other public body and
is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
NJPDES PERMIT — A permit issued by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NJPDES) rules, N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used to reduce temperature
for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come into direct contact
with any raw material, intermediate product (other than heat) or finished
product. Noncontact cooling water may, however, contain algaecides or
§ 212-7 STORM SEWERS § 212-8
212:337
biocides to control fouling of equipment such as heat exchangers and/or
corrosion inhibitors.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Any water which, during manufacturing or
processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production or
use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct
or waste product. Process wastewater includes, but is not limited to,
leachate and cooling water other than noncontact cooling water.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 212-9. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged through an illicit
connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by
the Borough any domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water, process
wastewater or other industrial waste (other than stormwater).
§ 212-10. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department and the Department
of Public Works.
§ 212-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this
article shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000. Every day in which a
violation of this article exists shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 212-8 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 212-11
212:338
Chapter 213
STORMWATER CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use procedures — See Ch. 45.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 135.
Sanitary sewers — See Ch. 198.
Storm sewers — See Ch. 212.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 218.
§ 213-1. Scope and purpose.
A. Policy statement. Flood control, groundwater recharge and pollutant
reduction through nonstructural or low-impact techniques shall be
explored before relying on structural BMPs. Structural BMPs should be
integrated with nonstructural stormwater management strategies and
proper maintenance plans. Nonstructural strategies include both
environmentally sensitive site design and source controls that prevent
pollutants from being placed on the site or from being exposed to
stormwater. Source control plans should be developed based upon
physical site conditions and the origin, nature and the anticipated
quantity or amount of potential pollutants. Multiple stormwater
management BMPs may be necessary to achieve the established
performance standards for water quality, quantity, and groundwater
recharge.
B. Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to establish minimum
stormwater management requirements and controls for "major
development," as defined in § 213-2.
C. Applicability.
(1) This chapter shall be applicable to all site plans and subdivisions
for the following major developments that require preliminary or
final site plan or subdivision review:
(a) Nonresidential major developments; and
(b) Aspects of residential major developments that are not
preempted by the Residential Site Improvement Standards at
N.J.A.C. 5:21.
(2) This chapter shall also be applicable to all major developments
undertaken by the Borough.
D. Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements.
Development approvals issued for subdivisions and site plans pursuant
to this chapter are to be considered an integral part of development
approvals under the subdivision and site plan review process and do not
§ 212-11 STORM SEWERS § 213-1
212:339
§ 213-2. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. The
definitions below are the same as or based on the corresponding definitions
in the Stormwater Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.2.
BMPS — Best management practices as set forth in the New Jersey
Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual; at http://www.state.nj.us/
dep/njgs/; or at New Jersey Geological Survey, 29 Arctic Parkway, P.O. Box
427, Trenton, New Jersey 08625-0427; (609) 984-6587.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Old Tappan.
CAFRA PLANNING MAP — The geographic depiction of the boundaries for
Coastal Planning Areas, CAFRA Centers, CAFRA Cores and CAFRA Nodes
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:7E-5B.3.
CAFRA CENTERS, CORES or NODES — Those areas within boundaries
accepted by the Department pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:8E-5B.
COMPACTION — The increase in soil bulk density.
CORE — A pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic uses serving
the surrounding municipality, generally including housing and access to
public transportation.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — An agency designated by the County Board
of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater management plans
and implementing ordinance(s). The county review agency may either be
a county planning agency or a county water resource association created
under N.J.S.A. 58:16A-55.5, if the ordinance or resolution delegates
authority to approve, conditionally approve or disapprove municipal
stormwater management plans and implementing ordinances.
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGNATED CENTER — A state development and redevelopment plan
center as designated by the State Planning Commission such as urban,
regional, town, village or hamlet.
relieve the applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits
or approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule,
act or ordinance. In their interpretation and application, the provisions
of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for
the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare. This
chapter is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other
ordinances, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law except
that, where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different
from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation or other
provision of law, the more restrictive provisions or higher standards
shall control.
§ 213-1 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 213-2
212:340
DESIGN ENGINEER — A person professionally qualified and duly licensed
in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may include, but not
necessarily be limited to, development of project requirements, creation
and development of project design and preparation of drawings and
specifications.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or structure, any mining
excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any building or
other structure, or land or extension of use of land, by any person, for which
permission is required under the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq. In the case of development of agricultural lands, development means
any activity that requires a state permit any activity reviewed by the County
Agricultural Board (CAB) and the State Agricultural Development
Committee (SADC), and municipal review of any activity not exempted by
the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq.
DRAINAGE AREA — A geographic area within which stormwater, sediments
or dissolved materials drain to a particular receiving water body or to a
particular point along a receiving water body.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREAS — An area or feature which is
of significant environmental value, including but not limited to stream
corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered or
threatened species; large areas of contiguous open space or upland forest;
steep slopes; and wellhead protection and groundwater recharge areas.
Habitats of endangered or threatened species are identified using the
Department's Landscape Project as approved by the Department's
Endangered and Nongame Species Program.
EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD — A neighborhood designated by the
Urban Coordinating Council in consultation and conjunction with the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-69.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice or gravity.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer of
material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
INFILTRATION — The process by which water seeps into the soil from
precipitation.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Any development that provides for ultimately
disturbing one or more acres of land. "Disturbance," for the purpose of this
rule, is the placement of impervious surface or exposure and/or movement
of soil or bedrock or clearing, cutting or removing of vegetation.
MUNICIPALITY — Any city, borough, town, township or village.
NODE — An area designated by the State Planning Commission
concentrating facilities and activities which are not organized in a compact
form.
§ 213-2 STORM SEWERS § 213-2
212:341
NUTRIENT — A chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or
phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the development of
organisms.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, the Borough of Old Tappan or political subdivision of this state
subject to municipal jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law,
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge, munitions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes, radioactive
substance [except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as
amended (42 U.S.C. § 2011 et seq.)], thermal waste, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal, agricultural, and
construction waste or runoff, or other residue discharged directly or
indirectly to the land, groundwaters or surface waters of the state, or
to a domestic treatment works. Pollutant includes both hazardous and
nonhazardous pollutants.
RECHARGE — The amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates into
the ground and is not evapotranspired.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is
being transported or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water or
gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE — The lot or lots upon which a major development is to occur or has
occurred.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin.
STATE DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN METROPOLITAN
PLANNING AREA (PA1) — An area delineated on the State Plan Policy Map
and adopted by the State Planning Commission that is intended to be the
focus for much of the state's future redevelopment and revitalization efforts.
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — The geographic application of the state
development and redevelopment plan's goals and statewide policies, and
the official map of these goals and policies.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface or is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or drainage facilities or
conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Water flow on the surface of the ground or in
storm sewers resulting from precipitation.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN -- — An excavation or embankment
and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A stormwater
management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a detention basin or
infiltration basin), retain water in a permanent pool (a retention basin), or
be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most constructed stormwater
wetlands).
§ 213-2 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 213-2
212:342
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Any structural or
nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program or other
method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated
pollutants, or to induce or control the infiltration or groundwater recharge
of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal nonstormwater discharges into
stormwater conveyances.
TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — A flood hazard area, which may be
influenced by stormwater runoff from inland areas, but which is primarily
caused by the Atlantic Ocean.
URBAN COORDINATING COUNCIL EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD
— A neighborhood given priority access to state resources through the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority.
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONES — A zone designated by the New Jersey
Enterprise Zone Authority pursuant to the New Jersey Urban Enterprise
Zones Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60 et seq.
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA — Previously developed portions of
areas:
§ 213-3. General standards.
A. Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) as the Metropolitan
Planning Area (PA1), Designated Centers, Cores or Nodes;
B. Designated as CAFRA Centers, Cores or Nodes;
C. Designated as Urban Enterprise Zones; and
D. Designated as Urban Coordinating Council Empowerment
Neighborhoods.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs,
streams, wetlands and bodies of surface or ground water, whether
natural or artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or
subject to its jurisdiction.
WETLANDS OR WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated
by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient
to support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a
prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions, commonly known as "hydrophytic vegetation."
A. Design and performance standards for stormwater management
measures.
(1) Stormwater management measures for major development shall be
developed to meet the erosion control, groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity and stormwater runoff quality
standards in § 213-4. To the maximum extent practicable, these
standards shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater
management strategies into the design. If these strategies alone
§ 213-2 STORM SEWERS § 213-3
212:343
§ 213-4. Stormwater management requirements for major
development.
are not sufficient to meet these standards, structural stormwater
management measures necessary to meet these standards shall be
incorporated into the design.
(2) The standards in this chapter apply only to new major development
and are intended to minimize the impact of stormwater runoff on
water quality and water quantity in receiving water bodies and
maintain groundwater recharge. The standards do not apply to new
major development to the extent that alternative design and
performance standards are applicable under a regional stormwater
management plan or water quality management plan adopted in
accordance with Department rules.
A. The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of a
major development in accordance with § 213-10.
B. Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse impacts of
concentrated flow on habitat for threatened and endangered species as
documented in the Department's Landscape Project or Natural
Heritage Database established under N.J.S.A. 13:1B-15.147 through
13:1B-15.150, particularly Helonias bullata (swamp pink) and/or
Clemmys muhlnebergi (bog turtle).
C. The following linear development projects are exempt from the
groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity and stormwater
runoff quality requirements of § 213-4F and G:
(1) The construction of an underground utility line, provided that the
disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion;
(2) The construction of an aboveground utility line, provided that the
existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent
practicable; and
(3) The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk
or trail with a maximum width of 14 feet, provided that the access
is made of permeable material.
D. A waiver from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity and stormwater runoff quality requirements
of § 213-4F and G may be obtained for the enlargement of an existing
public roadway or railroad, or the construction or enlargement of a
public pedestrian access, provided that the following conditions are
met:
(1) The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the
project that cannot be accomplished by any other means;
§ 213-3 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 213-4
212:344
(2) The applicant demonstrates through an alternatives analysis that,
through the use of nonstructural and structural stormwater
management strategies and measures, the option selected
complies with the requirements of § 213-4F and G to the maximum
extent practicable;
(3) The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the requirements
of § 213-4F and G, existing structures currently in use, such as
homes and buildings, would need to be condemned; and
(4) The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other
rights to areas, including the potential to obtain through
condemnation lands not falling under Subsection D(3) above within
the upstream drainage area of the receiving stream, that would
provide additional opportunities to mitigate the requirements of
§ 213-4F and G that were not achievable on site.
E. Nonstructural stormwater management strategies.
(1) To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in § 213-4F and
G shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater
management strategies set forth at § 213-4E into the design. The
applicant shall identify the nonstructural measures incorporated
into the design of the project. If the applicant contends that it is not
feasible for engineering, environmental or safety reasons to
incorporate any nonstructural stormwater management measures
identified in Subsection E(2) below into the design of a particular
project, the applicant shall identify the strategy considered and
provide a basis for the contention.
(2) Nonstructural stormwater management strategies incorporated
into site design shall:
(a) Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss;
(b) Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect the
flow of runoff over impervious surfaces;
(c) Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation;
(d) Minimize the decrease in the time of concentration from
preconstruction to postconstruction. "Time of concentration" is
defined as the time it takes for runoff to travel from the
hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to the point
of interest within a watershed;
(e) Minimize land disturbance, including clearing and grading;
(f) Minimize soil compaction;
§ 213-4 STORM SEWERS § 213-4
212:345
(g) Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages
retention and planting of native vegetation and minimizes the
use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides;
(h) Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas;
(i) Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the use or
exposure of pollutants at the site in order to prevent or
minimize the release of those pollutants into stormwater
runoff. Such source controls include, but are not limited to:
[1] Site design features that help to prevent accumulation of
trash and debris in drainage systems, including features
that satisfy § 213-4E(3) below;
[2] Site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash
and debris from drainage systems;
[3] Site design features that help to prevent and/or contain
spills or other harmful accumulations of pollutants at
industrial or commercial developments; and
[4] When establishing vegetation after land disturbance,
applying fertilizer in accordance with the requirements
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and implementing rules.
(3) Site design features identified under § 213-4E(2)(i)[2] above shall
comply with the following standard to control passage of solid and
floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this
subsection, "solid and floatable materials" means sediment, debris,
trash and other floating, suspended or settleable solids. For
exemptions to this standard see § 213-4E(3)(c) below.
(a) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates
whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground
surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a storm
drain or surface water body under that grate:
[1] The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT)
bicycle safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the
NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways
Planning and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
[2] A different grate, if each individual clear space in that
grate has an area of no more than 7.0 square inches, or is
no greater than 0.5 inches across the smallest dimension.
Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates
in grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening
portion) of combination inlets, grates on storm sewer
manholes, ditch grates, trench grates and grates of spacer
§ 213-4 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 213-4
212:346
bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground surfaces
include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields,
open channels and stormwater basin floors.
(b) Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear
space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if
the curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an
area of no more than 7.0 square inches, or be no greater than
2.0 inches across the smallest dimension.
(c) This standard does not apply:
[1] Where the review agency determines that this standard
would cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could
not practicably be overcome by using additional or larger
storm drain inlets that meet these standards;
[2] Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in § 213-4G(1) are conveyed through any device
(e.g., end of pipe netting facility, manufactured treatment
device or a catch basin hood) that is designed, at a
minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable
materials that could not pass through one of the following:
[a] A rectangular space four and five-eighths inches long
and 1 1/2 inches wide (this option does not apply for
outfall netting facilities); or
[b] A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches.
[3] Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the bars, to
the elevation of the water quality design storm as specified
in § 213-4G(1); or
[4] Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey
Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that
action to meet this standard is an undertaking that
constitutes an encroachment or will damage or destroy the
New Jersey Register listed historic property.
(4) Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater management
measure to meet the performance standards in § 213-4F and G
shall be dedicated to a government agency, subjected to a
conservation restriction filed with the appropriate County Clerk's
office or subject to an approved equivalent restriction that ensures
that measure or an equivalent stormwater management measure
approved by the reviewing agency is maintained in perpetuity.
§ 213-4 STORM SEWERS § 213-4
212:347
(5) Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management strategies is
available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in § 213-7 or found on the Department's website
at www.njstormwater.org.
F. Erosion control, groundwater recharge and runoff quantity standards.
(1) This subsection contains minimum design and performance
standards to control erosion, encourage and control infiltration and
groundwater recharge and control stormwater runoff quantity
impacts of major development.
(a) The minimum design and performance standards for erosion
control are those established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and
implementing rules.
(b) The minimum design and performance standards for
groundwater recharge are as follows:
[1] The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and
factors for stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge
calculations at § 213-5, either:
[a] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the site and its stormwater management
measures maintain 100% of the average annual
preconstruction groundwater recharge volume for the
site; or
[b] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the increase of stormwater runoff volume
from preconstruction to postconstruction for the twoyear
storm is infiltrated.
[2] This groundwater recharge requirement does not apply to
projects within the urban redevelopment area or to
projects subject to Subsection F(1)(b)[3] below.
[3] The following types of stormwater shall not be recharged:
[a] Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading.
"High pollutant loading areas" are areas in industrial
and commercial developments where solvents and/or
petroleum products are loaded/unloaded, stored or
applied; areas where pesticides are loaded/unloaded
or stored; areas where hazardous materials are
expected to be present in greater than "reportable
quantities" as defined by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR
302.4; areas where recharge would be inconsistent
§ 213-4 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 213-4
212:348
with Department-approved remedial action work plan
or landfill closure plan; and areas with high risks for
spills of toxic materials, such as gas stations and
vehicle maintenance facilities; and
[b] Industrial stormwater exposed to source material.
"Source material" means any material(s) or
machinery, located at an industrial facility, that is
directly or indirectly related to process,
manufacturing or other industrial activities, which
could be a source of pollutants in any industrial
stormwater discharge to groundwater. Source
materials include, but are not limited to, raw
materials; intermediate products; final products;
waste materials; by-products; industrial machinery
and fuels; and lubricants, solvents and detergents that
are related to process, manufacturing or other
industrial activities that are exposed to stormwater.
[4] The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on
the groundwater table and design the site so as to avoid
adverse hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse hydraulic
impacts include, but are not limited to, exacerbating a
naturally or seasonally high water table so as to cause
surficial ponding, flooding of basements or interference
with the proper operation of subsurface sewage disposal
systems and other subsurface structures in the vicinity or
downgradient of the groundwater recharge area.
(c) In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the
design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors for
stormwater runoff calculations at § 213-5, complete one of the
following:
[1] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that for stormwater leaving the site, postconstruction
runoff hydrographs for the two-, ten-, and one-hundredyear
storm events do not exceed, at any point in time, the
preconstruction runoff hydrographs for the same storm
events;
[2] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that there is no increase, as compared to the
preconstruction condition, in the peak runoff rates of
stormwater leaving the site for the two-, ten-, and onehundred-
year storm events and that the increased volume
or change in timing of stormwater runoff will not increase
flood damage at or downstream of the site. This analysis
shall include the analysis of impacts of existing land uses
and projected land uses assuming full development under
§ 213-4 STORM SEWERS § 213-4
212:349
existing zoning and land use ordinances in the drainage
area;
[3] Design stormwater management measures so that the
postconstruction peak runoff rates for the two-, ten-, and
one-hundred-year storm events are 50%, 75% and 80%,
respectively, of the preconstruction peak runoff rates. The
percentages apply only to the postconstruction
stormwater runoff that is attributable to the portion of the
site on which the proposed development or project is to be
constructed. The percentages shall not be applied to
postconstruction stormwater runoff into tidal flood hazard
areas if the increased volume of stormwater runoff will not
increase flood damages below the point of discharge; or
[4] In tidal flood hazard areas, stormwater runoff quantity
analysis in accordance with Subsection F(1)(c)[1], [2] and
[3] above shall only be applied if the increased volume of
stormwater runoff could increase flood damages below the
point of discharge.
(2) Any application for a new agricultural development that meets the
definition of "major development" at § 213-2 shall be submitted to
the appropriate Soil Conservation District for review and approval
in accordance with the requirements of this section and any
applicable Soil Conservation District guidelines for stormwater
runoff quantity and erosion control. For the purposes of this
section, "agricultural development" means land uses normally
associated with the production of food, fiber and livestock for sale.
Such uses do not include the development of land for the
processing or sale of food and the manufacturing of agriculturally
related products.
G. Stormwater runoff quality standards.
(1) Stormwater management measures shall be designed to reduce the
postconstruction load of total suspended solids (TSS) in stormwater
runoff by 80% of the anticipated load from the developed site,
expressed as an annual average. Stormwater management
measures shall only be required for water quality control if an
additional 1/4 acre of impervious surface is being proposed on a
development site. The requirement to reduce TSS does not apply to
any stormwater runoff in a discharge regulated under a numeric
effluent limitation for TSS imposed under the New Jersey Pollution
Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules, N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or in
a discharge specifically exempt under a NJPDES permit from this
requirement. The water quality design storm is 1.25 inches of
rainfall in two hours. Water quality calculations shall take into
account the distribution of rain from the water quality design
storm, as reflected in Table 1. The calculation of the volume of
§ 213-4 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 213-4
212:350
runoff may take into account the implementation of nonstructural
and structural stormwater management measures.
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative Rainfall
(inches)
0 0.0000
5 0.0083
10 0.0166
15 0.0250
20 0.0500
25 0.0750
30 0.1000
35 0.1330
40 0.1660
45 0.2000
50 0.2583
55 0.3583
60 0.6250
65 0.8917
70 0.9917
75 1.0500
80 1.0840
85 1.1170
90 1.1500
95 1.1750
100 1.2000
105 1.2250
110 1.2334
115 1.2417
120 1.2500
(2) For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below presents
the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs designed in
accordance with the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in § 213-7 or found on the Department's website
at www.njstormwater.org. The BMP Manual and other sources of
technical guidance are listed in § 213-7. TSS reduction shall be
calculated based on the removal rates for the BMPs in Table 2
§ 213-4 STORM SEWERS § 213-4
212:351
below. Alternative removal rates and methods of calculating
removal rates may be used if the design engineer provides
documentation demonstrating the capability of these alternative
rates and methods to the review agency. A copy of any approved
alternative rate or method of calculating the removal rate shall be
provided to the Department at the following address: Division of
Watershed Management, New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, PO Box 418, Trenton, New Jersey 08625-0418.
(3) If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the required
80% TSS reduction for a site, the applicant shall utilize the
following formula to calculate TSS reduction:
R = A + B — (AXB)/100
Where R = total TSS percent load removal from application of
both BMPs, and
A = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first BMP
B = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the second BMP
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice TSS Percent Removal Rate
Bioretention systems 90
Constructed stormwater
wetland
90
Extended detention basin 40 to 60
Infiltration structure 80
Manufactured treatment device See § 213-6C
Sand filter 80
Vegetative filter strip 60 to 80
Wet pond 50 to 90
(4) If there is more than one on-site drainage area, the eighty-percent
TSS removal rate shall apply to each drainage area, unless the
runoff from the subareas converge on site, in which case the
removal rate can be demonstrated through a calculation using a
weighted average.
(5) Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to
reduce, to the maximum extent feasible, the postconstruction
nutrient load of the anticipated load from the developed site in
stormwater runoff generated from the water quality design storm.
In achieving reduction of nutrients to the maximum extent feasible,
the design of the site shall include nonstructural strategies and
structural measures that optimize nutrient removal while still
achieving the performance standards in § 213-4F and G.
§ 213-4 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 213-4
212:352
(6) Additional information and examples are contained in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, which may
be obtained from the address identified in § 213-7.
(7) In accordance with the definition of FW1 at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4,
stormwater management measures shall be designed to prevent
any increase in stormwater runoff to waters classified as FW1.
(8) Special water resource protection areas shall be established along
all waters designated Category One at N.J.A.C. 7:9B, and perennial
or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters as shown on the USGS Quadrangle Maps or in the
County Soil Surveys, within the associated HUC14 drainage area.
These areas shall be established for the protection of water quality,
aesthetic value, exceptional ecological significance, exceptional
recreational significance exceptional water supply significance and
exceptional fisheries significance of those established Category
One waters. These areas shall be designated and protected as
follows:
(a) The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water
resource protection area in accordance with one of the
following:
[1] A three-hundred-foot special water resource protection
area shall be provided on each side of the waterway,
measured perpendicular to the waterway from the top of
the bank outwards or from the center line of the waterway
where the bank is not defined, consisting of existing
vegetation or vegetation allowed to follow natural
succession is provided.
[2] Encroachment within the designated special water
resource protection area under Subsection G(8)(a)[1]
above shall only be allowed where previous development
or disturbance has occurred (for example, active
agricultural use, parking area or maintained lawn area).
The encroachment shall only be allowed where applicant
demonstrates that the functional value and overall
condition of the special water resource protection area will
be maintained to the maximum extent practicable. In no
case shall the remaining special water resource protection
area be reduced to less than 150 feet as measured
perpendicular to the top of bank of the waterway or center
line of the waterway where the bank is undefined. All
encroachments proposed under this subsection shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(b) All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow through
the special water resource protection area and shall comply
with the Standard for Off-Site Stability in the Standards for Soil
§ 213-4 STORM SEWERS § 213-4
212:353
Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey, established under
the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et
seq.
(c) If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through the
special water resource protection area cannot comply with the
Standard For Off-Site Stability in the Standards for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey, established under
the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et
seq., then the stabilization measures in accordance with the
requirements of the above standards may be placed within the
special water resource protection area, provided that:
[1] Stabilization measures shall not be placed within 150 feet
of the Category One waterway;
[2] Stormwater associated with discharges allowed by this
section shall achieve a ninety-five-percent TSS
postconstruction removal rate;
[3] Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no impact on
the receiving waterway;
[4] The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection
area will be maintained to the maximum extent
practicable;
[5] A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with the
appropriate Department staff and Soil Conservation
District staff to identify necessary stabilization measures;
and
[6] All encroachments proposed under this section shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(d) A stream corridor protection plan may be developed by a
regional stormwater management planning committee as an
element of a regional stormwater management plan or by a
municipality through an adopted municipal stormwater
management plan. If a stream corridor protection plan for a
waterway subject to § 213-4G(8) has been approved by the
Department of Environmental Protection, then the provisions
of the plan shall be the applicable special water resource
protection area requirements for that waterway. A stream
corridor protection plan for a waterway subject to § 213-4G(8)
shall maintain or enhance the current functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection area
as defined in § 213-4G(8)(a)[1] above. In no case shall a stream
corridor protection plan allow the reduction of the special
water resource protection area to less than 150 feet as
§ 213-4 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 213-4
212:354
§ 213-5. Calculation of stormwater runoff and groundwater
recharge.
measured perpendicular to the waterway subject to this
subsection.
(e) Section 213-4G(8) does not apply to the construction of one
individual single-family dwelling that is not part of a larger
development on a lot receiving preliminary or final subdivision
approval on or before February 2, 2004, provided that the
construction begins on or before February 2, 2009.
A. Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the following:
(1) The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the
following methods:
(a) The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation and
Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described in the NRCS
National Engineering Handbook Section 4 — Hydrology and
Technical Release 55 — Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds; or
(b) The Rational Method for peak flow and the Modified Rational
Method for hydrograph computations.
(2) For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and groundwater
recharge, there is a presumption that the preconstruction condition
of a site or portion thereof is a wooded land use with good
hydrologic condition. The term "runoff coefficient" applies to both
the NRCS methodology at § 213-5A(1)(a) and the Rational and
Modified Rational Methods at § 213-5A(1)(b). A runoff coefficient or
a groundwater recharge land cover for an existing condition may
be used on all or a portion of the site if the design engineer verifies
that the hydrologic condition has existed on the site or portion of
the site for at least five years without interruption prior to the time
of application. If more than one land cover have existed on the site
during the five years immediately prior to the time of application,
the land cover with the lowest runoff potential shall be used for the
computations. In addition, there is the presumption that the site is
in good hydrologic condition (if the land use type is pasture, lawn
or park), with good cover (if the land use type is woods), or with
good hydrologic condition and conservation treatment (if the land
use type is cultivation).
(3) In computing preconstruction stormwater runoff, the design
engineer shall account for all significant land features and
structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows or
culverts, that may reduce preconstruction stormwater runoff rates
and volumes.
§ 213-4 STORM SEWERS § 213-5
212:355
§ 213-6. Standards for structural stormwater management
measures.
(4) In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the design
engineer shall consider the relative stormwater runoff rates and/or
volumes of pervious and impervious surfaces separately to
accurately compute the rates and volume of stormwater runoff
from the site. To calculate runoff from unconnected impervious
cover, urban impervious area modifications as described in the
NRCS Technical Release 55 — Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds and other methods may be employed.
(5) If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater management
measure is below the flood hazard design flood elevation as defined
at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the design engineer shall take into account the
effects of tailwater in the design of structural stormwater
management measures.
B. Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with the
following: The New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32 A Method
for Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in New Jersey,
incorporated herein by reference as amended and supplemented.
Information regarding the methodology is available from the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual; at
http://www.state.nj.us/dep/njgs/; or at New Jersey Geological Survey, 29
Arctic Parkway, P.O. Box 427, Trenton, New Jersey 08625-0427; (609)
984-6587.
A. Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as
follows:
(1) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
take into account the existing site conditions, including, for
example, environmentally critical areas; wetlands; flood-prone
areas; slopes; depth to seasonal high water table; soil type,
permeability and texture; drainage area and drainage patterns; and
the presence of solution-prone carbonate rocks (limestone).
(2) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and repairs and
ensure proper functioning. Trash racks shall be installed at the
intake to the outlet structure, as appropriate, and shall have
parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the bars to the
elevation of the water quality design storm. For elevations higher
than the water quality design storm, the parallel bars at the outlet
structure shall be spaced no greater than 1/3 the width of the
diameter of the orifice or 1/3 the width of the weir, with a minimum
spacing between bars of one inch and a maximum spacing between
bars of six inches. In addition, the design of trash racks must
comply with the requirements of § 213-8.
§ 213-5 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 213-6
212:356
(3) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed,
constructed and installed to be strong, durable and corrosion
resistant. Measures that are consistent with the relevant portions
of the Residential Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3,
5:21-7.4, and 5:21-7.5 shall be deemed to meet this requirement.
(4) At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management basin,
the orifice size shall be a minimum of 2 1/2 inches in diameter.
(5) Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the
minimum safety standards for stormwater management basins at
§ 213-8.
B. Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Other
stormwater management measures may be utilized, provided the
design engineer demonstrates that the proposed measure and its
design will accomplish the required water quantity, groundwater
recharge and water quality design and performance standards
established by § 213-4.
C. Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the requirements
of § 213-4, provided the pollutant removal rates are verified by the New
Jersey Corporation for Advanced Technology and certified by the
Department.
D. Private storm drain inlet retrofitting. [Added 7-18-2011 by Ord. No.
1034-11]
(1) Purpose. This section requires the retrofitting of existing storm
drain inlets which are in direct contact with repaving, repairing,
reconstruction, or resurfacing or alterations of facilities on private
property, to prevent the discharge of solids and floatables (such as
plastic bottles, cans, food wrappers and other litter) to the
municipal separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Borough
of Old Tappan so as to protect public health, safety and welfare,
and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
(2) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following terms,
phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meanings
stated herein unless their use in the text of this chapter clearly
demonstrates a different meaning. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense include the future, words
used in the plural number include the singular number, and words
used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A
conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with
drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters,
ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains) that is owned or
§ 213-6 STORM SEWERS § 213-6
212:357
operated by the Borough of Old Tappan or other public body, and is
designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this state subject to
municipal jurisdiction.
STORM DRAIN INLET — An opening in a storm drain used to
collect stormwater runoff and includes, but is not limited to, a grate
inlet, curb-opening inlet, slotted inlet, and combination inlet.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs,
streams and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural
or artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or
subject to its jurisdiction.
(3) Prohibited conduct. No person in control of private property
(except a residential lot with one single-family house) shall
authorize the repaving, repairing (excluding the repair of
individual potholes), resurfacing (including top coating or chip
sealing with asphalt emulsion or a thin base of hot bitumen),
reconstructing or altering any surface that is in direct contact with
an existing storm drain inlet on that property unless the storm
drain inlet either:
(a) Already meets the design standard below to control passage of
solid and floatable materials; or
(b) Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in § 213-6D(4)
below prior to the completion of the project.
(4) Design standard. Storm drain inlets identified in § 213-6D(3) above
shall comply with the following standard to control passage of solid
and floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For purposes of
this paragraph, "solid and floatable materials" means sediment,
debris, trash, and other floating, suspended, or settleable solids.
For exemptions to this standard see § 213-6D(4)(c) below.
(a) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates
whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground
surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a storm
drain or surface water body under that grate:
[1] The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT)
bicycle safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the
NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways
Planning and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
[2] A different grate, if each individual clear space in that
grate has an area of no more than seven square inches, or
is no greater than 0.5 inches across the smallest
dimension.
§ 213-6 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 213-6
212:358
[3] Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates
in grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening
portion) of combination inlets, grates on storm sewer
manholes, ditch grates, trench grates, and grates of spacer
bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground surfaces
include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields,
open channels, and stormwater basin floors.
(b) Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear
space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if
the curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an
area of no more than seven square inches, or be no greater
than two inches across the smallest dimension.
(c) This standard does not apply:
[1] Where the municipal engineer agrees that this standard
would cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could
not practicably be overcome by using additional or larger
storm drain inlets that meet these standards;
[2] Where flows are conveyed through any device (e.g., end of
pipe netting facility, manufactured treatment device, or a
catch basin hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to
prevent delivery of all solid and floatable materials that
could not pass through one of the following:
[a] A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches
wide (this option does not apply for outfall netting
facilities); or
[b] A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches.
[3] Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the bars; or
[4] Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey
Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that
action to meet this standard is an undertaking that
constitutes an encroachment or will damage or destroy the
New-Jersey-Register- listed historic property.
(5) Enforcement. This section shall be enforced by the Building
Department, code enforcement official; Department of Public
Works or the Police Department of the Borough of Old Tappan.
(6) Penalties. Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the
provisions of this section shall be subject the fines listed below for
each storm drain inlet that is not retrofitted to meet the design
standard.
§ 213-6 STORM SEWERS § 213-6
212:359
§ 213-7. Sources for technical guidance.
(a) First offense: written warning.
(b) Noncompliance after warning: $250.
(c) Second offense: $500.
(d) Third offense and up: $1,000.
(7) Severability. Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase
of this section is declared to be an independent section, subsection,
sentence, clause and phrase, and the finding or holding of any such
portion of this section to be unconstitutional, void, or ineffective for
any cause, or reason, shall not affect any other portion of this
section.
(8) When effective. This section shall be in full force and effect from
and after its adoption and any publication as may be required by
law.
A. Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be
found in the documents listed at Subsection A(1) and (2) below, which
are available from Maps and Publications, New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, 428 East State Street, P.O. Box 420, Trenton,
New Jersey 08625; telephone (609) 777-1038.
(1) Guidelines for stormwater management measures are contained in
the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual,
as amended. Information is provided on stormwater management
measures such as bioretention systems, constructed stormwater
wetlands, dry wells, extended detention basins, infiltration
structures, manufactured treatment devices, pervious paving, sand
filters, vegetative filter strips and wet ponds.
(2) The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual, as
amended.
B. Additional technical guidance for stormwater management measures
can be obtained from the following:
(1) The Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey
promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee and
incorporated into N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of these standards may be
obtained by contacting the State Soil Conservation Committee or
any of the Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4.
The location, address and telephone number of each Soil
Conservation District may be obtained from the State Soil
Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey 08625;
(609) 292-5540;
(2) The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service, 732-932-9306; and
§ 213-6 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 213-7
212:360
§ 213-8. Safety standards for stormwater management basins.
(3) The Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4. The
location, address, and telephone number of each Soil Conservation
District may be obtained from the State Soil Conservation
Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey, 08625, (609)
292-5540.
A. This section sets forth requirements to protect public safety through
the proper design and operation of stormwater management basins.
This section applies to any new stormwater management basin.
B. Requirements for trash racks, overflow grates and escape provisions.
(1) A "trash rack" is a device designed to catch trash and debris and
prevent the clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet from the stormwater
management basin to ensure proper functioning of the basin
outlets in accordance with the following:
(a) The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater than
six-inch spacing between the bars.
(b) The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely affect
the hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or structure.
(c) The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is not to
exceed 2.5 feet per second under the full range of stage and
discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the basis of the net
area of opening through the rack.
(d) The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be rigid,
durable and corrosion resistant and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 lbs./ft. sq.
(2) An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the
overflow structure. If an outlet structure has an overflow grate,
such grate shall meet the following requirements:
(a) The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but
removable for emergencies and maintenance.
(b) The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two inches
across the smallest dimension.
(c) The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable and corrosion resistant and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 lbs./ft. sq.
(3) For purposes of this Subsection B(3), "escape provisions" means
the permanent installation of ladders, steps, rungs or other
features that provide easily accessible means of egress from
§ 213-7 STORM SEWERS § 213-8
212:361
§ 213-9. Requirements for a site development stormwater plan.
stormwater management basins. Stormwater management basins
shall include escape provisions as follows:
(a) If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure,
escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the structure.
With the prior approval of the reviewing agency identified in
§ 213-8C, a freestanding outlet structure may be exempted
from this requirement.
(b) Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
stormwater management basins having a permanent pool of
water deeper than 2 1/2 feet. Such safety ledges shall be
comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four to six feet in
width. One step shall be located approximately 2 1/2 feet below
the permanent water surface, and the second step shall be
located one to 1 1/2 feet above the permanent water surface.
See § 213-8D for an illustration of safety ledges in a
stormwater management basin.
(c) In new stormwater management basins, the maximum interior
slope for an earthen dam, embankment or berm shall not be
steeper than 3 horizontal to 1 vertical.
C. Variance or exemption from safety standards. A variance or exemption
from the safety standards for stormwater management basins may be
granted only upon a written finding by the appropriate reviewing
agency (municipality, county or Department) that the variance or
exemption will not constitute a threat to public safety.
D. Illustration of safety ledges in a new stormwater management basin.
A. Submission of site development stormwater plan.
§ 213-8 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 213-9
212:362
(1) Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a development
subject to this chapter, the applicant shall submit all of the required
components of the checklist for the site development stormwater
plan at § 213-9C below as part of the submission of the applicant's
application for subdivision or site plan approval.
(2) The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the
standards set forth in this chapter.
(3) The applicant shall submit four copies of the materials listed in the
checklist for site development stormwater plans in accordance with
§ 213-9C.
B. Site development stormwater plan approval. The applicant's site
development project shall be reviewed as a part of the subdivision or
site plan review process by the municipal board or official from which
municipal approval is sought. That municipal board or official shall
consult the engineer retained by the Planning Board to determine if all
of the checklist requirements have been satisfied and to determine if
the project meets the standards set forth in this chapter.
C. Checklist requirements. The following information shall be required:
(1) Topographic base map. The reviewing engineer may require
upstream tributary drainage system information as necessary. It is
recommended that the topographic base map of the site be
submitted which extends a minimum of 200 feet beyond the limits
of the proposed development, at a scale of 1 inch equals 200 feet or
greater, showing two-foot contour intervals. The map, as
appropriate, may indicate the following: existing surface water
drainage, shorelines, steep slopes, soils, erodible soils, perennial or
intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters, wetlands and floodplains along with their appropriate
buffer strips, marshlands and other wetlands, pervious or
vegetative surfaces, existing man-made structures, roads, bearing
and distances of property lines and significant natural and manmade
features not otherwise shown.
(2) Environmental site analysis. A written and graphic description of
the natural and man-made features of the site and its environs. This
description should include a discussion of soil conditions, slopes,
wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the site. Particular
attention should be given to unique, unusual or environmentally
sensitive features and to those that provide particular
opportunities or constraints for development.
(3) Project description and site plan(s). A map (or maps) at the scale of
the topographical base map indicating the location of existing and
proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, structural
facilities for stormwater management and sediment control and
other permanent structures. The map(s) shall also clearly show
areas where alterations occur in the natural terrain and cover,
§ 213-9 STORM SEWERS § 213-9
212:363
including lawns and other landscaping, and seasonal high
groundwater elevations. A written description of the site plan and
justification of proposed changes in natural conditions may also be
provided.
(4) Land use planning and source control plan. This plan shall provide
a demonstration of how the goals and standards of §§ 213-3
through 213-6 are being met. The focus of this plan shall be to
describe how the site is being developed to meet the objective of
controlling groundwater recharge, stormwater quality and
stormwater quantity problems at the source by land management
and source controls whenever possible.
(5) Stormwater management facilities map. The following information,
illustrated on a map of the same scale as the topographic base map,
shall be included:
(a) Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface
contours, land area to be occupied by the stormwater
management facilities and the type of vegetation thereon and
details of the proposed plan to control and dispose of
stormwater.
(b) Details of all stormwater management facility designs, during
and after construction, including discharge provisions,
discharge capacity for each outlet at different levels of
detention and emergency spillway provisions with maximum
discharge capacity of each spillway.
(6) Calculations.
(a) Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations
for the pre-development and post-development conditions for
the design storms specified in § 213-4.
(b) When the proposed stormwater management control measures
(e.g., infiltration basins) depends on the hydrologic properties
of soils, then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report
shall be based on on-site boring logs or soil pit profiles. The
number and location of required soil borings or soil pits shall
be determined based on what is needed to determine the
suitability and distribution of soils present at the location of the
control measure.
(7) Maintenance and repair plan. The design and planning of the
stormwater management facility shall meet the maintenance
requirements of § 213-10.
(8) Waiver from submission requirements. The municipal official or
board reviewing an application under this chapter may, in
consultation with the Municipal Engineer, waive submission of any
of the requirements in § 213-9C(1) through (6) when it can be
§ 213-9 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 213-9
212:364
§ 213-10. Maintenance and repair.
demonstrated that the information requested is impossible to
obtain or it would create a hardship on the applicant to obtain and
its absence will not materially affect the review process.
A. Applicability. Projects subject to review as in § 213-1C shall comply with
the requirements of § 213-10B and C.
B. General maintenance.
(1) The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
a major development.
(2) The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventative
maintenance tasks and schedules; cost estimates, including
estimated cost of sediment, debris or trash removal; and the name,
address and telephone number of the person or persons
responsible for preventative and corrective maintenance (including
replacement). Maintenance guidelines for stormwater
management measures are available in the New Jersey Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual. If the maintenance plan
identifies a person other than the developer (for example, a public
agency or homeowners' association) as having the responsibility for
maintenance, the plan shall include documentation of such
person's agreement to assume this responsibility or of the
developer's obligation to dedicate a stormwater management
facility to such person under an applicable ordinance or regulation.
(3) Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or transferred
to the owner or tenant of an individual property in a residential
development or project unless such owner or tenant owns or leases
the entire residential development or project.
(4) If the person responsible for maintenance identified under
§ 213-10B(2) above is not a public agency, the maintenance plan
and any future revisions based on § 213-10B(7) below shall be
recorded upon the deed of record for each property on which the
maintenance described in the maintenance plan must be
undertaken.
(5) Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to
maintain the function of the stormwater management measure,
including repairs or replacement to the structure; removal of
sediment, debris or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow and ice
removal; fence repair or replacement; restoration of vegetation;
and repair or replacement of nonvegetated linings.
(6) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
§ 213-10B(2) above shall maintain a detailed log of all preventative
and corrective maintenance for the structural stormwater
§ 213-9 STORM SEWERS § 213-10
212:365
§ 213-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person who erects, constructs, alters, repairs, converts, maintains or
uses any building, structure or land in violation of this chapter shall pay a
fine not exceeding $1,000 or imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90
days, or both.
Chapter 214
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
management measures incorporated into the design of the
development, including a record of all inspections and copies of all
maintenance-related work orders.
(7) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
§ 213-10B(2) above shall evaluate the effectiveness of the
maintenance plan at least once per year and adjust the plan and the
deed as needed.
(8) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
§ 213-10B(2) above shall retain and make available, upon request
by any public entity with administrative, health, environmental or
safety authority over the site, the maintenance plan and the
documentation required by § 213-10B(6) and (7) above.
(9) The requirements of § 213-10B(3) and (4) do not apply to
stormwater management facilities that are dedicated to and
accepted by the municipality or another governmental agency.
(10) In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a
danger to public safety or public health, or if it is in need of
maintenance or repair, the municipality shall so notify the
responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the
responsible person shall have 14 days to effect maintenance and
repair of the facility in a manner that is approved by the Municipal
Engineer or his designee. The municipality, in its discretion, may
extend the time allowed for effecting maintenance and repair for
good cause. If the responsible person fails or refuses to perform
such maintenance and repair, the municipality or county may
immediately proceed to do so and shall bill the cost thereof to the
responsible person.
C. Nothing in this section shall preclude the municipality in which the
major development is located from requiring the posting of a
performance or maintenance guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.
§ 213-10 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 213-11
212:366
ARTICLE I
Work and Excavations Within Streets
[Adopted 11-21-2011 by Ord. No. 1038-1134]
§ 214-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
STREET — Any dedicated road, highway, public way, public alley, easement
or other right-of-way, whether accepted or not accepted, that is maintained
by the Borough as a public street. The term "street" shall include all areas
within the right-of-way, including curbs and sidewalks.
§ 214-2. Permits required.
§ 214-3. Denial of permit; appeal.
The Borough Council is authorized to refuse the issuance of any street
opening or right-of-way permit if it ascertains, after consultation with the
Superintendent of Public Works, Borough Engineer or otherwise, that such
refusal is in the interest of public safety, public convenience or public
health. If such a permit is refused, an appeal may be taken to the Borough
Council. The Borough Council, after hearing the applicant and considering
the evidence produced, may either direct the issuance of the permit or
sustain the refusal.
§ 214-4. Application information.
An application for a street opening or right-of-way permit shall contain the
following information:
A. No person shall make an excavation in or tunnel under any street
without first obtaining a street opening permit from the Borough
Council. A tunnel or excavation may be commenced without a permit
where an emergency has arisen which makes it necessary to start work
immediately, provided that the Superintendent of Public Works or his
designee is consulted before any work is commenced and an application
for a permit is made simultaneously with the commencement of the
work or as soon thereafter is practical. When issued, the permit shall be
retroactive to the date on which the work has begun.
B. No person shall perform work that affects any portion of a street, which
does not involve an excavation or tunnel without first obtaining a rightof-
way permit.
C. The Borough Clerk shall issue permits to other public bodies without
fee.
34.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. I, Street Excavations, adopted
5-26-1975 as Sec. 10-1 of the 1975 Code, as amended.
§ 214-1 STORM SEWERS § 214-4
212:367
§ 214-5. Issuance of contents of permit.
A. Name and address of the applicant.
B. Name of the street where the opening or work is to be made and the
street number, if any, of the abutting property.
C. The Borough Tax Map block and lot number of the property for the
benefit of which the opening is to be made.
D. Nature of the surface in which the opening is to be made or a
description of the work within the street.
E. Character and purpose of the work proposed.
F. Time when the work is to be commenced and completed.
G. Each application shall be accompanied by a set of plans in
quadruplicate showing the exact location and dimensions of all
openings and all work.
H. The name and address of the worker or contractor who is to perform
the work.
I. A statement that the applicant agrees to replace, at his/her own cost
and expense, the street, curb, gutter, utilities and sidewalk in the same
work state and condition in all things as they were at the time of the
commencement of the work, within 48 hours of the commencement of
same.
A. In the event that the applicant shall be granted a street opening or
right-of-way permit, the applicant shall be solely responsible for any
and all damages, liability and costs of any nature arising out of such
excavation or work, and the applicant agrees that (s)he will:
(1) Indemnify the Borough and hold it harmless from all loss, damage,
claim or expense, including expenses incurred in the defense of any
litigation arising out of injury to any person or property resulting
from any work done by the applicant under the permit.
(2) Indemnify the Borough for any expense incurred in enforcing any of
the provisions of the chapter.
(3) Indemnify any person who sustains personal injuries or damage to
his/her property as a result of any act or omission of the applicant,
his/her agents, employees or subcontractors done in the course of
any work under the permit.
B. Each permit shall state the identity and address of the applicant, the
name of the street and the location where the excavation, tunnel or
work is to be made, the dimensions of the opening and the period
during which the permit shall be valid.
§ 214-4 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 214-5
212:368
§ 214-6. Fee.
The applicant shall be charged a fee of $100 for each permit, which shall be
paid when the application is made.
§ 214-7. Deposit.
The applicant shall be required to deposit in cash or by certified check a
sum as hereinafter set forth to defray the expense of restoring the street
to its preexisting condition should the permittee fail to do so. The deposit
shall be $1,500 for excavations of areas of 100 square feet or less. For
excavations of areas greater than 100 square feet, the applicant shall be
required to deposit $1,500 of excavation work not exceeding a total area of
1,000 square feet. In the event that the area to be excavated shall exceed
1,000 square feet, the amount of the deposit shall be determined by the
Borough Engineer; provided, however, that the minimum deposit in such
event shall be $15,000. The deposit for a right-of-way permit shall be $750.
§ 214-8. Return of deposit upon satisfactory restoration.
The deposit paid to the Borough in accordance with § 214-7 shall be held
by the Borough Clerk for a period not to exceed six months following
restoration of the street approval thereof by the Superintendent of Public
Works. If, at the end of such six-month period, there are no settlement
or other problems with the area of the excavation work and restoration
performed by the permittee, then the deposit shall be repaid to the
permittee. If there are settlement or other problems relating to the
excavation work and restoration performed by the permittee during such
period, and the permittee shall fail to correct or cure same within 30 days
after receiving written notice from the Superintendent of Public Works,
such deposit may be used by the Borough to make such corrections or
repairs, and the balance of the deposit, if any, shall be returned to the
permittee.
§ 214-9. Insurance.
No permit shall be issued until the applicant has furnished the Borough
with satisfactory proof that (s)he is insured against injury to persons and
damage to property caused by any act or omission of the applicant, his/her
agents, employees or subcontractors done in the course of the work to be
performed under the permit. The insurance shall cover all hazards likely
to arise in connection with the work, including, but not limited to, collapse
and explosion, and shall also insure against liability arising from completed
operations. The limits of the policy of insurance shall be $1,000,000 for
injury to any one person, $1,000,000 for property damage for a single
incident. The Borough may waive the requirements of this section in the
C. The original of each permit shall remain on file with the Borough Clerk.
The Borough Clerk shall provide a copy of same to the applicant, the
Chief of Police and the Superintendent of Public Works.
§ 214-5 STORM SEWERS § 214-9
212:369
case of public utilities upon the presentation of satisfactory proof that it is
capable of meeting claims against it up to the amount of the limits of the
insurance policy which would otherwise be required.
§ 214-10. Rules and regulations; backfilling.
All permits issued under this article shall be subject to the following rules
and regulations:
A. All excavations shall be kept properly barricaded at all times and during
the hours of darkness shall be provided with proper warning lights. This
regulation shall not excuse the permittee from taking any other
precaution reasonably necessary for the protection of persons or
property.
B. All work shall be done in such a manner as to cause a minimum of
interference with travel on the street affected.
C. All refuse and material shall be removed within 48 hours.
D. All excavations shall be completely backfilled by the permittee, and
shall be compacted by tamping or other suitable means in a manner
prescribed by the Superintendent of Public Works. Where the
Superintendent of Public Works determines that the excavated material
is unsuitable for backfill, the permittee shall backfill the excavation
with sand, soft coal, cinders or other suitable material which shall be
placed in layers not exceeding six inches in depth and thoroughly
compacted with a mechanical vibrator or in the manner prescribed by
the Superintendent of Public Works. The permittee shall replace all
shoulder stone to a depth of six inches and thoroughly compact it with a
mechanical compaction devise. Upon completion of the work, the
permittee shall remove any excess material and leave the premises in a
clean condition. If it is determined that any backfilled excavation has
settled or caved in, the Superintendent of Public Works shall so notify
the permittee, who shall promptly continue backfilling until settlement
is complete.
E. If tunneling operations are required, the tunnel shall be backfilled with
rammed concrete composed of one part cement to 10 parts sand.
F. If blasting is required to be done in the course of any excavation, it shall
be done in strict compliance with all applicable state laws and
regulations.
G. If the work is not completed within the time specified in the permit or
any extension granted by the Borough, or is not performed in
accordance with the regulations set forth in this section and any other
relations that may be established by the Council, then the Borough may
complete the work itself and restore the surface of the street. The cost
of completing the work and restoring the street shall be charged to the
permittee and may be deducted from his/her deposit or recovered by an
action in any court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 214-9 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 214-11
212:370
§ 214-11. Rules and regulations for restoration of surface.
In all cases the permittee shall restore the surface of the street in
accordance with the following rules, regulations and requirements:
§ 214-12. Reopening of streets.
No Borough street which has been constructed or restored shall be opened
for a period of three years thereafter without the special permission of
the Borough Council, except in case of extreme emergency, when special
permission may be granted by the Superintendent of the Department of
Public Works. Applications for special permission to open any such street
within the prohibited three-year period shall be made, in writing, to the
Superintendent of the Department of Public Works and transmitted by him/
her with recommendations to the Borough Council. Any permission which
may be granted shall be upon such terms as the Council shall prescribe.
§ 214-13. Permit conditions and regulations.
A. No permittee shall commence the restoration of any street foundation
or surface until the Superintendent of Public Works has determined
that settlement of the surface is complete and the areas properly
prepared for restoration.
B. The street surface shall be restored so as to extend six inches beyond
the excavation on all sides.
C. The street surface shall be restored pursuant to the section designated
by the Superintendent of Public Works in the permit, but in no case
shall be less than the structural equivalent of the following:
(1) Six-inch course of quarry process subbase (Type 5 soil aggregate)
thoroughly compacted.
(2) Two inches of bituminous concrete Type FABC.
A. Transferability. A permit shall apply only to the person to whom it is
issued and shall not be transferable.
B. Commencement of work. Work under a permit shall commence within
45 days from the date of issuance of the permit. If the work is not
commenced within that time, the permit shall automatically terminate
unless extended, in writing, by the Borough Council.
C. Possession of permit. A copy of the permit together with a copy of the
plan endorsed with the approval of the Superintendent of Public Works
shall be kept in possession of the person actually performing the work
and shall be exhibited on demand to any duly authorized employee of
the Borough or police officer.
D. Revocation of permit.
§ 214-11 STORM SEWERS § 214-13
212:371
§ 214-14. Power to make additional rules and regulations.
The Road Committee, in conjunction with the Superintendent of Public
Works, may make any rules and regulations considered necessary for the
administration and enforcement of this article, but no regulation shall be
inconsistent with, alter or amend any provision of this article or impose
any requirement which is in addition to those expressly or by implication
imposed by this article. No regulations shall be effective unless they are
approved by the resolution of the Borough Council. Copies of all current
regulations shall be furnished each permittee at the time of the permit.
§ 214-15. Temporary closing of street for preservation of public
safety, health or welfare.
(1) The Borough Council may revoke a permit for any of the following
reasons:
(a) Violation of any provision of this article or any other applicable
rules, regulations, law or ordinance.
(b) Violation of any condition of the permit issued.
(c) Carrying on work under the permit in a matter which
endangers life or property, or which creates any condition
which is unhealthy, unsanitary or declared by any provision of
the revision to constitute a nuisance.
(2) The procedure for revoking a permit shall be the same as that set
forth in this Code for the revocation of licenses, except that the
initial hearing shall be before the member of the Borough Council
in charge of the Road Department with a right of appeal to the
Council, and the Chairperson may provide in his/her decision that
the revocation shall not become effective if the permittee corrects
the violation within a specified period of time.
E. Modification of permit conditions. In a special case, the Borough
Council may, by resolution, impose special conditions to which the
issuance of the permit may be subject, or may decide that any provision
of this article shall not apply or shall be altered.
A. Closing by regulation. The Mayor may provide by resolution for the
closing of any street or portion thereof to motor vehicle traffic on any
day or days or during specified hours on any day or days whenever it
finds that such closing is necessary for the preservation of the public
health, safety or welfare.
B. Posting of warning signs. Proper warning signs shall be posted in any
street or portion thereof during the time the same is closed.
C. Violations and penalties. For violation of this § 214-15, the penalty upon
conviction shall be a fine not exceeding $100 for each and every
offense.
§ 214-13 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 214-15
212:372
ARTICLE II
Traffic Control During Construction
[Adopted 5-26-1975 as Sec. 10-2 of the 1975 Code]
§ 214-16. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of Police or a person designated by the
Chief of Police to perform the function indicated.
§ 214-17. Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
The Borough of Old Tappan hereby adopts the Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices (hereinafter "the MUTCD," except as the MUTCD may be
supplemented or amended by the provisions hereof. The MUTCD provides
traffic controls and regulations for construction, maintenance operations
and utility work. Any person, contractor or utility who fails to comply with
the provisions of the MUTCD is in violation of this article.
§ 214-18. Preconstruction meetings.
It shall be the responsibility of the person, contractor, or, in the case of a
public utility, such person as may be designated in accordance with a public
utility agreement, conducting work on, under or above a street to contact
the Chief of Police to arrange a preconstruction meeting for the submission
and review of plans for the safe movement of traffic during such period of
construction or work. Any person, contractor or utility who fails to comply
with this article prior to the start of such work, or whose plans are not
approved by the Chief of Police, is in violation of this article.
§ 214-19. Emergency contacts for correction of hazardous
conditions at work site.
Prior to the start of any work, the person, contractor or utility shall provide
the Chief of Police with at least two emergency contact phone numbers, to
be called in case of emergency problems at the construction or maintenance
site. If, for any reason, emergency contact cannot be made, or if the
emergency contact person does not respond to the call from the Old Tappan
Police Department to correct a hazardous condition, the Borough may
correct such hazardous condition. The cost of such emergency service by
the Borough shall be charged to the person, contractor or utility responsible
for such condition.
§ 214-20. Hours.
There shall be no construction, maintenance operations or utility work on,
under, or above any street in the Borough before the hour of 9:00 a.m. or
after the hour of 4:00 p.m. This time limit may be adjusted by the Chief of
Police to permit work prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 4:00 p.m. If it is determined
§ 214-16 STORM SEWERS § 214-20
212:373
by the Chief of Police that construction or maintenance operations prior
to 9:00 a.m. or after 4:00 p.m. would substantially delay traffic or cause a
safety or health hazard then the work shall be permitted only between 9:00
a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
§ 214-21. Road closings and detours.
Road closings and/or traffic detours shall not be permitted unless approved
by the Chief of Police.
§ 214-22. Traffic directors.
Traffic directors shall be posted at all construction or maintenance sites
when determined by the Chief of Police that such directors are necessary to
provide for the safe and expeditious movement of traffic.
§ 214-23. Stop work.
The Chief of Police shall have the authority to stop work for the purpose of
abating any nuisance and/or safety hazard or to assure compliance with this
article. This authority shall include, but is not limited to, the authority to
order the removal of equipment, vehicles and stored materials from within
the street and right-of-way; the backfilling of open excavations; and/or other
related work.
§ 214-24. Site preparation.
No materials, vehicles or equipment are to be placed in the street or
sidewalk area until all construction signs, lights, devices and pavement
markings are installed.
§ 214-25. Violations and penalties.
Any person, contractor or utility who violates this article, upon conviction
thereof, shall pay the following fines: for a first offense, not less than $100
nor more than $1,000 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days,
or both; for a second offense, not less than $250 or imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 90 days, or both. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 214-20 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 214-25
212:374
Chapter 218
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Design Review Committee — See Ch. 30.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 45.
Open Space Advisory Committee — See Ch.
53.
Building construction — See Ch. 100.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 135.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 173.
Sanitary sewers — See Ch. 198.
Recycling — See Ch. 209, Art. II.
Trees — See Ch. 234.
Zoning — See Ch. 255.
§ 214-25 STORM SEWERS § 214-25
212:375

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 218-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Subdivision and Site
Plan Review Ordinance of the Borough of Old Tappan."
§ 218-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter shall be to provide rules, regulations and
standards to guide land subdivision and the development of the land on
the Borough in order to promote its public health, safety, convenience and
general welfare. It shall be administered to ensure orderly growth and
development, conservation, protection and proper use of land and adequate
provision for circulation, utilities, and services.
§ 218-3. Administration by Planning Board. [Amended 2-19-2002 by
Ord. No. 773-02]
As authorized by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-37, the provisions of this chapter shall be
administered by the Planning Board.
§ 218-4. Definitions.
A. Certain words and terms in this chapter are to be given the following
meanings:
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The person with whom applications
for development are filed pursuant to this chapter. The administrative
officer of the Planning Board shall be the Clerk to the Planning Board.
APPLICANT — A developer submitting an application for development.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — The application form and all
accompanying documents required by ordinance for approval for
subdivision plat, site plan, conditional use, zoning variance or direction
of the issuance of a permit for construction within the bed of a mapped
street or for construction of a structure not having access or not related
to a street.
CERTIFICATE AS TO APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISION OF LAND — A
certificate issued by the proper administrative officer of the Borough
certifying:
(1) That there is in the Borough a duly established Planning Board.
That there is in the Borough an ordinance controlling the
subdivision of land.
(2)
Whether a subdivision has been approved by the Planning Board
for the land designated in the application for such certificate, and if
so, the date of such approval and any extensions and terms thereof.
(3)
§ 218-1 STORM SEWERS § 218-4
212:377
COMMON OPEN SPACE — An open space within or related to a
residential cluster development, and designed and intended for the use
and enjoyment of residents and owners of the development.
DAYS — Calendar days.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of
any land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase or other person having
an enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more
parcels, the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural
alteration, relocation or enlargement of any building or other structure
or of any mining, excavation or landfill and any use or change in the use
of any building or other structure, or land or extension of use of land,
for which permission may be required pursuant to this chapter.
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or groundwater from land
by drains, grading or other means, including control of runoff to
minimize erosion and sedimentation during and after construction or
development and means necessary for water supply preservation or
prevention or alleviation of flooding.
DRAINAGEWAY — The lands required for the installation of stormwater
sewers or drainage ditches or required along a natural stream or
watercourse for preserving the channel and providing for the flow
of water therein to safeguard the public against flood damage in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 58:1-34.
INTERESTED PARTY —
LOADING SPACE — Any off-street space available for the loading or
unloading of goods and having direct usable access to the street or
alley.
LOT — A parcel or portion of land separated from other parcels or
portions by description, as on a subdivision or record of survey map, or
by metes and bounds for the purpose of sale, lease or separate use.
LOT AREA — The area of a lot expressed in square feet or acres. Any
portion of a lot included in a street shall not be included in calculating
lot area. However, any portion of a lot or lots dedicated to the Borough
In a criminal or quasi-criminal proceeding, any citizen of the State
of New Jersey.
(1)
In an administrative proceeding before a municipal agency, any
person, whether residing within or without the Borough, whose
right to use, acquire or enjoy property is or may be affected by any
action taken under this chapter or whose rights to use, acquire or
enjoy property under this chapter, or under any law of this state or
of the United States have been denied, violated or infringed by an
action or a failure to act hereunder.
(2)
§ 218-4 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 218-4
212:378
for other public use shall not be deducted from the calculation of the lot
area.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE — Any security, other than cash, which
may be accepted by the Borough for the maintenance of any
improvements required by this chapter.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision not classified as a minor
subdivision.
MASTER PLAN — A composite of the mapped and written proposals
recommending the physical development of the Borough which shall
have been duly adopted by the Planning Board.
MINOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision that does not involve:
OFF SITE — Located outside the lot lines of the lot in question but
within the property, of which the lot is a part; which is the subject of a
development application or contiguous portion of a street right-of-way.
OFF TRACT — Not located on the property which is the subject of
a development application nor on a contiguous portion of a street or
right-of-way.
ON SITE — Located on the lot in question.
ON TRACT — Located on the property which is the subject of a
development application or on a contiguous portion of a street or rightof-
way.
OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or area of land or water essentially
unimproved and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved in
connection with a residential cluster development for public or private
use or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants
of land adjoining or neighboring such open space.
OWNER — Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership
or corporation having sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought
to be developed to commence and maintain proceedings to develop the
same under this chapter.
PARKING SPACE — An off-street space available for the parking of a
motor vehicle, provided that such space shall have a minimum width
of ten feet and a minimum depth of 20 feet, exclusive of maneuvering
areas, passageways, driveways and loading spaces appurtenant
thereto.
(1) The creation of more than three lots.
(2) A planned development.
(3) Any new street.
Extension of any off-tract improvement, the cost of which is to be
prorated pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42.
(4)
§ 218-4 STORM SEWERS § 218-4
212:379
PARTY IMMEDIATELY CONCERNED — Any applicant for development,
the owners of a subject property and all owners of property and
government agencies entitled to notice under this chapter.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE — Any security which may be accepted
by the Borough, including cash, provided that the Borough shall not
require more than 10% of the total performance guarantee in cash.
PERMIT, BUILDING — A certificate issued by the Building Inspector for
the construction, reconstruction, remodeling, alteration or repair of a
building upon approval of the submitted application and plans.
PERMIT, CERTIFICATE OF USE AND OCCUPANCY — A certificate
issued by the Building Inspector upon completion of the construction
of a new building or addition, or upon a change in the occupancy
of a building, other than a dwelling unit as defined in this chapter
which certifies that all requirements of this chapter, or such adjustment
therefrom which has been granted by the Zoning Board of Adjustment,
have been met and that the purpose for which a building or land is to
be in conformance with the uses permitted and all other requirements
under this chapter for the zone in which it is located or is to be located.
PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of the Borough of Old
Tappan.
PLAT — The map or maps of a subdivision or site plan.
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL — Rights conferred pursuant to this chapter
prior to final approval after specific elements of a development plan
have been agreed upon by the Planning Board and applicant.
PRELIMINARY PLAT — The preliminary map indicating the proposed
layout of the subdivision which is submitted to the Secretary of the
Planning Board for its consideration and tentative approval and
meeting the requirements of § 218-25 of this chapter.
RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER — An area to be developed as a single entity
according to a plan approved by the Planning Board, containing singlefamily
detached dwelling units which have common open space as
appurtenances.
RETAINING WALL — A structure designed for the separation of varying
ground levels.
SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots on which is
shown:
The existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including, but
not necessarily limited to, topography, vegetation, drainage,
floodplains, marshes and waterways.
(1)
The location of all existing and proposed buildings, drives, parking
spaces, walkways, means of ingress and egress, drainage facilities,
utility services, landscaping, structures and signs, lighting,
screening devices.
(2)
§ 218-4 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 218-4
212:380
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, viaduct,
alley or other way which is an existing state, county or municipal
roadway, or a street or way on a plat duly filed and recorded in the
office of the county recording office prior to the appointment of a
Planning Board of the power to review plats, and includes the land
between the street lines whether improved or unimproved, and may
comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, sidewalks, parking areas and
other areas within the street lines. For the purpose of this chapter,
streets shall be classified as follows:
SUBDIVIDER — Any individual, firm, association, syndicate,
copartnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity commencing
proceedings under this chapter to effect a subdivision of land
hereunder for himself/herself or for another.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into
two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for sale or
development. The following shall not be considered subdivisions within
the meaning of this chapter if no new streets are created:
Any other information required by this chapter that may be
reasonably required in order to make an informed determination
pursuant to this chapter.
(3)
Arterial streets are those which are used primarily for fast or heavy
traffic.
(1)
Collector streets are those which carry traffic from minor streets
to the major system of arterial streets, including the principal
entrance streets of a residential development and the streets for
circulation within such a development.
(2)
Minor streets are those which are primarily for access to the
abutting properties.
(3)
Marginal access streets are streets which are parallel with and
adjacent to arterial streets and highways and which provide access
to abutting properties and protection from through traffic.
(4)
Alleys are minor ways which are used primarily for vehicular
service access to back or side of properties or otherwise abutting
on a street.
(5)
Divisions of land found by the Planning Board, or Subdivision
Committee thereof appointed by the Chairperson, to be for
agricultural purposes where all resulting parcels are five acres or
larger in size.
(1)
(2) Divisions of property by testamentary or intestate provisions.
Divisions of property upon court order, including, but not limited
to, judgments of foreclosure.
(3)
§ 218-4 STORM SEWERS § 218-4
212:381
§ 218-5. Approval required; approving agency.
The term "subdivision" shall also include the term "resubdivision."
TRANSCRIPT — A typed or printed verbatim report of the proceedings,
or reproduction thereof.
USE —
Consolidation of existing lots by deed or other recorded
instruments.
(4)
The conveyance of one or more adjoining lots, tracts or parcels
of land, owned by the same person or persons and all of which
are found and certified by the administrative officer to conform
to the requirements of Chapter 255, Zoning, and are shown and
designated as separate lots, tracts or parcels on the tax map or
atlas of the Borough.
(5)
The noun "use" shall include the actual or intended occupancy or
other employment of land or of a structure.
(1)
The verb "use" includes the phrase "or designed, intended or
arranged to be used."
(2)
B. Whenever in the administration of this chapter it shall be necessary or
desirable to define a term that has not hereinbefore been defined,
reference shall be made to the definition (if any) of such term in the
Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.; the State Uniform
Construction Code Act and regulations promulgated thereunder;
N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.1; N.J.S.A. 58:16A-50 et seq.; the Code of the Borough
of Old Tappan; and the State of New Jersey Revised Statutes,
Cumulative Supplement and New Jersey Statutes.
A. Subdivision approval. No person shall sell or agree to sell any land
which forms part of a subdivision as defined in this chapter until final
approval of such subdivision has been obtained pursuant to this
chapter.
B. Site plan approval.
(1) No building permit shall be issued for a new building unless a site
plan shall have first been approved by the Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Adjustment in accordance with the terms of this
chapter.
(2) No building permit shall be issued for an addition to an existing
building unless a site plan shall have first been approved by the
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment in accordance with
the terms of this chapter.
(3) No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any new building, for
any addition to an existing building or for any change in use,
ownership or occupancy of a building if under Chapter 255,
§ 218-4 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 218-5
212:382
Zoning,, a greater number of parking spaces would be required
for such new use or occupancy, unless the building and its
appurtenances conform in all respects to an approved site plan.
(4) Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsections A, B and C of this
section, no site plan approval shall be required prior to the
issuance of a building permit for any new building or addition to an
existing building or prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy for any building or addition if such building or addition
is a single- or two-family dwelling or as an accessory thereto.
§ 218-5 STORM SEWERS § 218-5
212:383

ARTICLE II
Procedures
§ 218-6. Minor subdivision.
For a minor subdivision, the procedure shall be as follows:
A. An application shall be submitted to the Borough Clerk, in writing, in
duplicate, on forms supplied by the Planning Board, furnishing
pertinent data such as names and addresses of owner, agent, engineer
and identification of property involved.
B. The application shall be accompanied by ten copies of a plan of the
proposed subdivision accurately drawn to a scale of not less than one
inch equals 100 feet, certified by a licensed land surveyor. The plan
shall be of a size acceptable to the county clerk for filing and shall
indicate:
(1) The location of the lots to be created in relation to the entire tract.
(2) All existing structures and wooded areas within the subdivision and
within 200 feet thereof.
(3) The name of the owner and of all adjoining property owners as
disclosed by the most recent Borough tax records.
(4) The Tax Map sheet, block and lot numbers.
(5) All streets and streams within 500 feet of the subdivision.
(6) The area in square feet of all lots to be created.
(7) A key map showing the entire subdivision and its relation to
surrounding areas.
(8) Easements, streets, buildings, watercourses, railroads, bridges,
culverts, drain pipes, rights-of-way and drainage easements.
(9) Any variance or variances required.
(10) Acreage of the entire parcel to be subdivided.
C. The Planning Board may require receipt of an application ten days prior
to the meeting at which action shall be taken on such application.
D. Upon receipt of a completed application, the Board shall, within the
time periods prescribed by ordinance, approve or conditionally approve
the subdivision without the necessity of full notice and hearing, classify
the subdivision as a major subdivision, or disapprove the subdivision.
The Board may, in addition to any other conditions which the Board may
deem necessary in order to carry out the purposes of this chapter,
require as a condition for minor subdivision approval, that the applicant
install such improvements required by Article III as the Board, in
accordance with law, shall deem necessary. Such improvements shall be
§ 218-6 STORM SEWERS § 218-6
212:385
§ 218-7. Preliminary approval of site plan and major subdivisions.
in accordance with the standards set forth in Article IV and
performance guarantees may be required in accordance with Article
VIII.
E. Before the Borough Clerk returns any approved minor subdivision plat
to the subdivider, the Clerk shall have sufficient copies made to furnish
one copy of each to the following. The cost of the copies shall be
charged to the subdivider and shall be collected before the return of the
original sketch plat to the subdivider.
(1) Borough Clerk.
(2) Borough Engineer.
(3) Building Inspector or Zoning Officer.
(4) Tax Assessor.
(5) Secretary of the Planning Board.
(6) County Planning Board.
A. Procedure. For preliminary approval of a major subdivision or site plan,
the procedure shall be as follows:
(1) An application shall be submitted to the administrative officer, in
writing, in duplicate, on forms supplied by the Planning Board,
furnishing pertinent data such as names and addresses of owner,
agent, engineer and identification of property involved.
(2) The application shall be accompanied by ten copies of a preliminary
plat of the proposed subdivision or of the site plan, accurate and to
scale as to boundaries, existing features and proposed features.
The accuracy of the boundaries and existing features shall be
certified by a licensed land surveyor. All design shall be done by a
licensed professional engineer. The details of the plat shall be in
conformity with Subsection B below.
(3) The preliminary plat shall be accompanied by a written statement
from the applicant which shall include:
(a) The name and address of the owner or agent making
application.
(b) The intention of the applicant respecting the proposed
character of the development.
(c) The deed restrictions, if any, which will govern the
development.
(d) The intended date of beginning development.
§ 218-6 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 218-7
212:386
(e) If the plat involves a residential cluster, a brief description of
the organization that will own and maintain the common open
space. In addition, if the plat involves a residential cluster, the
applicant shall submit an alternate plat showing the
subdivision of the tract into conventional lots that are not part
of a residential cluster and which would conform to the other
requirements of the zoning districts in which the tract is
located if a residential cluster were not proposed.
(4) Simultaneously with filing the application, folded copies of the
preliminary plat shall be forwarded by the applicant to the
following persons:
(a) The Borough Engineer;
(b) The Board of Health or Health Officer;
(c) The Chief of Police;
(d) The Department of Public Works;
(e) The Fire Prevention Bureau;
(f) The Shade Tree Commission;
(g) The Building Inspector;
(h) Environmental Commission;
(i) Professional planner.
The applicant shall produce proof by affidavit of the date
such copies were sent. The persons and Boards may make
recommendations in writing to the Board within 30 days after
service of the preliminary plat on them. The Board shall take
the recommendations into account, but shall have the
authority to proceed in the absence of such recommendation
or to disregard or modify such recommendations. Copies of
all recommendations shall be sent to the applicant by the
recommending professionals and boards.
(5) Upon receipt of a completed application, the Planning Board shall
schedule a public hearing. The applicant shall thereupon give
notice of such hearing in accordance with the requirements of
§ 45-28, of Chapter 45, Land Use Procedures, of this Code.
B. Plat details.
(1) The preliminary plat of site plan or subdivision shall contain the
following:
(a) Date. All revisions shall be noted and dated.
§ 218-7 STORM SEWERS § 218-7
212:387
(b) Key map showing the location of the tract with reference to
surrounding properties and existing street intersections.
(c) Title of development, North arrow, scale, block and lot number,
name and address of record owner, name and address, license
number and seal of person preparing the plat. If the owner of
the premises is a corporation, the name and address of the
president and secretary shall be submitted with the
application.
(d) A scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet. All distances
shall be in feet and decimals of a foot and all bearings shall be
given to the nearest 10 seconds.
(e) The names, as shown on the current tax records, of all owners
of the property within 200 feet of the subdivision, together
with the block and lot numbers of the property.
(f) The zoning district in which the parcel is located, together with
zone boundaries included within the boundaries of the parcel
or within 200 feet therefrom.
(g) Survey data showing boundaries of the property, building or
setback lines, and lines of existing and proposed streets,
corner radii lots, reservations, easements and areas dedicated
to public use, including grants, restrictions and rights-of-way.
(h) Reference to any existing or proposed covenants, deed
restrictions or exceptions covering all or any part of the parcel.
A copy of such covenants, deed restrictions or exceptions shall
be submitted with the application.
(i) The distances, measured along the right-of-way lines of
existing streets abutting the property, to the nearest
intersections with other public streets.
(j) Location of existing buildings and all other structures,
including walls, fences, culverts and bridges, with spot
elevations of such buildings and structures. Structures to be
removed shall be indicated by dashed lines; structures to
remain shall be indicated by solid lines.
(k) Location of all existing and proposed storm drainage
structures and utility lines, whether publicly or privately
owned, with pipe sizes, grades and direction of flow, locations
of inlets, manholes or other elevations. If any existing utility
lines are underground, the estimated location of such utility
lines shall be shown.
(l) Existing and proposed contours, referred to U.S. Coast and
Geodetic datum, with a contour interval of one foot for slopes
§ 218-7 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 218-7
212:388
of less than 10%, and an interval of two feet for slopes of more
than 10%. Existing contours shall be indicated by solid lines.
(m) Location of existing rock outcrops, high points, watercourses,
depressions, ponds, marshes, wooded areas and other
significant existing features, including previous flood
elevations of watercourses, ponds and marsh areas as
determined by survey.
(n) All proposed streets, with profiles, indicating grading; and
cross sections showing width of roadway, location and width of
sidewalk and location and size of utility conforming to the
standards and specifications of the Borough.
(o) The location of all existing and proposed water lines, valves
and hydrants and all sewer lines or alternative means of water
supply or sewage disposal and treatment.
(p) Existing and proposed storm water drainage system. All site
plans and major subdivisions shall be accompanied by a plan
sketch showing all existing drainage within 500 feet of any
boundary, and all areas such as paved areas, grassed areas,
wooded areas and any other surface area contributing to the
calculations, and showing methods used in the drainage
calculations.
(q) Acreage, to the nearest tenth of an acre, of tract to be
subdivided and the area, in square feet, of all lots.
(r) Approximate position of existing and proposed monuments.
(s) Open spaces to be dedicated for public use and the location
and use of all property reserved by covenant in the deed for the
common use of all property owners. If the plat involves a
residential cluster, the plat shall contain the common open
spaces, the public open spaces and the plans for improvement,
if any, thereof.
(t) Such other information or data as may be required by the
Planning Board or the County Planning Board for
determination that the details of the subdivision are in
accordance with the standards of this chapter, and all other
ordinances of the Borough and all other applicable laws,
ordinances or resolutions.
(2) In addition to the requirements of § 218-7B(1), the preliminary plat
of a site plan shall contain the following:
(a) The proposed use or uses of land and buildings, together with
the floor space of all buildings and the estimated number of
employees. If the precise use of the building is unknown at the
time of application, an amended plan showing the proposed
§ 218-7 STORM SEWERS § 218-7
212:389
use shall be required prior to issuance of a certificate of
occupancy.
(b) The means of vehicular access for ingress to and egress from
the site showing in particular the size and location of
driveways and curb cuts, walkways, the proposed traffic
channels, if any, additional width, if any, and any other means
of controlling vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
(c) The location and design of any off-street parking areas or
loading areas showing size and location of bays, aisles and
barriers. The plat shall also contain an itemization of the
proposed uses and the respective off-street parking
requirements for each of said uses in accordance with § 255-48
of Chapter 255, Zoning.
(d) The location, direction of illumination, power and hours of
operation of existing and proposed outdoor lighting.
(e) The location and elevation plan of existing and proposed signs.
(f) The proposed screening, landscaping and planting plan.
C. Effect of preliminary approval. Preliminary approval of a major
subdivision or of a site plan shall, except as provided in Subsection C(4)
below, confer upon the applicant the following rights for a three-year
period, with respect to a major subdivision and for a one-year period
with respect to a site plan, from the date of the preliminary approval:
(1) That the general terms and condition on which preliminary
approval was granted shall not be charged. Such terms and
conditions shall include, but not be limited to:
(a) Use requirements.
(b) Layout and design standards for streets, curbs and sidewalks.
(c) Lot size.
(d) Yard dimensions and off-tract improvements and, in the case of
a site plan, any requirements for preservation of existing
natural resources, for safe and efficient vehicular and
pedestrian circulation, parking and loading, for screening,
landscaping and location of structures and for exterior
lighting, except that nothing herein shall be construed to
prevent the Borough from modifying, by ordinance, such
general terms and conditions of preliminary approval as relate
to public health and safety.
(2) That the applicant may submit for final approval on or before the
expiration date of preliminary approval the whole or a section or
sections of the preliminary subdivision plat or site plan, as the case
may be.
§ 218-7 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 218-7
212:390
§ 218-8. Final approval of site plan and major subdivision.
(3) That the applicant may apply for and the Planning Board may grant
extensions on such preliminary approval for additional periods of at
least one year but not to exceed a total extension of two years,
provided that if the design standards have been revised by
ordinance, such revised standards shall govern.
(4) In the case of a subdivision or of a site plan for an area of 50 acres
or more, the Planning Board may grant the rights referred to in
Subsections C(1), (2) and (3) above for such period of time, longer
than three years with respect to a subdivision, or longer than one
year with respect to a site plan, as shall be determined by the
Planning Board to be reasonable, taking into consideration:
(a) The number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area
permissible under preliminary approval.
(b) Economic conditions.
(c) The comprehensiveness of the development.
(5) The applicant may apply for thereafter and the Planning Board may
thereafter grant an extension to preliminary approval for such
additional period of time as shall be determined by the Planning
Board to be reasonable taking into consideration:
(a) The number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area
permissible under preliminary approval.
(b) The potential number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor
area of the section or sections awaiting final approval.
(c) Economic conditions.
(d) The comprehensiveness of the development, provided that if
the design standards have been revised, such revised
standards shall govern.
A. Procedure. For final approval of a major subdivision or site plan, the
procedure shall be as follows:
(1) The plat of a subdivision and an application for final approval, in
duplicate and in a form approved by the Board, shall be submitted
to the proper administrative officer, together with the fee required
by this chapter.
(2) The original cloth tracing and five white prints, blue or black on
white, of the plat of a subdivision shall accompany the application.
No final plat shall be required for a site plan.
(3) The plat of a subdivision shall not differ substantially from the
preliminary plat as approved.
§ 218-7 STORM SEWERS § 218-8
212:391
(4) The final plat of a subdivision shall be drawn in ink on tracing cloth
at a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet and shall be in
compliance with all the provisions of the Map Filing Law35 and with
the plat details contained in Subsection B below.
(5) The administrative officer shall make a record of the date of
submission of the final plat and application to him/her, and shall
forthwith transmit the final plat and application to the Planning
Board.
(6) Prior to final approval of a subdivision or site plan the Board, upon
the advice of the Borough Engineer, shall determine:
(a) The nature of the improvements to be required as a condition
of final approval.
(b) The estimated value of the improvements installed or to be
installed.
(c) The nature and the amount of performance guarantees, if any,
to be required as a condition to final approval.
(d) The amounts to be deposited to reimburse the Planning Board
and Borough for costs incurred or to be incurred for legal,
engineering and other consultant reports, for recording fees
and for any other costs anticipated by the Board.
(e) Any other conditions upon which final approval shall be
granted.
(7) Prior to final approval of a subdivision or site plan, the applicant
shall submit to the Board:
(a) A developer's agreement, prepared by the Board attorney,
setting forth the obligations of the applicant in connection with
the final approval.
(b) A performance guarantee, in a form satisfactory to the Board
and Borough complying with this chapter and guaranteeing
performance of the developer's agreement.
(c) Maintenance guarantees, if any, for work completed prior to
final approval.
(d) Deed for any easements or rights-of-way, public open space or
other public land in a form satisfactory to the Board attorney.
(e) Funds to be deposited to reimburse the Board for costs
incurred or to be incurred for legal, engineering and other
consultant reports, for recording fees and for any other costs
anticipated by the Board.
35.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.
§ 218-8 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 218-8
212:392
(f) If the plat involves a residential cluster with common open
space, the charter and bylaws, in a form satisfactory to the
board attorney, of the organization formed to approve and/or
maintain the common open space.
(g) Evidence of compliance with any other conditions imposed by
the Board.
(8) Within 45 days after submission of a complete application for final
approval to the proper administrative officer, or within such further
time as may be agreed to by the applicant, but in no event less than
the thirty-day reporting period within which the County Planning
Board may act, the Planning Board shall approve, conditionally
approve or disapprove the final plat or site plan and report such
action, whether it be approval, conditional approval or disapproval,
to the Borough Council. In case of approval, the final plat shall be
so certified. The applicant shall be notified of the Board's action
and the reasons therefor.
(9) Upon final approval by the Planning Board and after all required
signatures are placed on the original tracing of the subdivision
plan, the administrative officer shall request the Borough Engineer
to have one cloth print and one Mylar reproducible and 10 copies
made of such final plat and file copy thereof with each of the
following:
(a) Secretary of the Board;
(b) Engineer of the Board;
(c) Building Inspector;
(d) Tax Assessor;
(e) Borough Clerk;
(f) Board of Health or Health Officer;
(g) Superintendent of Public Works;
(h) Shade Tree Commission;
(i) Environmental Commission.
B. Plat details. The final plat of a subdivision shall contain the following:
(1) Date, name and location of the subdivision, name of owner, graphic
scale and reference meridian.
(2) Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, street names,
easements and other rights-of-way, land to be reserved or
dedicated to public sale; all lot lines and other site lines, with
accurate dimensions, bearings or deflection angles and radii, arcs
and central angles of all curves; area of each lot.
§ 218-8 STORM SEWERS § 218-8
212:393
(3) The names, exact locations and widths of all existing and recorded
streets intersecting or paralleling the plot boundaries within a
distance of 200 feet.
(4) The purpose of any easement or land reserved or dedicated to
public use shall be designated and the proposed use of site, other
than residential, shall be noted.
(5) Lot, block and street number as approved by the Borough Engineer,
including lot and block numbers of abutting property.
(6) Minimum building setback line on all lots and other sites.
(7) Location and description of all monuments.
(8) Names of owners of adjoining unsubdivided lands.
(9) Certification by surveyor as to accuracy of details of plat.
(10) Certification that the applicant is agent or owner of the land, or
that the owner has given consent under an option agreement.
(11) When approval of a plat is required by any other officer or body of a
municipality, county or state, such approval shall be certified on the
plat, or evidence shall be submitted that an application has been
made for such approval.
(12) Proposed final grades of all streets shall be shown to a scale of one
inch equals five feet vertical and one inch equals 50 feet horizontal
on sheets 22 inches by 36 inches, and drawings shall include both
plans and profiles and shall show elevations of all monuments
referred to U.S.C. and G.S. level bench marks, and such elevations
shall be shown in feet and hundreds of feet.
(13) Plans and profiles of storm and sanitary sewers and water mains.
(14) Certificate from the Tax Collector that all taxes are paid to date.
(15)Written proof that the land set aside or shown for easement, public
use or streets are free and clear of all liens and encumbrances.
(16) A written statement that the specifications for the construction of
the proposed streets, sidewalks, curbs, storm drains and
appurtenances and all other contemplated improvements meet the
requirements of all ordinances of the Borough relating to the
acceptance of streets or standard specifications of the Borough on
file with the Borough Engineer.
(17) A written agreement to pay to the Borough Engineering and
inspection fees by it in connection with proper inspection of the
construction of the improvements.
(18) A written estimate of the total cost of constructing, installing and
completing all improvements and monuments.
§ 218-8 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 218-8
212:394
§ 218-9. Fees. [Amended 5-17-2004 by Ord. No. 850-04]
Upon the approval of any minor or major subdivision, the applicant shall
pay to the Borough a fee of $200 per lot for the purpose of updating
and amending the Borough Tax Map to reflect any necessary changes
occasioned by such subdivision.
C. As-built plans.
(1) After installation of the improvements required by this chapter, the
subdivider or applicant for site plan approval shall cause to be
prepared, signed and sealed by a licensed professional engineer or
land surveyor:
(a) Plans showing:
[1] The contours at two-foot intervals for lands having slopes
averaging 10% or greater and at one-foot intervals for
lands of lesser average slopes of the land as finally graded.
[2] The location, as built, of all improvements required by this
chapter, including, without intending to limit the
generality hereof, the location of water mains, gas mains
and underground supply lines for light, power and
telephone service.
(b) Profiles, as built, of streets, storm sewers and sanitary sewers
and their respective appurtenances.
(c) Cross sections, as built, of streets.
(2) The plans, profiles and cross sections required by this subsection
are hereinafter referred to as "as-built plans."
§ 218-8 STORM SEWERS § 218-9
212:395

ARTICLE III
Improvements
§ 218-10. Criteria.
The subdivider or site plan applicant shall provide for the ultimate
installation of the following on-site and off-site improvements:
A. Pavements of streets or portions thereof, in accordance with the
following standards:
(1) Four inches to 2 1/2 inches stone, dusted and rolled.
(2) Two inches of 1 1/2 inches stone, rolled.
(3) One coat of oil and 1 1/2 gallons per square yard.
(4) Five-eights-inch stone, spread and rolled.
(5) One and one-half inches Cap. Asphalt F.A.B.C. or S.M.
B. Approved street signs.
C. Curbs or gutters. There shall be no less than one foot nor more than two
feet between curb and sidewalk.
D. Sidewalks, when required by the Planning Board.
(1) The Planning Board, prior to final approval of a plat, shall finally
determine whether and where sidewalks shall be installed, and if it
determines that no sidewalk need be installed, whether and which
appropriate areas shall be graded for the possible future
installation of sidewalks. In determining whether sidewalks should
be installed and whether and which areas should be graded for the
future installation of sidewalks, the Planning Board shall consider
the requirements of public safety, convenience, aesthetic value,
terrain and landscape features and the overall objectives of this
article. In particular, the Planning Board shall take into
consideration the following.
(a) The actual or prospective density of population in the
subdivision and surrounding areas.
(b) The size and character of the streets in the subdivision and
their relation to the existing or prospective traffic pattern of
the Borough.
(c) The relation of the subdivision to actual or prospective public
service areas, such as business districts, park or recreation
areas and school sites, and the actual or reasonably
anticipated pedestrian traffic generated thereby.
§ 218-10 STORM SEWERS § 218-10
212:397
(2) Sidewalks, when required, shall be installed in accordance with the
directions of the Borough Council under specifications and
standards to be approved by the Borough Engineer.
E. No topsoil shall be removed from the site or used as spoil. Topsoil
moved during the course of construction shall be redistributed so as to
provide at least six inches of cover, and all replaced or redistributed
topsoil shall be stabilized by seeding or planting to ensure that it will
remain in place and free from erosion.
F. Monuments shall be of the size and shape required by N.J.S.A.
46:23-9.11, and shall be placed in accordance with such statute.
G. Utilities, including sewage disposal systems, storm drains and culverts,
water and gas mains, and electrical supply lines for light, power and
telephone service, hydrants and connections thereof with approved
existing and proposed systems, shall be adequate to handle all present
and probable future development. Electric telephone and other public
utility lines required to service any major subdivision shall be installed
underground in the public right-of-way. However, those subdivisions or
portions thereof, which can be served by existing overhead lines, may
be so served providing connections from houses in the subdivisions or
portions thereof are underground. If conditions are such that
application of the foregoing would cause undue hardship, the Planning
Board may waive strict application of the requirements.
H. Streetlighting in accordance with the requirements of the Planning
Board.
I. Shade trees shall be located on the street line so as not to interfere with
utilities or sidewalks and each 50 feet of frontage shall have one shade
tree of a caliper of no less than 13/4 inches.
J. Driveways. [Amended 7-24-2000 by Ord. No. 718-00]
(1) Driveways and aprons shall be constructed of any of the following
materials for a minimum distance of 50 feet back from the curbline
of the street to which the driveway connects:
(a) Four inches of one and one-half inch stone bound with dust or
quarry process stone with a surface of two inches of
bituminous concrete.
(b) Five inches of concrete.
(c) Cobblestone.
(d) Belgium blocks.
(e) Brick.
(2) No driveway or apron within such fifty-foot area shall be
constructed solely of a loose material such as crushed stone or the
§ 218-10 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 218-10
212:398
§ 218-11. Allocation of costs of improvements.
like; provided, however, that such material may be used for that
portion of a driveway beyond 50 feet back from said curbline.
K. Driveway aprons shall be a minimum of 10 feet wide at the curb.
L. All manholes and catch basins shall follow standard requirements of the
New Jersey State Highway Specifications.
M. Improvements, such as, but not limited to, pathways, bikeways,
benches, gardens, playing fields or recreation equipment, in common or
public open space, in accordance with the requirements of the Planning
Board.
A. The subdivider or site plan applicant shall, at his/her own cost, provide
for the ultimate installation of all off-tract water, sewers, drainage and
street improvements and easements therefor, required by the Planning
Board in connection with the subdivision or site plan if such off-tract
improvements:
(1) Are wholly made necessary by the subdivision or site plan or the
improvements therein.
(2) Do not confer material benefits on any land other than the land
within the subdivision or site plan.
B. The subdivider or site plan applicant shall provide for payment of its
proportionate share, allocated in accordance with this chapter, of the
cost of the ultimate installation of all off-tract water, sewer, drainage
and street improvements and easements therefor required by the
Planning Board and shown on the Master Plan if such off-tract
improvements:
(1) Are wholly or partially made necessary by the subdivision or site
plan or the improvements thereon.
(2) Confer benefit on lands other than those within the subdivision or
site plan.
C. In addition to the improvements set forth in 218-10 and Subsections A
and B of this section, the site plan applicant shall, upon the conditions
delineated by the Planning Board, provide for the ultimate installation,
prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, of the following:
(1) Buffer landscaping and foundation plantings.
(2) On-site paved parking areas and all appurtenant curbs, islands,
lighting and driveways.
(3) Fencing and screening.
(4) On-site lighting.
§ 218-10 STORM SEWERS § 218-11
212:399
§ 218-12. Inspection of improvements.
All of the improvements installed by a subdivider or site plan applicant shall
be subject to inspection and approval by the Borough Engineer who shall
be notified by the subdivider or site plan applicant at least 24 hours prior to
the start of construction. No underground installation shall be covered until
so inspected and approved.
§ 218-13. Off-tract improvements.
(5) On-site pedestrian ways.
D. All such improvements shall meet the design standards of this chapter.
A. Procedure for determination and allocation of costs. In the event the
Planning Board shall determine that off-tract improvements are
required in connection with any subdivision or site plan, then prior to
granting final approval:
(1) The Planning Board shall report to the Borough Council:
(a) The location, character and extent of the required off-tract
improvements.
(b) The Borough Engineer's estimate of the total cost of such offtract
improvements.
(c) The proposed allocation of the total cost determination in
accordance with the standards set forth in Subsection B of this
section.
(2) The Borough Council shall determine and report to the Planning
Board whether the off-tract improvement shall be constructed:
(a) By the Borough as a general improvement; or as a local
improvement or as a combination thereof; or
(b) By the subdivider or site plan applicant with a formula
specified by the Borough Council providing for partial
reimbursement if the improvement specially benefits property
other than that within the subdivision or site plan.
(3) The Planning Board shall require as a condition for approval of the
final plat or site plan that:
(a) If the improvement is to be constructed by the Borough as a
general improvement, the subdivider or site plan applicant
shall deposit with the Borough Treasurer an amount equal to
the difference, if any, between the estimated cost of the
improvement and the estimated total amount by which all
properties, including the subdivision or site plan to be serviced
by the improvement, shall be specially benefited by the
improvement; or
§ 218-11 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 218-13
212:400
(b) If the improvement is to be constructed by the Borough as a
local improvement, the subdivider or site plan applicant shall
deposit with the Borough Treasurer, in addition to the amount
specified in Subsection A(3)(a) above, the estimated amount by
which the subdivision or site plan shall be specially benefited
by the improvement; or
(c) If the improvement is to be constructed by the subdivider or
site plan applicant, the subdivider or site plan applicant shall
file with the Borough Clerk a performance guarantee meeting
the requirements of § 218-62 in the full estimated cost of the
improvement.
B. Standards for allocating costs.
(1) In determining the allocation of costs for off-tract improvements as
between the subdivider or site plan applicant, the other property
owners and the Borough, the Planning Board shall be aided by the
following factors:
(a) The total estimated cost of the off-tract improvements.
(b) The increase in market values of the properties affected and
any other benefits conferred.
(c) The needs created by the application.
(d) Population and land use projections for the land within the
general area of the subdivision or site plan and other areas to
be served by the off-tract improvements.
(e) The estimated time for construction of the off-tract
improvements.
(f) The condition and periods of usefulness of the improvements
which may be based upon the criteria of N.J.S.A. 40A:2-11.
(2) Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the Planning
Board may take into account the following specific factors:
(a) With respect to street, curb, gutter, sidewalk, shade trees,
street signs and traffic light improvements, the Board may
consider:
[1] Traffic counts.
[2] Existing and projected traffic patterns.
[3] Such other factors as it may deem relevant to the need
created by the subdivision or site plan.
(b) With respect to drainage facilities, the Board may consider:
§ 218-13 STORM SEWERS § 218-13
212:401
[1] The relationship between the area of the subdivision or
site plan and the area of the total drainage basin of which
the subdivision or site plan is a part.
[2] The proposed use of land within the subdivision or site
plan and the amount of land area to be covered by
impervious surfaces on the land within the subdivision or
site plan.
[3] The use, condition or status of the remaining land area in
the drainage basin.
(c) With respect to water, gas and electric supply and distribution
facilities, the Board may consider the use requirements of the
use proposed for the subdivision or site plan and the use
requirements of all other properties to be benefited by the
improvements.
(d) With respect to sewerage facilities, the Board may consider:
[1] The anticipated volume of effluent from the use proposed
for the subdivision or site plan and the anticipated volume
of effluent from all other properties to be benefited by the
improvements.
[2] The types of effluent anticipated and particular problems
requiring special equipment or added costs.
C. Deposits. Any money received by the Borough Treasurer for off-tract
improvements to be constructed or installed by the Borough pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter shall be deposited in a suitable
depository therefor and shall be used only for the improvements for
which they are deposited or improvements satisfying the same purpose.
If construction of improvements for which the Borough is responsible
has not commenced within five years from the date of deposit, the
amount deposited together with any income thereon shall be returned
to the subdivider or site plan applicant or his/her successor in interest.
D. Actual costs. Upon completion of any improvements constructed by the
Borough as a general or local improvement, the total cost of such
improvement shall be determined by the Borough Treasurer. The
difference between the actual cost as so determined and the estimated
cost shall be computed. The subdivider or site plan applicant or his/her
successor in interest shall make remittance to the Borough if the actual
cost exceeds the estimated cost, or shall receive a refund from the
funds deposited with the Borough if the estimated cost exceeds the
actual cost in an amount which bears the same relationship to the
difference between the actual and estimated costs as the amount
deposited by the subdivider or site plan applicant for his/her
proportionate share of the estimated cost bears to the total estimated
cost. Any sum payable by the subdivider or site plan applicant or his/her
successor in interest may be levied and collected by the Borough in the
§ 218-13 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 218-13
212:402
same manner as is provided by law for the levy and collection of real
estate taxes.
E. Successors in interest. In the absence of an express provision in a deed
or deeds of conveyance, it shall be presumed that the fee owners of all
lots in the subdivision or site plan at the date any deposit or portion
thereof is returned or additional charge is made pursuant to
Subsections C and D of this section are the lawful successors in interest
to the subdivider or site plan applicant and that each such fee owner
shall be charged with or entitled to receive a pro rata share, based on
lot area, of any funds to be returned or additional charge to be made
pursuant to this subsection. Upon payment of any such sums to the fee
owners, the Borough shall be released of liability to any other person.
§ 218-13 STORM SEWERS § 218-13
212:403

ARTICLE IV
Subdivision Design Standards
§ 218-14. Compliance required.
The subdivider shall observe the requirements and principles of land
subdivision in the design of each subdivision or portion thereof, as
hereinafter set forth in this section and as set forth in Article VI as
pertaining to landscaping.
§ 218-15. General standards.
The subdivision plat shall conform to design standards that shall encourage
good development patterns within the Borough. Where an Official Map
or Master Plan, or both, has or have been adopted, the subdivision shall
conform to the proposals and conditions shown thereon. The streets,
drainageways, school sites, flood control basins, public parks and
playgrounds and other public areas shown on an officially adopted Master
Plan or Official Map shall be considered in approval of subdivision plats.
Where no Master Plan exists, such facilities and areas shall be such as
to lend themselves to the harmonious development of the Borough and to
enhance the public welfare in accordance with the design standards set
forth in §§ 218-16 through 218-20.
§ 218-16. Streets.
A. The arrangement of streets not shown on the Master Plan or Official
Map shall be such as to provide for the appropriate extension of
existing streets.
B. Minor streets shall be so designated as to discourage through traffic.
C. Subdivisions abutting arterial streets shall provide a marginal service
road or reserve frontage with a buffer strip for planting, or some other
means of separation of through and local traffic as the Planning Board
may determine to be appropriate.
D. The right-of-way width shall be measured from lot line to lot line and
shall not be less than 50 feet or as may be shown on the Master Plan or
Official Map, whichever is greater.
E. No subdivision that shows reserve strips controlling access to streets
shall be approved, except where the control and disposal of land
comprising such strips have been placed in the Council under
conditions approved by the Planning Board.
F. Subdivisions adjoining or including existing streets that do not conform
to street widths shown on the Master Plan or Official Map, or to the
street width requirements of this chapter may be required to dedicate
additional width along one or both sides of streets of substandard
width. If the subdivision is along one side only, dedication of 1/2 of the
required extra may be required.
§ 218-14 STORM SEWERS § 218-16
212:405
§ 218-17. Blocks.
G. Grades of arterial and collector streets shall not exceed four percent.
Grades on other streets shall not exceed 10%. No streets shall have a
minimum grade of less than 1/2 of 1%.
H. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as is possible, and
in no case shall be less than 60º. The block corners at intersections
shall be rounded at the curbline with a curve having a radius of not less
than 20 feet.
I. Street jogs with center-line offsets of less than 125 feet shall be
prohibited.
J. A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between reverse
curves on arterial and collector streets.
K. When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any one point
by more than 10º and not more than 45º, they shall be connected by a
curve with a radius of not less than 100 feet for minor streets and 300
feet for arterial and collector streets.
L. All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves of sufficient
radius to provide a smooth transition and proper sight distance.
M. Dead-end streets or culs-de-sac shall not be longer than 600 feet and
shall provide a turnaround at the end with a radius of not less than 50
feet and tangent whenever possible to the side of the street. If a deadend
street is of temporary nature, a similar turnaround shall be
provided and provisions made for future extension of the street and
reversion of the excess right-of-way to the adjoining properties.
N. Street names shall be approved by the Mayor and Council. The Mayor
and Council may change street names at any time, subject to the
provisions of law. Proposed names shall not duplicate or closely
approximate any existing street names. The continuation of an existing
street shall have the same name. [Amended 5-17-2004 by Ord. No.
849-04]
O. No development of any parcel of land shall be permitted if the
development includes creation of a new roadway which would render
any other parcel of land not owned by the developer a corner lot. For
purposes of this provision, a corner lot is defined as one having abutting
frontages on two improved streets and, as a result, required by the
Zoning Ordinance36 to maintain two front yard setbacks. [Added
5-7-2007 by Ord. No. 942-07]
A. Block length and width or acreage within bounding roads shall be such
as to accommodate the size of lot required in the area by Chapter 255,
36.Editor's Note: See Ch. 255, Zoning.
§ 218-16 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 218-17
212:406
§ 218-18. Lots.
§ 218-19. Public use and service areas.
§ 218-20. Utilities design standards; approvals.
Zoning, of the Borough, and to provide for the convenient access,
circulation control and safety of street traffic.
B. In blocks over 1,000 feet long, pedestrian walkways may be required in
locations deemed necessary by the Planning Board. Each walkway shall
be 10 feet wide and be straight from street to street.
C. For commercial, group housing or industrial use, block size shall be
sufficient to meet all area and yard requirements for such use.
A. Lot dimensions and area shall not be less than the requirements of
Chapter 255, Zoning.
B. Insofar as is practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight
streets and radial to curved streets.
C. Each lot shall front upon an approved street at least 50 feet in width,
except lots fronting on streets described in § 218-16F.
D. Where extra width has been dedicated for widening of existing streets,
or where either the Borough or the County of Bergen has required, as a
condition of subdivision or other approval for a lot, that a portion
thereof be burdened with an easement for future road widening
purposes, lots shall begin at such extra-width line, and all setbacks shall
be measured from such line.
E. Where there is a question as to the suitability of a lot or lots for their
intended use due to factors such as rock formations, flood conditions or
similar circumstances, the Planning Board may, after adequate
investigation, withhold approval of such lots.
A. In a large-scale development, easements along rear property lines or
elsewhere for utility installation may be required. Such easements shall
be at least 15 feet wide and shall be located in consultation with the
companies and Borough departments concerned.
B. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway
channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or
drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such
watercourse, and such further width or construction, or both, as shall
be adequate for the purpose.
C. Natural features, such as trees, brooks, hilltops and views, shall be
preserved whenever possible in designing any subdivision containing
such features.
§ 218-17 STORM SEWERS § 218-20
212:407
§ 218-21. Recycling facilities for certain construction.
Any development proposal for the construction of 50 or more units of
single-family residential housing, the construction of 25 or more units of
multifamily residential housing or the utilization of 1,000 square feet or
more of land for any commercial or industrial use shall include as part
of its application for a subdivision, site plan, conditional use or other
developmental application, the following information and documentation:
§ 218-22. Open space design standards.
A. All storm drains and culverts and all sewage disposal systems and
installations, both individual and public, shall meet the standards
prescribed by, and be approved by, the Borough, county and state
health and engineering authorities having jurisdiction thereof.
B. All utilities and installations connected with systems maintained and
controlled by privately owned public utilities shall meet the standards
for underground installation prescribed by, and approved by, the public
utilities.
A. Adequate facilities shall be provided for the depositing and collection of
recyclable materials.
B. The location of all existing and proposed solid waste collection stations
shall be delineated on the subdivision plat or site plan. A plan detail, at
a scale of one inch equals 10 feet, shall be incorporated in the
submission for each such station or for a typical station. The containers
at each station shall be delineated on the detail plan and described in
tabular form. A separate container or containers shall be provided for
each recyclable materials specified in Chapter 209, Article II,
Recycling, of the Code of the Borough of Old Tappan, in addition to the
containers for nonrecyclable solid waste.
A. The open space shall include, whenever feasible, natural features such
as streams, brooks, wooded areas, deep slopes and other natural
features of scenic and conservation value. The applicant may be
required by the Planning Board to plant trees or make similar
landscaping improvements in order to preserve the natural open space.
B. To the extent possible, common open space shall be interior to the
development, and public open space shall be located at the edges of the
development.
C. To the extent possible, all parcels of open space within the same
residential cluster development shall be interconnected.
D. Common space shall be located so that it is easily accessible to the
maximum number of residents of the development. There should be a
close visual and physical relationship between the common open space
and as many dwelling units as is reasonably possible.
§ 218-20 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 218-22
212:408
E. All public open spaces shall be arranged so that, to the extent possible,
connections can be made to existing or future public open spaces.
F. Lands reserved for or dedicated to public open space shall be physically
suitable for public use. Such lands shall be coordinated with other
public lands to achieve effective distribution of public lands within the
Borough. Sites designed for public open space shall be readily
accessible and shall be of such size and shape as to be usable for public
uses as approved or designated by the Planning Board. The Board, in its
review and evaluation of the suitability of such land, shall be guided by
the Master Plan of the Borough, by the ability to assemble and link such
lands to adjoining areas to form continuous bands of open space, and by
the accessibility and potential utility of such lands.
G. Every parcel of land so dedicated on the subdivision plat of a cluster
development shall be free of any liens of any nature at the time final
approval is granted by the Borough to the final subdivision plat.
H. Common open space and public open space shall either be left in its
natural state or be suitably improved with passive or active recreational
areas, the design of which shall be approved by the Planning Board. In
determining the nature of such improvements, the Planning Board may
consider the existing physical features, the location of the residential
units, the needs of the residents in the residential cluster, the needs of
the public, and such other factors as the Board may deem to be
pertinent.
§ 218-22 STORM SEWERS § 218-22
212:409

ARTICLE V
Site Plan Design Standards
§ 218-23. Applicability.
In reviewing site plans, the Planning Board and all advisory boards and
professional advisers shall be guided by the standards set forth in this
article and in Article VI as pertaining to landscaping.
§ 218-24. Access.
There shall be adequate provision for ingress and egress to all parking
spaces. Access drives or driveways shall be no less than 12 feet for ingress
and egress and 24 feet wide for both ingress and egress. No driveway or
access drive shall be closer than 50 feet to the street lot lines of any two
intersecting streets.
§ 218-25. Buffer strips.
The site plan shall indicate buffer strips and planting strips as required
by this chapter. In the event the Planning Board shall determine that
additional buffer strips are required to protect public areas or neighboring
properties from adverse effects of the proposed building or addition, the
Board may require such additional buffer or planting strips. The Shade
Tree Commission may recommend landscaping and foundation planting
which shall ensure the attractiveness of premises subject to this chapter
and the protection of soil thereon. The Planning Board shall approve the
landscaping proposed by the applicant in accordance with the
recommendations.
§ 218-26. Circulation.
A. Provision shall be made for the safe and adequate circulation of
pedestrians and vehicles within the property. The width of all aisles or
driveways providing access to individual parking stalls shall be in
accordance with the following requirements:
Parking Angle Degrees Aisle of Driveway Width in Feet
0 - Parallel Parking 12
30 12
45 13
60 18
90 25
B. Only one-way traffic shall be permitted in aisles or driveways providing
direct access to parking spaces placed at an angle other than 90º.
Traffic shall move only one way on access roads. The location and
direction of traffic flow shall be shown on a subdivision plat or site plan
§ 218-23 STORM SEWERS § 218-26
212:411
§ 218-27. Drainage.
Provision shall be made for the safe and adequate drainage of the surface
runoff waters in and from the premises so that flooding and erosion of the
property and the property of others shall be prevented. Unless otherwise
provided by the Planning Board, drainage facilities shall be designed on the
basis of a ten-year storm, using a one-hour intensity of two inches.
§ 218-28. Fencing and screening.
Provision shall be made for the protective and covering fencing and
screening of such portions of the property as the Planning Board, upon
recommendation of the Shade Tree Commission, may deem necessary for
the safety and welfare of those persons most likely to be exposed to the
property.
§ 218-29. Fire and explosion hazard.
No process or storage of material in such manner as to create undue hazard
by reason of fire or explosion shall be permitted.
§ 218-30. Emissions causing health or property damage.
No emission which can cause any damage to health, to animals or
vegetables or other forms of property or any excessive soiling shall be
permitted.
§ 218-31. Storage of garbage and refuse.
Provision shall be made for the indoor or enclosed storage of garbage and
refuse.
§ 218-32. Illumination.
The lighting of the building, the property and all signs on the property shall
be such as not to produce any glare at the exterior lot lines of the premises.
The traffic circulation patterns shall be such as to eliminate, at the exterior
lot lines, glare from the lights of automobiles on the property.
§ 218-33. Loading spaces.
There shall be provided on the same lot with the building for which it shall
be used one loading berth for each 5,000 square feet of building floor area
and one berth for each 20,000 square feet, or fraction thereof, in excess
of 5,000 square feet of floor area. Each loading space shall be at least 12
feet wide, 35 feet long and 14 feet high and shall, as nearly as may be
practicable, be located in such a position as to cause the least hindrance to
internal circulation of traffic and the least noise and aesthetic disturbances
approved pursuant to this chapter. No parking or stopping shall be
permitted in driveways or access roads.
§ 218-26 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 218-33
212:412
to the public and neighboring property owners. No loading space shall be
located in a position in which any vehicle using the space shall block the
free passage of pedestrians or vehicles on the street.
§ 218-34. Noise.
Provisions shall be made for the elimination of all loud and offensive noise
to the general public emanating from the use of the property. No continuous
hum, intermittent noise or noise with any noticeable shrillness of a volume
of not more than 50 decibels, measured at the zoning lot lines, shall be
permitted.
§ 218-35. Odors.
No offensive odors shall be noticeable at the zoning lot line or beyond.
§ 218-36. Parking.
A. The Planning Board shall approve the most appropriate location on the
site for the proposed parking area, in view of the size and topography of
the property, considerations of safety and aesthetics, the requirement
of adequate buffer and the elimination of glare, dust and noise caused
by traffic. There shall be provided for each building subject to this
chapter the number of off-street parking spaces in accordance with the
provisions of § 255-48 of Chapter 255, Zoning.
B. Each off-street parking space shall have an area of at least 200 square
feet exclusive of access drives or aisles, be at least 10 feet wide and 20
feet long and shall be surfaced so as to be usable for parking. If off-site,
off-street parking is contemplated, the Board, in addition, shall
determine what provisions, if any, are required for the safe and
adequate circulation of pedestrians between the parking area and the
property.
C. All parking areas and appurtenant maneuvering areas, passageways
and driveways serving semipublic office research, commercial and
industrial uses shall be illuminated adequately during the hours
between sunset and sunrise when the use is in operation. Adequate
shielding shall be provided by all such users to protect adjacent
residential districts from the glare of such illumination and from glare
of automobile headlights produced by automobiles entering and leaving
the area.
D. Off-street parking areas shall be effectively screened on any side which
adjoins or faces premises situated in any residential district or
institutional premises, by a solid, uniformly painted fence or wall not
less than four or more than six feet in height maintained in good
condition, provided that, where the adjacent owners agree in writing, a
screening hedge or natural landscaping may be substituted for the
required fence or wall. No part of any parking area shall be closer than
§ 218-33 STORM SEWERS § 218-36
212:413
10 feet to any school, hospital or other institutional building unless
properly screened in accordance with Planning Board requirements.
E. Parking spaces may be located in yard areas only if they comply with
the provisions of § 242-2J. [Amended 7-24-2000 by Ord. No. 718-00]
F. Off-street parking areas located in commercial districts which provide
parking for 20 or more vehicles shall be provided with shade trees of a
type approved by the Borough Shade Tree Commission. The shade trees
shall be located in a planned manner within the parking lot area as
recommended by the Borough Shade Tree Commission and approved
by the Planning Board. There shall be not less than one shade tree for
every 10 parking spaces.37
G. The Planning Board, upon satisfactory proof that the occupancy of the
buildings for which a community parking program is provided, does not
require final grading and surfacing of the entire area may grant
permission for deferment of that portion of the final grading and
surfacing not required by the then current occupancy and use. No
person shall permit or cause to be occupied any building by more
persons than shall be permitted by Planning Board approval of the
community parking plan. In the event the Planning Board shall
determine, after notice to the owner of buildings participating in the
community parking plan and a hearing, that the partially paved and
graded parking area is inadequate, the owner shall forthwith complete
the final grading and surfacing of the entire required parking area.
H. In business districts no parking space or access thereto, except
entrance or exit drives as limited in this subsection, shall be within the
15 feet strip required above, provided:
(1) Such drives shall not exceed 35 feet in total aggregate width for
each 100 feet of street line abutting such lot, but in no case
exceeding 60 feet in total aggregate width for each street line upon
which a lot abuts.
(2) Such drives shall be at least 60 feet distant, measured along the
street line, from the point of intersection of two intersecting
streets, or from a bend in the street line of one street where the
change is 30º or greater.
(3) Such drives shall have on each side a triangular area formed by the
intersection of the driveway line, the street line and a straight line
joining the line at points 30 feet distance from their point of
intersection. Within such triangular areas no parking or loading or
unloading shall be permitted, nor shall there be located therein any
sign, fence, other structure or plant material over 21/2 feet in
height.
37.Editor's Note: See Ch. 234, Trees.
§ 218-36 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 218-37
212:414
§ 218-37. Paving and curbs.
Paving, when required, shall be dustless, durable, all-weather pavement,
and shall be adequate in size and location to direct surface water runoff
away from neighboring properties and toward approved drainage systems.
§ 218-38. Radioactivity.
No activities which emit dangerous radioactivity at any point, as covered by
federal government standards shall be permitted.
§ 218-39. Retaining walls.
Retaining walls shall be designed to be safe and adequate for the purpose
intended.
§ 218-40. Sewage disposal.
Provisions shall be made in accordance with applicable regulations of all
boards and bodies with jurisdiction over the collection and disposal of
sewage. No site plan approval may be granted until the Board of Health has
certified that a sanitary system has been designed to its satisfaction.
§ 218-41. Sidewalks. [Amended 7-16-2001 by Ord. No. 744-01]
Sidewalks shall be installed in accordance with the Residential Site
Improvement Standards except that, if the Planning Board determines that
a de minimis exception or waiver is warranted, the Planning Board shall
be permitted to accept a contribution in lieu of construction of sidewalks
to the Borough's Sidewalk Improvement Fund, a fund established for the
construction and maintenance of sidewalks within the Borough. The amount
of the contribution shall be the estimated cost of installation of sidewalks on
the applicant's site or on any adjoining right-of-way, as determined by the
Borough Engineer.
§ 218-42. Smoke.
No emission of visible gray smoke of a shade equal to or darker than No. 1
of the Ringelmann Chart shall be permitted.
§ 218-43. Storage.
Outside storage, when permitted, shall only be permitted in areas approved
by the Board. Such areas shall, as nearly as may be practicable, be shielded
from public view and protected by adequate fencing or screening.
§ 218-44. Utilities.
Facilities shall be provided for placing all utilities underground, including
telephone and electric power lines.
§ 218-37 STORM SEWERS § 218-45
212:415
§ 218-45. Single-family residential, commercial and industrial
development recycling facilities.
Any development proposal for the construction of 50 or more units of singlefamily
residential housing or the utilization of 1,000 square feet or more
of land for any commercial or industrial use shall include as part of its
application for a subdivision, site plan, conditional use or other development
application, the following information and documentation:
§ 218-46. Multifamily development recycling facilities.
A. Adequate facilities shall be provided for the depositing and collection of
recyclable materials.
B. The location of all existing and proposed solid waste collection stations
shall be delineated on the subdivision plat or site plan. A plan detail, at
a scale of one inch equals 10 feet, shall be incorporated in the
submission for each such station or for a typical station. The containers
at each station shall be delineated on the detail plan and described in
tabular form. A separate container or containers shall be provided for
each recyclable material specified in Chapter 209, Article II, Recycling,
of the Code of the Borough of Old Tappan, in addition to the containers
for nonrecyclable solid waste.
A. Definitions. As used in this § 218-46, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
MULTIFAMILY HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A building containing
three or more dwelling units occupied or intended to be occupied by
persons living independently of each other, or a group of such buildings.
RECYCLING AREA — Space allocated for collection and storage of
source separated recyclable materials.
B. Recycling area for multifamily housing development required. There
shall be included in any new multifamily housing development that
requires subdivision or site plan approval an indoor recycling area for
the collection and storage of residentially generated recyclable
materials. The dimensions of the recycling area shall be sufficient to
accommodate recycling bins or containers which are of adequate size
and number and which are consistent with anticipated usage and with
current methods of collection in the area in which the project is located.
The dimensions of the recycling area and the bins or containers shall be
determined in consultation with the Municipal Recycling Coordinator,
and shall be consistent with the district recycling plan adopted
pursuant to Section 3 of P.L. 1987, c.102 (N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13) and any
applicable requirements of the Municipal Master Plan, adopted
pursuant to Section 26 of P.L. 1987, c. 102.
C. Location. The recycling area shall be conveniently located for the
residential disposition of source-separated recyclable materials,
preferably near, but clearly separated from, a refuse container.
§ 218-45 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 218-46
212:416
§ 218-47. Vibration.
No vibration shall be discernible at the zoning lot lines or beyond.
D. Lighting; access; protection. The recycling area shall be well lit and
shall be safely and easily accessible by recycling personnel and
vehicles. Collection vehicles shall be able to access the recycling area
without interference from parked cars or other obstacles. Reasonable
measures shall be taken to protect the recycling area and the bins or
containers placed therein against theft of recyclable materials, bins or
containers. The recycling area or the bins or containers placed therein
shall be designed so as to provide protection against adverse
environmental conditions which might render the collected materials
unmarketable. Any bins or containers which are used for the collection
of recyclable paper or cardboard and which are located in an outdoor
recycling area shall be equipped with a lid, or otherwise covered, so as
to keep the paper or cardboard dry.
E. Signs. Signs clearly identifying the recycling area and the materials
accepted therein shall be posted adjacent to all points of access to the
recycling area. Individual bins or containers shall be equipped with a
sign indicating the materials to be placed therein.
F. Landscaping. Landscaping and/or fencing shall be provided around any
outdoor recycling area and shall be developed in an aesthetically
pleasing manner.
G. Recycling areas for individual units. Notwithstanding anything to the
contrary set forth in this § 218-46, the requirements for recycling areas
for multifamily housing developments may be met by individual
curbside pickup, provided it is determined by the municipal board
before whom the subdivision or site plan application is presented that
such individual curbside pickup is appropriate and proper to the
particular multifamily housing development. For example, individual
curbside pickup may be appropriate for a townhouse development but
would not be appropriate for a high-rise apartment complex.
§ 218-46 STORM SEWERS § 218-47
212:417

ARTICLE VI
Landscaping Requirements
§ 218-48. Findings.
§ 218-49. Application requirements.
Landscaping application for site plan and subdivision approval shall include
a separate, detailed plan, drawn to a scale of no less than one inch equals
50 feet of all proposed landscaping, buffering, screening and existing trees
to remain and be removed in accordance with Chapter 234, Trees, Article II,
Tree Preservation and Removal, provided that with respect to applications
for subdivision approval, such information shall be limited to the rear and
side yards of the proposed lots to be created, and all of the following items:
A. The Mayor and Council find that it has been recognized that well
designed landscape plantings and existing natural landscaping can
reduce air pollution; regulate solar radiation and wind control;
influence the type and speed of pedestrian and automobile traffic flow;
cut visual discomfort by screening out glare and reflection; prevent soil
erosion and produce an aesthetic appearance. It is the intent of this
chapter to provide proper guidelines and specifications for preserving
the natural character of the land and vegetation consistent with the
legal and purposeful use and development of all residential, commercial
and other land within the Borough.
B. It is the intent and purpose of this chapter that landscaping shall be
provided as part of the overall site design and shall be integrated into
building arrangements, topography, parking and buffering
requirement. Landscaping shall include trees, bushes, ground cover,
perennials, annuals and plants. Landscaping shall be provided in public
areas, on recreation sites, and adjacent to buildings to screen parking
areas, to mitigate adverse impacts, and provide windbreaks for winter
winds and summer cooling for buildings, streets and parking. Plants or
other landscaping material selected shall best serve the intended
function, and shall represent materials appropriate for local soil
conditions, water availability, and environment. Plant material used
should not be of an exotic variety requiring substantial maintenance or
material highly subject to pollution, salt, damage along highways and
current insect disease manifestations. The type and amount of
landscaping shall vary with the type of development and shall be used
to accent site entrances with special landscaping treatment. The impact
of any proposed landscaping plan at various seasonal time intervals
shall be considered.
A. Plant listing, including:
(1) All plant material to be used shall be keyed to plans and defined by
botanical and common name.
(2) Quantity to be used.
§ 218-48 STORM SEWERS § 218-49
212:419
§ 218-50. Protection of existing plantings.
The following procedures shall be implemented with respect to the
protection of existing plantings:
(3) Size of material to be planted.
(4) Ultimate sizes of each plan and times to reach maturity.
(5) Characteristics, i.e. fall color, flowering, ornamental factors.
(6) Plant delivery method, i.e. container, bailed and burlapped.
B. Information required for design shall include:
(1) Location, species and height of all existing plant material to remain
on site, excluding ground cover, but including all trees. In addition,
with respect to such trees, there shall be provided the diameter
width of each tree measured at a point on the tree four feet above
the ground level.
(2) The designation and location of all plant material to be installed in
any buffer zone, buffer area or buffer strip.
(3) Location and spacing of each plant to be planted, shown to scale.
(4) Methods to be used in welling, staking and guying, mulching and
wrapping according to any Borough standards as may be
established by the Borough Code Chapter 234, Trees, Article I,
Shade Trees.
(5) Ground covers to be used in design, which may be indicated as a
mass planting, but spacing must be defined in the plant list.
(6) A means of screening utility boxes using evergreen plant material
where they appear at ground level.
C. Name, signature, seal and address of person, firm or organization
preparing landscape plans.
D. Placement and size of street trees shall be indicated along all
thoroughfares in accordance with Borough shade tree specifications as
provided by Borough Code Chapter 234, Trees, Article I, Shade Trees,
§ 234-4D.
E. Existing soil type and condition.
A. A four-foot high standard wood snow fence as a physical barrier shall be
installed at the dripline of each plant or group of plants, being a line
connecting the tips of the outermost branches of a plant or tree
projected vertically to the ground, that are to remain on the site and
last until construction is completed.
§ 218-49 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 218-50
212:420
§ 218-51. Grading of land near trees.
The following procedures shall be implemented with respect to the grading
of land near trees:
§ 218-52. Specification for planting of new trees or shrubs.
The following specifications shall be followed for the planting of new trees
and shrubs.
B. Barriers shall not be supported by the plants they are protecting but
shall be self-supporting.
C. No soil shall be deposited or removed within the dripline or within eight
feet, whichever is greater, of any existing tree trunk.
A. The grade of land located along the dripline shall not be raised or
lowered more than six inches unless compensated for by welling or
retaining wall methods and in no event be less than eight feet from the
trunk.
B. Tree wells. For existing trees the well shall be the size of the tree. Wells
are to be constructed of suitable materials which shall include boulders,
decorative concrete block (but not cinder block or masonry units),
railroad ties or other suitably treated lumber, or reinforced, poured
concrete. Any well wall four feet or greater in diameter shall be
designed by a licensed engineer with calculations provided. Tree well
details are to be filed and inspected to determine specifications on a
case-by-case application.
C. Retaining walls. Retaining walls are to be constructed around each tree
or group of trees immediately after grade is lowered. Any retaining wall
is to be constructed of a suitable material which shall include the same
materials permitted for tree wells. Design calculations, which have
been signed and sealed by a professional engineer, shall be submitted
to the Borough Engineer for review and approval prior to construction.
The retaining walls shall be located after a field inspection to determine
the location of the wall to ensure maximum survivability.
D. Clearing near tree trunks. Any clearing within the dripline of a tree
shall be done by hand. No equipment shall be driven over any such
area, and no building materials shall be stacked against any trees or
within the area of the barrier to any trees.
E. Trees shall not be used as supporters or for stockpiling. No tree shall be
used to support any scaffolding, signs, temporary utilities or any other
device. Topsoil shall be stockpiled in an area outside of the dripline
from any tree designated to remain.
A. Only first quality, nursery-grown plant materials which conform to the
standards of the American Association of Nurserymen shall be
acceptable for planting.
§ 218-50 STORM SEWERS § 218-52
212:421
§ 218-53. Specifications for ground cover and mulch.
The following specifications shall be met for the planting of ground covers
and the use of mulch:
§ 218-54. Design specifications.
The following design specifications shall apply to the landscaping of parking
lot islands:
B. Prior to the installation of all plant material, the results of physical and
chemical tests of the subsoil and topsoil shall be submitted to the
Borough Engineer to assess soil composition and for determination
whether the pH of the soil is acceptable for proposed planting.
C. Trees and shrubs shall be planted only when the soil is frost-free and
friable.
D. All plant material shall be guaranteed for one year from date of
planting.
E. The use of and planting of bare root material shall be prohibited.
F. All plant material shall be planted so that the top of the root ball is no
higher or lower than the existing, finished grade dependent upon soil
conditions.
G. Minimum size of material at time of planting shall be 2 1/2 inches in
diameter for shade trees, measured at a point of the tree four feet above
the ground level; five feet to six feet in height for evergreens and
ornamentals; and 18 inches to 24 inches in height or spread for shrubs.
H. Upon the establishment of plant material at a site (which shall require a
minimum of one growing season), all stakes, guying, tree wrapping, and
saucers shall be removed.
I. The use of nylon twine on the root balls of proposed plant material is
prohibited. All burlap shall be pulled back 1/3 at time of planting.
A. All planting beds shall be mulched. The type of mulch to be used shall
be noted on the site plan or landscaping plan. The minimum required
depth of placement is three inches but shall not exceed four inches. A
NJDEP approved chemical pre-emergence selective herbicide and/or a
permeable landscape fabric shall be used to reduce weed growth. Any
chemical or chemicals to be used shall be specified on the site plan or
landscaping plan and used according to directions.
B. Suitable ground covers shall be installed in place of grass in small and
restricted areas, such as tree and shrub beds and planters. The
following ground covers are suitable for use: ivy, pachysandra, myrtle,
yellowroot, wintercreeper, Bar Harbor juniper, memorial rose,
perennials, wildflowers and hardwood mulch.
§ 218-52 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 218-54
212:422
§ 218-55. Planting procedures.
The following procedures shall be implemented with respect to the planting
of all landscaping:
A. Where parking islands are to be planted, they shall be a minimum width
of six feet from the interior edge of curb to curb.
B. Parking islands are permitted in any parking lot but shall be required in
all parking lots providing for more than 30 parking spaces. Planted
islands shall be provided within parking areas at a ratio of one island
per 30 parking stalls.
C. All single-parking curbed island planters shall be a minimum size of six
feet by 20 feet and double-parking curbed island planters shall be a
minimum of six feet by 40 feet. The minimum depth of acceptable
backfill in such planters shall be two feet for shrubs and four feet for
trees, unless poor drainage conditions exist, upon which modifications
are permitted.
A. All plant materials shall be installed on the site or subject property in
accordance with an approved landscaping plan or site plan.
B. Staking. All trees shall be staked in the following manner, in accordance
with Borough Code Chapter 234, Trees, Article I, § 234-4D(7): Stakes
shall be driven into the ground to a depth of two feet before backfilling.
Trees shall be guyed to the stakes by means of wire and rubber hose or
its equivalent and shall be fastened in such a manner that the tree trunk
shall not come in direct contact with the wire.
C. Wrapping. Each tree shall be wrapped with an expandable paper or
cloth treated to last at least one year, which wrap shall extend from the
ground level up to the trunk to the first branches. Said wrap is to
prevent sunscald and shall be attached or fastened at each end with a
material that will permit tree growth without girding.
D. Saucers.
(1) A ring of packed soil shall be placed around the finished planting
hole of each tree, which shall be a minimum of six inches higher
than the finished grade.
(2) Saucers placed on slopes shall be level at the top end and
perpendicular to the tree trunk.
(3) Saucers are to be designated to catch and hold the maximum
amount of water, either from natural precipitation or irrigation.
E. Mulching.
(1) A three-inch minimum to four-inch maximum layer of mulch shall
be applied around each individual or group of trees and shrubs.
§ 218-54 STORM SEWERS § 218-55
212:423
§ 218-56. Bonding requirements.
In connection with a landscaping plan submitted as part of a site plan
application, bonds shall be required in accordance with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53a(1).
(2) Mulch shall be a shredded organic material which is not readily
subject to movement by wind or water.
(3) The use of untreated new wood chips and marble and stone chips is
prohibited.
F. Edging. In order to delineate planting beds and reduce bed
maintenance, a physical edging of steel or other durable material with
the minimum dimensions of four inches by 1/8 shall be installed flush
with grade where planting areas abut turf areas.
§ 218-55 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 218-56
212:424
ARTICLE VII
Design Review Committee
§ 218-57. Purpose.
The provisions of this article are intended to promote the health, safety and
general welfare of the Borough of Old Tappan by:
§ 218-58. Applicability.
Except as provided hereinbelow, this article shall apply to all new buildings
or additions or changes to the exterior design or appearance of an existing
building including, without limitation, multifamily dwellings, townhouses,
affordable housing rental and sale units, commercial buildings, houses of
worship, municipal buildings and school buildings. However, this article
shall not apply to a single-family residential dwelling on a single lot or
parcel of land or to developments of two or more single-family residential
dwellings.
§ 218-59. Exhibits to be submitted.
The Design Review Committee38 may request an applicant to submit any or
all of the following exhibits:
A. The creation of a desirable visual environment through creative
development techniques and good civic design and arrangement.
B. Promoting good quality of design and attractive appearance of
structures and property.
C. Controlling new exterior construction in order to enhance the
streetscape and maintain or improve its character.
D. Fostering civic pride and beauty.
E. Restoring and preserving certain traditionally significant structures.
A. An overall site plan on a minimum scale of one inch equals 20 feet
showing the location of the subject property and all adjacent properties.
B. Building elevations of the subject property and adjacent properties, on
a minimum scale of 1/4 inch equals one foot.
C. Photographs of subject property and of adjacent properties and
buildings. Each photograph shall be properly identified and referenced
on the site plan.
D. Samples of colors, exterior construction materials and designs. Color
photographs of existing applications may suffice.
E. Drawings or photographs showing details of design and construction.
38.Editor's Note: See Ch. 30, Design Review Committee.
§ 218-57 STORM SEWERS § 218-59
212:425
§ 218-60. Report and recommendation. [Amended 2-19-2002 by
Ord. No. 773-02]
Upon its review of the information, documentation and exhibits submitted,
the Design Review Committee shall render a written report setting forth
its findings and recommendations to the Planning Board within 30 days
of its receipt of the application for development. In making its report and
recommendation, the Design Review Committee shall utilize the design
criteria set forth in § 218-61 hereinbelow. The Planning Board shall receive
and review the report and recommendation of the Design Review
Committee prior to rendering a decision on the application for development
pending before it. A copy of the Committee's report and recommendation
shall be provided to the applicant, and the applicant and/or his legal
representative may appear before the Planning Board and be heard with
respect to the Committee's report and recommendation. The Planning
Board will include the Design Review Committee on the checklist of
reviewing bodies to which an application for development shall be referred
in connection with the Board's review of a subdivision or site plan
application.
§ 218-61. Design criteria. [Amended 2-19-2002 by Ord. No. 773-02]
The Planning Board shall be guided in review and determination by the
design criteria set forth herein and shall consider the report and
recommendation of the Design Review Committee in light of said criteria.
These criteria are intended to provide a frame of reference for the applicant
in the development of site and building plans, as well as a method of review
for the reviewing authority. These criteria shall not be regarded as inflexible
requirements, nor are they intended to discourage creativity, invention and
innovation; nor shall they be used to dictate to an applicant an adherence
to a particular architectural style. The criteria are as follow:
F. Any other information or displays as the Design Review Committee
deems necessary which will clarify the visual and physical impact of the
proposed project.
A. Preservation of landscape. The landscape shall be preserved in its
natural state, insofar as practicable and where desirable, by minimizing
tree and soil removal, and any grade changes shall be in keeping with
the general appearance of neighboring developed areas. Landscape
treatment that is appropriate to the area and the terrain and which will
enhance the overall appearance of the site shall be employed. This
subsection shall be governed by the provisions of the Borough's tree
preservation, soil moving and buffer ordinances, where applicable.39
B. Similarity and dissimilarity of design. Proposed building construction
whose architectural design is incompatible with established
architectural character in any neighborhood shall be avoided. The basis
39.Editor's Note: See Ch. 234, Trees, Art. II, Tree Preservation and Removal; and Ch. 205, Soil
Removal.
§ 218-59 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 218-61
212:426
for this determination shall be exterior materials, mass line,
architectural style and authenticity, colors, size, proportion, roof design
and window fenestrations, either symbolic or ornamental building
elements. The Design Review Committee may suggest the
nonutilization of designs which mix design elements from various styles
of architecture or which fail to present a homogeneous whole.
C. Architectural plan. The applicant's architect, if requested by the
Committee, shall explain how the architectural plan complies with the
criteria of this section, especially its individual tailoring to the site and
surrounding structures. While the chosen architectural style is
important, the Committee shall emphasize authenticity, scale, accuracy,
integrity and detail of design as well. Such elements as roof pitch and
geometry, gables, dormers, window design and recesses, doorways,
rails, porches, gutters, eaves, louvers, garage doors, pillars, sills,
planters, symbolic elements, etc., shall be reviewed for design detail,
accurate reproduction, appropriate scale, harmony and visual integrity.
Upon receipt of the Design Review Committee report, the Planning
Board may suggest modification of designs which incorporates such
elements as blank walls, exposed foundations materials, shallow
rooflines, frail chimneys, flush windows, aluminum stacks and erratic
placement of windows and doors, symbolic and ornamental building
elements, etc.
D. Relation of proposed buildings to environment. Proposed structures
shall be related harmoniously to the terrain and to existing buildings in
the vicinity that have a visual relationship to the proposed structures.
Such relationship shall be achieved by:
(1) Architectural design which is harmonious with the character of
existing development or nearby structures.
(2) The use of exterior colors, facade or roof materials or the
combination of colors and materials that are harmonious.
(3) The relationship of design features, such as height and mass,
building proportions, rooflines, building projections and
ornamental features, that will create a coordinated and harmonious
appearance.
E. Design of building walls. All sides of a building should contribute to the
architectural unity of the building. The use of large, unbroken masses is
discouraged. Desirable materials, such as brick, stone, glass, and wood,
when properly treated, are encouraged. The use of exposed concrete
block is prohibited, unless the same is textured. Metal siding should not
be used to such an extent that it will be a dominant architectural
feature. In addition, metal siding with exposed fastenings is disfavored.
F. Special features. Exposed storage areas, exposed machinery
installations, including roof installations, service areas, truck loading
areas, utility buildings and structures, and similar accessory areas and
structures, shall be so located and screened with plantings or by other
§ 218-61 STORM SEWERS § 218-61
212:427
methods to prevent their being incongruous with the existing or
contemplated environment and the surrounding properties.
G. Advertising features and fences. The size, location, design, color,
textures, lighting and materials of signs, outdoor advertising structures
or features as well as fences or other man-made visual barriers shall not
detract from the design and appearance of existing or proposed
structures and the surrounding area, nor create confusion with traffic
or any other signs.
§ 218-61 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 218-61
212:428
ARTICLE VIII
Improvement Guarantees
[Amended 2-19-2019 by Ord. No. 1138-19]
§ 218-62. Guarantees required; surety; release.
A. Before filing a final subdivision plat or recording a minor subdivision
deed or as a condition of final site plan approval or as a condition to the
issuance of a zoning permit pursuant to Subsection D. of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-65, a developer shall furnish a performance guarantee, and
provide for a maintenance guarantee in accordance with the provisions
of this subsection.
(1) The developer shall furnish a performance guarantee in favor of the
Borough in an amount not to exceed 120% of the cost of installation
of only those improvements required by an approval or developer's
agreement, ordinance, or regulation to be dedicated to a public
entity, and that have not yet been installed, which cost shall be
determined by the Borough Engineer, according to the method of
calculation set forth in Section 15 of P.L. 1991. c.256 (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.4), for the following improvements as shown on the
approved plans or plat: streets, pavement, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, street lighting, street trees, surveyor's monuments, as
shown on the final map and required by the Map Filing Law, P.L.
1960, c. 141 (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.; repealed by Section 2 of P.L.
2011, c.217.) or N.J.S.A. 46:26B-8 through N.J.S.A. 46:26B-8, water
mains, sanitary sewers, community septic systems, drainage
structures, public improvements of open space, and any grading
necessitated by the preceding improvements.
(2) The performance guarantee shall be in the Borough's prescribed
form of performance bond on which the subdivider shall be
principal, and secured either by a bonding or surety company
approved by the Council or by a certified bank or cashier's check,
the proceeds of which shall be returnable to the subdivider without
interest after full compliance by the subdivider with all of the
requirements of this chapter and the developer's agreement.
(3) The performance guarantee shall be approved by the Borough
Attorney as to form, sufficiency and execution. Such performance
guarantee shall run for a period to be fixed by the Planning Board
but in no case for a term of more than three years. However, with
the consent of the owner and of the surety, if there be one, the
Council may, by resolution, extend the term of such performance
guarantee for an additional period or periods not to exceed, in the
aggregate, three years. As a condition or as part of any such
extension, the amount of any performance guarantee shall be
increased or reduced, as the case may be, to an amount not to
exceed 120% of the cost of the installation, as determined as of the
time of the passage of the resolution. The amount of the
§ 218-62 STORM SEWERS § 218-62
212:429
performance guarantee may be reduced by the Council by
resolution when portions of the required improvements have been
installed.
(4) A successor developer must furnish a replacement performance
guarantee as a condition to the approval of a permit update under
the State Uniform Construction Code, for the purpose of updating
the name and address of the owner of property on a construction
permit.
(5) The Borough Engineer shall prepare an itemized cost estimate of
the improvements covered by the performance guarantee, which
itemized cost estimate shall be appended to each performance
guarantee posted by the obligor.
(6) A performance guarantee shall include, within an approved phase
or section of a development, privately-owned perimeter buffer
landscaping, as required by Borough ordinance or imposed as a
condition of approval.
(7) At the developer's option, a separate performance guarantee may
be posted for the privately-owned perimeter buffer landscaping.
(8) In the event that the developer shall seek a temporary certificate of
occupancy for a development, unit, lot, building, or phase of
development, as a condition of the issuance thereof, the developer
shall furnish a separate guarantee, referred to herein as a
"temporary certificate of occupancy guarantee," in favor of the
Borough in an amount equal to 120% of the cost of installation of
only those improvements or items which remain to be completed or
installed under the terms of the temporary certificate of occupancy
and which are required to be installed or completed as a condition
precedent to the issuance of the permanent certificate of
occupancy for the development, unit, lot, building or phase of
development and which are not covered by an existing
performance guarantee. Upon posting of a temporary certificate of
occupancy guarantee, all sums remaining under a performance
guarantee, required pursuant to § 218-62A(1), which relate to the
development, unit, lot, building, or phase of development for which
the temporary certificate of occupancy is sought, shall be released.
The scope and amount of the temporary certificate of occupancy
guarantee shall be determined by the Zoning Officer, Borough
Engineer, or other municipal official designated by ordinance. At no
time may the Borough hold more than one guarantee or bond of any
type with respect to the same line item. The temporary certificate
of occupancy guarantee shall be released by the Zoning Officer,
Borough Engineer, or other municipal official designated by
ordinance upon the issuance of a permanent certificate of
occupancy with regard to the development, unit, lot, building, or
phase as to which the temporary certificate of occupancy relates.
§ 218-62 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 218-62
212:430
(9) A developer shall furnish to the Borough a safety and stabilization
guarantee, in favor of the Borough. At the developer's option, a
safety and stabilization guarantee may be furnished either as a
separate guarantee or as a line item of the performance guarantee.
A safety and stabilization guarantee shall be available to the
Borough solely for the purpose of returning property that has been
disturbed to a safe and stable condition or otherwise implementing
measures to protect the public from access to an unsafe or unstable
condition, only in the circumstance that:
(a) Site disturbance has commenced and, thereafter, all work on
the development has ceased for a period of at least 60
consecutive days following such commencement for reasons
other than force majeure; and
(b) Work has not recommenced within 30 days following the
provision of written notice by the Borough to the developer of
the Borough's intent to claim payment under the guarantee.
The Borough shall not provide notice of its intent to claim
payment under a "safety and stabilization guarantee" until a
period of at least 60 days has elapsed during which all work on
the development has ceased for reasons other than force
majeure. The Borough shall provide written notice to a
developer by certified mail or other form of delivery providing
evidence of receipt.
(c) The amount of a safety and stabilization guarantee for a
development with bonded improvements in an amount not
exceeding $100,000 shall be $5,000.
(d) The amount of a safety and stabilization guarantee for a
development with bonded improvements exceeding $100,000
shall be calculated as a percentage of the bonded improvement
costs of the development or phase of development as follows:
[1] $5,000 for the first $100,000 of bonded improvement
costs, plus 2 1/2% of bonded improvement costs in excess
of $100,000 up to $1,000,000, plus 1% of bonded
improvement costs in excess of $1,000,000.
[2] The Borough shall release a separate safety and
stabilization guarantee to a developer upon the
developer's furnishing of a performance guarantee which
includes a line item for safety and stabilization in the
amount required under this subsection.
[3] The Borough shall release a safety and stabilization
guarantee upon the Borough Engineer's determination
that the development of the project site has reached a
point that the improvements installed are adequate to
avoid any potential threat to public safety.
§ 218-62 STORM SEWERS § 218-62
212:431
B. The developer shall post with the Borough, prior to the release of a
performance guarantee required pursuant to § 218-62A(1) through (8),
a maintenance guarantee in an amount not to exceed 15% of the cost of
the installation of the improvements which are being released.
C. If required, the developer shall post with the Borough, upon the
inspection and issuance of final approval of the following private site
improvements by the Borough Engineer, a maintenance guarantee in an
amount not to exceed 15% of the cost of the installation of the following
private site improvements: stormwater management basins, in-flow and
water quality structures within the basins, and the out-flow pipes and
structures of the stormwater management system, if any, which cost
shall be determined according to the method of calculation set forth in
Section 15 of P.L. 1991, c.256 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4).
(1) The term of the maintenance guarantee shall be for a period not to
exceed two years and shall automatically expire at the end of the
established term.
(2) In the event that other governmental agencies or public utilities
automatically will own the utilities to be installed or the
improvements are covered by a performance or maintenance
guarantee to another governmental agency, no performance or
maintenance guarantee, as the case may be, shall be required by
the Borough for such utilities or improvements.
D. The time allowed for installation of the bonded improvements for which
the performance guarantee has been provided may be extended by the
governing body by resolution. As a condition or part of any such
extension, the amount of any performance guarantee shall be increased
or reduced, as the case may be, to an amount not to exceed 120% of the
cost of the installation, which cost shall be determined by the Borough
Engineer according to the method of calculation set forth in Section 15
of P.L. 1991. c.256 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4) as of the time of the passage
of the resolution.
E. If the required bonded improvements are not completed or corrected in
accordance with the performance guarantee, the obligor and surety, if
any, shall be liable thereon to the Borough for the reasonable cost of the
improvements not completed or corrected and the Borough may either
prior to or after the receipt of the proceeds thereof complete such
improvements.
F. Upon substantial completion of all required street improvements
(except for the top course) and appurtenant utility improvements, and
the connection of same to the public system, the obligor may request of
the governing body in writing, by certified mail addressed in care of the
municipal clerk, that the Borough Engineer prepare, in accordance with
the itemized cost estimate prepared by the Borough Engineer and
appended to the performance guarantee pursuant to Subsection A of
this section, a list of all uncompleted or unsatisfactory completed
§ 218-62 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 218-62
212:432
bonded improvements. If such a request is made, the obligor shall
send a copy of the request to the Borough Engineer. The request
shall indicate which bonded improvements have been completed and
which bonded improvements remain uncompleted in the judgment of
the obligor. Thereupon the Borough Engineer shall inspect all bonded
improvements covered by obligor's request and shall file a detailed
list and report, in writing, with the governing body, and shall
simultaneously send a copy thereof to the obligor not later than 45 days
after receipt of the obligor's request.
(1) The list prepared by the Borough Engineer shall state, in detail,
with respect to each bonded improvement determined to be
incomplete or unsatisfactory, the nature and extent of the
incompleteness of each incomplete improvement or the nature and
extent of, and remedy for, the unsatisfactory state of each
completed bonded improvement determined to be unsatisfactory.
(2) The report prepared by the Borough Engineer shall identify each
bonded improvement determined to be complete and satisfactory
together with a recommendation as to the amount of reduction to
be made in the performance guarantee relating to the completed
and satisfactory bonded improvement, in accordance with the
itemized cost estimate prepared by the Borough Engineer and
appended to the performance guarantee pursuant to Subsection A
of this section.
G. The governing body, by resolution, shall either approve the bonded
improvements determined to be complete and satisfactory by the
Borough Engineer, or reject any or all of these bonded improvements
upon the establishment in the resolution of cause for rejection, and
shall approve and authorize the amount of reduction to be made in the
performance guarantee relating to the improvements accepted, in
accordance with the itemized cost estimate prepared by the Borough
Engineer and appended to the performance guarantee pursuant to
Subsection A of this section. This resolution shall be adopted not later
than 45 days after receipt of the list and report prepared by the
Borough Engineer. Upon adoption of the resolution by the governing
body, the obligor shall be released from all liability pursuant to its
performance guarantee, with respect to those approved bonded
improvements, except for that portion adequately sufficient to secure
completion or correction of the improvements not yet approved;
provided that 30% of the amount of the total performance guarantee
and safety and stabilization guarantee posted may be retained to
ensure completion and acceptability of all improvements. The safety
and stabilization guarantee shall be reduced by the same percentage as
the performance guarantee is being reduced at the time of each
performance guarantee reduction.
H. For the purpose of releasing the obligor from liability pursuant to its
performance guarantee, the amount of the performance guarantee
attributable to each approved bonded improvement shall be reduced by
§ 218-62 STORM SEWERS § 218-62
212:433
the total amount for each such improvement, in accordance with the
itemized cost estimate prepared by the Borough Engineer and
appended to the performance guarantee pursuant to § 218-62A of this
section, including any contingency factor applied to the cost of
installation. If the sum of the approved bonded improvements would
exceed 70% of the total amount of the performance guarantee, then
the Borough may retain 30% of the amount of the total performance
guarantee and safety and stabilization guarantee to ensure completion
and acceptability of bonded improvements, as provided above, except
that any amount of the performance guarantee attributable to bonded
improvements for which a temporary certificate of occupancy
guarantee has been posted shall be released from the performance
guarantee even if such release would reduce the amount held by the
Borough below 30%.
I. If the Borough Engineer fails to send or provide the list and report as
requested by the obligor pursuant to § 218-62F within 45 days from
receipt of the request, the obligor may apply to the court in a summary
manner for an order compelling the Borough Engineer to provide the
list and report within a stated time and the cost of applying to the court,
including reasonable attorney's fees, may be awarded to the prevailing
party.
J. If the governing body fails to approve or reject the bonded
improvements determined by the Borough Engineer to be complete and
satisfactory or reduce the performance guarantee for the complete and
satisfactory improvements within 45 days from the receipt of the
Borough Engineer's list and report, the obligor may apply to the court
in a summary manner for an order compelling, within a stated time,
approval of the complete and satisfactory improvements and approval
of a reduction in the performance guarantee for the approvable
complete and satisfactory improvements in accordance with the
itemized cost estimate prepared by the Borough Engineer and
appended to the performance guarantee pursuant to Subsection A of
this section; and the cost of applying to the court, including reasonable
attorney's fees, may be awarded to the prevailing party.
K. In the event that the obligor has made a cash deposit with the Borough
or approving authority as part of the performance guarantee, then any
partial reduction granted in the performance guarantee pursuant to
this subsection shall be applied to the cash deposit in the same
proportion as the original cash deposit bears to the full amount of the
performance guarantee, provided that if the developer has furnished a
safety and stabilization guarantee, the Borough may retain cash equal
to the amount of the remaining safety and stabilization guarantee.
L. If any portion of the required bonded improvements is rejected, the
approving authority may require the obligor to complete or correct
such improvements and, upon completion or correction, the same
procedure of notification, as set forth in this section shall be followed.
§ 218-62 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 218-62
212:434
M. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed to limit the right of the
obligor to contest by legal proceedings any determination of the
governing body or the Borough Engineer.
N. The obligor shall reimburse the Borough for reasonable inspection fees
paid to the Borough Engineer for the foregoing inspection of
improvements; which fees shall not exceed the sum of the amounts set
forth in Subsection N(1) and N(2) of this section. The Borough may
require the developer to post the inspection fees in escrow in an
amount:
(1) Not to exceed, except for extraordinary circumstances, the greater
of $500 or 5% of the cost of bonded improvements that are subject
to a performance guarantee under Subsection A(1), Subsection
A(6) or both Subsection A(1) and A(6) of this section; and
(2) Not to exceed 5% of the cost of private site improvements that are
not subject to a performance guarantee under Subsection A(1) of
this section, which cost shall be determined pursuant to Section 15
of P.L. 1991, c.256 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4).
O. For those developments for which the inspection fees total less than
$10,000, fees may, at the option of the developer, be paid in two
installments. The initial amount deposited in escrow by a developer
shall be 50% of the inspection fees. When the balance on deposit drops
to 10% of the inspection fees because the amount deposited by the
developer has been reduced by the amount paid to the Borough
Engineer for inspections, the developer shall deposit the remaining
50% of the inspection fees.
P. For those developments for which the inspection fees total $10,000 or
greater, fees may, at the option of the developer, be paid in four
installments. The initial amount deposited in escrow by a developer
shall be 25% of the inspection fees. When the balance on deposit drops
to 10% of the inspection fees because the amount deposited by the
developer has been reduced by the amount paid to the Borough
Engineer for inspection, the developer shall make additional deposits of
25% of the inspection fees.
Q. If the Borough determines that the amount in escrow for the payment of
inspection fees, as calculated pursuant to § 218-62A, is insufficient to
cover the cost of additional required inspections, the Borough may
require the developer to deposit additional funds in escrow provided
that the Borough delivers to the developer a written inspection escrow
deposit request, signed by the Borough Engineer, which informs the
developer of the need for additional inspections, details the items or
undertakings that require inspection, estimates the time required for
those inspections, and estimates the cost of performing those
inspections.
R. In the event that final approval is by stages or sections of development
pursuant to Subsection A of Section 29 of P.L. 1975, c.291 (N.J.S.A.
§ 218-62 STORM SEWERS § 218-62
212:435
§ 218-63. Sewage disposal systems bond.
To guarantee the proper operation of sewage disposal systems, the Planning
Board may require the posting of a maintenance bond in a minimum amount
of $2,000 for each individual house in a subdivision. The amount of such
bond may be increased beyond $2,000 by the Planning Board or the Council
if, upon recommendation of the Borough Engineer or the Health Officer,
unusual terrain, drainage or soil conditions or other matters affecting the
public health require an increased bond. Such maintenance bond shall run
for a period of 18 months from the date of issuance of the certificate of
occupancy and shall be posted before the building permit is issued.
§ 218-64. Maintenance of common open space in residential
clusters.
40:55D-38), the provisions of this section shall be applied by stage or
section.
S. To the extent that any of the improvements have been dedicated to the
Borough on the subdivision plat or site plan, the municipal governing
body shall be deemed, upon the release of any performance guarantee
required pursuant to § 218-62A, to accept dedication for public use of
streets or roads and any other improvements made thereon according
to site plans and subdivision plats approved by the approving authority,
provided that such improvements have been inspected and have
received final approval by the Borough Engineer.
A. Each applicant for residential cluster development containing common
open space shall provide for an organization for the ownership and
maintenance of any such common open space if such open space is not
dedicated to the Borough. Such organization shall not be dissolved and
shall not dispose of any open space by sale or otherwise, except to an
organization conceived and established to own and maintain the open
space for the benefit of such development, and thereafter such
organization shall not be dissolved or disposed of any of its open space
without first offering to dedicate the same to the Borough.
B. In the event that such organization shall fail to maintain the open space
in reasonable order and condition, which means a condition free of
litter, garbage, debris, trash, dog or other animal waste, or any other
things which would cause an unsightly or offensive appearance, the
Borough Council may serve written notice, by certified mail, return
receipt requested, upon such organization or upon the owners of the
development setting forth the manner in which the organization has
failed to maintain the open space in reasonable condition. Such notice
shall include a demand that the deficiencies of maintenance be cured
within 35 days thereof and shall state the date the place of a hearing
thereon, which shall be held within 15 days of the notice. At such
hearing, the Borough Council may modify by resolution the terms of the
original notice as to deficiencies and may give a reasonable extension of
§ 218-62 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 218-64
212:436
§ 218-65. through § 218-67. (Reserved)
time, not to exceed 65 days, within which they shall be cured. If the
deficiencies set forth in the original notice or in the modification thereof
shall not be cured within 35 days, or any permitted extension, the
Borough, in order to preserve the open space and maintain the same,
for a period of one year may enter upon and maintain such land. Such
entry and maintenance shall not vest in the public any rights to use the
open space, except when the same is voluntarily dedicated to the public
by the owners and accepted by the Borough. Before the expiration of
such year, the Borough Council, upon its initiative or upon the request
of the organization theretofore responsible for the maintenance of the
open space, call a public hearing, upon 15 days written notice to such
organization and to the owners of the development, to be held by the
Borough Council. At the hearing the organization and the owners of the
development shall show cause why such maintenance by the Borough
shall not, at the election of the Borough, continue for a succeeding
year. If the Borough Council shall determine that such organization is
ready and able to maintain the open space in reasonable condition, the
Borough shall cease to maintain the open space at the end of the year. If
the Borough Council shall determine such organization is not ready and
able to maintain the open space in as reasonable condition, the Borough
may, in its discretion, continue to maintain the open space during the
next succeeding year, subject to a similar hearing and determination, in
each year thereafter. The decision of the Borough Council on any such
case shall constitute a final administrative decision subject to judicial
review.
C. The cost of such maintenance by the Borough shall be assessed pro rata
against the properties within the residential cluster development that
have a right of enjoyment of the open space in accordance with
assessed value at the time of imposition of the lien, and shall become a
lien and tax on such properties and be added to and be a part of the
taxes to be levied and assessed thereon, and enforced and collected
with interest by the same officers and in the same manner as other
taxes.
§ 218-64 STORM SEWERS § 218-65
212:437

ARTICLE IX
Developer's Agreement
§ 218-68. Agreement required.
Prior to the commencement of any improvements or operations at the
subdivision site and prior to the issuance of a building permit, a developer's
agreement shall be entered into between the subdivider and the Borough
Council. Such agreement shall specifically detail:
§ 218-69. Notice to purchasers.
To ensure that all purchasers of building lots in the subdivision have
knowledge of the subdivider's obligations concerning improvements and
work to be performed in the subdivision, the subdivider shall be required to
provide copies of the following documents to each contract purchaser of a
building lot in the subdivision prior to entering into a contract of sale with
each purchaser of a building lot:
§ 218-70. Proof of compliance.
Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the subdivider or
contractor shall be required to have filed written proof with the Borough
that the subdivider has complied with the notice provisions of this article.
Such written proof shall be in a form satisfactory to the Mayor and Council.
A. All items of public improvement to be performed by the subdivider.
B. The amount of maintenance and performance bonds to be furnished by
the subdivider.
C. All other requirements and conditions of the Borough Council.
D. All other items as agreed and stipulated between the subdivider
applicant and the Borough Council and the Planning Board. Such
agreement shall be in a form as approved by the Borough Attorney.
A. A true copy of the Planning Board resolutions granting preliminary and
final approval of the subdivision application.
B. A true copy of the developer's agreement entered into between the
subdivider and the Borough.
C. A true copy of Chapter 218, Subdivision of Land, of the Code of the
Borough of Old Tappan.
D. A list of all bonds and their purpose filed with the Borough.
§ 218-68 STORM SEWERS § 218-70
212:439

ARTICLE X
Violations and Remedies
§ 218-71. Disposal of land prior to final approval.
If, before final subdivision approval has been granted, any person, as owner
or agent, transfers or sells, or agrees to transfer or sell, any land which
forms a part of a subdivision for which Borough approval is required by
this chapter, except pursuant to an agreement expressly conditioned on
final subdivision approval, such person shall be subject to a penalty not to
exceed $1,000, and each lot disposition so made may be deemed a separate
violation.
§ 218-72. Civil remedy; unlawful sale of land.
In addition to the other remedies set forth in this chapter, the Borough
Council or Building Inspector may, in the event of a sale, transfer or
agreement which violates § 218-71, institute and maintain an action:
§ 218-73. Civil remedy; unlawful building.
In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, altered, repaired,
converted or maintained, or any building, structure or land is used in
violation of this chapter, the Borough Council, the Building Inspector or
any interested party, in addition to other remedies, may institute any
appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection,
construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or
use, to restrain, correct or abate such violation to prevent the occupancy
of such building, structure or land, or to prevent any illegal act, conduct,
business or use in or about such premises.
§ 218-74. Violations and penalties.
Any owner, tenant or other occupant, agent, architect, builder, contractor
or any other worker or any other person who shall commit, take part
or assist in any violation, other than a violation set forth in § 218-71,
or who shall knowingly maintain any building or premises in which any
A. For injunctive relief.
B. To set aside and invalidate any conveyance made pursuant to such a
contract of sale if a certificate as to approval of subdivision of land shall
not have been issued for such conveyance. In any such action, the
transferee, purchaser or grantee shall be entitled to a lien upon the
portion of the land from which the subdivision was made that remains
in the possession of the developer, or his/her assigns or successors, to
secure the return of any deposit made or purchase price paid, and also
a reasonable search fee, survey expense and title closing expense, if
any. Any such action must be brought within two years after the date of
the recording of the instrument of transfer, sale or conveyance of such
land, or within six years if unrecorded.
§ 218-71 STORM SEWERS § 218-74
212:441
violation of this chapter shall exist shall, upon conviction thereof, for each
and every violation, be subject to penalties as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article III, General Penalty. Each day that a violation is
permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 218-74 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 218-74
212:442
ARTICLE XI
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 218-75. Continuation of application.
All applications for subdivision and site plan review filed may be continued.
§ 218-76. Minimum standards. [Amended 2-19-2002 by Ord. No.
773-02]
The rules, regulations and standards contained in this chapter shall be
considered the minimum requirements for the protection of the public
health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Borough. Any action taken
by the Planning Board under the terms of this chapter shall give primary
consideration to the above-mentioned matters and to the welfare of the
entire community. However, if the subdivider or site plan applicant, or his/
her agent, can clearly demonstrate that, because of peculiar conditions
pertaining to his/her land, the literal enforcement of one or more of these
regulations is impracticable or will exact undue hardship, the Planning
Board or the Council may permit such variance or variances as may be
reasonable and within the general purpose and intent of the rules,
regulations and standards established by this chapter.
§ 218-75 STORM SEWERS § 218-76
212:443
Chapter 220
TAXATION
§ 218-76 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 218-76
212:444
ARTICLE I
Totally Disabled Veterans and Surviving Spouses Tax Exemption
[Adopted 3-19-2018 by Ord. No. 1120-18]
§ 220-1. Exemption established.
The Borough will allow for either a veteran or surviving spouse of a veteran
to obtain municipal property tax relief upon proper claim pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 54:4-30 et seq. An eligible veteran shall be defined as a member of
the armed forces who was either honorably discharged or released under
honorable circumstances from active service, in time of war, in any branch
of the Armed Forces of the United States, who has been or shall be declared
by the United States Veteran's Administration or its successor to have a
service-connected disability and to be determined to be 100% permanently
disabled.
§ 220-2. Qualifications for veterans.
In order to qualify for the municipal tax exemption, the veteran or someone
on his/her behalf, under oath, must file a written claim with the Tax
Assessor's office. The Tax Assessor's office will supply the applicant with the
appropriate paperwork and the applicant will be required to provide the Tax
Assessor's office with the following information:
§ 220-3. Qualifications for surviving spouse.
In order for a surviving spouse of a veteran to qualify for the municipal
tax exemption, the spouse, under oath, must file a written claim with the
Tax Assessor's office. The Tax Assessor's office will supply the surviving
spouse with the appropriate paperwork and the applicant will be required
to provide the Tax Assessor's office with the following information:
A. Reason for exemption;
B. A description of the property for which the exemption is claimed;
C. A certificate of claimant's honorable discharge or release under
honorable circumstances from active service in time of war and a
certificate/letter from the United States Veteran's Administration or its
successors, certifying to a service-connected disability;
D. Any other documentation as required by statute at the time the
application is made.
A. Proof to establish that the spouse is the owner of legal title to the
premises on which the exemption is made;
B. That the claimant occupies the dwelling house on said premises as the
claimant's legal residence in the State of New Jersey;
C. That the veteran has been declared by the United States Veteran's
Administration, or its successor, to have a service-connected disability
§ 220-1 STORM SEWERS § 220-3
212:445
§ 220-4. Exemption prorated.
In determining a grant of a municipal tax exemption under this section, the
Borough will prorate the exemption for the remainder of the year in which
application is made and accepted by the Borough. There shall be no further
retroactive refund granted, regardless of the disability date determination
of the United States Veteran's Administration.
or that the veteran shall have been declared to have died in active
service in time of war;
D. That the veteran is or would have been entitled to the exemption at the
time of death;
E. The claimant is a resident of the State of New Jersey and has not
remarried.
§ 220-3 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 220-4
212:446
Chapter 227
TOWING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 239. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 242.
§ 227-1. List of towing services.
The Police Department shall establish a list of persons or firms who shall
be utilized by the Borough to provide towing and wrecking services for
abandoned, wrecked or impounded vehicles. In establishing this list, first
consideration shall be given to those persons or firms who are presently
utilized by the Police Department for this service. All other operators shall
be given consideration based upon the date of the application filed by them,
which application is more fully described in § 227-2 of this chapter.
§ 227-2. License application information.
An application for a license as a proprietor of a towing or wrecking business
to be placed upon the list to be utilized by the Police Department shall be
made by the person or firm engaged in operating a wrecker or wreckers.
The application shall be made on forms furnished by the Borough Clerk and
shall specifically include the following:
A. The full name and address of the applicant. If the application is made
for a corporation, it shall state the names and addresses of the officers
and directors thereof, its registered office and its registered agent.
B. The year, make and type of each wrecker used in said business.
C. The address where the wrecker or wreckers shall be regularly garaged
and the telephone numbers available on a twenty-four-hour-per-day
basis.
D. The applicant shall purchase and maintain at his own expense
insurance protection for the Borough and itself in accordance with the
provisions of § 227-13 of this chapter. [Amended 3-15-2004 by Ord.
No. 843-04]
E. The applicant will indemnify and hold harmless the Borough from any
and all claims for personal injury or property damage against the
Borough arising out of the operation of any towing services or repair
services under this chapter. The applicant will file a hold harmless
agreement with the Borough as well as a certificate of insurance
naming the Borough of Old Tappan as the additional insured.
F. The Borough Clerk shall refer the application for a license to the Police
Department for a check of all equipment, personnel and facilities of the
§ 220-4 STORM SEWERS § 227-2
212:447
§ 227-3. Record of wreckers.
The Chief of Police shall see that a record is maintained containing the
names, addresses and twenty-four-hour telephone numbers of all licensed
wreckers and a record of the types of wreckers available to meet the
specific need of the emergency. He shall also see that a record is maintained
of the regular response of wreckers to police calls and any and all
complaints from vehicle owners as to improper service or charges.
§ 227-4. Rotation.
The Chief of Police shall maintain a revolving list of licensed wreckers to
provide service where needed and instruct all duty officers to call those
listed in alphabetical order on a rotational basis. All owners or operators
of disabled vehicles shall first be advised that they have a right to call a
wrecker of their own choosing and retain the right to direct the towing
vehicle to remove the damaged vehicle to a garage or workshop of their own
choosing.
§ 227-5. Towing fees. [Amended 7-16-2001 by Ord. No. 758-01;
4-17-2017 by Ord. No. 1115-17]
applicant to determine the ability of the applicant to perform the
business herein regulated.
G. The Chief of Police shall have the authorization to issue up to three
licenses.
H. Equipment.
(1) Each wrecker must meet all of the requirements of Revised
Statutes Title 39, "Motor Vehicle Rules and Regulations." In
addition, each wrecker must have the following equipment:
(a) One large broom and shovel.
(b) At least one set of dolly wheels.
(c) Steering wheel lock for towing vehicles from the rear.
(d) Tow sling-type tow bar to prevent any part of crane metal from
touching towed vehicles.
(e) Emergency warning lights.
(f) Portable safety lights to be installed on rear of towed vehicle if
necessary.
(g) Safety flares for night work.
(2) In lieu of the dolly wheels, steering wheel lock and tow sling-type
tow bar as required by Subsections H(1)(b) through (d) of this
section, the applicant may have a flatbed car carrier.
§ 227-2 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 227-5
212:448
§ 227-6. Obligations of tower or wrecker.
By making application to be utilized as a tower or wrecker by the Police
Department, and by accepting such contract, the person or firm agrees to:
§ 227-7. Promulgation of rules and revocation of rights by Chief of
Police.
The Chief of Police is hereby given the authority to promulgate rules and
regulations necessary to carry out the intent and purpose of this chapter.
The Chief of Police is hereby given the authority to suspend or revoke the
right of any person or firm which is on the authorized list if the person or
firm violates any of the terms and conditions of this chapter.
§ 227-8. Operator's choice.
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the owner or the operator of an
automobile from contacting a tower or wrecker of his own choice to remove
A. Days:
(1) First mile or less: $85.
(2) Each additional mile: $2.75.
B. Storage of vehicles and large equipment. Any items being held by the
Borough Police Department, upon proper notice to the owner, can be
retrieved and picked up or retrieved within a ten-day period from notice
sent by registered mail; a storage charge will be assessed at the rate of
$40 for every 20 hours of storage time.
C. Every operator of a towing service shall, prior to the actual towing or
storing of any vehicle, give the owner a state-mandated pricing sheet.
A. Provide a prompt response to each call;
B. Clean all glass and auto parts at the accident site emanating from the
accident;
C. Provide the Police Department with the following information on
vehicles unclaimed for over 30 days:
(1) Year, make, color and vehicle identification number;
(2) Owner's name and address if available;
D. Maintain a ledger of all towing or wrecking jobs handled, the name of
the owner or operator, the charges made for the service and the date
and amount of payments;
E. Comply with all other terms and conditions of this chapter; and
F. Comply with all motor vehicle rules and regulations found within Title
39.
§ 227-5 STORM SEWERS § 227-8
212:449
his vehicle from the public streets of the Borough of Old Tappan after it
has become disabled or otherwise inoperable by virtue of accident or other
reason. Said owner or operator shall have a reasonable time within which to
select a tower or wrecker of his own choice to remove the vehicle from the
public roadways of the Borough. After this reasonable period of time, the
Borough shall remove the vehicle by resorting to the procedure set forth in
this chapter.
§ 227-9. Specialty wrecker.
In an emergency and in such other circumstances when necessary, the Chief
of Police shall be permitted to call in a specialty wrecker company where
special needs must be met such as, but not limited to, bulldozers off trucks,
towing involved in a tractor/trailer accident, towing where hazardous
materials are involved and such other circumstances requiring a specialty
wrecker.
§ 227-10. Subletting work.
Under no circumstances shall an applicant which has obtained a license
in accordance herewith sublet or assign any towing or wrecking work
permitted by said license.
§ 227-11. Indemnification. [Added 3-15-2004 by Ord. No. 843-04]
The towing operator shall execute an indemnification and hold harmless
agreement which shall provide that the towing operator agrees to defend
at the towing operator's expense and to hold harmless and indemnify the
Borough of Old Tappan, its elected officials, boards, officers and employees
from any and all obligations, expenses and/or damages arising out of any
claims which may thereafter be asserted against the Borough of Old Tappan
by anyone for loss or damages to personal property, for personal injury
or for any other damages in connection with the rendering of services
pursuant to this chapter.
§ 227-12. Insurance requirements. [Added 3-15-2004 by Ord. No.
843-04; amended 4-17-2017 by Ord. No. 1115-17]
No towing operator shall be called by the Police Department unless the
towing operator has submitted as part of the application insurance policies
or certificates of insurance, in a form approved by the Borough's risk
management consultant, evidencing that there is in effect insurance policies
with the following coverage:
A. Commercial/General liability insurance. Limit of liability shall not be
less than $1,000,000 combined single limit (bodily injury and property
damage) per occurrence, including premises operations and products/
completed operations.
§ 227-8 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 227-12
212:450
B. Automobile liability insurance. Limit of liability shall not be less than
$1,000,000 combined single limit (bodily injury and property damage)
per occurrence.
C. Garage keepers insurance. Physical damage insurance policies shall be
provided for vehicles in tow, possession of or storage on property
owned or controlled by the contractor. Limit of said coverage shall be
not less than $100,000. Physical damage insurance policies shall be
specifically endorsed to provide direct primary insurance, where
applicable, for vehicles in tow.
D. Excess umbrella insurance. Limit of liability shall be not less than
$1,000,000 providing protection in excess of the $1,000,000 liability
coverage. This requirement may be waived by the Mayor and Council.
E. On all liability policies, the Borough shall be added as an additional
insured, and coverage policies and insurance certificates shall indicate
such coverage as primary coverage notwithstanding any insurance
carried by the Borough.
F. Workers' compensation insurance: New Jersey statutory coverage,
including employer's liability coverage.
G. The contractor shall indemnify the Borough against any loss due to
injuries, accidents or damages of any character whatsoever where any
such damage is the result of an act or omission of the contractor, his
agents or employees in or due to the execution of the work called for
under the contract.
H. Insurance policies or certificates shall provide that the Borough shall be
given at least 30 days' prior written notice of any cancellation of,
intention not to renew or material change in such coverage by certified
mail, return receipt. Insurance policies or certificates must be provided
before commencing work in connection with the contract. Failure to
submit this shall subject the contractor to immediate disqualification.
I. The providing of any insurance required herein does not relieve the
contractor of any of the responsibilities or obligations assumed by the
contractor for which the contractor may be liable by law or otherwise.
J. If any policies contain deductibles or copayment, it shall be the
responsibility of the contractor to pay such sums at the same time a
claim is settled by the contractor's insurance company.
K. If any policies contain limits of liability with an aggregate limit, the
contractor or the contractor's insurance company shall provide the
Borough, quarterly during the policy period, a statement evidencing the
limits of liability required under this contract to be in force.
L. Failure to provide and continue in force such insurance as required
above shall be deemed a material breach of the contract and shall cause
an immediate termination thereof.
§ 227-12 STORM SEWERS § 227-12
212:451
Chapter 231
TRAILER CAMPS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licensing — See Ch. 158.
§ 231-1. Definitions.
The following words, for the purposes of this chapter, shall have the
following meanings:
TOURIST CABIN — Any building or structure used or intended to be used
as a temporary dwelling for tourist occupancy, not being intended for
permanent or continuous dwelling.
TOURIST CAMPS — Any site or tract of land occupied or used by one or
more trailers or tourist cabins, including any building or enclosure used or
intended for use as part of, or in connection with, such tourist camp.
TRAILER — Any vehicle used or intended for conveyance upon the public
street or highways and constructed to permit occupancy of the vehicle as a
dwelling or sleeping place for one or more persons.
§ 231-2. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, maintain or operate within
the limits of the borough any tourist camp or any location or plot of ground
for the use of transients or nonresidents by day, week, month or season,
whether charge is or is not made, unless a permit therefor is first obtained
from the Mayor and Borough Council.
§ 231-3. Fee; permit expiration; renewal.
Each applicant for a permit shall pay a fee of $500 annually. The permit
shall be effective from the date of issuance until December 31 following and
shall be renewed annually thereafter.
§ 231-4. Surety bond required.
Before a permit shall be issued the applicant shall furnish to the borough
a surety bond in the amount of $10,000 which shall be conditioned for
the payment of any money the borough may expend for education, relief,
maintenance, food, clothing, shelter, medications, medical care or
hospitalization of the occupants of any trailer located on leased premises.
M. All policies shall be written by a company licensed in the State of New
Jersey, Best's rated A-VII (A minus seven). They shall be written on an
ISO (Insurance Service Office) form or better.
§ 227-12 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 231-5
231:452
§ 231-5. Area requirements.
Every tourist camp shall be laid out and arranged to provide not less than
30 feet by 40 feet in area for each trailer or tourist cabin.
§ 231-6. Parking restrictions.
It shall be unlawful to park, keep house or maintain any trailer in or upon
any street or upon any site, place or location in the borough unless in a
licensed tourist camp, except that parking for a brief time may be permitted
and that the provisions of this chapter shall not effect nor prohibit the
keeping or storage of any trailer on the home premises of any owner,
provided that the trailer is not used for permanent living or sleeping
quarters.
§ 231-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall establish, use, operate or maintain a tourist camp,
trailer or cabin without having complied with the provisions of this chapter
or who shall violate the same shall be subject to the penalty set forth in
Article III, General Penalty, of Chapter 1, General Provisions, of the Code of
the Borough of Old Tappan.
Chapter 234
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental Commission — See Ch. 9, Art.
VI.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 45.
Shade Tree Advisory Committee — See Ch. 72.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 218.
Zoning — See Ch. 255.
§ 231-5 TRAILER CAMPS § 231-7
231:453

ARTICLE I
Shade Trees
[Adopted 5-26-1975 as Ch. IX of the 1975 Code; amended in its
entirety 11-19-2001 by Ord. No. 767-01]
§ 234-1. Permit required for certain acts.
No person shall do or cause to be done by others, either purposely,
carelessly or negligently, without the written permission of the Mayor and
Council or its designee, any of the following acts on any of the public
highways and parks of the Borough:
§ 234-2. Wire, cable and electric current.
A. Cut, prune, break, climb with spikes, injure or remove any tree, shrub,
or plant; cut, unduly disturb or interfere in any way with any root of a
tree, shrub, or plant.
B. Spray any tree, shrub or plant with any chemical.
C. Fasten any rope, wire, sign, or other device to a tree or shrub or to any
guard about the tree or shrub.
D. Install, remove or injure any guard or device placed to protect any tree
or shrub.
E. Place, maintain or cause to be placed or maintained upon the ground
any stone, cement or other sidewalk or other substance, which shall
close or obstruct any open space provided about the base of a tree or
shrub or impede the free access of air, water and fertilizer to the roots
of any tree or shrub.
A. Wires through public parks. No person shall string any wire or wires
through a public park or other public land without the written
permission of the Mayor and Council or its designee.
B. Safeguards for wires required. Every person having or maintaining any
electric, telephone, telegraph or other wires running through a public
highway or park shall securely fasten and maintain the wires in such
manner as will safeguard the trees and shrubs against any damage
therefrom and shall make periodical adjustments whenever necessary
to prevent damage to trees and shrubs growing in any public highway
or park.
C. Wire insulators. No person shall, without the written permission of the
Mayor and Council or its designee, attach or fasten any wire, insulator,
or other device for holding any wire, to any tree or shrub in any public
highway or park.
D. Pruning or removal of trees. When necessary to prune or remove any
tree in a public highway, any person having a wire or wires running
through the public highway shall temporarily remove the wire or wires
§ 234-1 TRAILER CAMPS § 234-2
231:455
§ 234-3. Regulation of trees and shrubs.
within 24 hours after the service upon the owner of the wire, or his
agent, of a written notice from the Mayor and Council or its designee.
E. Exception. The requirements of this section shall not apply to any
person having such wire or wires who shall perform pruning or tree
removal work when authorized by or requested by the Mayor and
Council or its designee.
A. Approval by Mayor and Council required. No shade or ornamental tree
or shrub shall be planted in any public highway or park until the tree or
shrub shall have first been approved and then placed where it is to be
planted as designated by the Mayor and Council or its designee, and a
permit granted therefor.
B. Obstruction through planting prohibited. No person shall, through
planting of trees, shrubs, or plant life, obstruct the sight distance on
any street intersection.
(1) Whenever necessary and expedient for the preservation of the
public safety, the person in possession of the property as owner or
tenant shall, upon notification by the Mayor and Council or its
designee, trim and cut all bushes, hedges and plant life (except
shade trees) to a height of not more than 2 1/2 feet or to remove
same if it is located:
(a) Within the road right-of-way.
(b) Within the triangular area formed by the intersecting street
lines and a straight line joining the street lines at points which
are 30 feet distant from the point of intersection, measured
along the street lines.
(2) It shall be the responsibility of the tenant or owner of property to
maintain all shade or ornamental trees, hedges, or shrubs growing
on private property so that the lowest branches overhanging a
sidewalk area are at a height to permit pedestrians to walk freely
without interference.
C. Clearing of vacant lots. Vacant lots within a developed area must be
kept free from weeds and trash. The Mayor and Council, or its designee,
may request any or certain lots to be mowed twice a year and upon such
request shall be required within a reasonable time thereafter.
D. Removal of dangerous trees. The Mayor and Council, or its designee,
shall give reasonable notice to remove or cause the removal of a tree, or
part of a tree, dangerous to public safety, unless public safety requires
immediate removal, in which case no notice shall be necessary.
E. Failure to comply with notice. Upon failure of any owner or tenant to
comply with the terms of a notice issued in accordance with Subsection
§ 234-2 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 234-3
231:456
§ 234-4. Subdivision requirements.
C or D hereinabove, the Mayor and Council, or its designee, shall cause
such vacant lot to be mowed or such tree, or part of a tree, to be
removed. The costs of such work shall be certified to the Mayor and
Council which shall examine the certificate and, if found correct, shall
cause the costs to be assessed against the lands and premises to be
added to and become and form part of the taxes next assessed and
levied upon such land, the same to bear interest at the same rate as
taxes, and be collected in the same manner as taxes.
F. Construction requirements.
(1) In the erection, altering, or repairing of any building or structure,
the owner or contractor thereof shall place guards around all
nearby trees within a one-hundred-foot radius of public highway or
parks or public land which will effectually prevent injury to such
trees.
(2) Construction equipment and all other implements, machines, and
tools shall be used or operated in such a manner as not to damage
or destroy any tree, shrub or plant in any public highway or park or
public land or subdivision.
G. Chemical damage.
(1) No person shall place salt, brine, oil or any other substance
injurious to plant growth in any public highway or park in such a
manner as to injure any tree or shrub growing thereon.
(2) No person shall build any fire or station, any tar kettle, road roller
or other engine in any public highway in such a manner that the
heat, vapors or fumes therefrom may injure any tree or shrub
growing thereon.
H. Borough maintains certain shade trees. The Borough shall be
responsible for maintaining trees within the public right-of-way when
such trees are Borough trees. "Borough trees" for purposes of this
article shall be defined as trees within the public right-of-way which
have been planted by the Borough or approved by the Borough in
connection with a development application. Trees, shrubs, or other
plant life within the public right-of-way, which are not Borough trees,
shall be maintained by and shall be the responsibility of the property
owner.
A. Shade Tree Advisory Committee report required prior to final approval.
Before final approval of a subdivision by the Planning Board, the
subdivider or developer must have a report by the Shade Tree Advisory
Committee, which shall include, without limitation, recommendations
for the posting of bonds for the trees to be saved as recommended by
the Shade Tree Advisory Committee.
§ 234-3 TRAILER CAMPS § 234-4
231:457
B. Planting requirements.
(1) On all subdivisions the developer or builder shall be required to
deposit with the Borough a sum sufficient to purchase and plant
trees along both sides of the road right-of-way within the planting
area, unless, due to natural conditions, the Planning Board deems it
desirable to plant otherwise or not at all. The amount of money to
be deposited with the Borough shall be determined at the time of
such final approval and shall be the actual reasonable cost of such
purchase and planting of trees. Trees, when planted along the
right-of-way, shall be approximately 50 feet apart.
(2) The developer or builder shall furnish to the Shade Tree Advisory
Committee two maps of the approved subdivision upon which the
Shade Tree Advisory Committee shall make recommendations for
the location of all trees to be planted and return one copy to the
subdivider.
(3) All tree varieties, placement, condition and quality are subject to
inspection by the Shade Tree Advisory Committee. Trees shall be
nursery grown stock.
C. Bond required. A bond or bonds shall be required, as set forth in the
Shade Tree Ordinance, covering the preservation of certain trees to be
designated by the Planning Board to be left in place, upon
recommendation by the Shade Tree Advisory Committee.
D. Shade tree specifications. The following specifications shall apply to all
trees planted within the Borough:
(1) Shade trees shall be not less than 1 3/4 inches caliper, 12 inches
from ground level, and not less than eight to 10 feet high.
(2) In general, all trees planted in the planting area shall be planted
nine feet from the curbline.
(3) The approved varieties of trees shall be the following: American
ash, Norway maple varieties, sugar maple, pin oaks, oak varieties,
linden, zelkova, thornless, honeylocust or sweet gum, or any other
variety as may be deemed appropriate by the Mayor and Council
upon recommendation by the Shade Tree Advisory Committee. In
large developments it is advisable to use two varieties of trees,
alternating them, so that, should a disease strike a variety, all trees
on a street would not succumb. If desirable, neighboring streets
may differ in variety used.
(4) Planting soil in the excavation shall be composed of one-third peat,
one-third humus, one-third parent soil to which shall be added and
mixed two pounds of raw bonemeal.
(5) Backfill of the entire excavation shall be graded to a depth of two
inches below grade.
§ 234-4 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 234-4
231:458
§ 234-5. Interference with Shade Tree Advisory Committee.
No person shall prevent, delay, or in any manner interfere with the Shade
Tree Advisory Committee or its authorized agents in the performance of
their lawful duties.
§ 234-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person, applicant, developer or owner who violates any provision of this
article shall be liable for a fine not to exceed $1,000 or imprisonment for
a term not in excess of 90 days, or both. Each and every violation hereof
shall constitute a separate offense for which a fine or other penalty may be
imposed.
(6) Each tree shall be given ample water at the time of planting.
(7) All trees shall be staked. Stakes of red or white cedar shall be eight
feet long and not less than two inches in diameter at the top. Stakes
shall be driven into the ground to a depth of two feet before
backfilling. Trees shall be guyed to the stakes by means of wire and
rubber hose or its equivalent and shall be fastened in such a
manner that the tree trunk shall not come in direct contact with the
wire.
(8) All planting debris shall be removed so that the property is left in a
neat, orderly condition.
§ 234-4 TRAILER CAMPS § 234-6
231:459

ARTICLE II
Tree Preservation and Removal
[Adopted by Ord. No. 609-97, as amended through Ord. No. 652-98]
§ 234-7. Findings.
The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Old Tappan hereby finds and
determines as follows:
§ 234-8. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
APPLICANT — The owner or lessee of real property or duly authorized
agent.
DIAMETER AT POINT OF MEASUREMENT (DPM) — The diameter of a tree
measured at a point on the tree four feet above the ground level.
DRIPLINE — A line connecting the tips of the outermost branches of a tree
projected vertically to the ground.
A. There is a direct relationship between the preservation of and planting
of trees in populated areas, and the health, safety and welfare of
residents.
B. Trees are related to natural, scenic and aesthetic values and promote a
desirable visual environment which the Borough desires to protect.
C. Trees reduce noise, produce oxygen and reduce carbon dioxide gases in
the air, help to improve air quality, provide wildlife and bird habitat and
otherwise create a pleasant atmosphere in the Borough.
D. Trees stabilize the soil and help to reduce water and wind erosion,
thereby reducing water pollution.
E. Trees also yield advantageous climatic effects through shade and
transpiration, thereby reducing human energy consumption.
F. The preservation of trees promotes the retention of valuable natural
resources in the Borough.
G. The destructive and indiscriminate removal of trees causes increased
Borough costs for control of stormwater runoff, impairs the benefits of
occupancy of existing residential properties, impairs the stability and
value of both improved and unimproved real property in the area of
destruction, and adversely affects the health, safety, and general
welfare of residents of the Borough.
H. In order to provide protection for trees against destructive practices
and indiscriminate and excessive removal practices, this article
establishes minimum standards for the protection of and preservation
of trees within the Borough.
§ 234-7 TRAILER CAMPS § 234-8
231:461
ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION — The Environmental Commission of the
Borough of Old Tappan, established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 et seq.
and with the powers provided by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-27.
HABITAT — The natural growing characteristics of any tree, which include
branch spread and distribution, dripline, branch height above ground and
root spread and distribution.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association,
public utility or organization of any kind, or agent thereof.
PRIVATE REAL PROPERTY — All improved and unimproved privately owned
real property within the Borough of Old Tappan. Land owned by the
Borough of Old Tappan, the County of Bergen, or the State of New Jersey is
excluded.
PUBLIC TREE — A tree located on public property owned by the Borough
of Old Tappan, the County of Bergen or the State of New Jersey.
REGULATED TREE — A living deciduous or coniferous tree which has
attained a height of at least 25 feet or a DPM of at least eight inches prior
to any pruning, limb removal, topping, or other such activity.
SHRUB — A low, usually several-stemmed woody plant.
SUBSTANTIAL ALTERATION — Any cutting, pruning of a tree or the
alteration of the habitat of a tree which impairs, destroys or endangers the
life of such tree or its natural symmetry.
TREE — Any living, woody perennial plant and its root system.
§ 234-9. Prohibited acts and activities.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to cut, destroy, remove, substantially
injure or substantially alter the habitat of any regulated tree located on
private real property which is or may be subject to a developmental
application for minor subdivision, major subdivision or site plan
approval.
B. The following activities shall be expressly prohibited with respect to
public trees without the prior written permission of the Superintendent
of Public Works of the Borough:
(1) To cut, prune, break, injure, alter or remove any public tree; or cut,
unduly disturb or interfere in any way with a root of public tree.
(2) To spray any public tree with a chemical.
(3) To fasten any rope, cable, sign, light or other device to a public
tree, except for holiday lighting for no more than an eight-week
period during holiday seasons.
(4) To install, remove or injure any guard or device placed to protect a
public tree.
§ 234-8 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 234-9
231:462
§ 234-10. Permitted activities with respect to private real property
trees.
Notwithstanding the restrictions contained in § 234-9 hereof, the following
activities shall be specifically permitted with respect to trees on private real
property:
(5) To close or obstruct any open spaces provided about the base of a
public tree to permit access of air, water or fertilizer to tree roots.
C. Any person causing damage to a public tree by machines or
automobiles shall be liable for damage to the tree. Damage shall be
corrected or repaired, or the tree replaced by the Borough, and the
person liable shall repay the Borough for the costs of replanting
including labor and materials.
D. No person shall operate, place or maintain within the dripline of any
public tree any machinery, equipment, heavy object, stone, rocks,
cement, soil or other substance which may harm such public tree by
unduly compressing the earth or otherwise impeding the movement of
water, air or fertilizer to the roots of such tree.
E. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary which may be set forth in
Subsection B hereinabove, the Superintendent shall not permit any
public tree to be cut, destroyed or removed unless it is diseased, dead, a
danger to public safety or threatens damage to private property, except
that any public tree may be cut, destroyed or removed as may be
directed by the Mayor and Council.
A. The cutting, pruning or trimming of trees in a manner which is not
harmful to the health of the tree and will not endanger the tree's
continued vitality.
B. The cutting, destruction or removal of trees which are diseased or dead
or which endanger public safety or threaten damage to private
property.
C. The cutting or removal of trees in accordance with a landscape plan as
part of a subdivision or site plan application approved by the Planning
Board or Board of Adjustment in conjunction with subdivision or site
plan approval; provided, however, that the cutting or removal of trees
shall not commence until all conditions of approval by the Planning
Board or Board of Adjustment have been satisfied and an appropriate
tree removal permit is issued.
D. The cutting or removal of a tree as may be necessary to construct any
structure or improvements for which a building permit has been issued
by the Borough Construction Official, including but not limited to a
building permit issued in conjunction with subdivision or site plan
approval.
§ 234-9 TRAILER CAMPS § 234-10
231:463
§ 234-11. Excluded activities.
§ 234-12. Tree removal permit application procedure. [Amended
2-19-2002 by Ord. No. 773-02]
E. The cutting, removal or destruction of any tree pursuant to an order or
directive of any municipal, state or federal court or any governmental
agency.
F. An applicant shall make every effort to locate the proposed building or
structure within a less wooded area of the lot which is proposed for
development. Subject to this requirement, the applicant shall be
permitted to remove trees within the footprint of the building, plus a
ten-foot perimeter, as well as within existing and proposed rights-ofway,
without being obligated to replace same as set forth in § 234-15.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, a developer or builder shall still be
obligated to plant shade trees as required by § 234-4. [Added
5-17-2004 by Ord. No. 848-04; amended 3-21-2005 by Ord. No.
881-05; 12-5-2005 by Ord. NO. 898-05]
A. The provisions of this article shall not apply to the following:
(1) Activities involving shrubs.
(2) Activities with respect to trees growing on property being used as a
nursery, orchard or garden center.
B. For purposes of this section, if tree removal is proposed in connection
with an application for development, nursery shall be defined to include
land of which at least 80% of the area has been determined by the
Borough Assessor to be devoted to horticultural uses for purposes of
qualifying the property for farmland assessment for the year prior to
the application for development.
A. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary which may be set forth in this
§ 234-12, prior to the cutting, destroying or removal of any regulated
tree situated on private real property within the Borough of Old Tappan
which is or is to be the subject of a subdivision, site plan or other
developmental application before the Planning Board, the owner or
developer of such private real property shall file with the Planning
Board at the time any such developmental application is filed an
application for a tree removal permit.
B. An application for a tree removal permit shall include the following
information:
(1) Name and address of the applicant.
(2) Date of the application.
(3) Description of the subject property, including lot and block
numbers.
§ 234-10 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 234-12
231:464
§ 234-13. Application review process. [Amended 2-19-2002 by Ord.
No. 773-02]
(4) A specifically described location of the regulated tree or trees
proposed for removal, including a graphic depiction thereof drawn
to scale.
(5) The purpose or reason for the proposed tree cutting or removal.
(6) The location of all structures and improvements on the property
shown in relation to the proposed trees to be removed, including
building foundation, garages, driveways and other paved areas,
outbuildings, swimming pools, tennis courts.
(7) The tree species, size, quantity and diameter at a point of
measurement (DPM).
(8) The proposed date or dates for commencement and completion of
the tree removal project.
(9) The name and address of the person having express charge,
supervision and/or control of the proposed removal of trees.
(10) A grant of express, written permission to Borough officials,
employees, and consultants, and members of the Environmental
Commission to enter upon the property to inspect the trees to be
removed and to inspect the tree removal project as the work is in
process.
A. Any applicant seeking minor subdivision approval, major subdivision
approval or site plan approval shall file, together with any and all other
applications and plans as may be required by the Land Use Ordinances
of the Borough of Old Tappan,40 an application for a permit for removal
of regulated trees as hereinabove set forth.
B. A completed application for regulated tree removal shall be forwarded
by the enforcing agent to the Environmental Commission of the
Borough of Old Tappan. The Environmental Commission shall have a
period of 31 days from receipt of a completed application to make a
report and recommendation to the Planning Board pursuant to its
powers established under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-27. The Environmental
Commission shall also have the power to request the applicant to
appear at a public meeting so that it may inquire as to any aspect of the
application before its report and recommendation to the Planning
Board. However, the decision and determination to grant or deny the
tree removal permit shall be that of the Planning Board and shall be
made in the context of the proceedings on the developmental
application filed with the Board.
40.Editor's Note: See Ch. 45, Land Use Procedures; Ch. 218, Subdivision of Land; and Ch.
255, Zoning.
§ 234-12 TRAILER CAMPS § 234-13
231:465
§ 234-14. Criteria for review of application. [Amended 2-19-2002 by
Ord. No. 773-02]
The evaluation of said application by the Planning Board, as well as the
report and recommendation of the Environmental Commission, shall be
based on the following criteria:
§ 234-15. Tree replacement plan. [Amended 7-24-2000 by Ord. No.
723-00; 2-19-2002 by Ord. No. 773-02]
C. In the event that the Environmental Commission does not issue a report
and recommendation within said thirty-one-day period, the Planning
Board may proceed with its decision and determination in the absence
of any such report and recommendation.
A. The necessity of the removal of the regulated tree for the project in
question in the context of the development proposed.
B. The condition of the tree with respect to diseases and safety hazards.
C. The effect of the tree removal on ecological systems.
D. The aesthetic and environmental character existing at the site of the
proposed regulated tree removal with respect to existing vegetation on
the property, the immediate vicinity and the general area.
A. As part of its review and approval process, the Planning Board may
require the applicant to replace regulated trees where their removal
has been permitted in connection with proposed development. Further,
the Planning Board may require that the replacement trees have
heights of at least eight feet at the time of planting and be planted in
accordance with the following schedule:
(1) A deciduous tree shall be replaced by a tree the species of which is
identical to the tree being removed or is otherwise referred to in
the United States Conservation Service as compatible with the soil
type. A coniferous tree shall be replaced by a similar coniferous
tree. [Amended 4-21-2014 by Ord. No. 1069-14]
(a) On a case-by-case basis subject to Environmental Commission
and Planning Board review and approval, an applicant may
propose a tree replacement plan proposing alternate species of
trees. The alternate plan must provide details, rationale,
justification and evidence supporting the request to approve
the alternate plan to show that said plan promotes the general
welfare of the community and that the proposed tree species
are compatible with local environs.
(2) A tree with an eight-inch to less than twelve-inch diameter is to be
replaced by one two-and-one-half-inch caliper tree. A tree with a
twelve-inch to eighteen-inch diameter is to be replaced by two
§ 234-13 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 234-15
231:466
§ 234-16. Fees. [Amended 5-17-2004 by Ord. No. 850-04]
In addition to the application fees required for minor subdivision, major
subdivision or site plan application, an application for a tree removal permit
shall be accompanied by a fee of $100.
§ 234-17. Violations and penalties.
Any person, applicant, developer or owner who violates any provision of this
article shall be liable for a fine not to exceed $1,000 or imprisonment for
a term not in excess of 90 days or both. Each and every violation hereof
shall constitute a separate offense for which a fine or other penalty may be
imposed.
trees with diameters of at least 2 1/2 inches. [Amended
5-17-2004 by Ord. No. 848-04]
(3) A tree with a diameter of more than 18 inches to 24 inches is to be
replaced by three trees with diameters of at least 2 1/2 inches.
(4) A tree with a diameter of more than 24 inches to 36 inches is to be
replaced by four trees with diameters of at least 3 1/2 inches.
(5) A tree with a diameter of more than 36 inches shall be replaced by
not less than six trees with diameters of at least four inches.
B. In the event that the replacement of the required number of trees
cannot reasonably be achieved on site, the applicant may request to
contribute an amount equal to the cost of the replacement tree,
including installation and guarantee (twice the current wholesale value
of each unplanted tree), to a fund established by the Borough for the
purpose of tree maintenance, tree preservation, tree planting,
landscaping, and including the donation of trees to be planted within
the Borough. [Amended 12-5-2005 by Ord. NO. 898-05]
C. As a condition of its approval of a tree removal permit in connection
with any development, the Planning Board shall require the owner or
applicant to obtain a guarantee in a form satisfactory to the Borough
Attorney that will cover the replacement of any replacement trees and
plantings for a period of two years from the date of installation. A twoyear
warranty on new and existing trees will be required for trees
within 25 feet of the area of disturbance [Amended 5-17-2004 by
Ord. No. 848-04]
D. Any trees approved to be removed will be red-flagged and numbered
according to the tree replacement plan. All remaining trees in the area
of disturbance will be yellow-flagged and numbered. Upon issuance of a
certificate of occupancy, all flags shall be removed by the property
owner. [Added 5-17-2004 by Ord. No. 848-04]
§ 234-15 TRAILER CAMPS § 234-18
231:467
§ 234-18. Enforcement.
The Borough building inspector/construction code official is designated as
the enforcing agent for this article. Such enforcing agent shall deliver to the
Environmental Commission copies of all orders enforcing the provisions of
this article contemporaneously with the issuance of such orders.
§ 234-18 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 234-18
231:468
Chapter 239
VEHICLES, ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Towing — See Ch. 227.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 242.
Motorized off-road vehicles — See Ch. 245.
§ 239-1. Abandonment of vehicles prohibited.
No person shall abandon or cause or permit to be abandoned on a public
highway or on private property in the borough any abandoned vehicle.
§ 239-2. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to this chapter:
ABANDONED VEHICLE —
JUNKED VEHICLE — Any unfit vehicle from which parts are taken, stripped
or pirated which are necessary for its proper and legal locomotion on
the public highway and which are not replaced promptly with identical or
equivalent parts, either new, rebuilt or repaired and which is not under
repair.
VEHICLE —
VEHICLE UNDER REPAIR — Any vehicle which is temporarily and actively
undergoing a continuous and uninterrupted course of repair or
maintenance and which is not out of proper running order for more than
four continuous weeks.
Any vehicle which is not registered for operation on the public
highways and which has not been registered for the preceding three
months or is in an unsafe condition as defined in N.J.S.A. 39:3-44.
A.
For the purposes of this chapter, a vehicle registered as a farm vehicle
or which is operable and used by the owner on his/her own property
for the transport of wood, snowplowing or similar uses shall not be
considered an "abandoned vehicle."
B.
For the purposes of this chapter, "abandoned vehicle" shall mean when
the "abandoned vehicle" is visible from a public highway or a dwelling
unit on a neighboring property.
C.
A motor vehicle as defined by the motor vehicle law of New Jersey,
N.J.S.A. 39:1-1, designed to be self-propelled; or
A.
A trailer or semitrailer, as defined by N.J.S.A. 39:1-1, designed to be
hauled by a prime mover through a flexible attachment.
B.
§ 234-18 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 239-3
239:469
§ 239-3. Exceptions.
The following exceptions shall apply to this chapter:
§ 239-4. Impounding.
§ 239-5. Expense of removal and impounding.
The owner of any private property from which a vehicle is removed and
impounded pursuant to § 239-4 and the tenant, lessee or occupant of the
premises, if any, shall be jointly and severally liable for the cost and
expense, including reasonable overhead charges, paid or incurred by the
borough in effecting such removal and impounding, and shall be paid by the
person or persons liable therefor upon demand. In the event such payment
is not made, the amount due shall become a lien upon the lot or tract of
real estate from which such vehicle was removed and shall be added to and
form a part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon such lands, to
be collected and enforced in the same manner as taxes upon real estate; or
the same may be collected in a civil action or in such manner as may be
provided by law.
A. A "historic motor vehicle" is a vehicle, as defined by N.J.S.A. 39:3-27.3,
which is recognized generally by the press and trade as being of
unusual interest, either aesthetically or historically, and which is
maintained cosmetically in excellent condition, and is exempt from the
provisions hereof.
B. Any vehicle hereunder which is totally housed and enclosed by a
structure is exempt from the provisions hereof.
A. The Chief of Police, or any member of the Division of Police, is hereby
authorized to remove, or to cause to be removed, any vehicle left at any
place within the borough which reasonably appears to be in violation of
this chapter or which appears to have been lost, stolen or unclaimed.
B. With respect to vehicles on private property, the Chief of Police shall
serve, or cause to be served, a notice in writing, either personally or by
certified mail, upon the owner, tenant, lessee or occupant of the
property, requiring such owner, tenant, lessee or occupant, as the case
may be, to remove such vehicle within a certain period of time not less
than 15 days after the date of service, to be specified in the notice. In
the event that such vehicle is not removed within the time specified, the
Chief of Police may impound the vehicle and for that purpose may enter
upon private property upon which the vehicle may be located.
C. Any vehicle impounded pursuant to any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be held until lawfully claimed or disposed of in accordance with
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:10A-1 et seq.
§ 239-3 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 239-6
239:470
§ 239-6. Interpretation.
No act, illegal or forbidden under any other ordinance of the borough, shall
be made lawful by reason of the provisions of this chapter.
Chapter 242
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Towing — See Ch. 227.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 239.
Off-road vehicles — See Ch. 245.
Overnight parking of commercial
vehicles — See § 255-42.
§ 242-1. Words and phrases.
As used in this chapter, words and phrases concerning traffic shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in N.J.S.A. 39:1-1.
§ 242-2. Parking.
A. Regulations not exclusive. The provisions of this chapter imposing a
time limit on parking shall not relieve any person of the duty to observe
other more restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping,
standing or parking of vehicles as set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138, any
other New Jersey statute or as hereinafter provided.
B. Parking prohibited during state of emergency.
(1) Upon the declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking
upon streets or sections of streets where temporary emergency no
parking signs are displayed. The Chief of Police or, in his absence,
the ranking police officer is authorized to declare an emergency
and to direct the posting of EMERGENCY NO PARKING signs when
weather conditions, accidents, fires, public celebrations, etc.,
dictate or require the avoidance of hazards or other conditions
which interfere with the free flow of traffic. Notification that
EMERGENCY NO PARKING signs are being or will be posted shall
be given to the operator or owner of any vehicle which has been
parked prior to the posting of the signs.
(2) Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this
section shall be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and
proper regulation of traffic, and any police officer may provide for
the removal of such vehicle. The owner shall pay the reasonable
costs of removal and storage which may result from such removal
before regaining possession of the vehicle.
§ 239-6 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 242-2
239:471
(3) The effectiveness of this section is contingent upon signs being
erected as required by law.
C. Parking prohibited at all times on certain streets. No person shall park
a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule I attached to and made a part of this chapter.
D. Parking prohibited during certain hours during certain months. No
person shall park a vehicle between the hours of 2:00 am. and 6:00
a.m., from November 15 to April 1 on any street or road in the Borough.
E. Parking during certain hours on certain days prohibited. No person
shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts of
streets between those hours specified in Schedule II attached to and
made a part of this chapter.
F. One-hour parking during certain hours on certain days. No person shall
park a vehicle for longer than one hour upon any of the streets or parts
of streets between those hours specified in Schedule IIA attached to
and made a part of this chapter. [Added 4-15-2002 by Ord. No.
787-0241]
G. Parking prohibited on certain property. No person, other than
emergency personnel, including but not limited to Fire Department and
first aid corps members, shall park a vehicle on property situated in
easterly direction from the Old Tappan Fire House, along Russell
Avenue, or on the first aid corps building property, known as Lot 2 in
Block 1605, and Lot 3 in Block 1604, respectively, as shown on the
current Tax Assessment Map of the Borough.
H. Restricted parking spaces.
(1) Signs; location. Pursuant to the provision of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.5,
restricted parking spaces for use by handicapped persons (as
defined in N.J.S.A. 39:4-205) are hereby established, as described
in Schedule VIII attached to and made a part of this chapter.
Handicapped parking signs shall be installed adjacent to or on the
surface of such parking spaces at the expense of the owner of the
premises. If the premises have barrier-free entrances or other such
facilities for the handicapped, such restricted parking spaces shall
be located as near as possible to such barrier-free entrances of
facilities. Otherwise, such restricted parking spaces shall be as
near as possible to any public entrance to the premises.
(2) Restricted use. No person, other than a person who has been
issued a handicapped person identification card by the Division of
Motor Vehicles pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-205, and
who is using a motor vehicle on which is displayed a placard or
license plate bearing the national wheelchair symbol issued by the
41.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former § 242-2F through J as § 242-2G
through K, respectively.
§ 242-2 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 242-2
239:472
Director of the Division of Motor Vehicles pursuant to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-206, shall park in restricted parking
spaces designated for handicapped persons.
(3) Unauthorized parking; penalty. Any person parking a motor vehicle
in a restricted parking space as set forth in Schedule VIII, without
having a placard or license plate bearing the national wheelchair
symbol issued pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-206, shall be liable to a
penalty of not more than $100. [Amended 12-15-2003 by Ord.
No. 838-03]
(4) Failure to maintain; penalty. Any owner, tenant or occupant of
premises as set forth in Schedule VIII, who shall fail to install and
maintain handicapped parking signs pursuant to Subsection H
herein shall be subject to a penalty of not more than $250. Each day
that the owner, tenant or occupant fails to satisfy the requirements
of this subsection shall constitute a separate violation.
I. Parking prohibited in fire lanes. No person shall at any time park a
motor vehicle or in any other manner obstruct any driveway or area
that has been designated as a fire lane or zone pursuant to Chapter 131,
Fire Prevention, § 131-6 of the Code of the Borough of Old Tappan.
J. Reserved parking spaces. No person other than the Mayor, the six
members of Council, the Borough Clerk and the Tax Collector shall, at
any time, park a motor vehicle or in any manner obstruct any parking
space that has been designated as reserved for these municipal officials
in the Borough Hall parking lot off Russell Avenue.
K. Parking permitted in yard areas under certain conditions. [Added
7-24-2000 by Ord. No. 718-00]
(1) Other than with respect to planned residential developments, the
parking of motor vehicles shall be permitted in residential zones or
on property lawfully used for residential purposes only under the
following conditions:
(a) Parking shall only be permitted in an enclosed garage or on
any driveway or in a front yard area or side yard area as
specified herein.
(b) Parking shall not be permitted in any rear yard area except in
an enclosed garage or on any driveway.
(c) Parking in any front yard area or side yard area shall only be
permitted, provided that:
[1] Said parking space or spaces within a permitted yard area
are situated a minimum of 10 feet from any side lot line,
and 10 feet from any front lot line, which front lot line shall
be measured at the curb of the street on which the
property fronts; and
§ 242-2 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 242-2
239:473
§ 242-3. Traffic regulations.
[2] The surface for such parking space or spaces is
constructed of impervious materials; and
[3] The percentage of impervious materials comprising any
front yard area utilized for parking shall not exceed 25% of
the total front yard area.
(d) Nothing contained herein is intended to preclude parking on
driveways.
(2) The parking of motor vehicles shall be permitted in the B-1 Local
Business District, the B-2 Office District, on property lawfully used
for business, office or commercial purposes, or in a planned
residential development only under the following conditions:
(a) Parking shall only be permitted in an enclosed garage, on any
driveway, in a rear yard area, or in a front yard area or side
yard area as specified herein.
(b) Parking in any front yard area or side yard area shall only be
permitted, provided that:
[1] Said parking space or spaces within a permitted yard area
are situated a minimum of 10 feet from any side lot line,
and 10 feet from any front lot line, which front lot line shall
be measured at the curb of the street on which the
property fronts; and
[2] The surface for such parking space or spaces is
constructed of impervious materials; and
[3] The size and location of such parking space or spaces have
been approved by the Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment, as the case may be, in connection with its
review of a site plan application for said property.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained herein, parking in a yard area
other than as specifically limited herein shall be permitted,
provided that a site plan design waiver has been granted by the
Planning Board as the case may be. [Amended 2-19-2002 by Ord.
No. 773-02]
L. Parking restricted at Oakes Park. No person, other than persons
utilizing park facilities, shall park a vehicle in the parking lot at Oakes
Park, located on Central Avenue, and shown as Block 1101, Lots 17 and
18, on the current Tax Assessment Map of the Borough. [Added
4-17-2006 by Ord. No. 910-06]
A. Through streets. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the
streets or parts of streets described in Schedule III, attached to and
made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as through streets.
§ 242-2 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 242-3
239:474
§ 242-4. Bi-State Plaza Shopping Center.
STOP signs shall be installed on the near right side of each street
intersecting the through street except where YIELD signs are provided
for in the designations.
B. Stop intersections. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the
intersections described in Schedule IV, attached to and made a part of
this chapter, are hereby designated as stop intersections. STOP signs
shall be installed as provided therein.
C. Yield intersections. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the
intersections described in Schedule V, attached to and made a part of
this chapter, are hereby designated as yield intersections. YIELD signs
shall be installed as provided therein.
D. Left turns prohibited. No person shall make a left turn at any of the
locations described in Schedule VI, attached to and made a part of this
chapter.
E. Speed limits. The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule VII,
attached to and made a part of this chapter, shall have speed limits as
set forth therein. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and
maintained as required by the Division of Motor Vehicles.
F. Lane use restrictions. The streets or parts of streets described in
Schedule IX, attached to and made a part of this chapter, shall have lane
use restrictions as set forth herein.
G. Stopping or standing prohibited. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle
at any time upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in
Schedule X, attached hereto and by reference made a part hereof.
H. No turn on red. No person shall make a right turn upon a "Stop" or
"Caution" signal at any of the locations described in Schedule XI,
attached hereto and by reference made a part hereof.
I. Stopping or standing prohibited. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle
upon any of the streets or parts of streets between those hours specified
in Schedule XII, attached to and made a part of this chapter. [Added
9-20-2004 by Ord. No. 860-04]
A. Applicability of state traffic regulations. The provisions of Subtitle 1,
Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey be and hereby are made
applicable to the semipublic or private roads, streets, driveways,
sidewalks, parking lots or other roadways open to or used by the public,
tenants and employees for purposes of vehicular travel located on or
within the Bi-State Plaza Shopping Center.
B. Parking. No operator of a vehicle in or upon the Bi-State Plaza Shopping
Center shall stand or park such vehicle in other than a designated
§ 242-3 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 242-4
239:475
§ 242-5. Lake View at Old Tappan Development.
parking area and between painted lines as indicated on the site plan
attached hereto and made a part hereof.
A. Applicability of state traffic regulations. The provisions of Subtitle 1,
Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey be and hereby are made
applicable to the semipublic or private roads, streets, driveways,
sidewalks, parking lots or other roadways open to or used by the public
for purposes of vehicular travel located within the Lake View at Old
Tappan development, shown as Lot 1 in Block 3000 on the Tax Map of
the Borough of Old Tappan.
B. General parking.
(1) All vehicles must park in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
(2) No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon the entire length of
Road "A," Road "B," Road "C," Road "D," or Lakeview Drive at any
time. Road "A," Road "B," Road "C," and Road "D" and Lakeview
Drive are as shown on the site plan for the Lakeview at Old Tappan
development which is incorporated by reference herein and is
available at the Borough Clerk's office in the Borough Hall.
(3) Handicapped parking. All stalls shall be signed with R7-8P
(reserved parking sign and penalty plate) in the designated parking
areas for persons who have been issued the handicapped parking
permits by the Division of Motor Vehicles.
C. Stop intersections. The following described intersection is hereby
designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided herein:
Intersection Stop Sign(s) On
Lakeview Drive and Road "A" Road "A"
D. One-way streets. The following described streets or parts of streets are
hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction indicated:
Name of Street Direction Limits
Road "A" East Entire length
Road "B" South Entire length
Road "C" North Entire length
Road "D" South Entire length
E. Speed limits.
(1) The speed limit for both directions of travel on the entire length of
all roads is 25 miles per hour.
§ 242-4 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 242-5
239:476
§ 242-6. The Village at Old Tappan Development.
(2) Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to
effect the above designated speed limits authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
F. Tow away. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a
normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil
fills, any grassy area, pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a
safety or traffic hazard may be removed by towing the vehicle at the
owner's or operator's expense.
G. Authorized vehicles only. No other vehicle than an authorized vehicle
shall enter the fire access roadway.
A. Provisions of Title 39 applicable. The provisions of Subtitle 1 of Title 39
of the Revised Statutes of the State of New Jersey are applicable to the
semipublic roads, streets, driveways and parking lots at the
development known as The Village at Old Tappan.
B. General parking.
(1) All vehicles must park in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
(2) Handicapped parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on
the attached site plan42 and signed with the R7-8 and R7-8P
(reserved parking sign and penalty plate), in the designated
parking areas for persons who have been issued the handicapped
parking permits by the Division of Motor Vehicles.
C. Through streets. The following streets or parts of streets are hereby
designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the near
right side of each street intersecting the through street, except where
yield signs are provided for in the designation.
Name of Street Limits
Spring Hollow Road Entire length
Woods Edge Road Entire length
D. Stop intersections. The following described intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided therein:
42.Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
Borough Clerk.
§ 242-5 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 242-6
239:477
Intersection Stop Sign(s) On
Orangeburgh Road North and
Spring Hollow Road
Spring Hollow Road
Orangeburgh Road North and
Woods Edge Road
Woods Edge Road
Pheasant Run and Quail Run Quail Run
Pheasant Run and Spring Hollow
Road [Added 11-19-2001 by
Ord. No. 768-01]
Pheasant Run and Spring Hollow
Road
Spring Hollow Road and Woods
Edge Road [Added 11-19-2001
by Ord. No. 768-01]
Woods Edge Road
Woods Edge Road and Pheasant
Run [Added 11-19-2001 by
Ord. No. 768-01]
Pheasant Run
Woods Edge Road and Quail Run Quail Run [Added 11-19-2001 by
Ord. No. 768-01]
E. Speed limits.
(1) The speed limit for both directions of travel on the entire length of
all roads is 25 miles per hour.
(2) Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to
effect the above designated speed limits authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
F. Tow-away zones. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or
impede a normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading
zones, oil fills, any grassy area, pedestrian walkway, or present in any
way a safety or traffic hazard may be removed by towing the vehicle at
the owner's expense.
G. Turn prohibitions. No person shall make a turn at any location listed
and only in the manner described:
Intersection
Turn
Prohibition Movement Prohibited
Orangeburgh Road
North and Woods
Edge Road
Left From eastbound on Woods
Edge Road to northbound
on Orangeburgh Road
North
H. Installation of signs, posts or other materials. All signs, posts, or other
necessary materials shall be installed and paid for by The Village at Old
Tappan Condominium Association or its successor in interest. All
signing shall conform to the current Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and N.J.S.A. 39:4-183.27.
§ 242-6 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 242-7
239:478
§ 242-7. Foxwood Estates at Old Tappan Development. [Added
5-22-2000 by Ord. No. 721-00]
A. Provisions of Title 39 applicable. The provisions of Subtitle 1 of Title 39
of the Revised Statutes of the State of New Jersey are applicable to the
semipublic roads, streets, driveways and parking lots at the
development known as Foxwood Estates at Old Tappan.
B. General parking.
(1) All vehicles must park in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
(2) No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or
parts of streets described below:
Name of Street Sides Hours Length
Knickerbocker
Lane
Both 8:00 a.m. to 10
a.m. on school
days
Entire length
Roads "A" and
"B"
Both All Entire length
(3) Handicapped parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on
the attached site plan and signed with the R7-8 and R7-8P
(reserved parking sign and penalty plate), in the designated
parking areas for persons who have been issued the handicapped
parking permits by the Division of Motor Vehicles.
C. Through streets. The following streets or parts of streets are hereby
designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the near
right side of each street intersecting the through street, except where
yield signs are provided for in the designation:
Name of Street Limits
Road "A" Entire length
D. Speed limits.
(1) The speed limit for both directions of travel on the entire length of
all roads is 15 miles per hour.
(2) Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to
effect the above designated speed limits authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
E. Tow-away zones. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or
impede a normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading
zones, oil fills, any grassy area, pedestrian walkway, or present in any
way a safety or traffic hazard may be removed by towing the vehicle at
the owner's expense.
§ 242-7 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 242-7.1
239:479
§ 242-7.1. Winding Creek at Old Tappan Development. [Added
12-19-2005 by Ord. No. 899-05]
A. Provisions of Title 39 applicable. The provisions of Subtitle One of Title
39 of the Revised Statutes of the State of New Jersey are applicable to
the semipublic roads, streets, driveways and parking lots at the
development known as Winding Creek at Old Tappan.
B. General parking.
(1) All vehicles must park in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
(2) No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or
parts of streets described below, except in areas covered by other
parking restrictions:
Name of
Street Side Hours Length
All roads and
aisles
Both All Entire length
(3) Handicapped parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on
the site plan and signed with the R7-8 and R7-8P (reserved parking
sign and penalty plate), in the designated parking areas for persons
who have been issued the handicapped parking permits by the
Division of Motor Vehicles.
C. Through streets. The following streets or parts of streets are hereby
designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the near
right side of each street intersecting the through street, except where
yield signs are provided for in the designation:
Name of Street Limits
Winding Creek Way Entire length
D. Stop intersections. The following described intersections are hereby
designated stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as provided
therein.
Intersection Stop signs on
Winding Creek Way and Central
Avenue (both intersects)
Winding Creek Way
E. Speed limits.
(1) The speed limit for both directions of travel on the entire length of
all roads is 15 miles per hour.
(2) Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to
effect the above-designated speed limits authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
§ 242-7.1 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 242-7.1
239:480
§ 242-8. Traffic control devices.
§ 242-9. Drunk-driving-free school zones. [Added 10-23-2000 by
Ord. No. 728-00]
F. Tow-away zones. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or
impede a normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading
zones, oil fills, any grassy area, pedestrian walkway, or present in any
way a safety or traffic hazard may be removed by towing the vehicle at
the owner's or operator's expense.
G. All signs, posts or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid
for by Winding Creek at Old Tappan Condominium Association or its
successor in interest. All signing shall conform to the current Manual
on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and
N.J.S.A. 39:4-183.27.
A. Installation and maintenance. The property owner, tenant or occupant
of property shall be responsible for the installation and maintenance of
any and all traffic control devices on his or her property at his or her
own expense, including but not limited to signs and pavement
markings.
B. Recommendations of Chief of Police. The Chief of Police may
recommend to the Mayor and Council that a property owner, tenant or
occupant install any traffic control device which is deemed necessary or
in furtherance of the safe and efficient flow of traffic in accordance with
this chapter and Title 39 of the New Jersey statutes.
C. Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. All traffic control devices
installed or maintained in accordance with this section shall conform to
the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
A. Designation of school crossings. In accordance with P.L. 1999, Ch. 185
(N.J.S.A. 2C:11-5 et seq.), the following is a list of school crossings
which have been so designated by the Borough:
(1) Central Avenue and Haring Drive;
(2) Central Avenue and Northern Valley Regional High School;
(3) Old Tappan Road and Charles DeWolf School;
(4) Old Tappan Road and Washington Avenue;
(5) Washington Avenue and Herrick Drive;
(6) Charles Place and School Street;
(7) DeBerg Drive (behind T. Baldwin Demarest School);
(8) T. Baldwin Demarest School parking lot;
(9) Northern Valley Regional High School parking lot; and
§ 242-7.1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 242-9
239:481
(10) Charles DeWolf School parking lot.
B. Adoption of map. The Drunk-Driving-Free School Zones Map dated
September 25, 2000, as prepared by Thomas W. Skrable, P.E., the
Borough Engineer, is hereby approved and adopted as an official finding
and record of the location and areas within the Borough of property
which is used for school purposes and which is owned by or leased to
any elementary or secondary school on school land and of the areas on
or within 1,000 feet of such school property.43
C. Map and list to constitute official findings. The Drunk-Driving-Free
School Zones Map approved and adopted pursuant to Subsection B of
this section shall continue to constitute an official finding and record as
to the location and boundaries of areas on or within 1,000 feet of
property owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or
school board which is used for school purposes until such time, if any,
that this section shall be amended to reflect any additions or deletions
with respect to the location and boundaries of school property and
drunk-driving-free school zones. The list of school crossings designated
above by the Borough continue to constitute an official finding and
record of the location of school crossing zones within the Borough until
such time, if any, that this section shall be amended to reflect any
additions or deletions with respect to school crossing zones in the
Borough.
D. Changes in locations or boundaries. The school board, or the chief
administrative officer in the case of any private or parochial school, is
hereby directed and shall have the continuing obligation to promptly
notify the office of the Borough Engineer and the Borough Attorney of
any changes or contemplated changes in the location and boundaries of
any property owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school
or school board and which is used for school purposes or of any
additions or deletions to school crossings.
E. Original map and list to be on file; copies. The Borough Clerk is hereby
directed to receive and to keep on file the original of the map approved
and adopted pursuant to Subsection B of this section and the list of
school crossings and to provide at a reasonable cost a true copy thereof
to any person, agency or court which may from time to time request
such a copy, along with a certification that such copy is a true copy of
the map approved and adopted herein and kept on file. It is hereby
further directed that a true copy of such map and list and of this section
shall be provided without cost to the Bergen County Clerk and to the
office of the Bergen County Prosecutor.
F. Map and list as evidence. It is understood that the map and list
approved and adopted pursuant to this section was prepared and is
intended to be used as evidence in prosecutions arising under the
43.Editor's Note: The map is on file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
§ 242-9 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 242-9
239:482
§ 242-10. Violations and penalties.
§ 242-11. Schedule I: No Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 242-2C, no person shall park a
vehicle at any time upon any of the following described streets or parts of
streets:
Name of Street Sides Location
Chestnut Avenue North West of intersection with
Orangeburgh Road for a distance
of 775 feet
Forest Avenue [Added
9-24-2001 by Ord.
No. 764-01]
North From the west curb of Westwood
Avenue west for a distance of 120
feet
Forest Avenue [Added
9-24-2001 by Ord.
No. 764-01]
South From the west curb of Westwood
Avenue west for a distance of 150
feet
Irving Street North From Russell Avenue to Leonard
Drive
criminal and traffic laws of this state and that, pursuant to state law,
such map and list shall constitute prima facie evidence of the following:
(1) The location of elementary and secondary schools within the
Borough.
(2) The boundaries of the real property which is owned by or leased to
such schools or a school board.
(3) That such school property is and continues to be used for school
purposes.
(4) The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within 1,000
feet of such school property.
(5) The location of all school crossings in the Borough.
A. General penalty. Unless another penalty is expressly provided herein or
by statute, any person convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be
liable to a penalty of not more than $100 or imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 15, days or both. Each day that the person is in violation of
this chapter shall constitute a separate violation. [Amended 9-7-2004
by Ord. No. 859-04]
B. Penalty for failure to maintain. Any person convicted of a violation of
§ 242-8 of this chapter shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $250
or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both. Each day
the person is in violation of said section shall constitute a separate
violation.
§ 242-9 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 242-11
239:483
Name of Street Sides Location
Irving Street
[Amended 5-5-2003
by Ord. No. 823-03]
South From the intersection of DeBerg
Drive east for a distance of 440
feet
Irving Street South From the east curb of Russell
Avenue west for a distance of 235
feet
Knickerbocker Lane Both From the south curb of Central
Avenue south for a distance of 135
feet
Maple Street [Added
7-28-2010 by Ord.
No. 1015-10]
East Maple Street from Chestnut
Avenue North to its terminus
Russell Avenue East From the south curb of Demarest
Lane south for a distance of 75 feet
Russell Avenue East From the north curb of Irving
Street north for a distance of 50
feet
Russell Avenue East From the intersection of Old
Tappan Road south for a distance
of 110 feet
Russell Avenue West From the north curb of Irving
Street north for a distance of 770
feet
Russell Avenue West From the intersection of Old
Tappan Road south for a distance
of 80 feet
Westwood Avenue East From a point 334.52 feet north
from the Old Tappan - River Vale
boundary line, north for a distance
of 850 feet
Westwood Avenue
[Added 11-19-2001
by Ord. No. 768-01]
West From the north curb of Forest
Avenue north for a distance of 75
feet
Westwood Avenue
[Added 11-19-2001
by Ord. No. 768-01]
West From the south curb of Forest
Avenue south for a distance of 75
feet
§ 242-12. Schedule II: Parking During Certain Hours on Certain
Days Prohibited.
In accordance with § 242-2E, no person shall park a vehicle between the
hours specified upon any of the following described streets or parts of
streets:
§ 242-11 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 242-12
239:484
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
Charles Place
[Added
4-15-2002 by
Ord. No.
786-02;
repealed
6-3-2002 by
Ord. No.
792-2002]
Charles Place
[Added
8-18-2014 by
Ord. No.
1071-14]
East 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.
and 2:00 p.m. to 4:00
p.m.; school days
From Kay Street to
Irving Street
Charles Place
[Amended
4-6-2009 by
Ord. No.
984-09]
East 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.
and 2:00 p.m. to 4:00
p.m.; school days
From the north curb
of Kay Street to Old
Tappan Road
Charlotte Place
[Added
4-15-2002 by
Ord. No.
786-02;
repealed
6-3-2002 by
Ord. No.
792-2002]
Demarest Lane 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m.; school days
Entire length of
street
Doris Place
[Added
4-15-2002 by
Ord. No.
786-02;
repealed
6-3-2002 by
Ord. No.
792-2002]
Elena Drive
[Repealed
4-19-2004 by
Ord. No.
844-04]
§ 242-12 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 242-12
239:485
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
Haring Drive
[Repealed
4-19-2004 by
Ord. No.
844-04]
Herrick Drive
[Added
5-21-2012 by
Ord. No.
1047-12]
South One-hour parking
8:00 a.m. to 2:00
p.m.; school days
Entire length of
street
Howard Drive
[Added
4-15-2002 by
Ord. No.
786-02;
repealed
6-3-2002 by
Ord. No.
792-2002]
Howard Drive
[Repealed
5-20-2002 by
Ord. No.
790-2002]
Howard Drive
[Repealed
5-20-2002 by
Ord. No.
790-2002]
Howard Drive
Spur [Added
4-15-2002 by
Ord. No.
786-02;
repealed
6-3-2002 by
Ord. No.
792-2002]
Irving Street
[Added
5-20-2002 by
Ord. No.
790-02]
North 8:00 a.m. to 2:00
p.m.; school days
From the west curb
of Leonard Drive
westerly to the east
curb of DeBerg Drive
§ 242-12 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 242-12
239:486
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
Irving Street
[Added
5-20-2002 by
Ord. No.
790-02]
South 8:00 a.m. to 2:00
p.m.; school days
From the east curb of
DeBerg Drive
easterly for a
distance of 150 feet
Irving Street
[Added
5-20-2002 by
Ord. No.
790-02]
South 8:00 a.m. to 2:00
p.m.; school days
From the west curb
of Howard Drive
westerly for a
distance of 350 feet
Irving Street
[Repealed
5-20-2002 by
Ord. No.
790-2002]
Irving Street
[Repealed
6-3-2002 by
Ord. No.
792-2002]
Kay Street
[Added
9-8-2010 by
Ord. No.
1019-10]
North 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.
and 2:00 p.m. to 4:00
p.m.; school days
Entire length of
street
Knickerbocker
Lane Repealed
9-20-2004 by
Ord. No.
860-04]
Pearl Court
[Added
4-15-2002 by
Ord. No.
786-02;
repealed
6-3-2002 by
Ord. No.
792-2002]
§ 242-12 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 242-12
239:487
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
Phyllis Drive
[Added
4-15-2002 by
Ord. No.
786-02;
repealed
6-3-2002 by
Ord. No.
792-2002]
Russell Avenue
[Amended
9-20-2004 by
Ord. No.
860-04]
East 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m.; school days
From the north curb
of Demarest Lane
northerly to Old
Tappan Road
School Street Both 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m.; school days
Entire length of
street
§ 242-13. Schedule IIA: One-Hour Parking During Certain Hours on
Certain Days. [Added 4-15-2002 by Ord. No. 787-02]
In accordance with § 242-2F, no person shall park a vehicle for longer than
one hour upon any of the streets or parts of streets between those hours
specified:
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
Charles Place
[Amended
3-2-2009 by
Ord. No.
981-09]
Both 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.;
school days
Entire length of street -
north of Irving Street field
(except from the north
curb of Kay Street to Old
Tappan Road)
Charles Place
[Added
6-3-2002 by
Ord. No.
792-02]
Both 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.;
school days
Entire length of street -
south of Irving Street field
Charlotte Place
[Added
6-3-2002 by
Ord. No.
792-02]
Both 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.;
school days
Entire length of street
Doris Place
[Added
6-3-2002 by
Ord. No.
792-02]
Both 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.;
school days
Entire length of street
§ 242-12 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 242-13
239:488
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
Elena Drive
[Added
10-20-2003 by
Ord. No.
830-03]
Both 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.;
school days
Entire length of street
Haring Drive
West [Added
10-20-2003 by
Ord. No.
830-03]
Both 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m; school
days
Entire length of street
Howard Drive
[Added
6-3-2002 by
Ord. No.
792-02]
Both 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.;
school days
Entire length of street
Howard Drive
Spur between
Charlotte Place
and Charles
Place on north
side of Howard
Drive [Added
6-3-2002 by
Ord. No.
792-02]
Both 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.;
school days
Entire length of street
Irving Street
[Added
6-3-2002 by
Ord. No.
792-02]
North 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.;
school days
From the west curb of
Leonard Drive westerly to
the east curb of DeBerg
Drive
Irving Street
[Added
6-3-2002 by
Ord. No.
792-02]
South 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.;
school days
From the east curb of
DeBerg Drive easterly for
a distance of 150 feet
Irving Street
[Added
6-3-2002 by
Ord. No.
792-02]
South 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.;
school days
From the west curb of
Howard Drive westerly for
a distance of 350 feet
Kay Street Both 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.;
school days
Entire length of street
§ 242-13 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 242-13
239:489
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
Knickerbocker
Lane [Added
9-20-2004 by
Ord. No.
860-04]
Both 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.;
school days
From a point 135 feet
south of the curb of
Central Avenue south for
the entire length of
Knickerbocker Lane
Leonard Drive Both 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.;
school days
Entire length of street
Parker Place
[Added
10-20-2003 by
Ord. No.
830-03]
Both 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.;
school days
Entire length of street
Pearl Court
[Added
6-3-2002 by
Ord. No.
792-02]
Both 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.;
school days
Entire length of street
Phyllis Drive
[Added
6-3-2002 by
Ord. No.
792-02]
Both 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.;
school days
Entire length of street
Russell Avenue
[Added
5-16-2005 by
Ord. No.
884-05]
West 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.;
school days
From the west curb of Old
Tappan Road southerly for
a distance of 745 feet
§ 242-14. Schedule III: Through Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 242-3A, the following described
streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as through streets. STOP
signs shall be installed on the near right side of each street intersecting the
through street.
Name of Street Location
DeWolf Road Between Orangeburg Road and Old Tappan
Road
Irving Street Between DeBerg Drive and Russell Avenue
§ 242-15. Schedule IV: Stop Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 242-3B, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as STOP intersections:
§ 242-13 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 242-15
239:490
Intersection Stop Sign Installed On
Birchwood Road and Country Squire
Road
Country Squire Road
Birchwood Road and Old Crown Road
[Added 8-19-2002 by Ord. No.
800-02]
Birchwood Road
Churchill Road and Ogle Road [Added
8-16-2010 by Ord. No. 1018-10]
Churchill Road
Dearborn Drive and Moeser Place Moeser Place
Forest Avenue and Walter Street Walter Street
Haring Drive and Wilbur Road [Added
9-2-2008 by Ord. No. 973-08]
Wilbur Road
Heritage Road and Wescott Street
[Added 9-2-2008 by Ord. No. 973-08]
Wescott Street
Howard Drive and Pearl Court [Added
9-19-2005 by Ord. No. 893-05]
Howard Drive
Howard Place and Charles Place Charles Place
Irving Street and DeBerg Drive [Added
4-15-2002 by Ord. No. 785-02]
Irving Street
Kay Street and Charles Place [Added
4-15-2002 by Ord. No. 785-02]
Kay Street
Kay Street and Leonard Drive [Added
4-15-2002 by Ord. No. 785-02]
Kay Street
Lachmund Court and DeBerg Drive
[Added 4-15-2002 by Ord. No.
785-02]
DeBerg Drive at both
intersections with Lachmund
Court
Ogle Road and Greenwoods Road Greenwoods Road
Old Farm Road and Dearborn Drive
[Added 10-6-2008 by Ord. No.
974-08]
Old Farm Road
Old Farm Road and Haring Drive
[Added 10-6-2008 by Ord. No.
974-08]
Old Farm Road
Phyllis Drive and Pearl Court Pearl Court
Pine Hill Road and Churchill Road
[Added 2-1-2010 by Ord. No.
1002-10]
Pine Hill Road
Walter Street and Edith Street Edith Street
Wescott Street and Heritage Road
[Added 9-2-2008 by Ord. No. 973-08]
Heritage Road
§ 242-15 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 242-15
239:491
Intersection Stop Sign Installed On
Willow Drive and Birchwood Road Northerly approach of
Birchwood Road facing
southbound traffic
§ 242-16. Schedule V: Yield Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 242-3C, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as yield intersections:
(Reserved)
§ 242-17. Schedule VI: Left Turns Prohibited.
In accordance with the provisions of § 242-3D, no person shall make a left
turn at any of the following locations:
From School Street on to Charles Street during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m. on school days.
From the middle driveway to the Bi-State Plaza Shopping Center, located
420 feet west of the west curb of Central Avenue at the intersection of Old
Tappan Road and Central Avenue, to east on Old Tappan Road.
§ 242-18. Schedule VII: Speed Limits.
In accordance with the provisions of § 242-3E, the following speeds are
hereby established:
Name of Street Direction
Maximum Speed Limit
(mph)
DeWolf Road Both 35
Washington Avenue North Both 35
§ 242-19. Schedule VIII: Handicapped Parking. [Amended
3-19-2007 by Ord. No. 933-07]
A. In accordance with the provisions of § 242-2H, the following described
parking spaces are hereby designated as restricted parking spaces for
the use of handicapped persons:
Location No. of Spaces
Banks
Bank of America, 211 Old
Tappan Road, Block 1605, Lot
6
2
West Essex Bank, 207 Old
Tappan Road, Block 1101, Lot
1
1
§ 242-15 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 242-19
239:492
Location No. of Spaces
Municipal facilities
Borough Hall, 227 Old Tappan
Road, Block 1605, Lot 3
4
Old Tappan Library, 56 Russell
Avenue, Block 1504, Lot 10
3
Police Headquarters, 247 Old
Tappan Road, Block 1603, Lot
1
1
Old Tappan Golf Course, 83
DeWolf Road, Block 501, Lot 1
2
Oakes Park, Central Avenue,
Block 1101, Lots 17-18
1
Stone Point Park, Westwood
Avenue, Block 1902, Lot 15
3
Chestnut Avenue Field,
Chestnut Avenue, Block 1201,
Lot 4
1
Office buildings
Old Tappan Medical Group,
215 Old Tappan Road, Block
1605, Lot 4
3
One DeWolf Road, Block 701,
Lot 14.01
4
Pearson Technology, 200 Old
Tappan Road, Block 1606, Lot
7
14
Valley Office Park, 184 Central
Avenue, Block 1605, Lot 7
4
Retail shops
Bi-State Pharmacy, 173 Old
Tappan Road, Block 1102, Lot
3
1
Bi-State Plaza, 216 Old Tappan
Road, Block 1606, Lot 6
5
Restaurants
Charlie Brown's Restaurant,
203 Old Tappan Road, Block
1101, Lot 2
5
Colonial Manor, 137
Orangeburg Road, Block 803,
Lot 8
1
§ 242-19 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 242-19
239:493
Location No. of Spaces
Parmigiano's, 183 Old Tappan
Road, Block 1102, Lot 1
2
Planned residential developments
Foxwoods at Old Tappan,
Knickerbocker Lane, Block
1302, Lot 7
2
Lakeview at Old Tappan, Old
Tappan Road, Block 3000, Lot
13
1
The Village at Old Tappan,
Orangeburgh Road, Block
602.01
4
Winding Creek, Central
Avenue, Block 1301, Lot 9
2
Houses of worship
Presbyterian Church of the
Palisades, 244 Old Tappan
Road, Block 1606, Lot 3
2
Prince of Peace Lutheran
Church, 3 Haring Drive, Block
1003, Lot 6
2
St. Pius Church, 268 Old
Tappan Road, Block 1702, Lot
7
6
Schools
Charles DeWolf School, 275
Old Tappan Road, Block 1703,
Lot 17
4
T. Baldwin Demarest School,
School Street, Block 1703, Lot
17
3
Northern Valley Regional High
School, Central Avenue, Block
1505, Lot 9
2
Miscellaneous
Kindercare, 176 Old Tappan
Road, Block 701, Lot 14.02
3
Sunrise Assisted Living, 195
Old Tappan Road, Block 1105,
Lot 5
2
§ 242-19 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 242-19
239:494
§ 242-20. Schedule IX: Lane Use Restrictions.
In accordance with the provisions of § 242-3F, the following traffic lanes
shall be reserved for the propose stated:
Old Tappan Road and Central Avenue: Bi-State Plaza Shopping Center
entrances
The left lanes of Old Tappan Road's east and west approaches at
Central Avenue shall be for left turns only.
The right lanes of Old Tappan Road's east and west approaches at
Central Avenue shall be for right turns only.
The left lanes of Old Tappan Road's west approach to the entrances to
the Bi-State Plaza shall be for left turns only.
The left lane of Central Avenue's south approach at Old Tappan Road
and the left lane of the Bi-State Plaza Shopping Center driveway
north approach at Old Tappan Road opposite Central Avenue shall be
for left turns only.
The right lanes of Old Tappan Road's east approach at the two
driveways to the Bi-State Plaza Shopping Center west of the
intersection of Old Tappan Road and Central Avenue shall be for right
turns only.
Old Tappan Road and Washington Avenue
The left lanes of Old Tappan Road's east and west approaches at
Washington Avenue shall be for left turns only.
The left lanes of Washington Avenue's north and south approaches at
Old Tappan Road shall be for left turns only.
Old Tappan Road and driveways on south side of Old Tappan Road
The left lane of Old Tappan Road's east approach to the driveways on
the south side of Old Tappan Road west of the intersection with
Central Avenue shall be for left turns only.
Old Tappan Road and Russell Avenue
The left lane of Old Tappan Road's east approach to the intersection
of Russell Avenue shall be for left turns only.
Old Tappan Road and DeWolf Road
The left lane of Old Tappan Road's west approach to the intersection
of DeWolf Road shall be for left turns only.
The left lane of DeWolf Road's north approach to the intersection of
Old Tappan Road shall be for left turns only.
B. In addition to the foregoing, parking spaces designated as restricted
parking spaces for the use of handicapped persons on an approved site
plan shall be restricted for the use of handicapped persons.
§ 242-19 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 242-21
239:495
§ 242-21. Schedule X: Stopping and Standing Prohibited.
In accordance with the provisions of § 242-3G, no person shall stop or stand
a vehicle at any time upon any of the following described streets or parts of
streets:
Name of Street Sides Location
Bi-State Plaza driveway
opposite Central
Avenue
East and West From the north curb of Old
Tappan Road, north for a
distance of 90 feet
Central Avenue East and West From the south curb of Old
Tappan Road, south for a
distance of 350 feet
DeBerg Drive [Added
5-5-2003 by Ord. No.
823-03]
East From a point 235 feet north of
the intersection of Irving Street
and continuing for 70 feet in a
northwesterly direction
DeBerg Drive [Added
5-5-2003 by Ord. No.
823-03; repealed
9-20-2004 by Ord.
No. 860-04]
De Berg Drive [Added
5-5-2003 by Ord. No.
823-03; repealed
9-20-2004 by Ord.
No. 860-04]
Old Tappan Road
[Added 8-18-2014 by
Ord. No. 1072-14]
North and
South
From Central Avenue to
Washington Avenue
Old Tappan Road North and
South
From the east curb of Central
Avenue, east for a distance of
500 feet, and from the west curb
of Central Avenue, west for a
distance of 700 feet
Old Tappan Road North and
South
From the east curb of
Washington Avenue, east for a
distance of 400 feet; and from
the west curb of Washington
Avenue, west for a distance of
400 feet
Washington Avenue East and West From the south curb of Old
Tappan Road, south for a
distance of 400 feet; and from
the north curb of Old Tappan
Road, north for a distance of 400
feet
§ 242-21 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 242-22
239:496
§ 242-22. Schedule XI: No Right Turn on Red.
In accordance with the provision of § 242-3H, no person shall make a right
turn upon a "Stop" or "Caution" signal at any of the following locations:
Traveling west on Old Tappan Road turning north into the Bi-State Plaza
Shopping Center
Traveling east on Old Tappan Road running south on Washington Avenue
Traveling north on Washington Avenue turning east on Old Tappan Road
§ 242-23. Schedule II: Stopping and Standing During Certain Hours
on Certain Days Prohibited. [Added 9-20-2004 by Ord. No. 860-04]
In accordance with § 243-3I, no person shall stop or stand a vehicle between
the hours specified upon any of the following described streets or parts of
streets:
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
DeBerg Drive West 8:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m. and 2:00 p.m.
to 4:00 p.m.;
school days
Starting from a point 150
feet south of the
intersection of Irving Street
and continuing along the
curb for a distance of 770
feet
Chapter 245
VEHICLES, MOTORIZED OFF-ROAD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Towing — See Ch. 227. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 242.
§ 245-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to control and regulate off-road motor
vehicles within the borough in order to preserve the public peace and order
and protect the health, safety and welfare of the general public of the
borough.
§ 245-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter:
MOTORCYCLE — Any two-wheeled, motor-propelled apparatus licensed by
the State of New Jersey, Department of Motor Vehicles, for operation upon
the public highways.
§ 242-22 VEHICLES, MOTORIZED OFF-ROAD § 245-2
245:497
MOTORIZED SPORTBIKE: —
PRIVATE PROPERTY — All lands in the borough not defined as public
property or part of the road system.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Lands owned or leased by the borough, the County
of Bergen, the State of New Jersey, the Board of Education of the borough,
or any other equivalent public body, but specifically excluding therefrom
any roadways being used for public transportation and being part of the
accepted road system of the borough, the county, or the state.
UNLICENSED OPERATOR — The operator of any motor vehicle who does
not hold a special license permitting the operation of a motorcycle on
the public highways or the operator of any motorized sportbike who is in
violation of § 245-3B of this chapter.
§ 245-3. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful:
Any two-, three- or four-wheeled bicycle or similar apparatus motorpropelled
or having a helper motor and commonly referred to, among
other designations, as a "moped," "minibike," "go-cart", "all-terrain
vehicle," "trail bike," or the like which, by its nature, is not authorized to
be licensed by the State of New Jersey, Department of Motor Vehicles,
for use upon the public highways, notwithstanding the fact that
licensing of the same in some instances may not be required for
operation upon the public highways.
A.
A snowmobile and any similar sport vehicle which is motor-propelled
and traverses the terrain by means of treads, tracks or the like, all as
contrasted to wheels.
B.
A. To operate a motorized sportbike or motorcycle, as a licensed or
unlicensed operator, on private property other than with the written
consent of all of the owners of said property. When such written consent
has been obtained, the operator shall keep the same on his person for
display to the authorities. The failure to present such written consent
upon request or demand shall constitute a violation hereunder.
B. To operate a motorized sportbike or motorcycle on public or private
property other than in accordance with the general regulations set
forth in § 245-4 of this chapter.
C. To operate a motorized sportbike or motorcycle on public or private
property in such a way as to harass or disturb farm animals, domestic
livestock or wildlife or further to destroy or damage crops, cropland,
soils or vegetation.
D. To operate a motorized sportbike or motorcycle on public or private
property without the same being in "proper operating condition," which
is hereby defined as the presence of all original operating equipment
specified therefor by the original manufacturer or with the same in
§ 245-2 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 245-3
245:498
§ 245-4. Regulations governing operation.
The following regulations shall apply to the operation of a motorized
sportbike or motorcycle operated on public or private property, other than
the property of the family of which the operator is a member:
§ 245-5. Impoundment; duration; cost.
operating condition at least equal to the manufacturer's requirements
for the proper operation thereof or the equivalent thereof.
E. To operate a motorized sportbike or motorcycle on public or private
property in a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger
the safety or property of any person or public or private property, or in
violation of the provisions of Chapter 170, Noise, of the Code of the
Borough of Old Tappan.
A. No person operating a motorized sportbike or motorcycle shall carry
any other person, except in a place designated therefor and equipped
therefor as part of the original manufacture for said purpose, and in no
event shall a rider be carried on the handlebar thereof.
B. It shall not be unlawful for any public employee or other party with an
appropriate permit to operate motor vehicles in said locations for the
purpose of maintaining, repairing or doing work upon said lands for the
public good.
C. This section shall not be applicable to any recognized organization
which has obtained permission from the borough to use said lands for
the sole purpose of holding organized and supervised rallies, races and/
or meets.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle equipped with
a muffler cutout, muffler bypass or similar device.
A. Any police officer may, at his or her discretion:
(1) Impound any motorized sportbike or motorcycle operated on public
or private property alleged to be in violation of this chapter, either
by virtue of its operation and use contrary to the provisions of this
chapter or by virtue of its operation by an unlicensed operator.
(2) Impound any motorized sportbike or motorcycle operating on the
public roadways in violation of any then-applicable state statute or
any regulation validly promulgated by any state agency having
jurisdiction.
B. Said period of impoundment shall be from the date of the alleged
violation until the disposition of the alleged offense by such court of
competent jurisdiction as shall hear the same, and the owner thereof
shall pay the reasonable cost of said removal and storage constituting
impoundment, which cost is as set forth in § 227-5 of Chapter 227,
§ 245-3 VEHICLES, MOTORIZED OFF-ROAD § 245-5
245:499
§ 245-6. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 250
YARD WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Solid waste — See Chs. 209 and 296.
Towing, hereof. The Chief of Police or his designee may authorize early
release. Said expense of impoundment shall be in addition to any other
fine or penalty levied or collected under the terms of this chapter.
A. Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine or
not less than $100 nor more than $1,000, by imprisonment for a term
not to exceed 90 days or by community service of not more than 90
days, or any combination of fine, imprisonment and community service
as determined in the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge. The
continuation of such violation for each successive day shall constitute a
separate offense, and the person or persons allowing or permitting the
continuation of the violation may be punished as provided above for
each separate offense.
B. In addition to all other penalties, the violation of any provision of this
chapter shall be subject to abatement summarily by a restraining order
or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 245-5 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 245-6
250:500
ARTICLE I
Yard Waste Collection Program
§ 250-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish a yard waste collection and
disposal program in the Borough, so as to protect public health, safety and
welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 250-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
CONTAINERIZED — The placement of yard waste in a trash can, bucket,
bag or other vessel, such as to prevent the yard waste from spilling or
blowing out into the street and coming into contact with stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive or
other way which is an existing county or municipal roadway, and includes
the land between the street lines, whether improved or unimproved, and
may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, parking
areas and other areas within the street lines.
YARD WASTE — Leaves and grass clippings.
§ 250-3. Yard waste collection.
Sweeping, raking, blowing or otherwise placing yard waste that is not
containerized at the curb or along the street is only allowed during the
seven days prior to a scheduled and announced collection and shall not
be placed closer than 10 feet from any storm drain inlet. The schedule for
collection of yard waste shall be as determined by the Superintendent of
Public Works. Placement of such yard waste at the curb or along the street
at any other time or in any other manner is a violation of this article. If
such placement of yard waste occurs, the property owner and the party
responsible for placement of the yard waste, if different than the property
owner, must immediately remove the yard waste from the street or said
party shall be deemed in violation of this article.
§ 250-4. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Police Department and
Department of Public Works.
§ 250-1 YARD WASTE § 250-5
250:501
§ 250-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $100. Every day in which a violation
of this chapter exists shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 250-5 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 250-5
250:502
Chapter 255
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Affordable Housing Agency — See Ch. 5.
Planning Board — See Ch. 9, Art. II.
Environmental Commission — See Ch. 9, Art.
VI.
Design Review Committee — See Ch. 30.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 45.
Open Space Advisory Committee — See Ch.
53.
Senior Citizens Advisory Committee — See
Ch. 68.
Shade Tree Advisory Committee — See Ch. 72.
Building construction — See Ch. 100.
Filling stations — See Ch. 122.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 135.
Recycling — See Ch. 209, Art. II.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 218.
Trailer camps — See Ch. 231.
Trees — See Ch. 234.
§ 250-5 YARD WASTE § 250-5
250:503

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 255-1. Title.
The following chapter shall be known as the "Building Zone Ordinance of
the Borough of Old Tappan 1955."
§ 255-2. Purpose.
It is the intention of this chapter to zone, restrict and limit the use of land
within the Borough. The use of any land, whether or not there is a building
thereon, for any use prohibited hereby, in the district in which the same is
located, shall be unlawful.
§ 255-3. Interpretation of standards.
§ 255-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A building or structure, as defined herein, which
is not in direct contact with the structural walls of the principal building,
and is customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or
building and located on the same lot with such principal
building.[Amended 11-17-2003 by Ord. No. 834-03; 6-18-2012 by Ord.
No. 1048-12]
ACCESSORY USE — A use or building customarily incidental and
subordinate to the principal use or building and located on the same lot with
such principal use or building.
A. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion
of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare.
B. Whenever the regulations of this chapter require a greater width or size
of yards, courts or other open spaces, or require a lower height of
building or less number of stories, or require a greater percentage of lot
to be left unoccupied, or impose restrictions more extensive than are
required by other ordinances of the Borough, or regulation, the
provisions of this chapter shall govern.
C. Wherever the provisions of any statute of the State of New Jersey or
other ordinance or regulation of the Borough require a greater width or
size of yards, courts or open spaces, or require a lower height of
building or a less number of stories, or require a greater percentage of
lot to be left unoccupied, or impose restrictions more extensive than are
required by the regulations of this chapter, the provisions of such
statute of the State of New Jersey or other ordinance or regulation of
the Borough of Old Tappan, shall govern.
§ 255-1 YARD WASTE § 255-4
250:505
AREA, BUILDING — The total of areas taken on a horizontal plane at
the main grade level of the principal building and all accessory buildings,
exclusive of uncovered porches, terraces and steps.
ATTIC SPACE — That portion of the building above the highest finished
habitable floor not adjacent to living space on a habitable floor. Attic space
shall be unfurnished; will not count as a story; is not considered habitable
or living area; does not count as floor area; and can have a maximum clear
ceiling height of six feet. Any space adjacent to living space (habitable
area), whether the ceiling height is greater or lower than seven feet, shall
count as floor area.[Added 6-18-2012 by Ord. No. 1048-12]
AVERAGE FINISHED GRADE — A dimension calculated by measuring the
finished grade, as defined herein, along the perimeter of the building or
structure at points 10 feet apart with the beginning point being the lowest
finished grade adjacent to the building or structure, and adding all of
said measurements and then dividing the total arrived by the number of
measurements taken.[Added 6-18-2012 by Ord. No. 1048-12]
AVERAGE NATURAL GRADE — A dimension determined by measuring the
natural grade, as defined herein, along the perimeter of the building or
structure at points 10 feet apart with the beginning point being the lowest
natural grade adjacent to the building or structure, and adding all of said
measurements and then dividing the total arrived at by the number of
measurement taken.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building or structure partially, but no more
than 50%, below the average finished grade but no more than six feet above
the average finished grade and having a floor-to-ceiling height of not less
than seven feet six inches.[Amended 6-18-2012 by Ord. No. 1048-12]
BOARDINGHOUSE — Any dwelling in which more than three persons,
whether individually or as families, are housed or lodged for hire with or
without meals. A rooming house or a furnished room house shall be deemed
a boardinghouse.
BUFFER ZONE — An area of land which provides a physical separation
between different use zones and different land uses. Said area shall remain
in its natural state, where wooded, or shall otherwise consist of new
landscaping and plantings, which may be combined and integrated with
berm areas. Within any such buffer zone, no buildings, structures,
driveways, parking or loading areas, or other use of the land shall be
permitted; provided, however, that decorative walls and fences may be
erected only at the edge or outside perimeter of the buffer zone.
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof supported by columns or by walls
and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or
chattels.
BUILDING, HEIGHT OF — The vertical distance measured from the lowest
finished grade, as defined herein, immediately adjacent to the building
wall or from the average natural grade, as defined herein, to the highest
point of the roof of any building including an accessory building, excluding
chimneys, television antennas, mechanical equipment (including but not
§ 255-4 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 255-4
250:506
limited to elevator housings) and parapet walls not exceeding four feet in
height, whichever is greater.
CELLAR — That portion of a building or structure more than 50% below the
average finished grade, and having a floor-to-ceiling height of not less than
seven feet six inches which shall have no bedrooms.[Amended 6-18-2012
by Ord. No. 1048-12]
CHURCH or OTHER HOUSE OF WORSHIP — A building or structure, or
group of buildings or structures, which by design and construction are
intended for the conducting of organized religious services, and accessory
uses customarily associated therewith including, but not limited to, the
following: educational services, facilities for weddings, funerals, bar and
bat mitzvahs, parish houses, rectories, convents, and other similar functions
directly related with the principal function of the church or house of
worship; and emergency shelters, places of assembly for self-help and
support groups, temporary shelter for the homeless in accordance with a
local or regional program and other similar accessory functions relating
to community services or needs, provided such uses are not residential in
nature.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — An open space within or related to a residential
cluster development and designed and intended for the use and enjoyment
of residents and owners of the development.
COMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA — Any system of wires, rods, discs, panels,
flat panels, dishes, whips, or other similar devices used for the transmission
or reception of wireless signals. An antenna may include an omnidirectional
antenna (rod), directional antenna (panel), parabolic antenna (disc) or any
other wireless antenna. A communications antenna shall not include mobile
cellular communications antennas or mobile cellular communications
towers as otherwise regulated under this chapter.[Added 12-5-2016 by
Ord. No. 1105-16]
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE FOR PERSONS WITH HEAD INJURIES — A
community residential facility licensed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 30:11B-1 et seq.,
providing food, shelter and personal guidance, under such supervision as
required, to not more than 15 persons with head injuries, who require
assistance, temporarily or permanently, in order to live in the community,
and shall include, but not be limited to group homes, halfway houses,
supervised apartment living arrangements, and hostels. Such a residence
shall not be considered a health care facility within the meaning of N.J.S.A.
26:2H-1 et seq. "Person with head injury" means a person who has sustained
an injury, illness or traumatic change to the skull, the brain contents or
its coverings which results in a temporary or permanent physiological
decrease of mental, cognitive, behavioral, social or physical functioning
which causes partial or total disability.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE FOR THE DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED —
A community residential facility licensed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 30:11B-1 et
seq., providing food, shelter and personal guidance, under such supervision
as required, to not more than 15 developmentally disabled or mentally
ill persons, who require assistance, temporarily or permanently, in order
§ 255-4 YARD WASTE § 255-4
250:507
to live in the community, and shall include, but not be limited to group
homes, halfway houses, intermediate care facilities, supervised apartment
living arrangements, and hostels. Such a residence shall not be considered
a health care facility within the meaning of N.J.S.A. 26:2H-1 et seq. In the
case of a community residence housing mentally ill persons, such residence
shall have been approved for a purchase of service contract or an affiliation
agreement pursuant to such procedures as shall be established by
regulation of the Division of Mental Health and Hospitals of the Department
of Human Services. "Developmentally disabled person" means a person who
is developmentally disabled as defined in N.J.S.A. 30:11B-2, and "mentally
ill person" means a person who is afflicted with a mental disease as defined
in N.J.S.A. 30:4-23,44 but shall not include a person who has been committed
after having been found not guilty of a criminal offense by reason of insanity
or having been found unfit to be tried on a criminal charge.
COMMUNITY SHELTER FOR VICTIMS OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE — A
shelter approved for a purchase of service contract and certified pursuant
to standards and procedures established by regulation of the Department of
Human Services pursuant to N.J.S.A. 30:14-1 et seq., providing food, shelter,
medical care, legal assistance, personal guidance, and other services, to
not more than 15 persons who have been victims of domestic violence,
including any children of such victims, who temporarily require shelter and
assistance in order to protect their physical or psychological welfare.
COURT — An unoccupied open space, other than a yard, on the same lot
with a building, which is bounded on two or more sides by the walls of such
building.
COURT, INNER — A court enclosed on all sides by exterior walls of a
building or by exterior walls and lot lines on which walls are allowable.
COURT, OUTER — A court extending to a street line or opening upon any
front, side, rear yard.
COVERAGE — That percentage of the plot or lot area covered by the
building area.
COVERAGE, BUILDING — That percentage of plot or lot area covered by
the building area. Building area shall be computed by determining the first
floor area of any and all structures intended to be used or occupied on a
permanent basis and shall include, but not be limited to, buildings, sheds,
pool houses and garages and overhangs above the first floor in excess of
two feet.[Added 2-22-2005 by Ord. No. 876-05]
COVERAGE, IMPROVED LOT — That percentage of the plot or lot area
covered by all impervious surfaces, including, but not limited to, buildings
and structures, parking areas, driveways, tennis courts, patios, decks,
swimming pools, walkways and retention and detention basins. Special
paver stones with voids for grass will be calculated as impervious coverage
based upon the amount of impervious material area versus grass area as
44.Editor's Note: Repealed by L. 1987, c. 116. See now N.J.S.A. 30:4-27.2
§ 255-4 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 255-4
250:508
specified in the manufacturer's literature.[Added 2-22-2005 by Ord. No.
876-05; amended 1-21-2014 by Ord. No. 1064-13]
DISTRIBUTIVE ANTENNA SYSTEMS ("DAS") — A network of one or more
antennas and fiber-optic nodes typically mounted to streetlight poles, or
utility structures, which provide access and signal transfer services to one
or more third-party wireless service providers. DAS shall also include the
equipment location, sometimes called a "hub" or "hotel," where the DAS
network is interconnected with third-party wireless service providers to
provide the signal transfer services. The term shall be construed to include
supporting cables, wires, braces, masts or other appurtenances.[Added
12-5-2016 by Ord. No. 1105-16]
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY — Any structure comprised of a single dwelling
unit inhabited or to be inhabited by one or more persons occupying the
premises as a single housekeeping unit.
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT — A statement which shall
provide information needed to evaluate the effects of a proposed project
upon the environment of the Borough and the surrounding area and which
shall include the following:
FAMILY — One or more persons living, sleeping, cooking and eating on the
same premises as a single housekeeping unit.
Any inventory of existing environmental conditions at the project site
and in the surrounding region which shall describe air quality, water
quality, water supply, hydrology, geology, soils, topography, vegetation,
wildlife, aquatic organisms, ecology, demography, land use, aesthetics,
history and archaeology; for housing, the inventory shall describe water
quality, water supply. hydrology, geology, soils and topography.
A.
A project description which shall specify what is to be done and how it
is to be done, during construction and operation.
B.
A listing of all licenses, permits or other approvals as required by law
and the status of each.
C.
An assessment of the probable impact of the project upon all topics
described in paragraph a hereinabove.
D.
E. A listing of adverse environmental impacts which cannot be avoided.
Steps to be taken to minimize adverse environmental impacts during
construction and operation, both at the projects site and in the
surrounding region.
F.
Alternatives to all or any part of the project with reasons for their
acceptability or nonacceptability.
G.
A reference list of pertinent published information relating to the
project, the project site, and the surrounding region.
H.
§ 255-4 YARD WASTE § 255-4
250:509
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME — The private residence of a family day-care
provider which is registered as a family day-care home pursuant to the
Family Day Care Provider Registration Act, N.J.S.A. 30:5B-16 et seq.
FILLING STATION — Any area of land, including structures thereon, that is
used or designed to be used for the supply of gasoline, oil or other fuel for
the propulsion of motor vehicles and which may include facilities used or
designed to be used for polishing, greasing, washing, spraying, dry cleaning
or otherwise cleaning or servicing such motor vehicles.
FINISHED GRADE — A dimension or dimensions indicating the elevation
of the surface of real property above sea level as existing in its developed
state subsequent to any excavation, filling, earth movement, soil removal,
building, construction or alteration of such property.
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors
of a building measured from the outside face of the building and shall
include all square footage for accessory buildings exceeding 150 square
feet, except for two-car garages as noted herein. Except as provided herein
below, the computation of floor area ratio does not include basements,
cellars, garages (with a maximum capacity of two cars not exceeding an
area of 400 square feet, whether attached or detached, that are at or below
basement level), decks, patios and noninhabitable areas such as accessory
buildings not exceeding 150 square feet and attics.[Added 2-22-2005
by Ord. No. 876-05; amended 11-21-2005 by Ord. No. 886RR-05;
6-18-2012 by Ord. No. 1048-12]
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR) — The sum of the area of all floors (as defined
under "floor area") of the existing or new buildigs or structures, compared
to the total area of the property on which the structures are located,
expressed as a percentage.[Added 2-22-2005 by Ord. No. 876-05;
amended 6-18-2012 by Ord. No. 1048-12]
HOME OCCUPATION — An occupation or a profession which:
Is customarily carried on in a dwelling unit or in a building or structure
accessory to a dwelling unit.
A.
B. Is carried on by a member of the family residing in the dwelling unit.
Is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling unit for
residential purposes.
C.
Which conforms to the following additional conditions:
The occupation or profession shall be carried on wholly within the
principal building or within a building or other structure accessory
thereto.
(1)
Not more than one person outside the family shall be employed in
the home occupation.
(2)
There shall be no exterior display, no exterior sign (except as
permitted under § 255-8D, no exterior storage of materials and no
(3)
D.
§ 255-4 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 255-4
250:510
LIVING AREA — Space within a dwelling unit utilized for living, such as, but
not limited to, sleeping, eating, cooking, bathing, washing and sanitation
purposes. "Living area" includes all those building elements which
comprise, or provide for, livable space, i.e., the area of floors under all
interior building walls.[Added 6-18-2012 by Ord. No. 1048-12]
LOT — A parcel of land occupied or to be occupied by one principal use,
with its accessories and including the open spaces accessory to it. No
area shall be counted as accessory to more than one principal use, and no
area necessary for compliance with the open space requirements for one
principal use shall be included or counted in the calculation of the open
space accessory to any other principal use.
LOT, DEPTH OF — The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
lines, measured along the perpendicular bisector of the front setback line.
LOT, WIDTH OF — The horizontal distance between the side lot lines
measured along the minimum front setback line, required for the zone in
which the lot is situated.
other exterior indication of the home occupation or variation from
the residential character of the principal building.
No offensive noise vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat or glare shall
be produced.
(4)
In particular, home occupation includes, but is not limited to the
following:
(a) Art studio.
(b) Dressmaking.
Professional office or studio of a physician, surgeon, dentist,
doctor, lawyer, architect, artist, realtor, insurance agent,
notary public, musician, engineer, accountant or contractor.
(c)
Teaching, with musical instruction limited to a single pupil at a
time.
(d)
(5)
However, a home occupation shall not be interpreted to include the
following:
(a) Barbershop.
(b) Beauty parlor.
(c) Commercial stable or kennel.
(d) Restaurant.
(e) Undertaking establishment.45
(6)
45.Editor's Note: The definition of “improved lot coverage,” which immediately followed this
subsection, was deleted 2-22-2005 by Ord. No. 876-05. See now the definition of
“coverage, improved lot.”
§ 255-4 YARD WASTE § 255-4
250:511
LOW-INCOME HOUSING — Housing affordable according to federal
Department of Housing and Urban Development or other recognized
standards for home ownership and rental costs, and occupied or reserved
for occupancy by households with a gross household income equal to 50%
or less of the median gross household income for households of the same
size within the housing region in which the housing is located, and is subject
to affordability controls.
MOBILE CELLULAR COMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA — Any structure,
combination of materials or form of apparatus which is designed and used
for the purpose of sending, transmitting, receiving or relaying low-power
mobile radio waves for commercial communication purposes whether by
cellular, personal communications systems or other similar technologies.
MOBILE CELLULAR COMMUNICATIONS TOWER — A freestanding
structure of any type which is designed, intended or constructed for the
installation of or on which is affixed a mobile cellular communications
antenna or antennas.
MODERATE-INCOME HOUSING — Housing affordable according to federal
Department of Housing and Urban Development or other recognized
standards for home ownership and rental costs, and occupied or reserved
for occupancy by households with a gross household income equal to more
than 50% but less than 80% of the median gross household income for
households of the same size within the housing region in which the housing
is located and is subject to affordability controls.
NATURAL GRADE — A dimension or dimensions indicating the elevation of
the surface of real property above sea level as existing in its natural state
and prior to any excavation, filling, earth moving, soil removal, building,
construction or alteration of such property.
NONCONFORMING USE — Use of a building or of land that does not
conform to the regulations as to use for the district in which it is situated.
OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved
and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved in connection with a
residential cluster development for public or private use or enjoyment or
for the use or enjoyment of owners and occupants of land adjoining or
neighboring such open space.
PARKING SPACE — An off-street space available for the parking of one
motor vehicle and having an area of not less than 200 square feet exclusive
of passageways and driveways appurtenant thereto and giving access
thereto, and having direct access to a street or alley.
PATIO HOUSE — A townhouse type of building with one or two stores
utilizing an L-shape design and attached to other similarly shaped buildings
by no more than two party walls.
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE — An open space area conveyed or otherwise
dedicated to the Borough, to a Borough agency, to the Old Tappan Board
of Education, to a state or county agency or to any other public body for
recreation or conservation uses.
§ 255-4 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 255-4
250:512
QUADRUPLEX — Four attached dwellings in one structure in which each
unit has two open space exposures and share one or two walls with an
adjoining unit or units. In a quadruplex, one dwelling unit atop another is
permitted.
RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER — An area to be developed as a single entity
according to a plan approved by the Planning Board, containing singlefamily
detached dwelling units which have common open space or a public
open space as appurtenances.
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM — A waste collection system that includes
gravity sewers, force mains, pumping facilities and other equipment that
conveys wastewater to a central treatment plant, which system shall be
approved by the State of New Jersey, Department of Environmental
Protection, the Bergen County Utilities Authority, the Mayor and Council,
the Borough Engineer and such other authorities as may have jurisdiction
thereof.
SCHOOL — Any building which is designed, constructed or used primarily
for educational purposes. Uses which are primarily custodial in nature,
such as day-care centers or similar uses are not schools. Uses wherein
instruction is given to individuals or groups in a building used principally
for other purposes are not schools.
SHED — An accessory structure or building, not to exceed 150 square feet
in area, used primarily for storage purposes.[Added 6-18-2012 by Ord.
No. 1048-12]
SIGN — As used herein shall be defined as set forth in Article XVI, Signs, of
this chapter.
SIGN, ADVERTISING — As used herein shall be defined as set forth in
Article XVI, Signs, of this chapter.
SIGN, BUSINESS — As used herein shall be defined as set forth in Article
XVI, Signs, of this chapter.
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the floor next above it or, if there be no floor
above it, then the space between any floor and the ceiling or roof next
above, excluding basements, cellars and crawl spaces. No such area shall
be considered a story if it has an average height of less than seven feet.
Any such area having an average height of less than seven feet shall be
considered a half-story.
STREET — A public way which affords principal means of access to abutting
property.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for
occupancy, use or ornamentation, whether installed on, above or below the
surface of a parcel of land.
TOWNHOUSE — A building or structure designed for, or occupied by, no
more than one family or household and attached to other similar buildings
or structures by no more than two party walls extending from the
§ 255-4 YARD WASTE § 255-4
250:513
foundation to the roof and providing two direct means of access from the
outside. No dwelling unit in a townhouse shall be located above another
unit. Furthermore, each such dwelling unit shall be provided with cooking,
sleeping and sanitary facilities for the use of each family or household of
the townhouse. For the purpose of this chapter, a townhouse may include
a building or structure, title to which is held in a fee simple, condominium,
cooperative or leasehold ownership or any combination thereof.
TOWNHOUSE-DUPLEX OR FLATS — A townhouse type of structure in
which a row of dwelling units is permitted, with no dwelling unit permitted
atop another, except for the end units in the row.
TRIPLEX — A structure containing three dwelling units, each of which has
direct access to the outside or to a common hall.
USE, PRINCIPAL — The specific purpose for which land or a building is
designed, arranged, intended or for which it is or may be occupied or
maintained.
YARD — An unoccupied space open to the sky, on the same lot with a
building or structure.
YARD, FRONT — An open unoccupied space on the same lot with a main
building, extending the full width of the lot and situated between the street
line and the front line of the building projected to the side lines of the lot.
The depth of the front yard shall be measured between the front line of
the building and the street line. Covered porches, whether enclosed or not
enclosed, shall be considered as part of the main building and shall not
project into a required front yard.
YARD, REAR — An open unoccupied space on the same lot with the building
between the rear line of the building and the rear line of the lot and
extending the full width of the lot.
YARD, SIDE — An open unoccupied space on the same lot with the building
situated between the building and the side line of the lot and extending from
the front yard to the rear yard. Any lot line not a rear line or a front line
shall be deemed a side line.
§ 255-4 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 255-4
250:514
ARTICLE II
Zoning Districts and Zoning Map
§ 255-5. Districts enumerated. [Amended 6-18-2018 by Ord. No.
1128-18+]
For the purpose of this chapter, the Borough is hereby divided into the
following districts:
RA 40 Residential One-Family District
RA 40-CC Residential One-Family District - Conditional Cluster District
RA 30-LA Residential One-Family Lot Averaging District
RA 25 Residential One-Family District
RA 25-CC Residential One-Family District - Conditional Cluster District
RA 25-NL Residential One-Family District - Narrow Lot District
RA 15 Residential One-Family District
RA 10 Residential One-Family District
RB 130 Residential District
B-1 Local Businesses District
B-2 Office District
PRD Planned Residential Development
ES Environmentally Sensitive District
AH-2 Affordable Housing District
§ 255-6. Zoning Map.
The districts are bounded and defined as shown on a map entitled "Official
Zoning Map, Borough of Old Tappan," dated 1981, revised 11-16-1981 (and
as further amended by ordinances 341 and 345), and as may be further
revised or amended. This map, designated Schedule A, accompanies, and
with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby made a part of this chapter.46
The Zoning Map shall bear the legend of a more particular description of
the zoned boundaries herein.
§ 255-7. Metes and bounds descriptions.
Boundaries on the Official Zoning Map of the Borough of Old Tappan are
more particularly described as follows:
A. B-1 Zone. The description for the boundaries of the B-1 Zone is as
follows: Beginning at the northwest corner of lot 1 in block 6, as shown
on the current official assessment map of the Borough of Old Tappan
and running thence: [Amended 9-15-2003 by Ord. No. 828-03]
46.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the office of the Municipal Clerk.
§ 255-5 YARD WASTE § 255-7
250:515
(1) Southeasterly along the west line of lot 1 to a point 25 feet short of
the westerly prolongation of the northerly lot line of lot 3, both in
block 6, as shown on the current official assessment map of the
Borough; thence,
(2) Northeasterly along a line drawn parallel with and distant 25 feet
northerly, at right angles, from the north line of lot 3 in block 6,
across Central Avenue, to the north line of lot 28 in block 5, all as
shown on the current official assessment map of the Borough;
thence,
(3) Northerly, along the northeasterly line of lot 28 in block 5 and the
easterly prolongation thereof to its intersection with the east line,
as extended southerly, of lot 2 in block 5, both as shown on the
current official assessment map of the Borough; thence,
(4) Northwesterly along the west line of lot 2 in block 5 to a point
which is as distant, measured at right angles, from the center line
of Old Tappan Road as is the northwest corner of lot 6 in block 5-10,
as shown on the current official assessment map of the Borough;
thence,
(5) Northeasterly along a line drawn parallel with the center line of Old
Tappan to the northwest corner of lot 6 in block 5-10, as shown on
the current official assessment map of the Borough; thence,
(6) Northeasterly 215.56 feet along the north line of lots 6 and 5 in
block 5-10, as shown on the current official assessment map of the
Borough; thence,
(7) Northerly approximately 40 feet along the east line of lot 5A in
block 5 to the west bank of Dorotockeys Run, as shown on the
current official assessment map of the Borough; thence,
(8) Northerly along the west bank of Dorotockeys Run approximately
70 feet to a point; thence,
(9) Northwesterly to the south line of Old Tappan Road on a line drawn
at right angles thereto; thence,
(10) Southwesterly along the south line of Old Tappan Road to the place
of beginning.
(11) The B-1 zone northerly of Old Tappan Road shall be extended and
shall include the following described premises:
(a) All of Lots 69, 70 and 72 in Block 2, as shown on the current
official assessment map of the Borough.
(12) The B-1 zone shall also include lot 1 in block 1604.
§ 255-7 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 255-7
250:516
(13) Notwithstanding the foregoing, lot 18 in block 1101 is specifically
excluded from the B-1 zone. [Added 9-20-2004 by Ord. No.
858-04]
B. B-2 Office Zone. The B-2 Office Zone shall include the following
described premises: All of lots 71, 74, 75 and 75A in Block 2, as shown
on the current official Assessment Map of the Borough.
C. RA 10 Residential One-Family District. The RA-10 Residential Zone
shall consist of the following described premises, as shown, except as
indicated, on the former Official Assessment Map of the Borough:
[Amended 3-19-2001 by Ord. No. 741-01]
(1) All lots in blocks 23 through 33, inclusive.
(2) Block 11, lots 24 through 35, inclusive.
(3) Block 14, lots 29 through 56, inclusive.
(4) Block 8-2, lots 1 through 25.
(5) Blocks 8-3, 8-4, 8-5, 8-6, 8-7, 8-8 and 8-9.
(6) Block 1202, lots 1 through 5, 8 and 9, as shown on the current
Official Assessment Map of the Borough. [Amended 3-20-2006 by
Ord. No. 904-06]
D. Zoned Boundary Between RA 15 and RA 25/RA 25-CC, Southeast
Quadrant. The description of the zoned boundary between the RA 15
and RA 25/RA 25-CC zones in the southeast quadrant is as follows:
[Amended 9-15-2003 by Ord. No. 828-03]
(1) The line shown on the official Zoning Map of the Borough of Old
Tappan separating the RA 15 and RA 25/RA 25-CC zones that runs
between Central Avenue and Russell Avenue, and extending
southerly in a straight line, shall be defined as the block limit line
between block 6 and block 7-1 beginning at the southerly boundary
of Old Tappan Road and running southeasterly to the northwest
boundary of lot 5, block 7-21, as shown on the current official
assessment map of the Borough; thence,
(2) Southwesterly along the northwest boundary of lot 5, block 7-21 to
the intersection of this boundary with the eastern end line of Pearl
Court as shown on the current official assessment map of the
Borough; thence,
(3) Southerly along the end line of Pearl Court and the eastern sideline
of lot 1, block 7-21 to the common Borough line of the Borough of
Old Tappan and the Borough of Harrington Park, as shown on the
current official assessment map of the Borough.
(4) Lot 1 in block 1604 is excluded from the RA-15 district.
§ 255-7 YARD WASTE § 255-7
250:517
(5) Notwithstanding the foregoing, lot 17 in block 1101 is specifically
excluded from the RA-25 zone. [Added 9-20-2004 by Ord. No.
858-04]
E. RA 25-CC Residential Conditional Cluster Zone. The RA 25-CC
residential conditional cluster zone shall include the following
described premises, as shown, except as indicated, on the former
Official Assessment Map of the Borough: [Amended 3-19-2001 by
Ord. No. 741-01]
(1) All lots in blocks 12 and 13, and 15 through 22, inclusive.
(2) Lots 1 through 28, inclusive, in block 14.
(3) Lots 46, 47, 48, 48A, 49, 50, 51, 52, 77, 77A, 78 and 79 in block 5.
(4) Lot 1 in block 5-5.
(5) Lot 14 in block 5-8.
(6) Lot 1 in block 5-10.
(7) Lots 16, 17, 22, 23, 24 and 25 in block 6.
(8) Lot 5 in block 7-21.
(9) (Reserved) 47
(10) The existing drainage easements on the east side of Dorotockeys
Run in lots 10 and 11 in block 5-5 and on lots 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8 in
block 5-6 and a portion of the westerly side yard of lot 2 in block 5-6
for a distance of 50 feet east and parallel to the center line of
Dorotockeys Run.
(11) A portion of the rear yards of lots 35, 36, 74, 7d5 and 76 in block 5
for a distance of 50 feet west and parallel to the center line of
Dorotockeys Run.
F. RA 40-CC Residential Conditional Cluster. The RA 40-CC residential
conditional cluster zone district shall consist of the following described
premises, as shown on the current Official Assessment Map of the
Borough.
(1) Lot 1E in block 1.
(2) Lots 3, 4, 5, 18, 18A, 31, 40, 41, 41A, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 46A, 47, 48,
49, 50, 76, 77, 78, 79 and 79A in block 2.
(3) Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 21, 22, 23 and 24 in block 2-1.
(4) Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 6A in block 2-2.
47.Editor's Note: Former Subsection E(9), concerning lots 1 through 23 in block 11, was
repealed 3-20-2006 by Ord. No. 904-06.
§ 255-7 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 255-7
250:518
(5) Lots 1, 2 and 3 in block 2-6.
(6) Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 15, 15A, 15B, 16, 17, 20, 23, 24,
24A, 25, 26, 27, 28, 28A, 29 and 30 in block 3.
(7) That portion of lot 6 in block 3-2 which lies west of Dorotockeys
Run.
G. Zoned boundary between RA 25 and RA 40 Zones, Southwest Quadrant.
The description of the zoned boundary between the RA 25 and RA 40
zones in the southwest quadrant is as follows: Beginning at the
northwest corner of lot 5, block 9, which point is also in the southerly
sideline of Old Tappan Road (30 feet from center line) as shown on the
current Official Assessment Map of the Borough.
(1) Southerly along the west boundary line of lot 5, block 9 to the
southwest corner of lot 5, block 9, as shown on the current Official
Assessment Map of the Borough; thence,
(2) Easterly along the south boundary line of lot 5, block 9 to the rear
boundary line of lot 4, block 9-12, as shown on the current Official
Assessment Map of the Borough; thence,
(3) Southerly and easterly along the rear lot lines of lots 4 through 16
of block 9-12 (fronting on Birchwood Road), as shown on the
current Official Assessment Map of the Borough; thence,
(4) Southeasterly along the southwest property line of lot 17, block
9-12 to the point where this southwest property line meets the
north property line of lot 4, block 9-23 (fronting on Willow Drive),
as shown on the current Official Assessment Map of the Borough;
thence,
(5) Westerly along the rear lot lines of lots 4 and 5, block 9-23 (fronting
on Willow Drive) to the northwest corner of lot 5, as shown on the
current Official Assessment Map of the Borough; thence,
(6) Southerly along the sidelines of lot 5 and 6, block 9-23 to the rear
property line of lot 9, block 9-23 (fronting on Sycamore Street), as
shown on the current Official Assessment Map of the Borough;
thence,
(7) Southwesterly along the rear property line of lot 9 block 9-23 to the
southwest corner of lot 9, block 9-23, as shown on the current
Official Assessment Map of the Borough; thence,
(8) Easterly along the north boundary of lot 41, block 9 to the
intersection of this boundary with the west boundary of lot 28,
block 9 as shown on the current Official Assessment Map of the
Borough; thence,
(9) Northerly along the west boundary of lot 28, block 9 to the
northwest corner of lot 28, block 9 also being the southern sideline
§ 255-7 YARD WASTE § 255-7
250:519
of Willow Drive (50 feet wide) as shown on the current Official
Assessment Map of the Borough; thence,
(10) Easterly along the north boundary of lot 28, block 9 to the
northeast corner of lot 28, block 9, as shown on the current Official
Assessment Map of the Borough; thence,
(11) Southerly along the east boundary of lot 28, block 9 to the
southeast corner of lot 28, block 9, as shown on the current Official
Assessment Map of the Borough; thence,
(12)Westerly along the rear lot lines of Block 2101, Lots 11 and 12 to
the northwest corner of Block 2101, Lot 12; thence, southwesterly
along the side lot line of Block 2101, Lot 12 and the prolongation of
this line to the southerly right-of-way line of Forest Avenue; thence,
easterly along the southerly right-of-way line of Forest Avenue, also
being the northerly property line of Block 2103, Lot 2, to the
northwest corner of Block 2103, Lot 3; thence, southwesterly along
the side lot line of Block 2103, Lot 3 to the southwest corner of
Block 2103, Lot 3; thence, easterly along the rear property lines of
Block 2103, Lots 3 and 4 to the northeast corner of Block 2105, Lot
1. [Amended 1-3-2009 by Ord. No. 978-08]
(13) Easterly along the rear lot lines of lots 18, 17, 16, 15 and 14, block
9-2 (all fronting on Fred Street) and the prolongation of this line
across Fred Street and along the rear boundary lines of lots 3, 2
and 1, block 9-3 (fronting on Forest Avenue) to the intersection of
this line with the west sideline of Westwood Avenue (30 feet from
center line), as shown on the current Official Assessment Map of
the Borough; thence,
(14) Northerly and northeasterly along the western boundary of
Westwood Avenue to a point which is on the northwestern
boundary of Westwood Avenue 200 feet southwest from the
southwest boundary extended to Cripplebush Road (55 feet wide),
as shown on the current Official Assessment Map of the Borough;
thence,
(15) Southeasterly and easterly along a line 200 feet distant from and
parallel to the southern sideline of Cripplebush Road (55 feet wide
and 50.62 feet wide) to the point where this line intersects the
western boundary of lot 5 block 10, as shown on the current Official
Assessment Map of the Borough; thence,
(16) Northeasterly along the western boundary of lot 5, block 10 to the
southerly sideline of Cripplebush Road (25.31 feet from the center
line), as shown on the current Official Assessment Map of the
Borough; thence,
(17) Easterly and northeasterly along the southerly sideline of
Cripplebush Road to the northwest corner of lot 5A, Block 10, as
§ 255-7 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 255-7
250:520
shown on the current Official Assessment Map of the Borough;
thence,
(18) Southerly along the western boundary of lot 5A, Block 10 to the
southwest corner of said lot, as shown on the current Official
Assessment Map of the Borough; thence,
(19) Easterly along the southern boundary of lot 5A, Block 10 to the
northwest corner of lot 16, Block 10, as shown on the current
Official Assessment Map of the Borough; thence,
(20) Southerly along the western boundary of lots 16 and 15, Block 10
to the southwest corner of lot 15, Block 10, as shown on the current
Official Assessment Map of the Borough; thence,
(21) Easterly along the southern boundary of lot 15, Block 10 to the
common border between the Borough of Old Tappan and
Harrington Park.
H. Zoned Boundary Between the RA 25 Zone and the RA 40 Zone to the
North and the RA 10 Zone to the East, Northwest Quadrant (North of
Old Tappan Road). The description of the zoned boundary between the
RA 25 zone and the RA 40 zone to the north and the RA 10 zone to the
east in the northwest quadrant is as follows: Beginning at the northwest
corner of lot 3, Block 8-1, which is also the northeasterly sideline of Old
Tappan Road (16.5 feet from center line), as shown on the current
Official Assessment Map of the Borough; thence
(1) Easterly along the north boundary of lot 3, Block 8-1 to the
northeastern corner of said lot, as shown on the current Official
Assessment Map of the Borough; thence,
(2) Southerly along the easterly lot lines of lots 3, 10 and 11, all in
Block 8-1 to the northerly side of Old Tappan Road (33.0 feet from
center line).
I. Zoned boundary between RA 10 Zone and the RA 25 Zone to the West
and RA 40 to the North and East, Northwest Quadrant (North of Old
Tappan Road). The description of the zoned boundary between the RA
10 zone and the RA 25 zone to the west and the RA 40 zone to the north
and east in the northwest quadrant is as follows: Beginning at the
southeast corner of lot 11, Block 8-1, which is also the northerly sideline
of Old Tappan Road (33.0 feet from center line) as shown on the current
Official Assessment Map of the Borough; thence,
(1) Northerly along the westerly lot lines of lots 1 and 6 through 25
inclusive, Block 8-2 to the northwest corner of lot 25, in said block,
as shown on the current Official Assessment Map of the Borough;
thence,
§ 255-7 YARD WASTE § 255-7
250:521
(2) Easterly along the southern boundary of lot 26, Block 8-2 to the
southeast corner of said lot, as shown on the current Official
Assessment Map of the Borough; thence,
(3) Southerly along the rear lot lines of lots 25 through 22, Block 8-3
(all fronting on Lindy Place) to the northwest corner of lot 4, Block
8-4, as shown on the current Official Assessment Map of the
Borough; thence,
(4) Easterly along the northern boundary of lot 4, Block 8-4 to the
southwest corner of lot 5, Block 8-4, as shown on the current
Official Assessment Map of the Borough; thence,
(5) Northeasterly along the rear lot lines of lots 5, 6, 7 and 8 and
continuing 152.57 feet along the rear lot lines of lot 9, Block 8-4 (all
fronting on Amelia Drive), as shown on the current Official
Assessment Map of the Borough; thence,
(6) Easterly 46.20 feet along the rear lot line of lot 9 (fronting on
Amelia Drive) and along the rear lot lines of lots 10, 11, 12 and 13,
Block 8-4 (all fronting on Roseway Court) and along the
prolongation of this line across Leoson Parkway and along the
northern boundary line of lot 2, Block 8-8 to the northeast corner of
said lot, as shown on the current Official Assessment Map of the
Borough; thence,
(7) Southerly along the rear lot lines of lots 2 and 1, Block 8-8 (fronting
on Leoson Parkway) and the prolongation of this line across
Stewart Court and along the rear boundary lines of lots 7, 6, 5, 4, 3,
2 and 2, Block 8-9 (all fronting on Leoson Parkway) to the
intersection of this line with the north sideline of Old Tappan Road
(30 feet from center line), as shown on the current Official
Assessment Map of the Borough.
J. RB 130 Residential District. The RB 130 zone shall include the following
properties as shown on the current official tax map of the Borough:
(1) Lot 1 in Block 501.
(2) Lot 14 in Block 1201.
(3) Lots 1 and 2 in Block 1203.
(4) Lots 1 and 21 through 26, inclusive, in Block 1303.
(5) Lots 7 and 10 in Block 1504.
(6) Block 1603, Lot 1, except that portion of said lot described as
follows: beginning at the intersection of the easterly right-of-way
line of Leonard Drive and the boundary line between Block 1603,
Lots 1 and 3, and running thence along the easterly right-of-way of
Leonard Drive, north 37° 37' west, 200.00 feet to proposed lot line;
thence along said proposed lot line, north 52° 25' east, 93.18 feet to
§ 255-7 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 255-7
250:522
the westerly boundary line of Block 1603, Lot 2; thence along said
boundary line, south 37° 37' east, 200.00 feet to the boundary line
between Block 1603, Lots 1, 2 and 3; thence along said boundary
line, south 52° 25' west, 93.18 feet to the point or place of
beginning. That portion of Block 1603, Lot 1, which, pursuant
to this Subsection J(6) is excepted from the RB 130 Residential
District, shall be included in the RA 15 Residential One-Family
District. [Amended 7-10-2006 by Ord. No. 913-06]
(7) Lot 3 in Block 1604.
(8) Lots 1, 2 and 3 in Block 1605.
(9) Lot 13 in Block 1808.
(10) Lot 15 in Block 1903.
(11) Lot 17 in Block 1101. [Added 9-20-2004 by Ord. No. 858-04;
amended 6-7-2010 by Ord. No. 1013-10]
K. PRD Planned Residential District. The PRD planned residential district
shall include the following properties as shown on the current official
tax map of the Borough:
(1) Lots 7 through 10 in block 1302.
(2) Lots 3 and 5 in block 602.
(3) Lot 9 in block 1301.
(4) Lot 1 in block 3000.
(5) Lot 9 in block 602.
(6) Lots 1 and 2 in block 603.
L. RA 30-LA Residential Lot Averaging Zone. The RA 30-LA zone shall
include the following properties as shown on the current tax map of the
Borough: Lots 6 and 8 in block 301.
M. ES Environmentally Sensitive District. The ES zone shall include the
following properties as shown on the current tax map of the Borough:
(1) All lots in block 2901.
(2) Lots 2 through 5 in block 2902.
(3) Lots 1, 2, 4 and 6 in block 2802.
(4) All lots in block 2201.
(5) All lots in block 2202.
(6) Lot 1 in block 2305.
(7) All lots in block 2105.
§ 255-7 YARD WASTE § 255-7
250:523
(8) All lots in block 2001.
(9) Lots 4, 5 and 15 in block 1903.
(10) That portion of lot 16 in block 1903 which is on the easterly side of
a line drawn parallel to the right-of-way line of Westwood Avenue a
distance of 287.5 feet to the east of said right-of-way line. That
portion of said lot which is on the westerly side of said line shall be
included in the RA 40 Residential District.
(11) Lot 5 in Block 1406.
N. RA 25-NL Residential Narrow Lot Zone. The RA 25-NL zone shall
include Lot 1 in Block 502 as shown on the current official tax map of
the Borough.
O. RA 40 Residential District. Lot 1 in Block 2902 shall hereby be included
in the RA 40 Residential District.
P. AH-2 District. Lots 13, 14 and 15 in Block 1103 consisting of 3.0 acres
and as shown on the proposed Zoning Map attached hereto.48 [Added
6-18-2018 by Ord. No. 1128-18]
48.Editor's Note: The current Zoning Map is on file in the office of the Municipal Clerk.
§ 255-7 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 255-7
250:524
ARTICLE III
Residential Districts
§ 255-8. Permitted uses.
In any residential RA District the following uses only shall be permitted:
A. One-family dwellings. Any structure comprised of a single dwelling unit
inhabited, or to be inhabited, by one or more persons occupying the
premises as a single housekeeping unit.
B. Schools. Public schools, elementary and secondary grade levels.
C. Agriculture. Agriculture as a principal use, including farming and truck
gardening, provided that no smoke stall shall be over 20 feet in height
and only oil or gas fuel shall be used for any greenhouse or other
nonresidential heating plant.
D. Home occupation. Home occupations, as defined in § 255-4, are
permitted in residential districts. Signs relating to a home occupation
are permitted, subject to the provisions of Article XVI of this chapter.
E. Family day-care homes.
F. Residential clusters in the RA 40-CC Residential District. Subject to
approval by the Planning Board of a subdivision pursuant to Chapter
218, Subdivision of Land, of this Code, a residential cluster
development shall be permitted in the RA 40-CC District on the
following conditions:
(1) The entire parcel proposed for the residential cluster development
shall contain no less than 200,000 square feet.
(2) The maximum number of dwelling units in the residential cluster
development shall be no greater than the number of dwelling units
that would have been permitted by the Planning Board under a
subdivision plat that meets all of the requirements of the RA 40
District as set forth in the Zoning, Area and Bulk Schedule.49
(3) All lots in the residential cluster development and all dwellings
thereon shall meet all of the requirements of the RA 25 District, as
set forth in the Zoning, Area and Bulk Schedule.
(4) Common open space or public open space shall be provided in
accordance with subdivision approval by the Planning Board. The
minimum amount of such open space shall be equal to the product
of the number of lots permitted in the proposed residential cluster
development multiplied by the difference between 40,000 square
feet and the average size of the lots in the proposed residential
cluster development.
49.Editor's Note: The Zoning, Area and Bulk Schedule is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 255-8 YARD WASTE § 255-8
250:525
G. Residential Clusters in the RA 25-CC Residential District. Subject to
approval by the Planning Board of a subdivision pursuant to Chapter
218, Subdivision of Land, of this Code, a residential cluster
development shall be permitted in the RA 25-CC District on the
following conditions:
(1) The entire parcel proposed for the residential cluster development
shall contain no less than 200,000 square feet.
(2) The maximum number of dwelling units in the residential cluster
development shall be no greater than the number of dwelling units
that would have been permitted by the Planning Board under a
subdivision plat that meets all of the requirements of the RA 25
District, as set forth in the Zoning, Area and Bulk Schedule.
(3) All lots in the residential cluster development and all dwellings
thereon shall meet all of the requirements of the RA 15 District, as
set forth in the Zoning, Area and Bulk Schedule.
(4) Common open space or public open space shall be provided in
accordance with a subdivision approved by the Planning Board.
The minimum amount of such open space shall equal the product of
the number of lots permitted in the proposed residential cluster
development multiplied by the difference between 25,000 square
feet and the average size of the lots in the proposed residential
cluster development.
H. One-family residential development in the RA 30-LA Residential
District. Subject to approval by the Planning Board of a subdivision
pursuant to Chapter 218, Subdivision of land, a residential development
shall be permitted in the RA 30-LA District on the following conditions:
(1) The maximum number of dwelling units in the residential cluster
development shall be no greater than the gross areas of the parcel
located within the Borough of Old Tappan divided by 30,000 square
feet or a total of 25 dwelling units, whichever is less.
(2) A technique of lot averaging shall be permitted subject to the
following conditions:
(a) The minimum lot size shall be 12,500 square feet;
(b) A maximum of 65% of all residentially utilized lots within the
development shall have an area of between 12,500 square feet
and 14,999 square feet;
(c) A minimum of 35% of all residentially utilized lots within the
development and all lots abutting a county road or a private
road or driveway shall have a minimum lot area of 18,000
square feet;
(d) No lot shall exceed the maximum ratio of residential living
area, defined as all enclosed building space exclusive of garage
§ 255-8 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 255-8
250:526
areas used exclusively for the storage of automobiles and other
self-propelled vehicles, area utilized for mechanical and utility
functions and any area where the floor-to-ceiling height is
less than seven feet six inches to lot area, as set forth in the
following table:
Minimum Lot Area
(square feet)
Maximum Residential
Living Area Ratio
12,000 to 12,999 .256
13,000 to 13,999 .244
14,000 to 14,999 .241
15,000 to 15,999 .238
16,000 to 16,999 .233
17,000 to 17,999 .228
18,000 to 18,999 .223
19,000 to 19,999 .218
20,000 or more Maximum of 4,400 square
feet; and
(e) All lots shall conform to the requirements of the RA 30-LA
district as set forth in the Zoning, Area and Bulk Schedule.
(3) Common open space or public open space shall be provided in
accordance with subdivision approval by the Planning Board. The
common open space shall be forever reserved as open space by
deed restriction in a form to be approved by the Borough. In the
discretion of the Planning Board, open space need not be in
common ownership or open to the public but may be restricted for
use as open space by private deed restriction in a form to be
approved by the Borough.
(4) All lots shall have available sanitary sewer service prior to the
issuance of certificates of occupancy for any of the dwelling units.
(5) The applicant shall pay a developer fee to the Borough in
accordance with Article IV of Chapter 45, Land Use Procedures,
hereof in an amount required to enable the Borough to transfer via
regional contribution agreement the number of affordable housing
units equal to 15% of the dwelling units in the residential cluster
district except as follows:
(a) If it has been finally determined by the New Jersey Council on
Affordable Housing or a court of competent jurisdiction that
the Borough has met its "fair-share" obligation under the Fair
Housing Act50 and all appeals from such a determination have
50.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.
§ 255-8 YARD WASTE § 255-8
250:527
been exhausted, then the applicant need not pay a developer
fee in accordance with this section (for purposes of this
chapter, "fair share" refers to the Borough's obligation to
provide a realistic opportunity for the construction of its 1987
to 1993 fair share of affordable housing or its 1987 to 1999 fair
share of affordable housing, whichever period is determined
to be applicable to the Borough's petition for substantive
certification filed in 1995); or
(b) If it has been finally determined by the New Jersey Council on
Affordable Housing or a court of competent jurisdiction that
the Borough must provide a number of affordable housing
units that is less than 15% of the dwelling units in the
residential cluster district to meet its "fair-share" obligation
under the Fair Housing Act and all appeals from such a
determination have been exhausted, then the applicant must
pay a developer fee in an amount required to enable the
Borough to transfer via regional contribution agreement the
number of affordable housing units needed for the Borough to
meet its fair-share obligation as determined by the Council on
Affordable Housing or a court of competent jurisdiction.
I. Community residences for the developmentally disabled.
J. Community residences for persons with head injuries and community
shelters for victims of domestic violence. A community residence for
persons with head injuries or a community shelter for victims of
domestic violence for six persons or fewer, excluding resident staff,
shall be permitted. Subject to conditional use approval by the Planning
Board, a community residence for persons with head injuries or a
community shelter for victims of domestic violence for more than six
persons excluding resident staff, shall be permitted on the following
conditions:
(1) Off-street parking. One space for each resident plus one space for
each staff member.
(2) Bedrooms. Resident staff shall each have a separate bedroom.
(3) Bathrooms. There shall be one bathroom facility for every three
occupants with a minimum of two bathroom facilities.
(4) Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area shall be 20% greater than
the minimum lot area required for the district where the property is
situated for each occupant over six. For example, the minimum lot
area for a residence or shelter with eight occupants shall be 40%
greater than the minimum lot area for the district where the
property is situated.
(5) Signs. No signs shall be permitted on the residence or shelter
designating it a community residence for the developmentally
§ 255-8 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 255-8
250:528
disabled or for persons with head injuries or a community shelter
for victims of domestic violence.
(6) Conformity with neighborhood. The residence or shelter shall be
maintained and conform in design to single-family residences in the
neighborhood.
(7) Driveway. The driveway shall be consistent in design with
driveways in the neighborhood.
(8) Site plan approval. The conditional use applicant shall also obtain
site plan approval.
K. One-family residential development in the RA 25-NL Residential
District. Subject to approval by the Planning Board of a subdivision
pursuant to Chapter 218, Subdivision of Land, a residential
development shall be permitted in the RA 25-NL District on the
following conditions:
(1) Each lot shall conform to the bulk requirements for the RA 25 Zone
as set forth in the Zoning, Area and Bulk Schedule for Old Tappan,
New Jersey, as attached to and made part of this chapter,51 except
as follows:
(a) The minimum lot width shall be 100 feet.
(b) The minimum lot depth shall be 140 feet.
(c) The maximum lot coverage shall be 25%.
(2) Dead-ends and culs-de-sac. Because the zone encompasses only a
single property which has access only at the front of the lot to
DeWolf Road and no public road access at the rear of the lot, is too
narrow to accommodate construction of a loop road, and is too
deep to permit access to housing units on the rear portion of the lot
via a dead-end street or cul-de-sac of less than 1,200 feet, a deadend
street or cul-de-sac may be as long as 1,200 feet, but no longer.
(3) Ingress and egress. One route of ingress and egress is required. No
secondary or emergency road access is required.
(4) Street jogs. Because the zone encompasses only a single property
and the shape of the property requires that a road be constructed
in order to accommodate its development consistent with this
chapter and because of the proximity of another road, the
requirement of § 218-16I of Chapter 218, Subdivision of Land, that
street jogs with center-line offsets be 125 feet or more cannot be
met. Therefore, this zone shall be exempt from said requirement.
(5) The following additional requirements apply to lots adjoining lots
identified as Lots 10.08 and 10.09 in Block 502:
51.Editor's Note: The Zoning, Area and Bulk Schedule is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 255-8 YARD WASTE § 255-8
250:529
§ 255-9. Permitted uses in RB 130 District.
In any RB 130 District, the following uses only shall be permitted:
§ 255-10. Residential Clusters in the RA 40-CC Residential District.
Subject to approval by the Planning Board of a subdivision pursuant to
Chapter 218, Subdivision of Land, of this Code, a residential cluster
development shall be permitted in the RA 40-CC District on the following
conditions:
(a) Retaining walls. Retaining walls are permitted within the rear
yard, provided that such walls are not located closer than 30
feet to the rear lot line. If a retaining wall is constructed within
the rear yard, the area between the retaining wall and a line 40
feet from the rear lot line will be replanted with vegetation
comparable to the vegetation removed to permit construction
of the retaining wall.
(b) Swimming pools. No swimming pools are permitted within the
rear yard.
(c) Limited development area. The portion of the lot located more
than 40 feet from the rear lot line and less than 70 feet from
the rear lot line shall be designated the "restricted
development area." All accessory uses permitted in the RA 25
Zone shall be permitted in the restricted development area
except garages.
A. Those uses permitted in any other residential district, as provided by
§ 255-8 above.
B. Senior citizen and low- and moderate-income housing, as provided
herein.
C. Public utilities as essential services.
D. Municipal golf courses.
E. Parks, playgrounds, firehouses, police stations, first aid and ambulance
buildings, libraries, municipal buildings.
F. Museums and cultural facilities. [Added 6-7-2010 by Ord. No.
1013-10]
G. Educational facilities. [Added 6-7-2010 by Ord. No. 1013-10]
A. The entire parcel proposed for the residential cluster development shall
contain no less than 200,000 square feet.
B. The maximum number of dwelling units in the residential cluster
development shall be no greater than the number of dwelling units that
would be permitted by the Planning Board under a subdivision plat that
§ 255-8 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 255-10
250:530
§ 255-11. Residential Clusters in the RA 25-CC Residential District.
Subject to approval by the Planning Board of a subdivision pursuant to
Chapter 218, Subdivision of Land, of this Code, a residential cluster
development shall be permitted in the RA 25-CC District on the following
conditions:
§ 255-12. Land use intensity and distribution of low- and moderateincome
units in the RB 130 Residential Zone.
The following requirements as to the density and distribution of low- and
moderate-income dwelling units shall apply to the RB 130 Residential Zone:
meets all of the requirements in the RA 40 District as set forth in the
Zoning, Area and Bulk Schedule.
C. All lots in the residential cluster development and all dwellings thereon
shall meet all the requirements of the RA 25 District, as set forth in the
Zoning, Area and Bulk Schedule.
D. Common open space or public open space shall be provided in
accordance with subdivision approved by the Planning Board. The
minimum amount of such open space shall be equal to the product of
the number of lots permitted in the proposed residential cluster
development multiplied by the difference between 40,000 square feet
and the average size of the lots in the proposed residential cluster
development.
A. The entire parcel proposed for the residential cluster development shall
contain no less than 200,000 square feet.
B. The maximum number of dwelling units in the residential cluster
development shall be no greater than the number of dwelling units that
would have been permitted by the Planning Board under a subdivision
plat that meets all of the requirements of the RA 25 District as set forth
in the Zoning, Area and Bulk Schedule.
C. All lots in the residential cluster development and all dwellings thereon
shall meet all of the requirements of the RA 15 District, as set forth in
the Zoning, Area and Bulk Schedule.
D. Common open space or public open space shall be provided in
accordance with a subdivision approved by the Planning Board. The
minimum amount of such open space shall be equal to the product of
the number of lots permitted in the proposed residential cluster
development multiplied by the difference between 25,000 square feet
and the average size of the lots in the proposed residential cluster
development.
A. Overall residential density. The maximum overall residential density for
low- and moderate-income dwelling units in the RB 130 Residential
Zone shall be 10 units per acre. For the purpose of this section, internal
§ 255-10 YARD WASTE § 255-12
250:531
§ 255-13. Permitted accessory uses.
streets, roads and rights-of-way shall be included in the acreage
calculations.
B. Low- and moderate-income housing. Within the RB 130 Residential
District, low- and moderate-income housing, as defined herein, shall be
provided.
C. Distribution of low- and moderate-income dwelling units. For any
development of low- and moderate-income housing in the RB 130
Residential Zone, 50% of all units for low- and moderate-income
households shall be for moderate income households and 50% shall be
for low-income households, both as defined herein.
D. Distribution of dwelling types.
(1) Within the RB 130 Residential Zone, low- and moderate-income
dwelling units may be constructed as townhouses, patio houses,
townhouse duplexes, triplexes or quadruplexes, provided that they
comply with all area, yard and bulk requirements of this section as
provided herein.
(2) Within the RB 130 Residential Zone, at least 4% of the dwelling
units shall be designed for occupancy by handicapped persons, in
accordance with standards promulgated by the Federal
Department of Housing and Urban Development. All senior citizen
housing units shall be constructed "barrier free."
E. Percentage of dwellings. Within the RB 130 Residential Zone, a total of
13.79% of the housing units shall consist of two-bedroom apartments
and 86.21% shall consist of one-bedroom apartments.
F. Other requirements. The provisions of § 255-23, Open space
requirements, and § 255-27, Circulation, parking, utilities, planning and
staging, as provided herein, shall also apply to any development of lowand
moderate-income senior citizen housing in the RB 130 Residential
Zone.
A. Customary accessory uses for one-family residential dwellings,
including home occupations shall be permitted in any residential
district.
B. The following accessory uses shall be permitted for planned residential
developments as permitted conditional uses, as provided for herein:
(1) Private garages.
(2) Signs, in accordance with the provisions of Article XV of this
chapter.
(3) Off-street parking areas, subject to the provisions of Chapter 218,
Subdivision of Land, and Chapter 255, Zoning, of this Code.
§ 255-12 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 255-13
250:532
§ 255-14. Yard and bulk requirements; building relationships.
(4) Swimming pools, tennis courts and similar recreational facilities,
subject to the provisions of Chapter 218, Subdivision of Land, and
Chapter 255, Zoning, of this Code.
A. Within the RB 130 Zone, in addition to the area, yard and bulk
regulations established in the zoning schedule, the following shall be
the minimum distance between the buildings:
(1) Front of one building to front of another building: 70 feet.
(2) Side of one building to side of another building (other than an
attached unit): 30 feet.
(3) Rear of one building to rear of another building: 70 feet.
(4) Front of one building to side of another building: 40 feet.
(5) Front of one building to rear of another building: 70 feet.
(6) Side of one building to rear of another building: 40 feet.
B. The maximum length of a building group shall be six dwelling units or
150 feet in length.
C. An offset shall be provided wherever more than two dwelling units are
constructed adjacent to one another. Such offset shall be at least five
feet.
§ 255-13 YARD WASTE § 255-14
250:533

ARTICLE IV
Local Business District B-1
§ 255-15. Permitted uses.
In any B-1 Business District the following uses only shall be permitted and
subject to regulation as provided:
A. Any use permitted in the residence districts subject to the area and bulk
requirements of the least restrictive residence district immediately
adjoining, except a use described in § 255-8 or any other residential
dwelling use.
B. Professional, business and government offices.
C. Banks and other financial institutions.
D. Restaurants including restaurants where food and beverage are sold
within the premises primarily for consumption therein and take-out
restaurants where food and beverage are sold primarily for
consumption outside the premises except as provided in Subsection N
hereinbelow.
E. Medical clinics.
F. Laboratories (for research, experiments and testing which are not
noxious or hazardous).
G. Storage facilities that are an integral part of and contained within the
same structure as their business offices and which do not exceed 50%
of the floor area of the structure.
H. Private clubrooms and places of assembly for nonprofit organizations
such as veterans' organizations, lodges, etc.
I. Bus stations, provided that there is no maintenance, repair or storage of
vehicles on the premises.
J. Gas stations and public garages subject to the following regulations:
(1) No repair work is performed out of doors.
(2) Gas pumps, lubricating or other devices are located at least 35 feet
from any street or highway property line, and all fuel, oil or similar
inflammables are stored at least 35 feet from any street or lot line.
(3) All automobile parts, dismantled vehicles and similar articles are
stored within a building.
(4) No such garage or service station shall be located on a lot if any
part of the lot is situated within a radius 1,500 of any lot containing:
(a) A public school or playground or lands held by any board of
education for school playground or other purposes.
§ 255-15 YARD WASTE § 255-15
250:535
(b) A duly organized school other than a public school conducted
for children under 16 years of age and given regular
instruction at least five days a week for eight or more months a
year.
(c) Any hospital, public, charitable or private, maintaining at least
15 beds for patients.
(d) A church with seating capacity for 100 or more persons.
(e) Any apartment house, including garden apartments.
(f) A theater containing at least 300 seats.
(g) Any public playground or athletic field.
(h) Another gas station or public garage.
(5) No provision in Subsection I of this section shall be deemed to
repeal, expressly or by implication, any provisions of any other
ordinance of the Borough of Old Tappan regulating or licensing
gasoline filling stations.
K. A retail and personal service business, provided that the building in
which such retail and personal service business is conducted has a floor
area not in excess of 17,000 square feet.
L. A retail and personal service business with the building in which such
retail and personal service business is conducted having a floor area in
excess of 17,000 square feet, without regard to whether the unit of such
retail and personal service business is single or multiple, provided that
the existence, location and extent of such retail and personal service
business and a site plan therefor, meeting the requirements of Chapter
218, Subdivision of Land, is first approved by the Planning Board after
hearing, whose findings shall give due consideration to the following
standards:
(1) Avoiding undue congestion in the streets.
(2) Procuring safety from panic and other danger.
(3) Providing adequate light and air.
(4) Preventing overcrowding of buildings on land.
(5) Avoiding undue concentration of population.
(6) Encouraging the most appropriate use of land within the Borough
in accordance with a comprehensive plan.
(7) Conserving the value of property.
(8) Encouraging harmonious visual relationship between buildings,
improvements and surrounding land area.
§ 255-15 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 255-15
250:536
§ 255-16. Accessory uses; signs.
Customary accessory uses, including business signs, shall be permitted.
Such signs shall be subject to the provisions of Article XVI of this chapter.
(9) Promoting health, safety and general welfare.
M. Retail and personal service businesses are subject to the following
regulations:
(1) No fabricating, manufacturing, converting, finishing or assembling
shall be permitted within such store except when:
(a) Such use is clearly incidental to a permitted retail use;
(b) No work is done on the premises for retail sale elsewhere.
(2) Stock-in-trade, merchandise and supplies of such business may not
be stored, displayed or exhibited outside the confines of the
structure unless display or exhibition is done in compliance with
the following:
(a) During regular business hours, displays of stock-in-trade and
merchandise are permitted, provided that during the hours the
business is closed the stock-in-trade is stored within the
confines of the building.
(b) The display must be within six feet of the front of the building
and within its sidelines.
N. No drive-in restaurant or refreshment stand commonly called, snack
bars, dairy bars, hamburger stands or hot dog stands where customers
and patrons are served food, soft drinks or ice cream for their
immediate consumption outside of the confines of the building or
structure in which the business is conducted shall be permitted.
O. Martial arts schools, dance schools and such other similar uses shall be
considered personal service businesses for purposes of this section and
shall therefore be subject to the restrictions as set forth for retail and
personal service businesses as set forth in Subsections K and L of this
§ 255-15.
P. Child care centers for which a license is required from the Department
of Human Services pursuant to N.J.S.A. 30:5B-1 et seq.
§ 255-15 YARD WASTE § 255-16
250:537

ARTICLE V
Office District B-2
§ 255-17. Permitted uses.
In any Office Business District, the following uses only shall be permitted:
business, executive and professional offices, such as, but not limited to,
administrative offices, utility offices, medical and dental offices, insurance
offices, offices of architects, engineers, surveyors or lawyers, real estate
offices and child care centers for which a license is required from the
Department of Human Services pursuant to N.J.S.A. 30:5B-1 et seq.
§ 255-18. Prohibited uses.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in § 255-17, biological or
chemical laboratories and their related offices or facilities used for scientific
research or product testing and their related offices are specifically
prohibited in the Office Business District.
§ 255-19. Accessory uses; signs.
Customary accessory uses, including signs, shall be permitted, subject to
the provisions of Article XVI of this chapter.
§ 255-17 YARD WASTE § 255-19
250:539

ARTICLE VI
Planned Residential Developments
§ 255-20. Conditional uses in residential zones.
Upon proper application and hearing as herein provided, planned
residential developments shall be permitted as a conditional use on sites
identified by block and lot number as noted in § 255-7K herein, provided
that the Planning Board finds and determines that the following conditions
have been met:
A. One-family dwelling. Planned residential development shall include
one-family dwellings, as defined by Article III.
B. Uses.
(1) Planned residential developments shall also include at least two of
the following residential uses:
(a) Townhouses and patio houses.
(b) Townhouses-duplex combination only.
(c) Triplexes.
(d) Quadruplexes.
(2) Planned residential developments may also include any of the
following nonresidential uses; provided, however, that same may
only be used by residents of the development and their guests, and
not by the general public:
(a) Parks and playgrounds.
(b) Indoor or outdoor swimming pools, clubhouses, arboretums,
botanical gardens, hiking trails and outdoor but not indoor
tennis courts.
C. Size of planned residential developments. No tract, parcel or lot or
assemblage of lots may be developed as a planned residential
development unless it shall be comprised of a minimum of 10 or more
acres of adjoining and contiguous land and unless it has sufficient
access to an approved and improved street. For the purpose of this
section, internal streets, roads and rights-of-way shall not be deemed to
divide acreage of a planned residential development.
D. Sanitary sewer system. A planned residential development shall be
required to be joined to a centralized sanitary sewer system as defined
herein. Such linkage to a sanitary sewer system must be reviewed and
approved by the State of New Jersey, Department of Environmental
Protection, and Bergen County Utilities Authority, the Mayor and
Council and the Borough Engineer.
§ 255-20 YARD WASTE § 255-20
250:541
E. Environmentally sensitive lands. No planned residential development
shall be approved as a conditional use where the subject property is
located within environmentally sensitive lands. Lands shall be deemed
to be environmentally sensitive if they meet one or more of the
following criteria:
(1) Fifty percent or more of the site is classified as a wetland area.
(2) Twenty-five percent or more of the site is classified as a floodway.
(3) Fifty percent or more of the property is identified as a flood hazard,
flood fringe or flood plain area.
(4) Twenty-five percent or more of the property contains slopes in
excess of 15% grade.
(5) Fifteen percent or more of the property contains slopes in excess of
20% grade.
(6) No portion of any lands within 250 feet of the one-hundred-year
floodline of the Lake Tappan Reservoir or the Hackensack River
shall be utilized for a planned residential development purpose, nor
utilized in calculating lands for qualification of a planned
residential development.
(7) Any building, structure, area or property that is significant to the
history, architecture, archaeology or culture of the United States,
the State of New Jersey, the County of Bergen or the Borough of
Old Tappan, and has been so designated, shall not be utilized in a
planned residential development.
F. Road frontage. A planned residential development shall be located on a
principal roadway in the Borough and shall contain minimum of 50 feet
of road frontage measured at the street right-of-way line. All
multifamily units within a planned residential development shall have
direct access to such principal roadway. Principal roadways shall be
limited to the following streets within the Borough:
Old Tappan Road (Washington Avenue)
Central Avenue (Cripplebush Road)
DeWolf Road (Westwood Avenue)
Orangeburg Road
G. Centralized water supply facilities. A planned residential development
shall be provided with an adequate supply of water from the requisite
serving utility. Proof of its availability and sufficient water pressure
shall be provided to the Planning Board at the time of submission of an
application for development.
H. Except as provided in Subsection D(1)(a) of § 255-22 hereof, the
applicant shall provide and maintain a buffer area, as defined in § 255-4
for a planned residential development which shall be no less than 50
§ 255-20 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 255-20
250:542
§ 255-21. Area, yard and bulk requirements.
The following area, yard and bulk requirements shall apply to planned
residential developments as a permitted conditional use:
§ 255-22. Land use intensity and distribution of dwelling units.
The following requirements as to the density and distribution of residential
units shall apply to planned residential developments as permitted
conditional uses:
feet in width from all external property lines of the site. Such buffer
area shall be required to provide a year-round visual screen, as
determined by the Planning Board. [Added 4-24-2000 by Ord. No.
714-00]
A. The minimum sizes of lots, the number and minimum sizes of yards and
building bulk controls for planned residential developments shall be
governed by the accompanying schedule entitled "Zoning, Area and
Bulk Schedule for Old Tappan, New Jersey" which, together with all
explanatory matter thereon, is attached to and made part of this
chapter.52
B. All buildings and structures within a planned residential development
shall be set back no less than 70 feet from any external street right-ofway
line, as existing, or such distance as may be determined by the
Bergen County Planning Board as part of its review procedures,
whichever is greater.
C. All setbacks shall be measured from the right-of-way line of the street,
but if the Master Plan or Official Map of the Borough shows the location
of a right-of-way line different from the existing right-of-way line, the
required setbacks shall be measured from the right-of-way line as
shown on the Official Map, if any, or the Master Plan.
D. At all street intersections, no obstruction to vision exceeding 30 inches
in height above the grade to be established at the curb, other than
existing buildings, posts, columns, trees or proposed necessary traffic
control devices, shall be permitted in an area bounded by the
intersecting curbline and a line joining points each 30 feet distant from
the intersection of the curblines along the curbline of each street.
A. Overall residential density. The maximum overall residential density for
a planned residential development shall be six units per acre of total
land area. For the purpose of this section, internal streets, roads and
right-of-ways shall be included in the acreage calculations.
B. Low- and moderate-income housing. Every planned residential
development shall provide low- and moderate-income housing as
defined herein as part of the development. A planned residential
52.Editor's Note: The Zoning, Area and Bulk Schedule is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 255-20 YARD WASTE § 255-22
250:543
development shall provide a minimum of 20% of its dwelling units for
low- and moderate-income households; provided, however, that if the
planned residential development meets its low- and moderate-income
housing obligation with rental housing, the planned residential
development shall provide sufficient low- and moderate-income housing
which will result in total credits for affordable housing from the Council
on Affordable Housing to the Borough in an amount equal to at least
20% of the dwelling units in the planned residential development.
C. Distribution of low- and moderate-income dwelling units. Within a
planned residential development 50% of all units for low- and moderateincome
housing shall be for moderate income households and 50% shall
be for low income households, both as defined here.
D. Distribution of dwelling types.
(1) Single-family dwellings.
(a) Within a planned residential development there shall be a
minimum of three types of dwelling units. A minimum of 5% of
the total number of units permitted shall be one-family
dwellings which shall meet the area, yard and bulk
requirements of the RA 15 Zone as it applies to single-family
residences. The one-family dwellings shall be located adjacent
to or near existing one-family dwellings so as to form a
transition zone between the planned residential development
and such existing one-family dwellings. The remaining units
may be constructed as townhouses, patio homes, townhouse
duplexes, triplexes and quadruplexes, provided that they
comply with the minimum area, yard and bulk standards of this
section, as provided herein.
(b) One-family dwellings proposed and constructed within any
planned residential development may only be counted toward
the five-percent minimum requirement for that development,
and may not be counted toward such five-percent minimum
requirement for any adjacent or other planned residential
development.
(c) As a condition to any approval granted to such planned
residential development, the owner shall record a restrictive
covenant or other deed restriction, in form satisfactory to the
Planning Board Attorney, provided that no further development
or construction shall be permitted with respect to such singlefamily
dwellings or, if applicable, with respect to the lots on
which such dwellings are erected.
(d) The RA 15 Zone minimum front yard, side yard, and rear yard
area requirements for a one-family residential dwelling within
a planned residential development shall supersede the buffer
area requirements of § 255-20H hereof, where such yard is
situated within the required buffer area of a planned
§ 255-22 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 255-22
250:544
residential development. [Amended 4-24-2000 by Ord. No.
714-00]
(2) Economic segregation prohibited. Except where a planned
residential development meets its requirement for low- and
moderate-income housing by providing low- and moderate-income
rental housing, within a planned residential development there
shall be no economic segregation of dwelling units separating lowand
moderate-income units from marketplace units, except that
one-family dwellings may be separated from low- and moderateincome
units; and two building groups of townhouses adjacent to
each other, regardless of the total number of dwelling units
contained therein, shall contain at least one low- and moderateincome
unit as part of the two building groups.
(3) Handicapped accessible units. Within a planned residential
development, at least 4% of the dwelling units shall be designed for
occupancy by handicapped persons, in accordance with standards
promulgated by the handicapped persons, in accordance with
standards promulgated by the Federal Department of Housing and
Urban Development.
(4) Low- and moderate-income units.
(a) Within a planned residential development, the distribution of
low- and moderate-income units shall be governed by the
following standards:
Percent Distribution of Dwelling Units
Number of Bedrooms
Percent Low- and
Moderate-Income Dwellings
Efficiency and one-bedroom* 50%
Two-bedroom 35%
Three-bedroom 15%
Total 100%
*No more than 20% of the total units may be efficiency units.
(b) Within planned residential developments, low- and moderateincome
housing units shall be built in accordance with the
following schedule:
Minimum Percentage Lowand
Moderate-Income
Units Completed
Percentage of Market
Housing Units Completed
0 25
10 25 + 1 unit
50 50
75 75
§ 255-22 YARD WASTE § 255-22
250:545
Minimum Percentage Lowand
Moderate-Income
Units Completed
Percentage of Market
Housing Units Completed
100 90
— 100
In the event COAH waives this requirement for any
developer, then this requirement may also be waived by the
Borough by resolution of the Mayor and Council.
(c) The construction of low- and moderate-income units, as part of
a planned residential development, shall be the responsibility
of the applicant. Any plan for such development shall be
subject not only to conditional use approval as provided for
herein, but also subject to site plan approval by the Planning
Board, pursuant to Chapter 218, Subdivision of Land.
E. Transfer of low- and moderate-income housing unit obligations.
(1) Findings.
(a) It is in the best interests of the citizens of the Borough to
provide low- and moderate-income housing within the Borough
consistent with the standards established by the Supreme
Court of New Jersey in its "Mount Laurel II" decision and the
New Jersey Legislature in the Fair Housing Act, N.J.S.A.
52:27D-301 et seq.
(b) In furtherance of providing for its fair share of low- and
moderate-income housing, the Borough has enacted an
amendment to this chapter which provides for the construction
of low- and moderate-income housing within the Borough as a
conditional higher density use.
(c) N.J.S.A. 52:27D-325 authorizes the Borough to provide for the
construction of low- and moderate-income housing in such
manner as may be necessary or useful for those purposes.
(d) Construction of low- and moderate-income housing on Borough
owned property will further the low- and moderate-income
housing objectives.
(e) Permitting a developer, with the Borough's consent, to transfer
its obligation to build low- and moderate-income housing from
the developer's site to the RB-130 Residence District facilitates
the construction of low- and moderate-income housing in the
RB-130 Residence District.
(2) Transfer of obligation to other lands. A developer, with the written
consent of the Borough incorporated in a developer's agreement,
may transfer all or part of this low- and moderate-income housing
obligation to another site within the Borough, which other site shall
§ 255-22 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 255-22
250:546
§ 255-23. Open space requirements.
The following requirements as to open space shall apply to a planned
residential development as a conditional use:
§ 255-24. Building relationships.
be on Borough owned land in an RB 130 Residential district. Such a
transfer shall be in furtherance of the Borough providing low- and
moderate-income housing consistent with N.J.S.A. 52:27D-325.
F. Transfer of low- and moderate-income housing unit obligations via inlieu
contribution.
(1) In-lieu contribution. A developer and the Borough may enter into
an agreement whereby the developer may make a contribution to
the Borough in accordance with § 45-38 of Chapter 45, Land Use
Procedures, of the Code of the Borough of Old Tappan in lieu of
constructing low- and moderate-income housing on-site as per
N.J.A.C. 5:93-8.10(c).
(2) Distribution of low- and moderate-income dwelling units. Of the
remaining low- and moderate-income housing units built on site,
50% shall be for moderate-income households and 50% shall be for
low-income households in accordance with Subsection C of this
§ 255-22 and COAH regulations. In the event COAH waives this
requirement for any developer, then this requirement may also be
waived by the Borough.
(3) Limitations. In-lieu contributions shall be made in accordance with
the applicable provisions of COAH regulations and Borough
ordinances. Further, developers transferring 50% or more of their
low- and moderate-income housing obligation in accordance with
Subsection E of this § 255-22 shall not be permitted to make an inlieu
contribution in accordance with this Subsection F of § 255-22.
A. At least 20% of the total land area of any planned residential
development shall be designed for and devoted to open space. In
computing such twenty-percent requirement, common recreation areas
accessory to the residential use and required buffer areas shall be
included as open space.
B. Any open space proposed as part of a planned residential development
shall comply with the same open space design standards pertaining to
residential cluster developments, as set forth in § 218-22 of this Code.
C. Any common open space proposed as part of a planned residential
development shall comply with the same maintenance requirements
pertaining to residential cluster developments, as set forth in § 218-53
of this Code.
§ 255-22 YARD WASTE § 255-24
250:547
§ 255-25. Affordability controls, marketing and qualification for
low- and moderate-income housing units.
A. In all planned residential developments, where dwelling units are not
being subdivided into individual lots and the circulation system is
privately owned and maintained, the following shall be the minimum
distance between buildings other than one-family dwellings:
(1) The front of one building to the front of another building: 75 feet.
(2) The front of one building to the side of another building: 60 feet.
(3) The front of one building to the rear of another building: 75 feet.
(4) The side of one building to the side of another building (other than
an attached unit): 30 feet.
(5) The side of one building to the rear of another building: 60 feet.
(6) The rear of one building to the rear of another building: 75 feet.
B. The maximum length of a building unit containing townhouses shall be
the lesser of five dwelling units or 155 feet in length.
C. The maximum length of a building unit containing townhouses and
duplexes or flats shall be the lesser of six dwelling units in the total
structure or 160 feet in length.
D. The applicant shall designate on the plans submitted the front and rear
of each building.
A. Purpose and scope. This section is designed to provide assurances that
low- and moderate-income units are created with controls on
affordability over time and that low- and moderate-income people
occupy these units. To this end, Old Tappan designates the Old Tappan
Affordable Housing Agency (hereinafter "the agency") with the
responsibility of ensuring the affordability of sales and rental units over
time. The agency shall also be responsible for affirmative marketing;
income qualification of low- and moderate-income households; placing
income eligible households in low- and moderate-income units upon
initial occupancy; placing income eligible households in low- and
moderate-income units as they become available during the period of
affordability controls; and enforcing the terms of the deed restriction
and mortgage loan.
B. Placing households in low- and moderate-income units. In placing
households in low- and moderate-income units, Old Tappan shall utilize
the following verification and certification procedures:
(1) Every household member 18 years of age or over who will live in
the affordable unit and receives income shall be required to provide
income documentation as applicable and determined by the
reviewer for the agency. This includes income received by adults on
§ 255-24 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 255-25
250:548
behalf of minor children for their benefit. Household members
18 years of age or over not receiving income must produce
documentation of current status.
(2) Verification may include, but is not limited to, the following:
(a) Four consecutive pay stubs including overtime, bonuses, or
tips dated within 120 days of the interview date or a letter from
the employer stating present annual income figure as
projected annually.
(b) A copy of regular IRS Form 1040 (tax computation form),
1040A, or 1040EZ as applicable and state income tax returns
filed for each of the three years prior to the date of the
interview;
(c) A letter or appropriate reporting form verifying benefits such
as social security, unemployment, welfare, disability or pension
income (monthly or annually);
(d) A letter or appropriate reporting form verifying any other
sources of income claimed by the applicant such as alimony
and child support;
(e) Reports that verify income from assets to be submitted by
banks or other financial institutions managing trust funds,
money market accounts, certificates of deposit, stocks or
bonds;
(f) Evidence or reports of income from assets such as real estate
or businesses that are directly held by any household member;
(g) Evidence or reports that verify assets that do not earn regular
income such as non-income-producing real estate or savings
that do not earn interest; and
(h) A notarized statement of explanation in such form as to be
satisfactory to the reviewer.
(3) Generally, sources of annual income shall be based on regular
income reported to the IRS and which can be utilized for mortgage
approval. Household annual gross income shall be calculated by
projecting current gross income over a twelve-month period.
(4) Income includes but is not limited to wages, salaries, tips,
commissions, alimony, regularly scheduled overtime, pensions,
social security, unemployment compensation, AFDC, verified
regular child support, disability, net income from business or real
estate, and income from assets such as savings, certificates of
deposit, money market, mutual funds, stocks and bonds and
imputed income from non-income-producing assets such as equity
in real estate.
§ 255-25 YARD WASTE § 255-25
250:549
(5) Assets not earning a verifiable income shall have an imputed
interest income using a current average annual savings interest
rate. Assets not earning income include present real estate equity.
Applicants owning real estate must produce documentation of a
market value appraisal and outstanding mortgage debt. The
difference will be treated as the monetary value of the asset and the
imputed interest added to income.
(6) Income from assets that have delayed earnings, such as IRA's or
annuity programs shall not be included in current income until
such payments are being received. However, these assets must be
reported and verified.
(7) Net rent from real estate is considered income after the monthly
mortgage payment including real estate taxes and insurance is
deducted. Other expenses are not deductible. In addition, the
equity in the rented real estate is considered an asset and will have
the imputed interest income on the calculated value of equity
added to income.
(8) Income does not include payments, rebates or credits received
under federal or state low-income home energy assistance
programs, food stamps, payments received for care of foster
children, relocation assistance benefits, income of live-in
attendants, scholarships, student loans, personal property such as
automobiles, lump-sum additions to family assets such as
inheritances, one-time lottery winnings, and insurance settlements
except for additional income earned from these additions, and
casual, sporadic or irregular gifts and bonuses.
(9) Standard credit information services that provide conventional
credit and tenant reports may be utilized when certifying a
household with required written permission from the household.
An unsatisfactory credit history or credit information that
demonstrates a disproportionate debt to income ratio may result in
a denial of certification. Court-ordered payments for alimony or
child support to another household shall be considered a regular
monthly debt whether or not it is being paid regularly.
(10) Households whose total gross annual income is measured at 50%
or below 50% of the authorized median income guideline shall be
certified as low-income households and referred to units
designated for low-income households.
(11) Households whose total gross annual income is measured above
50% but below 80% of the authorized median income shall be
certified as moderate income households and referred to units
designated for moderate income households.
(12) Generally, households will be referred to units where
predetermined total monthly housing costs correspond to the
household's calculated ability to pay using 28% of gross monthly
§ 255-25 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 255-25
250:550
income as a standard for home ownership and 30% of gross
monthly income as a standard for rental units.
(13) At the discretion of the agency, households may also be required to
produce documentation of household composition for determining
the correct unit size and the applicable median income guide.
(14) Generally, households will be referred to available units using the
following standards for occupancy:
(a) A maximum of two persons per bedroom;
(b) Children of same sex in same bedroom;
(c) Unrelated adults or persons of the opposite sex other than
husband and wife in separate bedrooms; and
(d) Children not in the same bedroom with parents.
(15) Households may be considered for units other than as above, but in
no case shall a household be referred to a unit that provides for
more than one additional bedroom per household occupancy
standards as stated in Subsection B(14) above.
(16) A form for certification shall be prepared and signed by the agency.
Only households receiving certification shall be referred to
affordable housing units.
(17) Certified households who reject an opportunity for affordable
housing may be replaced on the referral list at their request and
may be reinterviewed for certification when their name appears on
a listing for a subsequent unit.
(18) Certification shall be valid for no more than 120 days unless a valid
sales contract or lease has been executed within that time period.
In this event, certifications shall be valid until such time as the
sales contract or lease is held invalid and no occupancy has
occurred. Certifications may be renewed in writing at the request
of a certified household for no more than an additional period of
120 days at the discretion of the agency.
(19) Households who are denied certification may make a written
request for a redetermination. Households shall be required to
produce additional documentation to support their claim.
Households which are denied certification a second time may
request a hearing by forwarding a written request to the agency
within 30 days following the household's receipt of a denial
notification. If a written request has not been received within the
thirty-day time period, the ineligible determination will be final.
The hearing decision shall be final.
C. Length of controls.
§ 255-25 YARD WASTE § 255-25
250:551
(1) Old Tappan shall determine measures to assure that newly
constructed low- and moderate-income sales units remain
affordable to low- and moderate-income households for an
appropriate period of not less than 30 years. The agency shall do so
by requiring all conveyances of newly constructed low- and
moderate-income sales units subject to the Act to contain the deed
restriction and mortgage lien adopted by the New Jersey Council
on Affordable Housing (hereinafter "COAH").
(2) Municipalities receiving state aid pursuant to P.L. 1978, c .14
(N.J.S.A. 52:27D-178 et seq.) that exhibits one of the characteristics
delineated in N.J.A.C. 5:93-2.3(b) shall adopt measures to assure
that newly constructed low- and moderate-income sales units
remain affordable to low- and moderate-income households for a
period of not less than 10 years. The agency shall do so by
requiring all conveyances of newly constructed low- and moderateincome
sales units subject to the Act to contain the deed
restrictions and mortgage lien adopted by COAH.
(3) Rehabilitated owner-occupied single-family housing units that are
improved to code standard shall be subject to affordability controls
for at least six years.
(4) Rehabilitated renter-occupied housing units that are improved to
code standard shall be subject to affordability controls for at least
10 years.
(5) Old Tappan will assure that newly constructed low- and moderateincome
rental units remain affordable to low- and moderate-income
households for a period of 30 years. Municipalities receiving state
aid pursuant to P.L. 1978, c. 14 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-178 et seq.) that
exhibit one of the characteristics delineated in N.J.A.C. 5:93-2.3(b)
shall adopt measures to assure that newly constructed low- and
moderate-income rental units remain affordable to low- and
moderate-income households for a period of at least 10 years.
Affordability controls on rental units may exceed the prescribed
periods if the developer agrees to a longer period.
(6) Housing units created through conversion of a nonresidential
structure shall be considered a new housing unit and shall be
subject to controls on affordability as delineated in Subsections
C(1), (2) and (5) above.
(7) Affordability controls on accessory apartments shall be for a period
of at least 10 years. However, in order to be eligible for a rental
bonus pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.13, controls on affordability shall
extend for a period of 30 years.
(8) Alternative living arrangements shall be controlled in a manner,
suitable to COAH, that provides assurances that such a facility will
house low- and moderate-income households for at least 10 years.
§ 255-25 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 255-25
250:552
D. General provisions concerning uniform deed restriction liens and
enforcement through certificates of occupancy or reoccupancy on sales
units.
(1) A certificate of occupancy for initial occupancy of a low- or
moderate-income sales unit shall not be issued unless there is a
written determination by the agency that the unit is to be
controlled by a deed restriction and mortgage lien as adopted by
COAH. The agency shall make such determination within 10 days of
receipt of a proposed deed restriction and mortgage lien.
Amendments to the deed restriction and lien shall be permitted
only if they have been approved by COAH. A request for an
amendment to the deed restriction and lien may be made by the
agency, Old Tappan or the developer.
(2) Initial occupancy of a low- or moderate-income sales unit shall not
be permitted prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy in
accordance with Subsection D(1) above.
(3) A certificate of reoccupancy shall be required for any occupancy of
a low- or moderate-income sales unit resulting from a resale and
shall not issue such certificate unless there is a written
determination by the agency that the unit is to be controlled by the
deed restriction and mortgage lien prior to issuance of a certificate
of occupancy, regardless of whether the sellers had executed the
deed restriction and mortgage lien adopted by COAH upon
acquisition of the property. The agency shall make such
determination within 10 days of receipt of a proposed deed
restriction and mortgage lien.
(4) The certificate of reoccupancy shall not be required in sales for
which controls are allowed to expire or in which the repayment
option is being exercised pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.4.
(5) The mortgage lien and the deed restriction shall be filed with the
records office of Bergen County. The lien and deed restriction shall
be in the form adopted by COAH, unless amendments have been
approved by COAH, for a specific municipality.
(6) The deed restriction, including the repayment clause, and the
mortgage lien shall have priority over all mortgages on the
property except for a first mortgage placed on the property by the
mortgagee prior to the expiration of resale controls.
E. Option-to-buy sales units.
(1) The deed restriction governing the deeds of low- and moderateincome
units shall include an option permitting purchase of the
affordable housing unit at the maximum allowable restricted sales
price at the time of the first nonexempt sale after controls on
affordability have been in effect on the unit for the period specified
in N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.2. The option to buy shall be available to the
§ 255-25 YARD WASTE § 255-25
250:553
municipality, the Department of Community Affairs, the agency, or
a qualified nonprofit as defined by COAH.
(2) All deed restrictions governing low- and moderate-income units
shall require the owner to notify the agency and COAH by certified
mail of any intent to sell the unit 90 days prior to entering into an
agreement for the first nonexempt sale after controls have been in
effect on the housing unit for the period specified in N.J.A.C.
5:93-9.2.
(3) Upon receipt of such notice, the option to buy the unit at the
maximum allowable restricted sales price or any mutually
agreeable sales price that does not exceed the maximum allowable
sales price shall be available for 90 days. The agency shall notify
the Department of Community Affairs, the agency, and COAH that
the unit is for sale. If the Borough exercises this option, it may
enter into a contract of sale. If the Borough fails to exercise this
option within 90 days, the first of the other entities giving notice to
the seller of its initial purchase during the ninety-day period shall
be entitled to purchase the unit. If the option to purchase the unit
at the maximum allowable restricted sales price is not exercised by
a written offer to purchase the housing unit within 90 days of
receipt of the intent to sell, the owner may proceed to sell the
housing unit (pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.8). If the owner does not
sell the unit within one year of the date of the delivery of notice of
intent to sell, the option to buy the unit shall be restored, and the
owner shall be required to submit a new notice of intent to sell 90
days prior to any future proposed date of sale.
(4) Any option to buy a housing unit at the maximum allowable
restricted sales price shall be exercised by certified mail and shall
be deemed exercised upon mailing.
F. Municipal option; sales units.
(1) If Old Tappan elects to purchase a low- or moderate-income unit
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.4, it may:
(a) Convey or rent the housing unit to a low- or moderate-income
purchaser or tenant at a price or rent not to exceed the
maximum allowable restricted sales price or rent, provided
that the unit is controlled by a deed restriction in accordance
with COAH regulations or an alternative approved by COAH;
or
(b) Convey the unit at fair market value subject to the following
provisions:
[1] If Old Tappan purchases low-income housing units, it shall
maintain them as low-income housing units.
§ 255-25 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 255-25
250:554
[2] If Old Tappan elects to purchase low- or moderate-income
housing units and convey them at a fair market value, it
shall:
[a] Notify COAH of any proposed sale and sales price 90
days before closing;
[b] Notify COAH of the price differential as defined in
N.J.A.C. 5:93-1.3; and
[c] Deposit the price differential in an interest-bearing
housing trust fund devoted solely to the creation,
rehabilitation or maintenance of low- and moderateincome
housing.
(2) Money deposited in housing trust funds may not be expended until
Old Tappan submits and COAH approves a spending plan in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.1(c). Money deposited in housing
trust funds shall be subject to the restrictions, monitoring
requirements and penalties outlined in N.J.A.C. 5:93-8.15 through
17.
G. State option; sales units. When the Department of Community Affairs or
agency elects to purchase a low- or moderate-income unit pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.4, it may:
(1) Convey or rent the housing unit to a low- or moderate-income
purchaser or tenant at a price or rent not to exceed the allowable
restricted sales price or rental; or
(2) Convey the unit at fair market value and utilize the price
differential to subsidize the construction, rehabilitation or
maintenance of low- and moderate-income housing within the
appropriate housing region.
H. Nonprofit option; sales units.
(1) Nonprofit agencies may apply to COAH at any time for the right to
purchase low- or moderate-income units subsequent to the period
of controls on affordability, provided that the unit remains
controlled by a deed restriction in accordance with COAH rules and
regulations, or an alternative approved by COAH.
(2) Nonprofit agencies that have been designated by COAH shall be
eligible to purchase low- or moderate-income units pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.4 for the sole purpose of conveying or renting the
housing unit to a low- or moderate-income purchaser or tenant at a
price or rent not to exceed the allowable restricted sales price or
rental. Low-income units shall be made available to low-income
purchasers or tenants, and the housing unit shall be regulated by
the deed restriction and lien adopted by COAH, in accordance with
COAH rules and regulations. The term of the controls on
§ 255-25 YARD WASTE § 255-25
250:555
affordability shall be the same as those required by N.J.A.C.
5:93-9.2.
I. Seller option; sales units.
(1) An eligible seller of a low- or moderate-income unit which has been
controlled for the period established in N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.2 who has
provided notice of an intent to sell may proceed with the sale if no
eligible entity as outlined in N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.4(c) and 9.7 exercises
its option to purchase within 90 days.
(2) Subject to N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.9, the seller may elect to:
(a) Sell to a qualified low- and moderate-income household at a
price not to exceed the maximum permitted sales price in
accordance with existing COAH rules, provided that the unit is
regulated by the deed restriction and lien adopted by COAH in
accordance with COAH rules and regulations, for a period of at
least 20 years; or
(b) Exercise the repayment option and sell to any purchaser at
market price, provided that 95% of the price differential is paid
to the agency, as an instrument of the Borough, at closing.
(3) If the sale will be to a qualified low- and moderate-income
household, the agency shall certify the income qualifications of the
purchaser and shall ensure the housing unit is regulated by the
deed restriction and lien required by COAH in accordance with
COAH rules and regulations.
(4) The agency shall examine any contract of sale containing a
repayment option to determine if the proposed sales price bears a
reasonable relationship to the housing unit's fair market value. In
making this determination, the agency shall not approve any
contract of sale where there is a determination that the sales price
does not bear a reasonable relationship to a fair market value. The
agency shall make a determination within 20 days of receipt of the
contract of sale and shall calculate the repayment option payment.
(5) The agency shall adopt an appeal procedure by which a seller may
submit written documentation requesting the agency to recompute
the repayment obligation if the seller believes an error has been
made, or to reconsider a determination that a sales price does not
bear a reasonable relationship to fair market value.
(6) The repayment shall occur at the date of closing and transfer of
title for the first nonexempt transaction after the expiration of
controls on affordability.
(7) Repayment proceeds shall be deposited in a housing trust fund (see
N.J.A.C. 5:93-8.14) and may be used as per N.J.A.C. 5:93-8.15.
Money deposited in housing trust funds may not be expended until
§ 255-25 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 255-25
250:556
the municipality submits and COAH approves a spending plan. See
N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.1(c).
J. Old Tappan rejection of repayment option; sales units.
(1) Old Tappan shall have the right to determine the most desirable
means of promoting an adequate supply of low- and moderateincome
housing and to prohibit the exercise of the repayment
option and maintain controls on lower income housing units sold
within the municipality beyond the period required by N.J.A.C.
5:93-9.2. Such determination shall be made by resolution of the Old
Tappan governing body and shall be effective upon filing with
COAH and the agency. The resolution shall specify the time period
for which the repayment option shall not be applicable. During
such period, no seller in Old Tappan may utilize the repayment
option permitted by N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.8.
(2) If Old Tappan exercises the option outlined in Subsection J(1)
above, it shall:
(a) Provide public notice in a newspaper of general circulation;
and
(b) Notify the agency and COAH of its action.
(3) The agency shall ensure that the deed restriction on all affected
housing units reflects the extended periods of controls.
K. Continued application of options to create, rehabilitate or maintain lowand
moderate-income units; sales units. When a housing unit has been
maintained as a low- or moderate-income unit after controls have been
in effect for the period specified in N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.2, the deed
restriction governing the housing units shall allow the Borough, the
state, nonprofit agencies and sellers of low- and moderate-income units
to again exercise all the same options as provided in this section.
L. Eligible capital improvements prior to the expiration of controls; sales
units.
(1) Property owners of single-family, owner-occupied housing may
apply to the agency for permission to increase the maximum price
for eligible capital improvements. Eligible capital improvements
shall be those that render the unit suitable for a larger household.
Property owners shall apply to the agency if an increase in the
maximum sales price is sought.
(2) At resale, all items of property which are permanently affixed to the
units and/or were included when the unit was initially restricted
(for example, refrigerator, range, washer, dryer, dishwasher, wallto-
wall carpeting) shall be included in the maximum allowable
resale price. Other items of property may be sold to the purchaser
at a reasonable price that has been approved by the agency at the
§ 255-25 YARD WASTE § 255-25
250:557
time of signing the agreement to purchase. The purchase of central
air conditioning installed subsequent to the initial sale of the unit
and not included in the base price may be made a condition of
the unit resale, provided that the price has been approved by the
agency. Unless otherwise permitted by COAH, the purchase of any
property other than central air conditioning shall not be made a
condition of the unit resale. The owner and the purchaser must
personally certify at the time of closing that no unapproved transfer
of funds for the purpose of selling and receiving property has taken
place at resale.
M. Subsidy to ensure affordability prior to the expiration of controls; sales
units. If the use of median income data adopted by COAH to index the
cost of housing renders a unit unaffordable to a low- or moderateincome
household at the time of resale, Old Tappan shall not lose credit
for the housing unit, provided that adequate controls on affordability
remain in place, but Old Tappan may subsidize the housing unit to
maintain affordability.
N. Impact of foreclosure on resale while controls are in place; sales units.
A judgment of foreclosure or a deed in lieu of foreclosure to a financial
institution regulated by state and/or federal law or to a lender on the
secondary mortgage market (including, but not limited to, the Federal
National Mortgage Association, the Home Loan Mortgage Corporation,
the Government National Mortgage Association or an entity acting on
their behalf) shall extinguish controls on affordable housing units,
provided that there is compliance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.14. Notice of
foreclosure shall allow the agency, the Borough of Old Tappan, the
Department of Community Affairs, or a nonprofit entity to purchase the
affordable housing unit at the maximum permitted sales price and
maintain it as an affordable unit for the balance of the intended period
of controls. Failure to purchase the affordable housing unit shall result
in COAH adding that unit to the municipal present and prospective fair
share obligation. Failure of the financial institution to provide notice of
a foreclosure action to the agency shall not impair any of the financial
institution's rights to recoup loan proceeds; shall not negate the
extinguishment of controls or the validity of the foreclosure; and shall
create no cause of action against the financial institution.
O. Excess proceeds upon foreclosures; sales units. In the event of a
foreclosure sale, the owner of the affordable housing unit shall be
personally obligated to pay the agency responsible for assuring
affordability, any surplus funds, but only to the extent that such surplus
funds exceed the difference between the maximum price permitted at
the time of foreclosure and the amount necessary to redeem the debt to
the financial institution, including costs of foreclosure.
P. Annual indexed increases while controls are in place; sales and rentals.
(1) The price of an owner-occupied housing unit and the rents of
affordable housing units may increase annually based on the
§ 255-25 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 255-25
250:558
percentage increase in the regional median income limit for each
housing region. In no event shall the maximum resale price
established by the agency be lower than the last recorded purchase
price.
(2) With the exception of rentals constructed pursuant to low-income
tax credit regulations, the rent of a low- or moderate-income
housing unit may be increased annually based on the percentage
increase in the Housing Consumer Price Index for the United
States. This increase shall not exceed 9% in any one year. Rents for
units constructed pursuant to low-income tax credit regulations
shall be indexed pursuant to the regulations governing low income
tax credits.
Q. Procedures for initial sales, resale prior to the expiration of controls
and rentals.
(1) Low- and moderate-income sales units shall not be offered to nonincome-
eligible households at initial sale without COAH approval.
Parties that petition COAH for such approval shall document efforts
to sell housing units to income-eligible households and shall adhere
to the procedures outlined in N.J.A.C. 5:91-12.
(2) Persons wishing to sell affordable units shall notify the agency
responsible for assuring affordability of the intent to sell. If no
eligible buyer enters a contract of sale for the unit within 90 days of
notification, the agency shall have the option to purchase the unit
for a negotiated price that shall not exceed the maximum price
permitted based on the regional increase in the median income as
defined by HUD or other recognized standards adopted by COAH.
If the agency does not purchase the unit, the seller may apply for
permission to order the unit to a non-income-eligible household at
the maximum price permitted. The seller shall document efforts to
sell the unit to an income-eligible household as part of this
application. In reviewing the request, the agency shall consider the
specific reasons for any delay in selling the housing unit and the
hardship to the seller in continuing to offer the affordable unit to an
income-eligible applicant. The inability to sell a unit for the
maximum permitted resale price shall not, in itself, be considered
an appropriate reason for allowing a housing unit to be sold to a
non-income-eligible household. If the request is granted, the seller
may offer a low-income housing unit to a moderate-income
household and a moderate-income housing unit to a household
earning in excess of 80% of median. In no case shall the seller be
permitted to receive more than the maximum price permitted. In no
case shall a sale pursuant to this section eliminate the resale
controls on the unit or permit any subsequent seller to convey the
unit in full compliance with the terms of this section.
(3) Owners of low- and moderate-income rental units shall not offer
rental units to a non-income-eligible household without prior
§ 255-25 YARD WASTE § 255-25
250:559
approval of COAH. Parties that petition for such approval shall
document all efforts to rent to income-eligible households and
demonstrate to the satisfaction of COAH that alternatives, such as
a reduction in rent, are not feasible. Parties that petition COAH
shall adhere to the procedures outlined in N.J.A.C. 5:91-12.
R. Affirmative marketing plan.
(1) Purpose. The Borough has a fair-share obligation of 98 units of
which 98 are new construction. This subsection will apply to all
planned residential developments that contain proposed low- and
moderate-income units. The affirmative marketing plan is a
regional marketing strategy designed to attract buyers and/or
renters of all majority and minority groups, regardless of sex, age
or number of children, to housing units which are being marketed
by a developer/sponsor, municipality and/or designated
administrative agency of affordable housing. The plan will address
the requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:93-11. In addition, the plan prohibits
discrimination in the sale, rental, financing or other services
related to housing on the basis of race, color, sex, religion,
handicap, age, familial status/size or national origin. The Borough
is in the housing region consisting of Bergen, Hudson, Passaic and
Sussex Counties. The affirmative marketing program is a
continuing program.
(2) Advertisement. All newspaper articles, announcements and
requests for applications for low- and moderate-income units will
appear in the following daily regional newspapers/publications:
The Record, The Star Ledger and Jersey Journal. The primary
marketing will take the form of at least one press release sent to
the above publications and a paid display advertisement in each of
the above newspapers. Additional advertising and publicity will be
on an as-needed basis. The advertisement will include a description
of the street address of units, general directions to housing units,
the number of bedrooms per unit, the range of prices/rents, the size
of units, income information, and location of applications including
business hours and where/how applications may be obtained. All
newspaper articles, announcements and requests for applications
for low- and moderate-income housing will appear in the following
neighborhood-oriented weekly newspaper within the region:
Community Life.
(3) Applications. The following is the location of applications,
brochure(s), sign(s) and/or poster(s) used as part of the affirmative
marketing program: the Borough Hall, the Borough Library and the
developer's sales office. Applications will be mailed to prospective
applicants upon request.
(4) Other contacts. The following is a listing of community contact
person(s) and/or organization(s) in Bergen, Hudson, Passaic and
Sussex Counties that will aid in the affirmative marketing program
§ 255-25 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 255-25
250:560
§ 255-26. Standards pertaining to low- and moderate-income
housing units.
with particular emphasis on contacts that will reach out to groups
that are least likely to apply for housing within the region: Housing
Authority of Bergen County, Community Resource Council, Bergen
County Human Services, Urban League, Fair Housing Council and
the Board of Social Services.
(5) Random selection. The following is a description of the random
selection method that will be used to select occupants of low- and
moderate-income housing: Certified households shall be chosen at
random for available units by lottery system administered by the
Affordable Housing Agency.
(6) Affordable Housing Agency. The Affordable Housing Agency shall
administer the affirmative marketing program. The Affordable
Housing Agency has the responsibility to income-qualify low- and
moderate-income households; to place income-eligible households
in low- and moderate-income units upon initial occupancy; to
provide for the initial occupancy of low- and moderate-income units
with income-qualified households; to continue to qualify
households for reoccupancy of units as they become vacant during
the period of affordability controls; to assist with advertising and
outreach to low- and moderate-income households; to enforce the
terms of the deed restriction and mortgage loan as per N.J.A.C.
5:93-9.1; and to comply with monitoring and reporting
requirements as per N.J.A.C. 5:93-11.6 and 12.1.
(7) Preference. Households who live or work in the COAH-established
housing region may be given preference for sales and rental units
constructed within that housing region. Applicants living outside
the housing region will have an equal opportunity for units after
regional applicants have been initially serviced. The Borough
intends to comply with N.J.A.C. 5:93-11.7.
(8) Developer assistance. All developers of low- and moderate-income
housing units will be required to assist in the marketing of the
affordable units in their respective developments.
(9) Duration of marketing program. The marketing program will
commence at least 120 days before the issuance of either
temporary or permanent certificates of occupancy. The marketing
program will continue until all low- and moderate-income housing
units are initially occupied and for as long as affordable units are
deed restricted and occupancy or reoccupancy of units continues to
be necessary.
A. Purpose and scope. The purpose of this section is to provide standards
that pertain to the creation of low- and moderate-income housing units.
The rules that follow shall pertain to all planned residential
§ 255-25 YARD WASTE § 255-26
250:561
developments. This section provides standards on the distribution of
low- and moderate-income units; bedroom distribution; and
establishing the rents and prices of low- and moderate-income units.
B. Distribution of low- and moderate-income units.
(1) At least half of all units within each planned residential
development shall be affordable to low-income households.
(2) At least 1/3 of all units in each bedroom distribution (pursuant to
Subsection C hereinbelow) shall be affordable to low-income
households.
C. Bedroom distribution.
(1) Planned residential developments shall be structured in
conjunction with realistic market demands so that:
(a) The combination of efficiency and one-bedroom units is at least
10% and no greater than 20% of the total low- and moderateincome
units;
(b) At least 30% of all low- and moderate-income units are two
bedroom units; and
(c) At least 20% of all low- and moderate-income units are three
bedroom units.
(2) Low- and moderate-income units restricted to senior citizens may
utilize a modified bedroom distribution. At a minimum, the number
of bedrooms shall equal the number of senior citizen low- and
moderate-income units within the development. The standard can
be met by creating all one-bedroom units or by creating a twobedroom
unit for each efficiency unit.
D. Establishing rents and prices of units.
(1) The following criteria, in conjunction with realistic market
information, shall be used in determining maximum rents and sale
prices:
(a) Efficiency units shall be affordable to one-person households;
(b) One-bedroom units shall be affordable to 1.5-person
households;
(c) Two-bedroom units shall be affordable to three-person
households; and
(d) Three-bedroom units shall be affordable to 4.5-person
households.
(2) Median income by household size shall be established by a regional
weighted average of the uncapped Section 8 income limits
§ 255-26 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 255-26
250:562
published by HUD. The maximum average rent and price of lowand
moderate-income units within each planned residential
development shall be affordable to households earning 57.5% of
median income. Moderate-income sales units shall be available for
at least three different prices, and low-income sales units shall be
available for at least two different prices.
(3) In averaging 57.5% under Subsection D(2) above, developers may
establish one rent for a low-income unit and one rent for a
moderate-income unit for each bedroom distribution.
(4) Low- and moderate-income units shall utilize the same heating
source as market units within the planned residential development.
(5) The initial price of a low- and moderate-income owner-occupied
single-family housing unit shall be established so that after a down
payment of 5%, the monthly principal, interest, homeowner and
private mortgage insurance, property taxes (property taxes shall be
based on the restricted value of low- and moderate-income units)
and condominium or homeowner fees do not exceed 28% of the
eligible gross monthly income. Master deeds of inclusionary
developments shall regulate condominium or homeowner
association fees or special assessments of low- and moderateincome
purchasers at a specific percentage of those paid by market
purchasers calculated as follows: square footage of the subject lowor
moderate-income unit divided by the average square footage of
market rate units within the planned residential development with
the identical number of bedrooms.
(6) Gross rents, including an allowance for utilities, shall be
established so as not to exceed 30% of the gross monthly income of
the appropriate household size referenced in Subsection D(1)
above. Those tenant-paid utilities that are included in the utility
allowance shall be so stated in the lease. The allowance for utilities
shall be consistent with the utility allowance approved by HUD for
use in New Jersey.
(7) Low-income housing units shall be reserved for households with a
gross household income less than or equal to 50% of the median
income approved by the Council on Affordable Housing. Moderateincome
housing units shall be reserved for households with a gross
household income less than 80% of the median income approved by
the Council on Affordable Housing. For example, a household
earning 48% of median income may be placed in any low-income
unit; however, a household earning 53% may not qualify for a lowincome
unit. A household earning 67% of median may be placed in
any moderate-income housing unit. A household earning less than
50% of median may be placed in a moderate-income housing unit.
Low- and moderate-income units shall not be offered to households
that are not income-eligible without approval of the Council on
Affordable Housing.
§ 255-26 YARD WASTE § 255-27
250:563
§ 255-27. Circulation, parking, utilities, planning and staging.
A. In any planned residential development and senior citizen housing
development, all off-street parking and loading facilities shall comply
with the provisions of Chapter 218, Subdivision of Land, of this Code.
B. Any such planned residential development and senior citizen housing
development shall also comply with the following requirements with
respect to streets, utilities, environmental standards and staging of
development:
(1) Streets.
(a) The right-of-way and pavement widths of all internal streets,
roads and vehicular traveled ways shall be determined by the
Planning Board based upon sound planning and engineering
standards in conformity with the estimated needs of the fully
proposed development and the traffic to be generated thereby.
They shall be adequate in size, loading and design to
accommodate the maximum traffic, parking and loading needs
and access for fire-fighting, police and other emergency
vehicles.
(b) All private residential roads and streets shall contain a
minimum pavement width of 30 feet.
(c) All streets and roads, whether dedicated or privately owned
and maintained, or any combination thereof, shall comply with
all Borough ordinances as well as the laws of the State of New
Jersey with regard to construction and safety.
(d) Where an Official Map or Master Plan, or both, have been
adopted, the proposed street system shall conform to the
proposals and conditions shown thereon except as may be
modified by the Planning Board or governing body, as provided
by law.
(2) Utility improvements.
(a) Every planned residential development and senior citizen
housing development shall be serviced by a centralized water
and sanitary sewer system as defined herein.
(b) All utility improvements, including storm drainage systems,
sanitary sewage collection and disposal, garbage collection
and recycling, and water supply systems, shall be in
accordance with standards and procedures as established by
local, county and state regulations. Such improvements shall
be subject to review and approval by the Borough Engineer
and the Board of Health, as well as appropriate county and
state agencies. Water supply facilities shall be subject to
§ 255-27 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 255-27
250:564
review and approval by the Borough Engineer and Fire
Department.
(3) Electric, gas and telephone service. Electric, gas and telephone
service lines shall be installed by the developer in concert with the
appropriate public utilities providing such service. All such utility
lines shall be installed underground.
(4) Street improvements. Monuments, street names, traffic control
devices, shade trees, streetlights, sidewalks, curbs, fire hydrants
and all aspects of street construction, as well as other
improvements, shall comply with all applicable provisions of the
Code of the Borough of Old Tappan and shall meet with the
approval of the Borough Engineer.
(5) Environmental standards. Any planned residential development
and senior citizen housing development shall comply with all
environmental standards as provided herein and all other
provisions of the Code of the Borough of Old Tappan. Any new
building or structure to be erected, any existing building or
structure to be moved, enlarged, altered or added to and any land
within such planned residential development and senior citizen
housing development shall also comply with the following
requirements:
(a) There shall be no increase in the rate of runoff of any adjoining
or nearby stream or watercourse. Zero percent increase in
runoff shall be maintained for the site in consideration of a onehundred-
year storm.
(b) All principal buildings shall be set back a minimum of 30 feet
from the one-hundred-year flood line of any stream or
watercourse. All stream and watercourse corridors within this
thirty-foot distance shall remain in their natural state, except
where necessary to provide utility easements or connecting
roadways. The Planning Board shall, in addition, require the
applicant to dedicate to the public an easement of not less than
10 feet along each side or edge of such body of water.
(c) No portion of the sanitary sewer system servicing the
development may be located within 100 feet of any
groundwater source in any area of fractured bedrock.
(d) No portion or feature of any planned residential development
and senior citizen housing development shall impede any
existing waterways or streams or substantially alter the
hydrology of the area.
(e) In any planned residential development and senior citizen
housing development, no structure shall be permitted in any
area of the development having a topographic slope of 15% or
greater, after final grading.
§ 255-27 YARD WASTE § 255-27
250:565
(f) Any application for a planned residential development as a
conditional use shall include an environmental impact
statement, in accordance with the standards and procedures
established in Chapter 218, Subdivision of Land, of this Code.
(6) Comprehensive plan. As part of any application for a planned
residential development as a conditional use, the applicant shall
submit a comprehensive plan for the development of all property
under the applicant's ownership and control and as to which the
proposed planned residential development is a part. Such
comprehensive plan shall comply with all applicable provisions of
Chapter 218, Subdivision of Land, and this chapter of the Code, and
all other applicable county and state regulations.
(7) Required construction of low- and moderate-income units. Upon
approval by the Planning Board of a planned residential
development and senior citizen housing development, an
appropriate developer's agreement shall be entered into among the
applicant, the Planning Board and the Borough, by which the
applicant shall be required to construct the low- and moderateincome
housing units proposed for the development, regardless of
the sale or ownership of any or all of the marketplace residential
units or rental housing units provided in senior citizen housing.
This obligation shall be binding upon the applicant's heirs,
successors and assigns.
(8) Staging. As permitted by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-39c(6), any planned
residential development may be developed in stages. No proposed
sequence of stages submitted by the applicant shall be approved
unless the Planning Board finds and determines as follows:
(a) That each stage is substantially self-functioning and selfsustaining
with regard to access, utility services, parking, open
space and other similar physical features and that such stage
can be separately occupied, operated and maintained upon
completion of construction and development.
(b) That each stage is properly related to every other segment of
the planned residential development and to the community as
a whole and to all necessary community services which are
available or which may be needed to serve the development in
the future.
(c) That adequate protection will be provided to ensure the proper
disposition of each stage through the use of maintenance and
performance guarantees, covenants and other formal
agreements.
(d) That the landowner will provide a balanced distribution for
development in each stage. Such disposition shall be judged on
the basis of the level of improvement costs, physical planning
§ 255-27 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 255-27
250:566
§ 255-28. Transfer of one-family dwellings.
One-family dwellings in a planned residential development shall not be
conveyed outside of the common ownership scheme of the planned
residential development. Deeds conveying one-family dwellings in a planned
residential development shall contain provisions satisfactory to and
approved by the Borough Attorney requiring the transferee to be
responsible for its share of the common elements of the planned residential
development. One-family dwellings with deeds containing provisions
approved as hereinabove, when subsequently conveyed, shall be conveyed
by deed containing the identical approved provisions regarding
responsibility for common elements. The responsibility for common
elements shall be described in detail in the master deed for the planned
residential development, which master deed shall be filed with the Borough.
and coordination required and other relationships which may
be necessary to undertake each stage or segment.
§ 255-27 YARD WASTE § 255-28
250:567

ARTICLE VII
Mobile Cellular Communications Antennas and Towers
§ 255-29. Mobile cellular communications antennas.
Upon proper application and hearing, as herein provided, mobile cellular
communications antennas shall be permitted as a conditional use in all
zones of the municipality, provided that the Planning Board finds and
determines that the following conditions have been met:
A. Any mobile cellular communications antenna shall be located a
minimum distance of 500 feet from any residential structure not located
on the subject property and from any of the following structures or
uses: public buildings, public and private schools, libraries and senior
citizen centers.
B. Any mobile cellular communications antenna shall be located a
minimum distance of 500 feet from any historic district or historic site,
as designated on the National and/or State Register of Historic Places.
C. Any applicant for a permit to erect a mobile cellular communications
antenna shall establish by competent evidence that there exists a need
for such facility within the Borough and at the proposed location for
which approval is sought. Such evidence shall include but need be
limited to the following:
(1) An identification of the cellular network layout and coverage areas
to be serviced by the proposed cellular antennas and an
explanation as to why existing facilities are inadequate to provide
service.
(2) Why the proposed site is suitable for such use. Evidence to be
presented on this issue shall include a radio frequency engineering
analysis of the potential suitability or nonsuitability of existing
buildings or structures for such commercial antenna, which
engineering analysis shall be subject to review by the Borough
Engineer or other consultant called upon by the Planning Board.
D. Provided that the above stated conditions have been met, a mobile
cellular communication antenna may be erected upon or affixed to an
existing building or structure as long as it meets the following
requirements:
(1) Any such mobile cellular communications antenna shall not extend
above or beyond the height of any such building or structure by
more than 10 feet.
(2) Any such mobile cellular communications antenna shall be securely
affixed to the building or structure for which it is proposed.
(3) Any such mobile cellular communications antenna shall be suitably
finished or painted in a manner so as to minimize any obtrusive
§ 255-29 YARD WASTE § 255-29
250:569
§ 255-30. Mobile cellular communications towers.
characteristics and their visual impact. When practicable, the color
of paint or finishing materials shall be consistent and not
contrasting with the color of materials of the building upon which
it is erected or affixed.
A. Where permitted as conditional use. Upon proper application and
hearing, as herein provided, a mobile cellular communications tower
shall be permitted as a conditional use only on the Borough-owned
property known as Lot 1 in Block 1303 as shown on the current Tax Map
of the Borough. [Amended 5-22-2000 by Ord. No. 720-00]
B. Conditions. Upon proper application and hearing, as herein provided, a
mobile cellular communications tower shall be permitted as a
conditional use, provided that the Planning Board finds and determines
that the following conditions have been met:
(1) That the applicant has made a diligent effort to situate the antenna
on existing buildings or structures, but that despite said diligent
efforts, the applicant has been unable to secure permission to do so
from the owners of the property on which such buildings or
structures are situated or that the locations of such antenna on
existing buildings or structures would not be effective.
(2) That the applicant has investigated and made a diligent effort to
situate the antenna on an existing mobile cellular communications
tower, but either said existing tower is not a suitable location in
light of the design of the existing mobile cellular communications
network, or that, despite diligent efforts, the applicant has been
unable to secure permission to situate its antenna from the owners
of the property on which the tower is situated or the operator of the
tower.
(3) No more than one mobile cellular communications tower may be
erected or constructed on any one lot, site or tract of land.
C. Requirements. Provided that all of the above stated conditions have
been met, a mobile cellular communications tower may be erected or
constructed on property within the Borough as long as it meets the
following requirements:
(1) Minimum setback of tower and equipment compound from any
property line: 50 feet. Said setback areas shall not include
wetlands, wetland buffers or watershed lands.
(2) Maximum height of tower (measured from ground level to the
highest vertical point of any part of the structure, except that the
height of a lightning rod shall not be considered in measuring the
height of the tower, provided that the lightning rod is not more than
eight feet in height): 150 feet. [Amended 4-24-2000 by Ord. No.
715-00]
§ 255-29 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 255-30
250:570
§ 255-31. Application procedure.
§ 255-32. Miscellaneous provisions.
(3) The site on which the tower and any accessory buildings or
structures are situated shall be completely enclosed with a fence at
least four feet high, of composition meeting the approval of the
Planning Board, which shall include a locking security gate.
A. No building permit shall be issued for the construction, erection or
installation of a mobile cellular communications antenna unless a
conditional use approval therefor has been granted by the Planning
Board.
B. No building permit shall be issued for the construction, erection or
installation of a mobile cellular communications tower unless a
separate conditional use approval therefor has been granted by the
Planning Board.
C. For a conditional use approval for a mobile cellular communications
antenna or tower, the applicant shall comply with the application
requirements set forth in § 45-26 of Chapter 45, Land Use Procedures.
D. Upon filing of a completed application for a mobile cellular
communications antenna or tower as a conditional use, the Planning
Board shall conduct a hearing in accordance with the provisions of
§ 45-27 of Chapter 45, Land Use Procedures.
E. The applicant shall give notice of such hearing in accordance with the
provisions of § 45-28 of Chapter 45, Land Use Procedures.
F. A list of property owners to whom the applicant is required to give
notice shall be furnished to the applicant in accordance with the
provisions of § 45-29 of Chapter 45, Land Use Procedures.
G. The Planning Board shall render its decisions not later than 95 days
from the filing of a completed application.
H. The Planning Board's decision on such application shall be in
accordance with the provisions of § 45-31 of Chapter 45, Land Use
Procedures. Publication of such decisions shall be in accordance with
§ 45-32.
A. On or before the first of January next following the issuance of a
conditional use permit for a mobile cellular communications tower, and
on or before each and every January 1 next ensuing, the owner or
operator of such tower shall file in the office of the Construction Code
Official, with a copy to be filed with the Borough Engineer, a written
report from a licensed professional engineer certifying to the structural
integrity of the tower and that all antennas mounted thereon are secure
and that they meet applicable minimum safety requirements.
§ 255-30 YARD WASTE § 255-32
250:571
§ 255-32.1. Installation of distributive antenna systems ("DAS")
within public rights-of-way. [Added 12-5-2016 by Ord. No. 1105-16]
B. The written report required in Subsection A hereinabove shall also be
filed within 20 days of the date that there is any modification or repair
of an existing tower or that there is any modification of the placement of
antennas on the tower.
C. If such owner or operator shall fail to file when due the written report
required hereunder, the conditional use permit issued for the tower
shall automatically be revoked and the Construction Code Office shall
notify the owner or operator, in writing, of such revocation. Any
continued use of the tower following notice of revocation shall
constitute a violation of this article. For each day that the tower
remains in use or operation following the owner or operator's receipt of
said revocation notice, same shall constitute a separate violation.
D. Any mobile cellular communications tower which has not been used for
mobile communications purposes for a period of six months shall be
considered abandoned, upon which the Construction Code Official
shall, in writing, notify the owner or operator of such abandonment.
Upon receipt of such notice of abandonment, the owner shall, within 30
days of such notification, at its sole cost and expense, remove the tower
and any other structures on the site and restore the site to the condition
it was in before the conditional use permit was issued. If the owner or
operator shall fail to remove the tower and restore the site as herein
required, such failure shall constitute a violation of this article. For
each day beyond the thirty-day removal and restoration period that said
owner or operator has failed to remove the tower and restore the site,
same shall constitute a separate violation.
A. Communications antennas relating to a DAS system shall be permitted
in areas in which all utilities are located aboveground regardless of the
underlying zoning district, so long as such antennas are located on
existing poles in the public right-of-way. Antennas shall not be located
on any sign listed in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
(MUTCD) nor on any traffic signal pole, mast arm device or associated
equipment.
B. Communications antennas and support equipment shall be co-located
on existing poles, such as existing utility poles or streetlight poles. New
poles for communications antennas intended to solely support a DAS
system are expressly prohibited unless otherwise approved by the
governing body upon a showing that such installation is absolutely
necessary and can be accomplished in a manner that is consistent with
the following standards:
(1) Any new DAS pole and its accessory equipment shall be located so
as to not cause any physical or visual obstruction to pedestrian or
vehicular traffic, or to otherwise create safety hazards to
§ 255-32 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 255-32.1
250:572
pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or to otherwise inconvenience
public use of the right-of-way as determined by the Borough.
(2) New DAS poles cannot be located within 1,000 feet of another pole
either on the same side or across the street from an existing pole
used for a DAS system.
(3) In no case shall a new DAS pole be located within 36 inches of the
exposed back of the curb or from the edge of pavement or within an
easement extending onto privately owned land.
(4) No new DAS pole shall be located within five feet of a private
driveway or in a manner that would otherwise obstruct visibility
from a private driveway to the public right-of-way.
(5) Any required accessory equipment intended to support the DAS
pole shall not be located on the ground but shall be placed within
an underground vault or, alternatively, be pole-mounted. If polemounted,
screening requirements and height and extension from
pole limitations cited herein for co-location shall govern.
(6) Construction of a new pole shall comply with all applicable building
and electrical code requirements and shall require a construction
permit. Prior to the issuance of a construction permit, the Borough
Engineer shall, at the applicant's cost, review and approve the
construction drawings in conjunction with the Borough
Construction Official.
(7) Any disturbance to the public right-of-way as a result of the
construction of a new pole shall be restored to its original condition
post-construction to the satisfaction of the Borough Engineer.
(8) A DAS pole shall be maintained in good condition and repair by
qualified maintenance and construction personnel at the cost of the
responsible party that operates the pole so that the pole shall not
endanger the life of any person or any property in the Town.
(9) Insurance by each owner or operator of a DAS pole shall provide to
the Borough a certificate of insurance, in a form acceptable to the
Borough Attorney, evidencing general liability coverage in the
minimum amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence and property
damage coverage in the minimum amount of $1,000,000 per
occurrence covering the new pole.
(10) Each owner or operator of a DAS pole shall, at its sole cost and
expense, indemnify, defend and hold harmless the Borough, its
elected and appointed officials, employees and agents, at all times,
against any and all claims for personal injury, including death, and
property damage arising in whole or in part from, caused by or
connected with any act or omission of the person, its officers,
agents, employees or contractors arising out of, but not limited to,
the construction, installation, operation, maintenance or removal of
§ 255-32.1 YARD WASTE § 255-32.1
250:573
the DAS pole. Each person that owns or operates a DAS pole shall
defend any actions or proceedings against the Borough in which
it is claimed that personal injury, including death, or property
damage was caused by the construction, installation, operation,
maintenance or removal of a DAS pole. Such indemnification shall
be provided to the Borough prior to the issuance of a construction
permit in a form acceptable to the Borough Attorney.
(11) The removal and replacement of a DAS pole and/or its related
equipment for the purposes of upgrading or repairing the pole is
permitted, so long as such repair or upgrade does not increase the
overall size, height or design of the originally approved pole. Any
modification shall require a new permit and authorization by the
Borough.
(12) Should it be the intent of the owner or operator of a DAS pole to
abandon the pole and discontinue its use, the owner or operator
shall provide written notice to the Borough of its intent to
discontinue use and the date when the use shall be discontinued.
Unused or abandoned DAS poles shall be removed as follows:
(a) All unused or abandoned DAS poles and accessory facilities
shall be removed within six months of the cessation of
operations at the site unless otherwise extended by the
Borough.
(b) If the DAS pole and all related facilities are not removed within
six months of the cessation of operations at the site, or within
any longer period approved by the Borough, the DAS pole and
all its related facilities may be removed by the Borough and the
cost of removal assessed against the owner of the DAS pole.
(13) The Borough may assess appropriate and reasonable permit fees
directly related to the Borough's actual costs in reviewing,
processing the application for approval as well as related
inspection, monitoring and related costs.
(14) Prior to the approval of the construction permit for the new DAS
pole, the owner or operator of the pole shall provide the Borough
financial security sufficient to guarantee the removal of such pole
in a form acceptable to the Borough Attorney. Said financial
security shall remain in place until the DAS pole is removed.
(15) In accordance with applicable law, the Borough reserves the right
to deny an application for a new DAS pole for numerous factors,
including, but not limited to, visual impact, design, and safety
standards.
C. Antennas and all support installations shall be designed so as to
minimize visual impacts as follows:
§ 255-32.1 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 255-32.1
250:574
(1) Antennas and all support equipment shall be treated to match the
supporting structure. Antennas and accompanying equipment shall
be painted or otherwise coated to be visually compatible with the
support structure upon which they are mounted.
(2) All equipment shall be compatible in scale and proportion to the
structure upon which it is mounted. All equipment used shall utilize
the smallest and least intrusive technology available.
(3) There shall be no more than one such antenna per pole. One
additional antenna may be permitted, provided that such antenna
can be designed and accommodated on a pole in a manner that
complies with the requirements of this section.
(4) No antennas shall exceed a height of four feet above the structure
upon which they are mounted.
(5) Antennas shall not project more than four inches from the pole
upon which they are attached.
D. Within 60 days following written notice from the Borough, or such
longer period as the Borough determines is reasonably necessary or
such shorter period in the case of an emergency, an owner of an
antenna in the public right-of-way shall, at its own expense, temporarily
or permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any
antenna when the Borough, consistent with its authority under the
police power and state law, shall have determined that such removal,
relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary under the
following circumstances:
(1) The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any
Borough or other public improvement in the right-of-way;
(2) The operations of the Borough or other governmental entity in the
right-of-way;
(3) Vacation of a street or road or the release of a utility easement; or
(4) An emergency as determined by the Borough.
E. The Borough shall determine the time, place and manner of
construction, maintenance, repair and/or removal of all communication
antenna(s) in the right-of-way based upon public safety, traffic
management, physical burden on the right-of-way, and related
considerations. The applicant/owner/operator of the antenna or DAS
system shall be responsible for the repair of any damage to paving,
existing utility lines, or any surface or subsurface installations arising
from its construction, installation or maintenance.
§ 255-32.1 YARD WASTE § 255-32.1
250:575

ARTICLE VIII
Environmentally Sensitive District ES
§ 255-33. Permitted uses.
In any environmentally sensitive district, the following uses shall be
permitted:
§ 255-34. Permitted accessory uses.
Customary accessory uses for one-family residential dwellings, including
home occupations shall be permitted in any ES District.
§ 255-35. Area, yard and bulk requirements.
The area, yard and bulk requirements for the ES District are as set forth in
the annexed Zoning, Area and Bulk Schedule for Old Tappan, New Jersey.53
A. One-family dwellings.
B. Arboreta.
C. Hiking trails, nonmotorized bike trails, and cross-country ski trails.
D. Fish, game and woodland preserves.
E. Watershed conservation.
F. Reservoirs.
G. Municipal parks and playgrounds.
H. Fishing and picnicking facilities.
53.Editor's Note: The Zoning, Area and Bulk Schedule is included as an attachment to this
chapter.
§ 255-33 YARD WASTE § 255-35
250:577

ARTICLE IX
Churches and Houses of Worship
§ 255-36. Primary and accessory uses.
A church or other house of worship may consist of the following primary
use, together with a combination of one or more of the following accessory
uses:
§ 255-37. Conditional use approval.
Upon proper application and hearing, as herein provided, a church or other
house of worship shall be permitted as a conditional use in any district of
the Borough, provided that the Planning Board finds and determines that
the following conditions have been met:
A. Primary use. A place of assembly for religious services or worship.
B. Accessory uses.
(1) An apartment, group of rooms, or other residence for the facility's
religious leader within the same building or structure as the place
of assembly for religious services or worship, hereinafter referred
to as "cleric's inside residence."
(2) An apartment, group of rooms, or other residence for the facility's
religious leader outside the same building or structure as the place
of assembly for religious services or worship, but on the same lot or
lots as is situated said place of assembly, hereinafter referred to as
"cleric's outside residence."
(3) Facilities for religious education and instruction, including but not
limited to Sunday school, after-school learning and adult study
groups, within the same building or structure as the place of
assembly for religious services or worship, hereinafter referred to
as "inside educational facilities."
(4) Facilities for religious education and instruction, including but not
limited to Sunday school, after-school learning and adult study
groups, outside the same building or structure as the place of
assembly for religious services or worship, hereafter referred to as
"outside educational facilities."
(5) Facilities for social functions such as, but not limited to, weddings,
funerals, bar/bat mitzvahs and other similar events, hereinafter
referred to as "social facilities."
(6) Facilities for a convent or other housing for members of a religious
order, separate and apart from a residence for the facility's
religious leader, as referred to in Subsection A(1) and (2) hereof.
A. For a church or other house of worship consisting solely of the primary
use set forth in § 255-36, a place of assembly for religious services or
§ 255-36 YARD WASTE § 255-37
250:579
worship, the following minimum area, yard and dimensional standards
must be met:
(1) Minimum lot size: three acres.
(2) Minimum lot width: 250 feet.
(3) Minimum lot depth: 400 feet.
(4) Minimum front yard setback: 75 feet.
(5) Minimum side yard setback for one side yard: 50 feet.
(6) Minimum side yard setback for other side yard: 50 feet.
(7) Minimum rear yard setback: 100 feet.
(8) Minimum buffer width: 50 feet.
(9) Maximum lot coverage: 30%.
(10) Maximum improved lot coverage: 65%.
B. For a church or other house of worship consisting of the primary use set
forth in § 255-36A, a place of assembly for religious services or worship,
together with the accessory use set forth in § 255-36B(1), a cleric's
inside residence, the same area, yard and dimensional standards for the
primary use only shall apply.
C. For a church or other house of worship consisting of the primary use set
forth in § 255-36A, a place of assembly for religious services or worship,
together with the accessory use set forth in § 255-36B(3), inside
educational facilities, the same area, yard and dimensional standards
for the primary use only shall apply.
D. For a church or other house of worship consisting of the primary use set
forth in § 255-36A, a place of assembly for religious services or worship,
together with any one or more of the following ancillary uses, the
following additional area, yard and dimensional standards must be met
for each separate ancillary use, as set forth on Table I, Area, Yard and
Bulk Standards for Churches and Other Houses of Worship annexed
hereto and incorporated by reference herein.54
(1) A cleric's outside residence, as herein defined:
(a) Minimum lot size: an additional 0.5 acres.
(2) Outside educational facilities, as herein defined:
(a) Minimum lot size: an additional 1.0 acres;
(b) Minimum lot width: an additional 50 feet;
54.Editor's Note: Table 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 255-37 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 255-37
250:580
(c) Minimum side yard setback for one side yard: an additional 10
feet; and
(d) Minimum side yard setback for other side yard: an additional
10 feet.
(3) Social facilities as herein defined:
(a) Minimum lot size: an additional 2.5 acres;
(b) Minimum lot width: an additional 200 feet;
(c) Minimum lot depth: an additional 200 feet;
(d) Minimum front yard setback: an additional 25 feet;
(e) Minimum side yard setback for one side yard: an additional 25
feet;
(f) Minimum side yard setback for other side yard: an additional
25 feet;
(g) Minimum rear yard setback: an additional 50 feet; and
(h) Minimum buffer width: an additional 25 feet.
(4) Facilities for a convent or other housing for members of a religious
order, separate and apart from a residence for the facility's
religious leader:
(a) Minimum lot size: an additional 2.5 acres;
(b) Minimum lot frontage: an additional 250 feet;
(c) Minimum lot depth: an additional 350 feet;
(d) Minimum front yard setback: an additional 25 feet;
(e) Minimum side yard setback for one side yard: an additional 35
feet;
(f) Minimum side yard setback for other side yard: an additional
35 feet;
(g) Minimum rear yard setback: an additional 50 feet; and
(h) Minimum buffer width: an additional 25 feet.
E. For a church or other house of worship consisting of the primary use set
forth in § 255-36A, a place of assembly for religious services or worship,
together with any one or more of the following ancillary uses, the
following maximum lot coverage and improved lot coverage
requirements shall apply:
(1) Outside educational facilities:
§ 255-37 YARD WASTE § 255-37
250:581
(a) Maximum lot coverage: 28%; and
(b) Maximum improved lot coverage: 62.5%.
(2) Cleric's outside residence together with educational facilities:
(a) Maximum lot coverage: 25%; and
(b) Maximum improved lot coverage: 60%.
(3) Outside educational facilities together with social facilities:
(a) Maximum lot coverage: 25%; and
(b) Maximum improved lot coverage: 60%.
(4) Cleric's outside residence together with outside educational
facilities and social facilities:
(a) Maximum lot coverage: 25%; and
(b) Maximum improved lot coverage: 60%.
(5) Cleric's outside residence together with outside educational
facilities, social facilities and facilities for a convent or other
housing for members of a religious order, separate and apart from a
residence for the facility's religious leader:
(a) Maximum lot coverage: 22%; and
(b) Maximum improved lot coverage: 55%.
F. In addition to the area, yard and bulk requirements set forth herein,
churches and other houses of worship shall also meet the following
conditions with respect to off-street parking:
(1) A church or other house of worship consisting solely of a place of
assembly for religious services or worship shall provide one
parking space for each three permanent or fixed seats based on
seating capacity. Any such church or other house of worship not
having permanent or fixed seating shall provide one parking space
for each three persons based on capacity attendance, which shall
be calculated by taking the total square footage of the place of
assembly for religious services or worship and dividing it by the
square footage of space allotted to each person in attendance as
stated in the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code (BOCA Code).
(2) In addition to the off-street parking required for a church or other
house of worship consisting solely of the primary use set forth in
§ 255-36A, a place of assembly for religious services or worship,
there shall be provided the following off-street parking:
(a) For a cleric's inside residence or outside residence: two
parking spaces;
§ 255-37 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 255-37
250:582
§ 255-38. Amendment of Area and Bulk Schedule.
The Zoning, Area and Bulk Schedule for Old Tappan, New Jersey is hereby
amended and supplemented as set forth in the annexed table.55 Said table
is incorporated by reference herein as though set forth at length.
(b) For inside or outside educational facilities: 1.25 parking spaces
for every teaching station for children under the age of 17, and
two parking spaces for each three persons age 17 or over
participating in the educational program;
(c) For social facilities the required parking shall be one parking
space for each three persons based on the maximum capacity
of the facility as determined by application of the New Jersey
Uniform Construction Code (BOCA Code), plus 10%;
(d) For a convent or other housing for members of a religious
order, separate and apart from a residence for the facility's
religious leader: one parking space for every three members of
the religious order.
(e) For any other accessory use not listed herein, additional
parking shall be one parking space for each three persons
based upon maximum capacity of the facility as determined by
application of the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code
(BOCA Code).
55.Editor's Note: The Zoning, Area and Bulk Schedule is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 255-37 YARD WASTE § 255-38
250:583

ARTICLE X
Area and Bulk Requirements
§ 255-39. Zoning, Area and Bulk Schedule.
The minimum sizes of lots, the number and minimum sizes of yards and
building bulk controls shall be governed by the accompanying schedule
entitled "Zoning, Area and Bulk Schedule for Old Tappan, New Jersey"
which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is attached to and
made a part of this chapter.56
§ 255-40. Housing of animals.
In addition, any building, stable, outhouse or accessory building used for
housing an animal of Class II or Class III, as such classes are defined
in § 91-2 of this Code, shall be subject to the provisions of § 91-4C and
applicable ordinances of the Board of Health of the Borough of Old Tappan.
56.Editor's Note: The Zoning, Area and Bulk Schedule is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 255-39 YARD WASTE § 255-40
250:585

ARTICLE XI
Supplementary Regulations
§ 255-41. Exception, additions and modifications.
The provisions of this chapter shall be subject to such exceptions, additions
or modifications as herein provided by the following supplementary
regulations.
§ 255-42. Garages; overnight parking of commercial vehicles.
[Amended 8-20-2001 by Ord. No. 754-01; 1-21-2014 by Ord. No.
1064-13]
§ 255-43. Entrances for multiple garages.
No public or private garage for more than five motor vehicles shall have an
entrance or exit for motor vehicles within 50 feet of a residential district,
except as may be permitted under § 255-42.
A. In a private garage accessory to a dwelling in any district, the number
of car spaces which may be provided shall not exceed three, except that
for each one-half acre the lot exceeds one acre, space for one additional
motor vehicle may be provided, to a maximum of five car spaces in a
private garage or garages.
B. In all residential districts, where there is more than one garage space,
no more than half such space may be rented to other than occupants of
the premises.
C. In a residential zone, no more than one commercial vehicle and one
trailer used for commercial purposes, as defined herein, shall be stored
or parked overnight in a space that is not enclosed or uncovered;
provided, however, that said commercial vehicle shall only be parked or
stored on a driveway located on property principally owned or leased by
the owner, lessee, or principal user of the vehicle.
D. For purposes of the foregoing provision, the term "commercial vehicle"
shall be deemed to mean a motor-driven vehicle used for commercial
purposes on the highways, having a gross vehicle weight of 10,000
pounds or less, which vehicle is used by the owner or lessee of the
property for the transportation of people, goods, wares, merchandise,
tools and/or equipment, and which is the principal vehicle used by said
owner or lessee of the property in connection with said property
owner's or lessee's business. "Trailer" shall be deemed to mean an
enclosed trailer not to exceed eight feet by 16 feet in size.
E. No truck or commercial vehicle shall be parked within the required
front yard setback. No commercial vehicle shall be parked in such a
manner as to be used as a billboard or other sign.
§ 255-41 YARD WASTE § 255-44
250:587
§ 255-44. Visibility at intersections. [Amended 2-19-2002 by Ord.
No. 773-02]
On a corner lot in any district no fence, wall, hedge or other structure
or planting more than 2 1/2 feet in height shall be erected, placed or
maintained within the triangular area formed by the intersecting street
lines and a straight line joining the street lines at points which are 30
feet distant from the point of intersection, measured along the street lines.
Where, due to topographic or other conditions, the application of the rules
stated above does not produce a clear visibility above 4 1/2 feet at the
center lines of the streets adjacent to the above-mentioned triangular area,
plans for development of such triangular area shall be subject to approval
by the Planning Board.
§ 255-45. Lots in two districts.
Where a district boundary line divides a lot in single or joint ownership
of record at the time such line is adopted, the regulations for the less
restricted portion of such lot shall extend not more than 20 feet into the
more restricted portion, provided that the lot has frontage on a street in the
less restricted district.
§ 255-46. Side yard and rear yard transition.
Where a lot in a business or industrial district abuts a lot in residence
districts, there shall be provided along such abutting lines a yard equal
in width or depth to that required in the residence district, or as may be
required for the district in which the lot is located, whichever is greater.
§ 255-47. Buffer strip.
Where a lot in Business District B-1 or B-2 abuts a lot in a residence district
a buffer strip of not less than 20 feet wide shall be required between the lots
on the business district side. Along the residence district side of the buffer
strip, there shall be a cyclone fence, or its equivalent, not less than four
feet in height, or such height as will match any existing fencing. The fence
shall be installed in accordance with the recommendations of the Borough
Engineer.
§ 255-48. Off-street parking.
In conjunction with any principal building hereafter erected or any use
of land hereafter established, there shall be provided on the same lot
therewith, sufficient parking spaces to meet the minimum requirements
specified herein, as follows:
A. One-family dwellings: two spaces for each and every dwelling unit.
B. Planned residential developments in RA Zones.
(1) Townhouses, duplexes, etc.: 2.4 spaces for each and every dwelling
unit of which a minimum of one space per dwelling unit shall be
§ 255-44 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 255-48
250:588
provided in an enclosed garage plus 0.4 of one space per dwelling
unit shall be provided for common area parking.
(2) One-family dwellings: two spaces per dwelling unit.
(3) Low- and moderate-income housing: 1 1/2 spaces per dwelling unit
of which a minimum of 3/4 of one space per dwelling unit on
average shall be provided in an enclosed garage. Additionally,
guest parking as provided in Subsection B(1) above may be
required by the Planning Board in addition to these standards in
conjunction with site plan approval.
C. Low- and moderate-income housing in the RB 130 Zone.
(1) One-family dwellings: two spaces per dwelling unit.
(2) Low- and moderate-income senior citizen housing: 1 1/2 spaces per
dwelling unit. One parking space shall be provided for each onebedroom
senior citizen housing unit, which parking space shall be
provided adjacent to the entrance of the housing unit. Two parking
spaces shall be provided for each two-bedroom senior citizen
housing unit, which parking spaces shall be provided adjacent to
the entrance of the housing unit. Additionally, 0.5 parking spaces
per dwelling unit shall be provided as guest parking, which shall be
located in off-street parking spaces generally scattered throughout
the site.
D. Customary home occupation: one space per dwelling unit, plus three
spaces for each 200 square feet of floor area so used, or any fraction
thereof.
E. Meeting rooms and schools. Meeting room, club, lodge, community
center and school: one space for each five seats based on seating
capacity. Any place not having seating capacity for patrons or
assemblage shall allow one space for each five persons based on
capacity attendance.
F. Places of amusement and sanctuaries. Theater, auditorium, stadium
and sanctuaries in a place of worship: one space for each three seats
based on fixed or permanent seating capacity. Any place not having
fixed or permanent seating capacity for patrons or assemblage shall
allow for one space for each three persons based on capacity
attendance.
G. Businesses and offices. Business, commercial, personal service
establishment, retail stores and offices: one space for each 200 square
feet of ground floor building area multiplied by the number of stories.
H. Mixed uses. Where there is a mixed use of the lot (for example, a
building used for an auditorium and offices), then the minimum
requirements for each use shall be added together and the total number
of required parking spaces for all uses shall be provided. Necessarily, a
§ 255-48 YARD WASTE § 255-48
250:589
§ 255-49. Yards.
§ 255-50. Storage, overnight parking in residential zones.
variance may be obtained from the requirements of this subsection
should an applicant for site plan or subdivision approval establish,
through competent testimony, that the building cannot be used for all
the contemplated uses of the building at the same time.
A. Terraces. A paved terrace shall not be considered in the determination
of yard sizes or lot coverage, provided that the terrace is unroofed and
without walls, parapets or other form of enclosure. The terrace,
however, may have an open guardrailing not over three feet high, and
shall not project into any yard to a point closer than four feet from any
lot line.
B. Porches. Any porches roofed over shall be considered a part of the
building in the determination of the size of yard or lot coverage.
C. Projecting architectural features. The space in any required yard shall
be open and unobstructed, except for the ordinary projections of
window sills, belt courses, cornices, eaves and other architectural
features, provided that such features shall not project more than two
feet into any required yard.
D. Bay windows. Bay windows, including their cornices and eaves, may
project into any required yard not more than two feet, provided that the
sum of such projections on any wall does not exceed 1/3 the length of
the wall.
E. Fire escapes. Open fire escapes may extend into any required yard not
more than four feet, six inches.
A. No tractor used for towing a trailer, construction equipment, including,
but not limited to, bulldozers, backhoes, flatbed trucks or trailers for
hauling same, trailers normally pulled or towed singly or in tandem by a
motor tractor of the type normally used for towing trailers or vehicles
having a gross vehicle weight in excess of 10,000 pounds, whether or
not in a space enclosed or covered, shall be stored or parked overnight
in any residential district; provided, however, this section shall not
apply when such equipment is in current use on the lot or premises on
which it is stored or parked in actual performance of work authorized
by a valid current building permit or permits.
B. This section shall not apply to recreational vehicles.
C. Section 255-50 shall be primarily enforced by the Police Department of
the Borough.
§ 255-48 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 255-51
250:590
§ 255-51. Private swimming pools.
Private swimming pools, as defined by the provisions of the Uniform
Construction Code of New Jersey, N.J.A.C. 5:23-11 et seq., shall be permitted
as an accessory use in a residential district. Such pools and pertinent decks,
walkways or other structures shall be located as follows:
§ 255-52. Buffer zone requirements.
§ 255-53. Recycling provisions.
Any development proposal for the construction of 50 or more units of
single-family residential housing, the construction of 25 or more units of
multifamily residential housing or the utilization of 1,000 square feet or
more of land for any commercial or industrial use shall include as part
of its application for a subdivision site plan, conditional use or other
developmental application, the following information and documentation:
A. Such pools and appurtenances shall be located in back of the rear
building line of the existing or proposed dwelling.
B. On all interior lots, all such pools and appurtenances shall be located a
minimum of 10 feet from any rear or side property line in any
residential district.
C. On any corner lot, all such pools and appurtenances shall be located a
minimum of 30 feet from the street side property line in an RA 40
District and a minimum of 20 feet from the street side property line on
all other residential districts.
A. All senior citizen housing shall provide and maintain a buffer zone
within the RB 130 Zone which shall be no less than 50 feet in width
from all external lot lines of the site which abuts more than one singlefamily
residence, except for that portion which fronts upon an existing
external street or roadway. A buffer zone of no less than 25 feet in width
shall be provided along all external property lines of the site that abuts
only one single-family residence. Such buffer zone shall be kept in its
natural state where wooded. When natural vegetation is sparse or
nonexistent, the landowner shall be required to provide a year round
visual screen, as determined by the Planning Board.
B. No use or structure, including parking or loading areas, shall be
permitted within the required buffer area.
C. The required buffer area may be included in the area for the purpose of
computing compliance with the open space requirements of this
chapter.
A. Adequate facilities shall be provided for the depositing and collection of
recyclable materials.
§ 255-51 YARD WASTE § 255-53
250:591
§ 255-54. Permitted accessory buildings.
B. The location of all existing and proposed solid waste collection stations
shall be delineated on the subdivision plat or site plan. A plan detail, at
a scale of one inch equals 10 feet, shall be incorporated in the
submission for each such station or for a typical station. The containers
at each station shall be delineated on the detail plan and described in
tabular form. A separate container or containers shall be provided for
each recyclable material, specified in Chapter 209, Article II, Recycling,
of the Code of the Borough of Old Tappan, in addition to the containers
for nonrecyclable solid waste.
A. Requirement for building permit. No accessory building shall be
constructed on any property without the grant of a zoning and building
permit, which shall be applied for and obtained in accordance with the
provisions of the Borough ordinances.
B. Limitation on number of accessory buildings. Not more than one
accessory building shall be permitted on any lot.
C. Prohibited use of accessory buildings. No accessory building may at any
time be used for human habitation, residence, or the performance of a
home occupation. In no case shall a second residential building be
permitted as an accessory building in any zone district. In addition, no
accessory building may at any time be used for a use not permitted in
the zone in which the property on which the accessory building is
situated.
D. Construction prior to principal building. No building permit shall be
issued for the construction of an accessory building prior to the
issuance of a building permit for construction of the main building upon
the same premises. If construction of the main building does not
proceed or coincide with construction of the accessory building, the
Construction Official shall revoke the building permit for the accessory
building until construction of the main building has been completed.
E. Height and area restriction. [Amended 3-18-2002 by Ord. No.
783-02; 6-18-2012 by Ord. No. 1048-12]
(1) An accessory building to be used as a garage shall not exceed 14
feet in height and shall not be greater than 400 square feet in area.
Any other accessory building shall not exceed 14 feet in height and
shall not exceed 500 enclosed square feet, 750 roofed square feet
and 25 feet in length parallel to the side lot line for properties on
RA-40 Zoned lots; and 350 enclosed square feet, 500 roofed square
feet and 20 feet in length parallel to the side lot line on RA-25
Zoned lots.
(2) Square footage in an accessory building over 150 square feet shall
count as building floor area and shall be counted toward the
applicable floor area ratio requirement.
§ 255-53 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 255-54
250:592
(3) A second accessory building or structure is permitted, provided the
second accessory building or structure and does not exceed 150
square feet in area. The secondary accessory building may only be
a shed, as defined in this chapter.
(4) Any accessory building or structure at least 10 feet in height shall
be set back from the property line either 10 feet or the accessory
building height, whichever is greater. If located in a rear yard, any
accessory building or structure less than 10 feet in height and
having an area of less than 150 square feet as a minimum setback
of at least four feet from the property line.
F. Location of accessory buildings. Accessory buildings in residential and
nonresidential zones shall conform to the following regulations as to
their location upon the lot on which they are to be constructed:
(1) No accessory building may be located or situated in the front yard
of the lot on which it is to be constructed.
(2) On an interior lot, an accessory building shall be located a
minimum of 10 feet from any rear or side property line.
(3) In no event shall an accessory building be permitted closer to any
street than the building line of the principal building on the lot.
G. Exemption. Agricultural uses are exempt from the provisions of
Subsections B, D and E of this § 255-54.
H. Stationary generators, air-conditioner compressors or units. [Added
6-18-2012 by Ord. No. 1048-12]
(1) Exterior stationary generators, air-conditioner compressors or
units are permitted as accessory uses, but are required to be
located within the side or rear yards.
(2) The footprint of stationary generators, air-conditioner compressors
or units may not exceed 10 square feet, must be located no more
than three feet from the residential dwelling and shall be set back a
minimum of five feet from any operable window or door. Stationary
generators cannot be located within the required front yard
setback and must be located a minimum of 10 feet from the
property line. [Amended 1-21-2014 by Ord. No. 1064-13]
(3) Stationary generators, air-conditioner compressors or units must
be maintained in good working order consistent with manufacturer
specifications, may only be powered by natural gas, propane or
diesel fuel, and shall not exceed a noise level of 85 dba at the
source and 50 dba at the property line.
(4) Stationary generators, air-conditioner compressors or units are
required to be screened so as to not be visible to adjoining
properties.
§ 255-54 YARD WASTE § 255-54
250:593
§ 255-54.1. Temporary storage container and/or dumpsters. [Added
1-6-2014 by Ord. No. 1065-13]
(5) Stationary generators, air-conditioner compressors or units are
required to meet all applicable accessory structure setback
requirements. Stationary generators, air-conditioner compressors
or units are not considered a second accessory structure under this
subsection.
(6) Stationary generators, air-conditioner compressors or units are
subject to applicable local and state noise ordinances and
regulations.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
CONSTRUCTION DUMPSTER — A roll-off waste container transported
to and from the place of use by trucks or trailers and positioned
at a construction site for the collection and eventual disposal of
construction waste.
TEMPORARY STORAGE CONTAINER — A container designed for the
outdoor storage of personal property for temporary or permanent use,
which is to be delivered and removed by vehicle.
B. Permit required.
(1) No temporary storage container or dumpster (said dumpster to
mean one not being used in conjunction with an ongoing
construction permit issued by the Borough of Old Tappan) shall be
allowed on any private property in the Borough of Old Tappan
unless a storage container/dumpster permit is issued prior to the
placement of such unit for the length of time as provided herein.
(2) The owner or occupant of the site where the unit is to be placed
shall apply for a storage container permit to the Zoning Officer or
his designee. The applicant shall pay, upon issuance of the storage
container/dumpster permit, a required fee of $25.
(3) The storage container/dumpster permit shall be valid for 60 days.
Upon the request of the owner or occupant of the site to renew the
permit, the Zoning Officer or his designee shall inspect the site
where the unit is located to determine whether such permit should
be extended. Such permit may be extended up to four additional
thirty-day periods upon approval of the Zoning Officer or his
designee. An additional fee of $15 shall be paid for the extension of
such permit for said thirty-day additional period. In no event shall a
container or dumpster be placed on any site in the Borough of Old
Tappan for more than 180 days without the approval of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment, said approval to be in the form of a duly
adopted and memorialized resolution authorizing said container/
§ 255-54 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 255-54.1
250:594
dumpster for a period in excess of the one-hundred-eighty-day
aggregate limit set forth herein.
C. Regulations.
(1) Location.
(a) No more than one temporary storage container and/or
dumpster shall be permitted on any single tax map lot.
(b) A temporary storage container and/or dumpster shall not be
placed in the public easements or rights-of-way, nor shall it
obstruct the sidewalk.
(c) No temporary storage container and/or dumpster shall be
placed within five feet of a neighboring property line.
(d) A temporary storage container and/or dumpster shall be set
back at least 15 feet from the principal building on the lot.
(e) No temporary storage container and/or dumpster shall occupy
an area greater than 5% of the total lot area at which it is
located.
(f) The owner or occupant of the site where the unit is to be
placed shall utilize existing buffers when determining the
location for a temporary storage container and/or dumpster, to
screen the container from adjoining properties.
(g) A temporary storage container and/or dumpster shall not
obstruct circulation for vehicles, particularly emergency
vehicles.
(2) Size. No temporary storage container and/or dumpster shall exceed
eight feet in height, eight feet in width and 24 feet in length.
(3) Use. A temporary storage container and/or dumpster shall be
utilized on private property only for the limited purpose of
temporarily storing common household items such as furniture,
clothing or other household belongings coming from or to a
structure on the property that is being renovated or sold.
(a) The following items are expressly prohibited from being stored
or kept within a temporary storage container and/or dumpster:
hazardous substances, including chemical, flammable or
explosive materials; firearms; ammunition; prescription drugs
or narcotics; any material or contraband the possession of
which is unlawful; food, other than as packaged for sale in
cans, jars or bottles and for use by the occupant of the dwelling
upon the lot where the unit is permitted; and solid waste,
recyclables, construction or demolition debris, commercial
items or property for use other than at the premises where the
unit is located.
§ 255-54.1 YARD WASTE § 255-54.1
250:595
§ 255-54.2. Cannabis and electronic vapor inhalation. [Added
11-19-2018 by Ord. No. 1135-18]
(b) In no event shall a temporary storage container and/or
dumpster be used for temporary habitation of humans or
animals.
(c) A dumpster shall only be used to contain and remove debris
and material generated at the location where the dumpster is
located. No garbage or similar putrescible material may be
discarded in the dumpster, except in approved containers for
such materials.
(4) Signage. All temporary storage container and/or dumpsters shall
comply with the following:
(a) A temporary storage container and/or dumpster shall have no
signage other than the name, address and telephone number of
the person or entity engaged in the business of renting or
otherwise placing the unit.
(b) The sign shall be permanently adhered to or painted on a
temporary storage container and/or dumpster and the
container shall have no more than one sign attached to a side,
and no more than two signs total.
(c) A sign attached to a temporary storage container and/or
dumpster shall be no larger than 15% of the area of the side to
where it is attached.
(5) Lighting. There shall be no lighting fixtures attached to a
temporary storage container and/or dumpster, nor shall any
lighting fixture be solely utilized to light a container.
(6) Maintenance. A temporary storage container and/or dumpster shall
be in good condition, free from evidence of deterioration,
weathering, discoloration, rust, ripping, tearing, or other holes or
breaks. When not in use, the container shall be locked at all times.
All temporary storage container and/or dumpsters used in the
Borough of Old Tappan shall be equipped with floors that prevent
the intrusion of rats or other vermin into the unit.
D. Fines and penalties. Violations of this section, other than for failure to
apply for and acquire a valid permit, shall be punishable by a fine of up
to $250 per day for the first violation, up to $500 per day for a second
violation, and up to $1,000 per day for a third or subsequent violation.
E. Abatement. Any temporary storage container and/or dumpster not in
compliance with this section is hereby declared to be a public nuisance
and may be abated by the Borough at the owner's or responsible
person's expense. Abatement shall, at the Borough's option, include the
removal and/or the emptying of the dumpster.
§ 255-54.1 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 255-54.2
250:596
A. Purpose.
(1) The purpose of this section is to prohibit the establishment,
location and operation of any business engaged in the sale,
distribution, cultivation, manufacture and/or testing of cannabis
and cannabis products, electronic vapor devices, electronic vapor
inhalation substances, and electronic/vapor substance inhalation
shops and lounges in the Borough of Old Tappan, Bergen County, in
order to maintain and protect the Borough's safety, security and
general welfare.
(2) These regulations will rely on all definitions in this chapter and the
Code of the Borough of Old Tappan.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
BUSINESS — Any sole proprietorship, joint venture, corporation or
other business entity formed for profit-making purposes, including, but
not limited to, retail and wholesale establishments where goods and/or
services are sold, manufactured, distributed, cultivated or tested.
CANNABIS — All parts of the plant Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis
indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not, including the
seeds or resin thereof, whether extracted or not from any part of the
plant. This includes every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative,
mixture, concentrate, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, resin, and
including edible or topical products containing any of the above.
CANNABIS RETAILER, WHOLESALER, DISTRIBUTOR AND
MANUFACTURER — Any person or entity that operates any facility,
business, property, store, stand, booth, concession or other place at
which the growing, preparation, assemblage, packing, delivery, testing,
sales, rentals, or other distributions, including give-aways, of cannabis
and cannabis products are made to entities or persons for the purpose
of introducing cannabis or cannabis products into the consumer market
in any manner for the eventual consumption or use by people.
CREATION OF CANNABIS OR SMOKE SHOP ESTABLISHMENT —
ELECTRONIC/VAPOR SUBSTANCE INHALATION SHOPS — Those
businesses where customers can purchase and/or use electronic/vapor
substance inhalation products and/or devices, commonly known as
"electronic cigarettes," "e-cigarettes," "e-cigars," "e-cigarellos," "e-
The opening of any such establishment as new when it did not exist
before;
(1)
The conversion of any such establishment as new when it did not
exist before;
(2)
The relocation of any such establishment from one location to
another.
(3)
§ 255-54.2 YARD WASTE § 255-54.2
250:597
pipes," "e-hookahs," "electronic nicotine delivery systems" and other
similar devices.
SMOKE SHOP — Any store, stand, booth, concession or other place
that either devotes a substantial portion of its display area (15% or
more space) to hookahs, electronic vapor devices, electronic inhalation
substances or drug paraphernalia to purchasers for consumption or
use.
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF CANNABIS RETAILER
OR SMOKE SHOP —
(1) The sale, lease or sublease of such establishment;
The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in
such establishment, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means;
or
(2)
The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device
which transfers ownership or control of such establishment, except
for the transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon death of
the person possessing such ownership of controlling interest.
(3)
C. Prohibition. No person or entity shall cause or permit the creation,
enlargement or transfer of ownership or control of any cannabis or
marijuana retailer, wholesaler, distributor, grower, tester or
manufacturer selling cannabis or cannabis related paraphernalia,
smoke shop or electronic/vapor inhalation shop or lounge within 1/4
mile of any residential, educational, religious or recreational use, or
zoning district permitting such uses, within the Borough of Old Tappan.
D. Measure of distance. Distance, without regard to intervening
structures, shall be a straight line measured from the closest exterior
structural wall of a cannabis retailer, wholesaler, distributor, tester or
manufacturer, smoke shop or electronic/vapor substance inhalation
shop or lounge to the closest property line of a residential, educational,
religious or recreational use, or zoning district permitting such uses,
within the Borough of Old Tappan.
E. Violations and penalties.
(1) Any person or entity violating any of the provisions of this section
shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000.
(2) Each person or entity found guilty of a violation shall be deemed
guilty of a separate offense for every day during any portion of
which a violation of any section of this section is committed,
continued or permitted by such person. Any use or occupation of
any building or structure maintained contrary to the provisions of
this section, shall constitute a public nuisance.
(3) Notwithstanding any other penalty for violating any of the
provisions of this section, the Borough of Old Tappan may, but shall
§ 255-54.2 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 255-54.2
250:598
not be required to, to seek to enjoin such violation in a court of
competent jurisdiction.
F. Enforcement. Enforcement of the provisions of this section may be
enforced by the Borough Health Officer, members of the Police
Department, Borough Building Department, the Borough Code Official
and any other person so designated by the Borough of Old Tappan.
§ 255-54.2 YARD WASTE § 255-54.2
250:599

ARTICLE XII
Accessory Dwelling Units for Senior Citizens
§ 255-55. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT — A separate dwelling unit incorporated
within or to become part of an existing detached one-family dwelling which
dwelling also contains a primary dwelling unit.
CELLAR — That portion of a building which is partly or completely below
grade and having at least 1/2 of its height below grade.
DWELLING UNIT — A room or group of rooms within a building forming
a single habitable residential unit with permanent facilities for living,
sleeping, cooking, eating and sanitation.
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors
of a dwelling, excluding garage areas and cellar floor areas. Such gross
horizontal areas shall be measured from the outside walls of the dwelling,
without deduction for hallways, stairs, closets, thickness of walls, columns
or other features.
PERSON — A natural person only and not a corporation, partnership or
other similar entity.
PRIMARY DWELLING UNIT — The main dwelling unit constituting the
space remaining in such dwelling after the creation of an accessory dwelling
unit.
§ 255-56. Approval of accessory dwelling unit as a conditional use.
Upon proper application and hearing as herein provided, one accessory
dwelling unit shall be permitted as a conditional use in any existing
detached one-family dwelling in any residential district in the Borough,
provided that the Planning Board finds and determines that the following
conditions have been met:
A. The dwelling for which a permit for an accessory dwelling unit is sought
shall be situated on a lot having a minimum area of 10,000 square feet.
B. The dwelling for which such permit is sought shall have been occupied
as a detached one-family dwelling pursuant to an initial certificate of
occupancy issued at least 10 years prior to the filing of an application
for approval of an accessory dwelling unit.
C. Either the accessory dwelling unit or the primary dwelling unit shall
constitute the domicile of the person or persons who own the lot on
which the dwelling house is situated.
§ 255-55 YARD WASTE § 255-56
250:601
§ 255-57. Application procedure.
D. At least one of the persons occupying either the accessory dwelling unit
or the primary dwelling unit of the dwelling shall be 62 years of age or
older.
E. The accessory dwelling unit shall be occupied as a residence by no
more than three persons.
F. The accessory dwelling unit shall have a minimum floor area of 100
square feet, but shall not be greater than 25% of the total floor area of
the building.
G. No changes shall be made to the exterior of the dwelling which would
detract from its external appearance as a detached one-family dwelling,
except that a separate door to serve as an entrance and exit for such
accessory dwelling unit may be installed, provided it does not abut the
front yard of the lot. There shall be no separate utility meters for the
accessory dwelling unit.
H. In addition to the off-street parking required for the dwelling pursuant
to § 255-48A, there shall also be provided on the same lot one additional
parking space for the accessory dwelling unit, which shall also comply
with the requirements of § 255-48.
I. An accessory dwelling unit may not be situated or contained within a
cellar or garage.
J. The sanitary disposal system for the dwelling, either existing or as may
be modified to accommodate the accessory dwelling unit, shall be
inspected and approved by the board of health.
K. The accessory dwelling unit as proposed shall comply with all other
ordinances and regulations of the Borough.
L. The granting of such application for a conditional use shall not
substantially impair the visual aspect of the immediate neighborhood of
which the dwelling is a part or the surrounding area.
A. No building permit shall be issued for the creation of an accessory
dwelling unit unless a conditional use approval therefor has been
granted by the Planning Board.
B. For a conditional use approval for an accessory dwelling unit, the
procedure shall be as follows:
(1) An application shall be submitted to the clerk of the Planning
Board, in writing, in duplicate, on forms supplied by the Planning
Board, furnishing pertinent data such as the names, addresses and
ages of the owners, the names, addresses, and ages of the persons
who are intended to occupy the primary dwelling unit and the
accessory unit and an identification, by street number and lot and
block designation, of the property involved.
§ 255-56 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 255-57
250:602
(2) The application shall be accompanied by 10 copies of the current
survey of the property prepared by a licensed engineer or land
surveyor depicting the boundaries of the lot and all existing
structures and improvements on the property.
(3) The application shall also be accompanied by 10 copies of a
proposed floor plan drawn by a licensed architect or engineer
depicting all proposed interior and exterior changes to the
dwelling, including the relation of the accessory dwelling unit to
the primary dwelling unit, the location of any proposed additional
exterior doors, any proposed additional parking spaces and any
proposed modifications to the existing sanitary disposal system.
(4) The fee for such application shall be $200, plus $1,000 as an
escrow for engineering and legal expenses. [Amended
11-17-2003 by Ord. No. 833-03; 8-16-2004 by Ord. No.
852-04]
C. Upon filing of a complete application for an accessory dwelling unit as a
conditional use, the Planning Board shall conduct a hearing in
accordance with the provisions of § 218-37.
D. On such hearing the applicant shall give notice in accordance with the
provisions of § 218-38.
E. A list of property owners to whom the applicant is required to give
notice shall be furnished in accordance with the provisions of § 218-39.
F. The Planning Board shall render its decision not later than 95 days from
the filing of a complete application.
G. Any such approval granted by the Planning Board shall expire unless
the construction with respect thereto shall have been actually
commenced within 120 days of the Planning Board's determination on
the application, except that the running of the period of limitation
herein shall be tolled from the date of filing an appeal from the Planning
Board's decision to a court of competent jurisdiction until the
termination in any manner of such appeal or proceeding.
H. The Planning Board's decision on such application shall be in
accordance with the provisions of § 218-41. Publication of such decision
shall be in accordance with § 218-42.
I. Within 30 days of the completion of all construction with respect to the
creation of such accessory dwelling unit and written notification thereof
by the applicant, the Construction Code Official shall conduct a physical
inspection of the dwelling, including the accessory dwelling unit, to
determine whether all such construction complies with all ordinances
of the Borough including, but not limited to, the provisions of Chapter
100, Article II, Housing. If the Construction Code Official finds and
determines that all such ordinances have been complied with, (s)he
shall issue a certificate of occupancy for the accessory dwelling unit
§ 255-57 YARD WASTE § 255-57
250:603
§ 255-58. Affidavit of continued compliance.
§ 255-59. Transfer of dwelling.
upon the payment of a fee of $25. [Amended 8-16-2004 by Ord. No.
852-04]
A. On or before the first of January next following the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy for an accessory dwelling unit, and on or before
each and every January 1 next ensuing, the owner of the dwelling for
which such certificate of occupancy was granted shall file in the office
of the Construction Code Official a sworn affidavit in the form
prescribed by the Borough Clerk, which shall state that there has been
no change in the conditions upon which the approval was originally
granted.
B. If such owner shall fail to file any affidavit as herein required, the
certificate of occupancy issued for the accessory dwelling unit shall
automatically be revoked, and the Construction Code Official shall
notify the owner, in writing, of such revocation.
C. Any continued occupancy of such accessory dwelling unit following
notice of revocation shall constitute a violation of this section.
A. Upon the transfer of title by the owner of a dwelling in which an
accessory dwelling unit is contained, the certificate of occupancy issued
with respect to such accessory dwelling unit shall automatically expire
upon the later of:
(1) The 180th day after the recordation of such transfer in the Office of
the Bergen County Clerk; or
(2) The expiration of a written lease for such accessory dwelling unit,
provided that in no event shall such continued use of the accessory
dwelling unit under a written lease extend beyond a period of one
year from the date of recordation of such transfer in the Office of
the Bergen County Clerk, unless within such time period a new
certificate of occupancy for such accessory dwelling unit is issued
in the name of the new record owner of the property.
B. Before any new certificate of occupancy may be issued, the
Construction Code Official shall conduct a physical inspection of the
dwelling, including the accessory dwelling unit, in order to determine
that, other than with respect to the new ownership of the dwelling,
there has been no change in the conditions upon which the original
certificate of occupancy was granted.
C. If the Construction Code Official finds and determines that there has
been no such change in conditions, (s)he shall issue a new certificate of
occupancy for the accessory dwelling unit upon the payment of a fee of
$50. [Amended 8-16-2004 by Ord. No. 852-04]
§ 255-57 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 255-60
250:604
§ 255-60. Death of or vacation by senior citizens.
§ 255-61. Inspections.
The Construction Code Official shall have the right to conduct inspections in
order to determine compliance or continued compliance with the provisions
of this section in accordance with the provisions of § 100-13.
§ 255-62. Expiration.
Any accessory dwelling unit approved by the Planning Board as a
conditional use pursuant to the terms and provisions of this article shall be
deemed abandoned, and the certificate of occupancy with respect thereto
shall automatically expire upon any change in or noncompliance with the
conditions set forth in § 255-56.
§ 255-63. Violations and penalties.
The creation, maintenance or occupancy of any accessory dwelling unit
other than in accordance with the provisions of this article shall constitute
a violation of this article and shall be punishable as provided by Article XX.
A. Upon the death of the person 62 years or older, or the permanent
vacation of such person from the accessory dwelling unit or primary
dwelling unit in the dwelling for which approval hereunder was
granted, the owner of such dwelling shall have a grace period within
which the certificate of occupancy shall continue in full force and effect.
Such grace period shall consist of the longer of either:
(1) One hundred eighty days; or
(2) The time remaining in the term of a written lease for the accessory
dwelling unit, provided that in no event shall such continued use of
the accessory dwelling unit under a written lease extend beyond a
period of one year from the date of the death of the person 62 years
of age or older, or the permanent vacation of such person from the
accessory dwelling unit or primary dwelling unit.
B. If, by the expiration of such period, no other person or persons being 62
years of age or older shall have commenced occupancy of the accessory
or primary dwelling unit, the certificate of occupancy issued for the
accessory dwelling unit shall automatically be revoked, and the
Construction Code Official shall notify the owner, in writing, of such
revocation.
C. Any continued occupancy of such accessory dwelling unit as an
accessory dwelling unit following notice of revocation shall constitute a
violation of this section.
§ 255-60 YARD WASTE § 255-63
250:605

ARTICLE XIII
Nonconforming Uses and Buildings
§ 255-64. Nonconforming uses.
A lawful nonconforming use may be continued, except as provided below:
§ 255-65. Buildings with nonconforming bulk.
A lawful use of a building upon a lot with less than the minimum area, with
less than minimum front, rear or side yards, with a greater height or greater
coverage than permitted may be continued, except as provided below:
A. Change of use. A nonconforming use may be changed to any use
permitted in the district in which the lot is located. If once changed to a
conforming use, it shall not be changed back to a nonconforming use.
B. Relocation. A nonconforming use shall not be moved to another lot
where it is also nonconforming nor shall a nonconforming use of land be
moved closer to any lot line.
A. Alterations. A building with nonconforming bulk may be altered if:
(1) Such alteration is in conformance with the bulk regulation.
(2) Such alteration will decrease the nonconforming bulk.
B. Extension. A building with nonconforming bulk may be extended,
provided that:
(1) The maximum coverage permitted in the district in which the
building is located is not exceeded.
(2) The extension shall not project any closer to any side or rear lot line
than the existing building or the required yard dimension from any
such lot line, whichever is less.
C. Restoration.
(1) Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the restoration, within six
months of the date of destruction, of a nonconforming use or
building with nonconforming bulk destroyed by fire, explosion, act
of God or act of the public enemy, provided that the restoration
does not exceed the size of the original nonconforming use or
building.
(2) Nothing in this section shall prevent the strengthening or restoring
to a safe condition of any building or structure or part thereof
declared unsafe by the Construction Code Official.
§ 255-64 YARD WASTE § 255-65
250:607

ARTICLE XIV
Antennas
§ 255-66. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANTENNA — Any apparatus which is designed for the purpose of receiving
and/or transmitting television, radio, microwave, satellite or similar signals.
§ 255-67. Objective.
The objective of this Article XIV is to regulate antennas for safety and
aesthetic reasons. Antennas may cause a safety hazard if not positioned
and secured properly. Antennas may be aesthetically undesirable, and this
concern is addressed by regulating the location and placement of the
antenna so as to minimize the visual. The conditions set forth in § 255-68
are intended to address these safety and aesthetic concerns.
§ 255-68. Conditions for approval as conditional accessory use.
A. Except as provided hereinbelow, no antenna shall be constructed,
erected or installed in the Borough unless and until a building permit is
issued by the Building Inspector, following the procedures set forth
herein. In all zones, a building permit shall not be required for the
construction, erection or alteration of an antenna one meter or less in
length or width or one meter or less in diameter. In the B-1 and B-2
Districts, a building permit shall not be required for the construction,
erection or alteration of an antenna two meters or less in length or
width or two meters or less in diameter.
B. Upon proper application and hearing as provided herein, one antenna
shall be permitted as a conditional accessory use in any residential or
business district in the Borough, provided that the Planning Board finds
and determines that the following conditions have been met:
(1) The antenna surface area, measured in terms of square feet, shall
be no more than 12 square feet.
(2) The equivalent diameter of the cable dish, measured in terms of
lineal feet, shall be no more than four feet.
(3) The height of the antenna, including its base or mounting
structure, measured vertically from the ground to the highest point
of the antenna when positioned for operation, shall be no more than
six feet.
(4) Any antenna shall be mounted on a base affixed to the ground and
shall be erected on a secure foundation. No antenna may be
erected or mounted on another structure or portion thereof such
as, but not limited to, a roof or wall.
§ 255-66 YARD WASTE § 255-68
250:609
§ 255-69. Application procedure.
(5) Any antenna shall be located only in the rear yard of the lot for
which it is to be installed and shall comply in all respects with the
minimum requirements for the rear yard and side yards of the zone
in which such lot is situated.
(6) Any antenna shall be located in a position on the lot and screened
in such a way so as to minimize noise and visual impact as may be
perceived from the street or streets adjacent to the lot and from
adjacent properties. Plants or trees equal to or greater in height
than the antenna itself shall be planted to provide maximum
screening and shielding from view and hearing.
(7) All power controls and signal cables from the antenna to the
structure which it is designed to serve shall be installed
underground and shall comply with all applicable provisions of the
Borough Building Code.57
(8) Any antenna shall be designed only for the reception of signals for
the use, benefit and enjoyment of the occupants of the structure on
the lot on which the antenna is proposed to be installed.
(9) No more than one antenna shall be permitted as an accessory for
any primary use.
A. No building permit shall be issued for the construction, erection or
installation of an antenna unless a conditional use approval therefor has
been granted by the Planning Board. As set forth in § 255-68, in all
zones, a building permit or conditional use approval shall not be
required for the construction, erection or installation of an antenna one
meter or less in length or width or one meter or less in diameter. In the
B-1 and B-2 Districts, a building permit or conditional use approval
shall not be required for the construction, erection or installation of an
antenna two meters or less in length or width or two meters or less in
diameter.
B. For a conditional use approval for an antenna, the procedure shall be as
follows:
(1) An application shall be submitted to the Planning Board clerk, in
writing, in duplicate, on forms supplied by the Planning Board,
furnishing the name and address of the owner and applicant, and
an identification by street number and lot and block designation of
the property involved.
(2) The application shall be accompanied by 10 copies of a survey of
the property prepared by a licensed engineer or land surveyor
depicting the boundaries of the lot and all existing structures and
improvements on the property. There shall be further shown or
57.Editor's Note: See Ch. 100, Building Construction.
§ 255-68 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 255-69
250:610
§ 255-70. Violations and penalties.
The construction, erection or maintenance of any antenna other than in
accordance with the provisions of this article shall constitute a violation of
this article and shall be punishable as provided by Article XX.
marked on the survey, and drawn to scale, the proposed location of
the antenna on the property.
(3) The application shall also be accompanied by 10 copies of a
drawing showing the dimensions of the antenna and the planting or
screening as required hereunder.
(4) The fee for such application shall be $200, plus $1,000 as an
escrow for engineering and legal expenses. [Amended 8-16-2004
by Ord. No. 852-04]
C. Upon filing of a completed application for an antenna as a conditional
accessory use, the Planning Board shall conduct a hearing in
accordance with the provisions of § 218-37.
D. On such hearing the applicant shall give notice in accordance with the
provisions of § 218-38.
E. A list of property owners to whom the applicant is required to give
notice shall be furnished to the applicant in accordance with the
provisions of § 218-39.
F. The Planning Board shall render its decision not later than 95 days from
the filing of a completed application.
G. The Planning Board's decision on such application shall be in
accordance with the provisions of § 218-41. Publication of such
decisions shall be in accordance with § 218-42.
H. No other provision of Article XIV shall be enforced, if such enforcement
would reasonably limit or prevent reception of satellite-delivered
signals by receive-only antennas or transmission of signals by licensed
transmitters, or impose costs on users of such antennas that are
excessive in the light of the purchase and installation cost of the
equipment.
I. In the event an applicant seeks a building permit for construction of an
antenna which does not comply with the limitations of this Article XIV,
he shall append to his application competent proof in affidavit form that
compliance would unreasonably limit or prevent such reception or
transmission, or impose costs upon the applicant that are excessive in
the light of the purchase and installation cost of the equipment, in
either case or both cases setting forth the bases for such conclusion
including, where applicable, all such cost estimates, in detail.
§ 255-69 YARD WASTE § 255-70
250:611

ARTICLE XV
Fences
§ 255-71. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FENCE — A substantially vertical structure, regardless of material
composition, designed to provide a barrier or demarcation point on real
property, to prevent escape or intrusion, to ensure privacy or to serve
as a support for vegetation. Unless otherwise provided herein, shrubbery,
bushes, trees and other landscaping shall not be considered a fence; nor
shall a retaining wall be considered a fence.
§ 255-72. Permit requirements for erection of fences in residential
zones. [Amended 8-16-2004 by Ord. No. 852-04; 1-21-2014 by Ord.
No. 1064-13]
A. No fence shall be constructed or erected, or replaced in a residential
zone except upon the filing of an application to the Code Official, the
payment of the required fee provided for hereunder and the issuance of
a permit.
B. An application for a fence permit shall state:
(1) The name of the owner of the property;
(2) The lot and block number and the street address of the property;
(3) A description of the fence to be erected including type or style,
length and height, materials to be used in its construction and the
area of the lot or property which will be enclosed by the fence;
(4) There shall also be submitted as part of the application a survey or
plot plan of the applicant's property showing the proposed location
of the fence and the height of the fence. If the height of the fence is
not uniform throughout its length, the height of the different
sections or segments of the fence shall be marked. If available, the
applicant shall also submit a photograph, brochure or other
pictorial representation of the type of fence to be erected.
C. At the time of filing of the application and prior to the issuance of a
permit, the applicant shall pay a fee of $40 for a zoning review.
D. Upon filing of an application for a fence erection permit, the Code
Official shall examine the application, and if the proposed fence
complies with all requirements of this chapter and all other laws and
ordinances of the Borough, a fence erection permit shall be issued. The
applicant shall erect the fence within six months of the issuance of the
permit. If the fence is not erected within that time, the permit shall
expire and become null and void.
§ 255-71 YARD WASTE § 255-72
250:613
§ 255-73. Standards.
Fences shall be permitted to be constructed and a fence erection permit
shall issue, provided that all of the following standards and requirements
are complied with and provided further that such construction does not
violate any of the other provisions of this chapter or any other Borough
ordinance.
E. The proposed fence shall be constructed in conformity with the plans or
description and shall be located as shown on the submitted survey. If
the Code Official, upon inspection, determines that the fence has not
been constructed according to the plans or description or has not been
located as shown on the survey, he shall notify the property owner in
writing and shall order such fence to be constructed according to the
plans submitted or shall order the fence to be located as shown on the
survey, as the case may be. Upon receipt of such order, the owner shall,
within 10 days thereof, either remove the fence or make it comply with
such order. Each day the owner fails to comply with the order referred
to shall be a separate violation of this section.
A. No fence shall exceed six feet in height above the normal grade
elevation. However, between the building and front property line, if an
interior lot, and, between the building and front and side street
property line, if a corner lot, no fence over three feet above the normal
grade shall be erected except that fences around swimming pools may
be up to four feet above the normal grade. On corner lots, between the
building and side street property line, no fence over four feet above the
normal grade shall be erected. [Amended 5-8-2000 by Ord. No.
710-00]
B. No fences, shrubs, bushes, trees or other obstructions to visibility,
except buildings in existence as of the effective date hereof, shall be
erected, planted or maintained on a corner lot within the triangular
area formed by the intersecting curblines and a straight line joining
said curblines at points 30 feet distant from the point of intersection
measured along said curblines. Any existing obstruction of this
character, which within the foregoing limits, obstructs the view of
drivers or vehicles approaching the intersection shall be removed by
and at the expense of the owners of such corner lots. Where there is no
curb, the term "curbline" shall mean the edge of pavement line.
C. No fence over three feet in height shall be erected within 10 feet of the
curbline, and no fence, shrub, bush or tree shall be erected, planted or
permitted to grow in a way that shall encroach on any public right-ofway.
D. Any fence which is considered to have a face or front side shall be
erected so that such face or front side is placed outward from the area
being enclosed.
§ 255-72 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 255-73
250:614
§ 255-74. Fence more than 500 feet in length in one direction.
E. Fences shall be erected in such a manner as to permit the flow of
natural drainage and shall not cause surface water to be blocked or
dammed to create ponding.
F. The following fence materials are prohibited except around vegetable
or flower gardens: barbed wire, pointed materials (except as used in
picket or stockade fences), cloth (except to protect shrubbery or
bushes), electrically charged materials, and poultry netting or chicken
wire.
G. All fences shall be constructed and maintained in a safe, sound, sturdy
and upright condition.
H. Fences which are painted shall be painted in only one color, harmonious
with the surrounding area. Multicolored fences are prohibited.
I. All fences or walls must be erected within the property lines, and no
fences shall be erected so as to encroach upon a public right-of-way or
to interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic or with visibility on
corner lots.
J. No fence over three feet in height and over 500 continuous feet in
length in one direction or which extends an existing fence for an
aggregate of more than 500 continuous feet in one direction may be
erected without the grant of a separate conditional permit by the Old
Tappan Planning Board, as provided for in § 255-74 herein.
A. In addition to the other requirements of this article, no fence more than
three feet in height and 500 continuous feet in length in one direction,
nor any fence which extends an existing fence more than three feet in
height and 500 continuous feet in length in one direction, may be
erected without the issuance of a resolution of approval by the Old
Tappan Planning Board as a conditional accessory use/structure. A
fence shall be considered continuous if pedestrian access is blocked or
inhibited for the entire length of the fenced area, regardless of the
existence of a gate.
B. An application to the Planning Board under this section shall state:
(1) The name of the owner of the property;
(2) The lot and block number and the street address of the property;
(3) A description of the fence to be erected including type or style,
length and height, materials to be used in its construction and the
area of the lot or property which will be enclosed by the fence;
(4) There shall also be submitted as part of the application a survey or
plot plan of the applicant's property showing the proposed location
and the height of the fence. If the height of the fence is not uniform
throughout the length, the height of the different sections or
§ 255-73 YARD WASTE § 255-74
250:615
§ 255-75. Waiver or relaxation of regulations.
If the applicant can clearly demonstrate to the Planning Board that, due to
peculiar conditions pertaining to his/her property, the literal enforcement of
the regulations of this article would be impractical or would cause or create
an undue hardship, the Planning Board may, upon appropriate findings and
conclusions, grant a waiver or relaxation of the regulations hereunder as
may be necessary to alleviate such impracticality or undue hardship.
§ 255-76. Fences over six feet in height. [Amended 2-19-2002 by
Ord. No. 773-02]
segments of the fence shall be marked. If available, the applicant
shall also submit a photograph, brochure or other pictorial
representation of the type of fence to be erected.
C. The application shall be accompanied by the fee as provided by
§ 255-72C hereof. In addition, the applicant shall post an escrow
deposit with the Borough in the amount of $300, to cover the Board's
expenses for legal and engineering review. In the event this deposit is
exhausted, the Planning Board may direct the applicant to make a
further deposit.
D. The Board shall conduct a hearing on notice, pursuant to the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12 (provided, however, that no notice by publication
in the official newspaper of the municipality shall be required), and
shall approve the application, provided that the proposed fence or
fences as extended meets all of the requirements of this article and that
same does not have a substantial negative impact on the desirable
visual environment of the neighborhood in which the subject property is
located. In connection with its review, the Planning Board may
condition any such approval on modifications which it deems
appropriate to reduce or eliminate any negative impact on said
desirable visual environment of the neighborhood.
E. The Planning Board shall approve, deny or modify any such application
filed hereunder within 95 days of submission of a complete application
by the applicant, unless such period for review and action is extended
by mutual consent of the applicant and the board.
A. Planning Board approval required. Fences higher than six feet, such as
those required around a tennis court, may be erected in a residential
zone upon application to and the grant of a variance by the Planning
Board.
B. Setback requirements. Such a fence shall comply with all side yard and
rear yard requirements of this Chapter 255, Zoning.
C. Applications.
(1) Applications to the Planning Board under this section shall contain
the following information:
§ 255-74 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 255-76
250:616
§ 255-77. Fences for private swimming pools. [Amended 1-21-2014
by Ord. No. 1064-13]
Fences erected in connection with private swimming pools in residential
zones shall separately comply with all the applicable requirements of the
Uniform Construction Code.
§ 255-78. Fences in nonresidential zones.
All fences in nonresidential zones shall be subject to site plan approval by
the Planning Board.
§ 255-79. Violations and penalties; enforcement. [Amended
1-21-2014 by Ord. No. 1064-13]
Any person who shall violate, permit, allow or suffer to be violated any
provision of this article shall be subject to a fine of not more that $500
for the first violation and not more than $500 for each such succeeding
violation. For the purposes of this section, each day that a violation remains
in effect may be considered a separate violation. The provisions of this
article shall be administered and enforced by the Code Official of the
Borough.
(a) The name of the owner of the property;
(b) The lot and block number and the street address of the
property;
(c) A description of the fence to be erected, including type or style,
length and height, materials to be used in its construction and
the area of the lot or property which will be enclosed by the
fence.
(2) There shall also be submitted as part of the application a survey or
plot plan of the applicant's property showing the proposed location
and the height of the fence. If the height of the fence is not uniform
throughout the length, the height of the different sections or
segments of the fence shall be marked. If available, the applicant
shall also submit a photograph, brochure or other pictorial
representation of the type of fence to be erected.
D. Fee; escrow deposit. The application shall be accompanied by the fee as
provided by § 255-72C hereof. In addition, the applicant shall post an
escrow deposit with the Borough in the amount of $300, to cover the
Board's expenses for legal and engineering review. In the event this
deposit is exhausted, the Planning Board may direct the applicant to
make a further deposit.
§ 255-76 YARD WASTE § 255-79
250:617

ARTICLE XVI
Signs
§ 255-80. Definitions and authority.
A. Authority. The power to regulate signs in the Borough as provided in
this chapter is part of the general zoning power of the Borough
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
B. Enforcement. The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the
Zoning Officer of the Borough of Old Tappan.
C. Definitions. As used herein, the following words or terms shall have the
following meanings:
BUILDING COMMITTEE — A committee of members of the Borough
Council appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Council, for
the purpose of enforcement of this chapter. The Building Committee
shall designate the Building Inspector or other agent for purposes of
inspection, removal, approval or disapproval, including consideration
of factors of structural safety and stability of signs in accordance with
provisions of Article XVI, Signs.
POLITICAL SIGN — A sign of a political nature, relating to a candidate
for public office or a poistion on an issue to be determined in an
election or other specific political event.[Added 5-17-2004 by Ord.
No. 851-04]
SIGN — Any structure or part thereof or device attached thereto or
painted or represented thereon, which shall display or include any
letter, word, model, banner, flag, pennant, insignia, device or
representation used as, or which is in the nature of, an announcement,
direction or advertisement. The word "sign" includes the word
"billboard," but does not include the flag, bunting, streamers, pennant
or insignia of any nation, state, city or other political unit, or of any
political, educational, charitable, philanthropic, civic, professional,
religious or like campaign, drive, movement or event.
The word "sign," as used in this chapter, shall also include any lettered
or worded advertisement of a permanent or semipermanent nature,
not outdoors, which is visible and is intended to be read from the
outdoors. The word "sign," as used in § 255-81B(1) and (2), shall mean
a sign in one or more component parts. The word "sign" shall not
include advertisements or displays of a temporary nature intended
to advertise a product, sale, service or public or civic announcement
whose use shall not exceed a period of five weeks' duration and is
entirely interior to a building. However, any advertisement or display
kept in use by the owner, agent or other person in charge thereof for a
period exceeding five weeks' duration shall be considered permanent
or semipermanent in nature and subject to the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 255-80 YARD WASTE § 255-80
250:619
§ 255-81. Restrictions on signs.
SIGN, ADVERTISING — A sign which directs attention to a business
commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered
elsewhere than on the premises and only incidentally on the premises,
if at all.
SIGN, BUSINESS — A sign which directs attention to a business or
profession conducted on the premises. A "For Sale" sign or a "To Let"
sign relating to the property on which it is displayed shall be deemed a
business sign.
SIGN FACE — The side of a sign intended to be read.
A. Restrictions on signs permitted in residential zone. No sign shall be
erected in the residential zones except as provided in this article and
except the following: [Amended 5-17-2004 by Ord. No. 851-04;
9-18-2006 by Ord. No. 918-06]
(1) One double-faced ground sign not exceeding one square foot in
area stating only the name and profession of the occupant, or the
street address of the premises, which sign shall constitute the only
advertising permitted for premises in which a home occupation, as
defined in § 255-4, is being conducted.
(2) Signs erected by the municipal, county or federal government, as
may be deemed necessary for their respective functions.
(3) One wall or ground sign not exceeding three feet by four feet on the
premises of a church, library or other public building giving only
the name and nature of the occupancy and information as to the
condition or schedule of use or occupancy. In addition, wall or
ground signs not exceeding one square foot in area may be used for
a driveway entrance, exit or for warning purposes on the grounds
of libraries, schools, churches or other public buildings.
(4) (Reserved)
(5) Temporary ground signs not exceeding one square foot in area
erected for directional purposes for a period not exceeding two
days.
(6) Builders’, architects’, developers’, home improvement contractors',
landscapers', and engineers’ temporary signs erected on the site of
construction during the course of any building or developing
operations, not exceeding three feet by four feet.
B. Restrictions on signs permitted in planned residential developments.
Signs in planned residential developments shall be restricted in the
same manner as signs in other residential zones except that one sign for
the main entrance shall be permitted. The main entrance sign shall be a
ground sign, shall not exceed 25 square feet in area, shall not have a
display height greater than two times the width or vice versa, and shall
§ 255-80 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 255-81
250:620
be erected so that the distance from the top of the sign to the ground
shall not exceed eight feet.
C. Restriction on signs permitted in business and industrial zones. The
following signs may be erected in the business, limited commercial and
industrial zones, subject to the requirements of § 255-85:
(1) Wall signs. One wall sign per established business frontage, not
exceeding a total of 10% of that building face, including the window
area, but not to exceed three feet in height advertising only the
business carried on or the services and products made or sold on
the premises.
(2) Window signs. Window signs or displays of a permanent or
semipermanent nature painted, transferred or otherwise bonded to
the window area and any electric, neon or painted sign attached to
or in close proximity to and parallel with the window area and
visible from the business or industrial frontage, the use of which
shall be intended for a period greater than five weeks' duration,
shall be included in calculating the maximum allowable wall sign
area as set forth in Subsection C(1) of this section. In addition, no
such signs shall exceed 25% of the individual window area or 10%
of the glass area of any required exit door. Any sign or combination
of signs permitted under Subsections C(1) and (2) of this section
shall constitute one sign "face" within the meaning of this chapter.
(3) Ground signs. In addition to the wall sign specified in Subsection
C(1) of this section, one ground sign also may be erected near, but
wholly inside, the front property line and at right angles thereto.
Such sign shall not exceed 30 square feet in area, shall not have a
display height greater than two times the width or vice versa, shall
be erected so that the distance from the top of the sign to the
ground shall not exceed 10 feet, and the distance from the bottom
of the display area to the ground shall be not less than four feet.
Entrance, exit and other directional signs as permitted under
Subsection C(6) hereinbelow shall not be considered ground signs.
(4) Roof signs. Signs erected, constructed and maintained above the
roof of a building, which signs shall not exceed three feet in height
above such buildings.
(5) Marquee signs. Marquee signs attached to or hung from a
marquee, canopy of other covered structure extending from and
supported by the building. Such marquee signs shall not exceed
four square feet in area nor shall they be more than 12 inches wide
by 48 inches long.
(6) Entrance, exit and other directional signs. Entrance, exit and other
signs directing the flow of traffic, provided that such signs shall not
exceed eight square feet in area, shall not have a display height
greater than two times the width or vice versa, and the distance
§ 255-81 YARD WASTE § 255-81
250:621
from the bottom of the sign to the ground shall not be more than
two feet.
(7) Miscellaneous signs. In addition to the signs permitted in
Subsection C(1) through (6) of this section, also permitted in these
zones are the signs specified in § 255-81A with the same
restrictions as to the number and size except as to exit, entrance
and other directional signs, and subject to the permit and fee
requirements set forth in § 255-85.
(8) Temporary banners, pennants and bunting. Banners, streamers,
pennants and/or bunting which signify the opening of a business.
Banners shall not exceed three feet in height. The length of a
banner shall not exceed the width of the storefront or business
front or 30 feet, whichever is less. Such banners, streamers,
pennants and bunting shall not cross a public street. Such banners,
streamers, pennants and bunting are only permitted for a period of
30 days from the installation date given on the application. No sign
shall be placed in a residential property or residential zone.
[Amended 9-15-2014 by Ord. No. 1073-14]
(9) Temporary sign permits for houses of worship and charities.
Temporary signs and/or banners for a house of worship on its
property, and charities whose principal office is in Old Tappan, are
permitted for a maximum of 21 calendar days from installation, up
to but not exceeding four times per year. No sign shall be placed on
residential property. Prior to erecting a temporary sign or banner,
such house of worship or charity shall obtain a zoning permit, but
no fee shall be charged for same. [Added 9-15-2014 by Ord. No.
1073-14]
D. Restrictions on signs permitted in any zones at roadside. The following
signs may be erected in any zone, subject only to the permit
requirements set forth in § 255-85:
(1) Public information signs. Public information signs, including
service club, church, public building, charitable or civic
organization or hospital signs, not exceeding three square feet in
area at roadside.
(2) Developer's directional signs. Placed at intersections during the
period of sale of development, not exceeding six square feet in
area. Application renewable every six months subject also to fee
requirements set forth in § 255-85.
E. Signs prohibited in all zones of the Borough. Signs of the following
types, or types closely related to them, are specifically prohibited:
(1) Billboards and outdoor display structures.
(2) Projecting signs or signs attached at, or nearly at, right angles to a
building wall.
§ 255-81 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 255-81
250:622
(3) Pylon signs or special ground signs supported by tall mast-like
members or pyramidal tower supports.
(4) Roof signs or display signs placed above or supported on the top of
a building or structure, except as provided in § 255-81C(4).
(5) Awning signs.
(6) Banners, streamers and advertising flags, except as provided in
§§ 255-81C(8) and 255-81F. [Amended 11-15-2004 by Ord. No.
868-04]
(7) Fence signs, except those necessary for safety such as "high
voltage."
(8) Advertising signs tacked, pasted, painted or otherwise attached on
poles, posts, trees, fences, sidewalks or curbs.
(9) Illuminated signs of the flashing or animated type.
(10) Silhouette cutout three dimensional caricature or signs of a bizarre
nature.
(11) Signs producing glare.
(12) Except as otherwise permitted in this chapter, advertising signs
placed anywhere on Borough property or within the public right-ofway
for a period in excess of 24 hours. [Added 11-15-2004 by
Ord. No. 868-04]
F. Temporary banners for Borough events. The Mayor and Council may
authorize the erection of temporary banners, including banners across
public streets, for events sponsored by the Borough. [Added
11-15-2004 by Ord. No. 868-04]
G. Real estate signs. In addition to the foregoing, signs announcing the
name of the owner, manager, realtor or other persons directly involved
in the sale or rental of the property upon which the signs are placed or
announcing the purpose for which it is being offered. Signs shall
conform to the following requirements: [Added 9-18-2006 by Ord.
No. 918-06]
(1) Signs may be freestanding or wall-mounted. Signs shall not be
placed on trees or utility poles.
(2) Signs must be removed within 10 days after sale or rental of the
property.
(3) There shall be only one sign per property. Corner properties,
however, may contain two signs, one per frontage.
(4) Signs shall not exceed six square feet in residential districts, and
32 square feet in nonresidential districts.
§ 255-81 YARD WASTE § 255-81
250:623
§ 255-81.1. Political signs. [Added 5-17-2004 by Ord. No. 851-04;
amended 9-7-2004 by Ord. No. 862-04; 1-3-2016 by Ord. No.
1092-15]
(5) A freestanding sign shall be located entirely upon the lot it is
advertising for sale or rent, and shall have a minimum setback of 10
feet from the street curbline.
(6) Temporary directional signs for an open house or similar event
shall be erected and taken down on the day of the event.
(7) No other real estate signs, except as permitted by this Subsection
G, shall be permitted.
H. Garage sale signs. Signs advertising a garage sale shall be permitted
subject to the following requirements: [Added 9-18-2006 by Ord. No.
918-06]
(1) Directional and advertising signs for a garage sale shall be
freestanding. Such signs shall not be posted on trees, utility poles,
shrubs, vehicles, dwellings or structures.
(2) Directional and advertising signs may be placed no more than two
days prior to the sale and shall be removed within one day after the
sale.
(3) Directional signs placed on private property shall have the owner’s
permission.
(4) Directional signs may not be placed in the street right-of-way.
A. Political lawn signs may be erected and maintained on private property
in any zone within the Borough without a sign permit or payment of
fees.
B. Political signs can be erected three weeks prior and must be removed
no later than five days after the political event to which the sign refers.
C. Lawn signs shall be no larger that 18 inches by 24 inches and may be
double-sided.
D. A political signboard/billboard/banner, no larger than 18 square feet, is
permitted by permit only, which shall be issued by the Zoning Officer
upon application therefor. Such political signboard/billboard/banner
may be double-sided. No more than one such political sign shall be
permitted per property. A permit is required for such a sign, with a fee
of $10 per sign.
E. No political signs shall be placed on public property, which is defined as
all publicly owned property, streets, rights-of-way, easements, and
everything affixed thereto and thereover.
§ 255-81 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 255-81.1
250:624
§ 255-82. Illuminated signs.
§ 255-83. Nonconforming signs.
Any signs now in existence, the erection or placing of which is prohibited
hereunder, may be continued on such building, structure, lot or land so
occupied. However, at no time shall such sign be altered, enlarged,
extended or relocated unless such action changes a nonconforming sign
into a conforming sign, as provided herein. The failure to keep a
nonconforming sign in good repair for a period of one year, or the failure
to repair such sign within 30 days after written notice by the Uniform
Construction Code enforcing agency shall constitute abandonment, and
such sign may not be reused and must be removed. The provisions of this
article notwithstanding, the owner, agent or person otherwise in control
of such nonconforming sign shall have the right to replace such
nonconforming sign in the event of accidental damage or destruction.
§ 255-84. Maintenance and removal of signs.
F. Political signs shall not be placed on any property without the
permission of the owner or occupant thereof.
G. Political signs shall be constructed, erected, or located in a manner
which obstructs the visibility or movement of motorists or pedestrians
proceeding along or entering the public way, whether at intersections,
driveways, or in a manner that is unsafe, insecure or a danger to the
public safety. This section shall be enforced by the Police Department
and/or Borough Zoning Official.
H. Violations of this section shall be punishable by a fine of up to $100 per
sign per day.
A. In no case shall illuminated signs interfere with traffic. No ground signs
of the type permitted in § 255-81C may be illuminated by red or green
lights when they are situated within 200 feet of any street intersection.
All illuminated signs shall conform with respect to wiring and
appliances to the requirements of the National Board of Fire
Underwriters.
B. All electrical signs must display a fire underwriter's inspection label,
and the label number must be registered with the Uniform Construction
Code enforcing agency before erection of such sign.
A. Any sign that is or shall become dangerous or unsafe in any manner
whatsoever, or any sign erected hereafter contrary to the provisions of
this chapter, shall be repaired, made safe, made attractive and in
conformity with this chapter or shall be taken down and removed by the
owner, lessor, agent or occupant of the building, property or land upon
which it is placed or to which it is attached.
§ 255-81.1 YARD WASTE § 255-84
250:625
§ 255-85. Permits, fees and bonds.
B. In addition to the foregoing, after written notice is served by the Zoning
Officer, any sign which no longer serves the purpose for which it was
originally erected shall be removed by the owner, lessor, agent or
occupant of the building, property or land upon which it is placed or to
which it is attached.
C. The Uniform Construction Code agency shall have the power to order
the repair or removal of any sign which is or is likely to become
dangerous or unsafe and to remove the same after notice shall have
been given as herein provided.
D. The Uniform Construction Code agency shall serve written notice upon
the owner, agent or person having control of any sign commanding him/
her to repair or to remove the same, as the case may be, within 24 hours
thereafter, if in its judgment such necessity exists, or within a time not
exceeding five days if in the judgment of the Uniform Construction
Code agency such time is reasonable or just. In case of failure of such
owner, agent, or other person having control, as aforesaid, to comply
with such notice, the Uniform Construction Code agency, immediately
upon the expiration of the time allowed, shall cause the sign to be
removed, and the Uniform Construction Code agency shall have the
power to enter upon or into the lands, house or property upon which the
sign, billboard or fence is or shall be erected and to remove or cause
same to be removed.
E. The expenses and disbursements incurred in carrying out the
provisions of this section shall be recoverable by the Borough from the
owner, agent or person having control of such sign in an action at law in
any court of competent jurisdiction upon his/her or their neglect or
refusal to pay the same within 10 days after service of a statement
thereof.
A. Permit required. No new sign shall be erected or existing sign enlarged,
maintained, relocated or replaced until after the required permit is
obtained from the Uniform Construction Code agency, except signs
erected as specified in § 255-81A(1), (2), (3) and (5); and § 255-81F, G
and H. [Amended 9-18-2006 by Ord. No. 918-06]
B. Fees. Sign permits shall not be issued until the following fees shall have
been paid: [Amended 8-16-2004 by Ord. No. 852-04]
(1) Signs defined in § 255-81A(1) through (5): no fee.
(2) Signs defined in §§ 255-81A(6), 255-81C(1) through (7) and
§ 255-81D(2): $25 per sign.
C. Expiration of permit. Sign permits shall expire on December 31 and
shall be renewed in accordance with § 255-85B on the first day of each
year.
§ 255-84 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 255-85
250:626
§ 255-86. Appeal. [Amended 1-5-2002 by Ord. No. 771RR-01]
If any person shall be aggrieved by the action of the Uniform Construction
Code agency, appeal may be made to the Planning Board in accordance
with procedures of the Board within 60 days of the Uniform Construction
Code agency action. Appeal may be made on the basis of sign vision,
obstruction, architectural necessity or topography. The findings and reasons
for disposition of the appeal shall be stated in the minutes of the Planning
Board, and the applicant shall be given a copy.
§ 255-87. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than $25 and not more than $100
and in default of payment of such fine may be confined to the county jail for
a period not exceeding 30 days. Each day that any violation continues shall
be considered a new and separate violation of this chapter.
D. Bond. In addition to required fees, a cash bond of $100 shall be
deposited with and held by the Uniform Construction Code agency for
each sign permitted to be erected under § 255-81A(6) or 255-81D(2) to
ensure the removal of such sign after it has served its purpose.
§ 255-85 YARD WASTE § 255-87
250:627

ARTICLE XVII
Buffer Zones
§ 255-88. Buffer zone required for certain properties.
Property within the Borough of Old Tappan shall be required to have, keep
and maintain a buffer zone as defined herein, as follows:
§ 255-89. Buffer zones requirements.
The following general requirements shall apply to all buffer zones:
A. Every planned residential development, as established pursuant to and
as set forth in Article VI.
B. Every property or development within the B-1 and B-2 Zone, which
property or development is immediately adjacent to property that is
situated in a residential zone or property which has a residential use or
character.
C. Every church or other house of worship, which is immediately adjacent
to property that is situated in a residential zone or property which has a
residential use or character.
D. Every property developed with a nonpermitted use, a nonconforming
use or any other use, which property is the subject of an application for
a variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(d), under any of its
subsections.
E. Every property which is proposed to be developed with an institutional
use, as may be permitted and provided by New Jersey statutes,
including but not limited to community residences for developmentally
disabled persons, community shelters for victims of domestic violence,
child care centers, schools and adult day-care centers.
A. The required depth (dimensions) of each buffer zone shall be
determined based upon the particular use of the property containing
each such buffer zone in accordance with Table A, Buffer Zone
Requirements, incorporated herein and made part hereof.58
B. Any buffer zone shall remain in its natural state where wooded, or shall
otherwise consist of new landscaping and plantings, including yearround
plantings of both deciduous and evergreen type trees, which may
be combined and integrated with berm areas. Said new landscaping
and planting shall provide a year-round visual screen and shall be
comprised of plant material that is at least six feet in height planted six
feet on centers with staggered planting to be provided where
practicable.
58.Editor's Note: Table A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 255-88 YARD WASTE § 255-89
250:629
C. No buildings, structures, driveways, parking or loading areas or other
use of the land shall be permitted within any buffer area, provided
however that decorative walls and fences may be erected only at the
edge or perimeter of the buffer zone.
D. Any application for development of property which includes a required
buffer zone shall provide a landscaping plan which includes an
inventory of all existing trees within the buffer zone, having a minimum
caliper of eight inches or greater measured three feet above ground
level.
E. The following special requirements shall apply to buffer zones solely
within planned residential developments, for which developmental
approval is sought pursuant to Article VI:
(1) Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection C hereof, on an
application for development of a particular property as a planned
residential development, the Planning Board may, upon specific
findings and conclusions, permit a portion of a buffer area to be
used for utility easements or emergency access roads or proposed
streets to provide access to and from a principal roadway.
(2) The required buffer zone for a planned residential development
shall be included in the computation of open space requirements
for such development, as set forth in § 255-23 hereof.
(3) Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A hereof, pertaining
to the required depth of a buffer zone, upon an application for
development of a particular property as a planned residential
development, the Planning Board may increase the required buffer
zone to a maximum depth of 100 feet, upon the Board's specific
findings of particular circumstances relating to conditions of
topography, natural features, lot configuration, natural vegetation
or the lack thereof, soil conditions, drainage or other related site
characteristics, or where such proposed planned residential
development is incompatible with existing adjacent development.
§ 255-89 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 255-89
250:630
ARTICLE XVIII
Tennis Courts
[Added 3-18-2002 by Ord. No. 779-0259]
§ 255-90. Definitions.
The following words and terms shall have the meanings herein indicated for
the purposes of this article:
COURT — A tennis court or a platform tennis court constructed or to be
constructed in any residential zone in the Borough.
FOOTCANDLE — One footcandle is the amount of illumination provided by
one lumen uniformly distributed on one square foot of surface.
OWNER — Any landowner, lessee, tenant or other person occupying or in
possession of lands lying within the Borough.
§ 255-91. Procedure.
Any owner shall, prior to the construction of a court, submit to the
Construction Official a plan of the proposed court and such other
information as required hereinbelow.
§ 255-92. Plan details.
The plan shall be drawn on a map to scale not smaller than one inch equals
20 feet and not larger than one inch equals 10 feet and shall include and
show the following information:
A. The name and address of the applicant and the owner and the name,
address and title of the person preparing the plan, maps and
accompanying data, the date of preparation, and the dates of each
revision where applicable. All plans shall be prepared, signed and
sealed by a professional engineer or architect licensed to practice in
New Jersey.
B. The lot and block number or numbers of the lot or lots from the Borough
Tax Maps; length and bearings of the lot lines of the lot.
C. Scale and North sign and key map.
D. The zone district in which the lot is located.
E. The location, names and pavement and right-of-way widths of all
existing and proposed streets abutting the lot or lots in question, the
property lines of all abutting properties together with the names and
addresses of the owners as disclosed on the Borough Tax Map and tax
rolls as of the date of the application, and the location of buildings
adjacent to the sides and rear of the property in question.
59.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Art. XVIII, Enforcement
(consisting of §§ 255-90 and 255-91) as Art. XIX (§§ 255-97 and 255-98).
§ 255-90 YARD WASTE § 255-92
250:631
§ 255-93. Design standards.
Each plan shall provide for the following:
F. All existing buildings and structures and all accessory buildings or
structures on the lot, if any, with dimensions showing present and
finished grade elevations at all corners.
G. Present and proposed topography based on New Jersey geodetic
control survey datum at two-foot contour intervals, including sufficient
distance outside the site to show the relationship to adjoining
properties.
H. All existing and proposed setback dimensions, landscape areas, trees of
six-inch caliper on the site affected by the proposed tennis court and
fencing.
I. Existing and proposed plantings to provide screening for noise, light
and glare.
J. Any and all other information and data necessary to meet any of the
requirements of this article not listed hereinabove.
A. A court shall be located only in the rear yard in all residential districts.
B. No court shall be located within 30 feet of all lot lines.
C. The total height of a platform tennis court structure inclusive of
screening shall not exceed 15 feet, which shall be measured from
finished grade.
D. A tennis court shall be enclosed by a black or green vinyl fence which
may be erected to a height of 10 feet.
E. All setbacks required for courts shall be measured from the fence
enclosing the tennis court and from the base of fence enclosing a
platform tennis court.
F. No owner shall be permitted to construct more than one paddle tennis
court or one tennis court.
G. Where any portion of the retaining structure for the court is more than
three feet above finished grade, the retaining structure and ground
area intervening between it and the property line shall be terraced and
landscaped in a manner approved by the Borough Engineer. In
reviewing the plan, the Construction Official and Borough Engineer
shall consider proper drainage of the site and shall minimize the visual
impact of the court on adjoining property owners by the installation of
landscaping and, if necessary, the reduction in the elevation of the
court.
§ 255-92 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 255-94
250:632
§ 255-94. Lighting standards.
Each plan shall provide the following:
§ 255-95. Site improvement.
Each plan shall provide the following:
A. Light standards inclusive of fixtures shall not exceed 25 feet in height
above ground level, nor shall any light fixture be installed more than 25
feet above ground level.
B. The court surface, nets, net standards, fences, wind screens and all
other fixtures related to the court and the use thereof shall be a dark,
light absorbing color.
C. The lighting system shall be a "low mast" system, with sharp cutoff
luminaries and forward throw reflectors to minimize spill light onto
adjacent properties. All fixtures must be installed approximately
horizontal with all lamps completely within the fixture housing to
minimize glare. All lenses shall be clear, flat glass and be recessed into
the fixture housing.
(1) The following light levels must be provided (all levels are
maintained, not initial):
(a) Maximum average on court: 55 footcandles; and
(b) Maximum uniformity ratio on court (maximum/minimum): 2.0.
(2) All wiring shall be underground. Fixture shields shall be provided
at the discretion of the Borough Engineer and/or Construction
Official.
D. On any adjoining property the total direct and indirect glare measured
at a height of three feet above ground level shall not exceed 0.4 of a
footcandle, maintained. The readings shall be made with a direct
reading portable light meter held towards the source of light, which
meter shall have an accuracy of plus or minus 5%. The meter shall have
been tested and calibrated by an independent commercial photometric
laboratory or the manufacturer of the said meter within one year prior
to the date of use as attested by a certified laboratory issued by said
manufacturer.
E. Lighting of a court is prohibited between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the
next day.
A. Adequate screening and landscaping, including shrubbery, bushes,
trees and other plantings to provide protection from noise, light and
glare. Except where the proposed court is to be located at least 50 feet
from all lot lines and there is natural vegetation in the area between the
court and the lot lines, screening shall include evergreens, at least six
feet tall, on all sides facing lot lines, planted 12 feet apart on center.
§ 255-94 YARD WASTE § 255-95
250:633
§ 255-96. Escrow deposit.
The owner shall deposit $500 to cover the cost of reviewing services
provided by the Borough Engineer, which deposit shall be administered in
accordance with Article 4 of Chapter 5 of the Code of the Borough.
B. Standards for grading, drainage and other improvements found
necessary shall be provided and approved by the Borough Engineer
where applicable. A maximum retaining wall height of three feet shall
be allowed. Where tiered walls are used, the minimum separation
between walls shall be twice the wall height. Landscaping shall be
required between the walls.
§ 255-95 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 255-96
250:634
ARTICLE XIX
Massage, Bodywork and Somatic Therapy Businesses
[Adopted 3-18-2003 by Ord. No. 813-03 60]
§ 255-97. Conditional use.
A massage, bodywork and/or somatic therapy business shall be a
conditional use in the Local Business District, B-1, provided that, upon
proper application and hearing, the Planning Board finds and determines
that the following conditions have been met:
A. The business may only be operated and carried on by a person
possessing a certification, which shall be prominently displayed, as a
massage, bodywork or somatic therapist issued pursuant to the
Massage, Bodywork and Somatic Therapist Certification Act, N.J.S.A.
45:11-53 et seq., and any amendments thereto; and
B. The business owner shall submit a site plan for approval by the
Planning Board which, in addition, shall detail all entrances, partitions,
window openings, ventilation, plumbing, fixtures, water supply, waste
and vent connections, which plan shall also be submitted to the
Construction Code Official to determine compliance with all applicable
building codes; and
C. The business shall be equipped with toilet and lavatory facilities for
patrons and personnel as required by law, and each operating area shall
be equipped with a hand lavatory; and
D. No part of the business premises shall contain, be equipped with or be
used as a bedroom or sleeping quarters; and
E. The business shall comply with all other Borough ordinances applicable
to the site, including off-street parking.
60.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Art. XIX, Enforcement (consisting
of §§ 255-97 and 255-98) as Art. XX (§§ 255-98 and 255-99).
§ 255-97 YARD WASTE § 255-97
250:635

ARTICLE XX
Enforcement
§ 255-98. Violations and penalties.
For any and every violation of the provisions of this chapter, the owner
or owners, architect or architects, general agent or agents, contractor
or contractors of a building or premises, or any other person or persons
interested as lessee, tenant or otherwise in any building or premises where
such violation has been committed or shall exist, and any other person
who commits, takes part in, or assists in such violation or who maintains
any building or premises in which any such violation shall exist and who
refuses to abate the violation within five days after written notice has been
served upon him/her or them, either by mail or by personal service, shall for
each and every violation be subject to a fine of not more than $500 at the
discretion of the court or judicial officer, before whom a conviction may be
had, or imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed 30 days,
or both. Each and every day that such violation continues after the notice
shall be considered a separate and specific violation of this chapter.
§ 255-99. Other remedies.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as depriving the Borough or the
Mayor and Council of any other available remedy.
§ 255-98 YARD WASTE § 255-99
250:637

ARTICLE XXI
Affordable Housing District, AH-2
[Added 6-18-2018 by Ord. No. 1128-18]
§ 255-100. Purpose.
The purpose of this district is to encourage the production of low- and
moderate-income housing in conformance with the latest procedural and
substantive rules for affordable housing as determined by the courts or
other applicable authority, by permitting inclusionary townhouse and
multifamily development subject to the AH-2 regulations enumerated
herein. This article is created in fulfillment of a settlement agreement by
and between the Borough of Old Tappan, New Jersey, SMDC, LLC and the
Fair Share Housing Center in connection with the Borough of Old Tappan's
declaratory judgment action captioned "In the Matter of the Application
of the Borough of Old Tappan" bearing docket number BER-L-6086-15
pursuant to in re the Adoption of N.J.A.C. 5:96 and 5:97 by the Council on
Affordable Housing, 221 N.J. 1 (2015).
§ 255-101. Principal permitted uses.
§ 255-102. Permitted accessory uses.
Any use which is ordinarily subordinate and customarily incidental to the
principal permitted uses allowed in the AH-2 Zone, including but not limited
to decks and patios.
§ 255-103. Residential area and bulk requirements.
A. Townhouses.
B. Market-rate units or low- and moderate-income units within townhouse
buildings, which may be designed as one-over-one apartment flats or
one-over-one for-sale duplexes within a townhouse configuration.
C. Townhouse-duplex combination.
D. Quadraplexes.
A. Maximum density: The total number of units shall not exceed 26 units.
B. Townhouse and multifamily area, external yard and bulk requirements.
(1) Minimum lot area (acres): three.
(2) Minimum lot width (feet): 300.
(3) Minimum lot depth (feet): 400.
(4) Minimum distance between buildings (feet): 30.
(5) Minimum setbacks from external lot lines (feet):
§ 255-100 YARD WASTE § 255-103
250:639
§ 255-104. Residential parking requirements.
§ 255-105. Site design requirements.
(a) Front yard: 50.
(b) Side yard: 35*.
(c) Rear yard: 50*.
(6) Maximum number stories and building height: three stories/35
feet.
(7) Maximum building lot coverage: 25%.
(8) Maximum impervious lot coverage: 60%.
(9) Maximum building length (feet): 220.
(10) Minimum landscaped buffer area: As defined by § 255-4, a
minimum thirty-foot planted landscape buffer shall be maintained
from the side property line and forty-foot planted buffer shall be
maintained from the rear property line. No buffer area shall be
required in the front yard. Such buffer shall be required to provide
year-round visual screening as determined by the Planning Board.
NOTE: *Except porches, balconies and decks may extend into a
required side and rear yard by no greater than six feet.
A. Residential Site Improvement Standards (RSIS) shall apply.
B. Required off-street parking for townhouse or duplex units in
combination with affordable housing units in stacked arrangements: At
least one of the two stacked affordable units within a townhouse
building shall have a minimum of one garage space. One additional
parking space for this affordable unit shall be provided in its associated
driveway in front of the garage. The second affordable unit, lacking a
garage space, shall have one driveway space, with the additional
required parking for both affordable units provided per RSIS standards
within 150 feet of said units. Required off-street visitor parking for lowand
moderate-income units, as required by RSIS, should be located
within 150 feet of the units serviced. All exterior parking shall be
landscaped, screened, and lighted, where appropriate.
C. Each garage space shall be counted as 1.0 parking space. A one-car
garage and driveway combination shall be counted as 2.0 parking
spaces provided the driveway measures a minimum of 18 feet between
the face of the garage door and the internal roadway line [RSIS
§ 5.21-4.14(d)]. Required visitor parking spaces for market rate units
shall be provided no farther than 250 feet of the unit it serves.
A. Landscaping.
§ 255-103 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 255-105
250:640
(1) Landscaping shall be provided to promote a desirable visual
environment, to accentuate building design, define entranceways,
screen parking areas, mitigate adverse visual impacts and provide
windbreaks for winter winds and summer cooling for buildings, and
enhance buffer areas. The impact of any proposed landscaping plan
at various time intervals shall be considered. Plants and other
landscaping materials shall be selected in terms of aesthetic and
functional considerations. The landscape design shall create visual
diversity and contrast through variation in size, shape, texture and
color. The selection of plants in terms of susceptibility to disease
and insect damage, wind and ice damage, habitat (wet-site,
drought, sun and shade tolerance), soil conditions, growth rate,
longevity; root pattern, maintenance requirements, etc., shall be
considered. Consideration shall be given to accenting site
entrances and unique areas with special landscaping treatment.
Flowerbed displays are encouraged.
(2) Landscaped islands should be at least six feet in width to
accommodate plantings.
(3) Landscaping within sight triangles shall not exceed a mature
height of 30 inches. Shade trees shall be pruned up to an eight-foot
branching height above grade.
(4) All areas that are not improved with buildings, structures and other
man-made improvements shall be landscaped with trees, shrubs,
ground cover, street furniture, sculpture or other design amenities.
(5) Shade trees should be a 2.5- to three-inch caliper with a canopy
height of at least the minimum American Nursery and Landscape
Association standards for this caliper.
(6) Ornamental trees shall be installed at a minimum size of six feet in
height.
(7) Shrubs shall be planted at a minimum size of 18 to 24 inches.
(8) All plant material shall meet the minimum latest American Nursery
and Landscape Association standards.
(9) Buffer areas. Buffers shall comply with the following standards:
(a) Buffer planting shall provide year-round visual screen in order
to minimize adverse impacts from a site on an adjacent
property or from adjacent areas. It may consist of evergreen
and deciduous trees and shrubs, berms, boulders, mounds, or
combinations thereof to achieve the stated objectives as
approved by the Planning Board. While fencing may be
installed to delineate the property line, the use of fencing or
walls shall not be relied upon as the primary source of
screening.
§ 255-105 YARD WASTE § 255-105
250:641
(b) Where required, buffers shall be measured from property lines
and street rights-of-way. Compliance shall be determined by
the Planning Board, and any approvals required pursuant to
this section shall be obtained at the time of site plan and
subdivision review. Buffer areas may overlap required
setbacks.
(c) The landscaping shall be designed to provide a visual screen
along the majority of the buffer area. Planting shall be installed
at a variety of sizes which conform to the following minimum
sizes:
[1] Shade trees: 2 1/2 to three-inch caliper.
[2] Evergreen trees: seven to eight feet.
[3] Shrubs: 18 to 24 inches.
(d) No buildings, structures, accessory structures, parking,
driveways, or storage of materials shall be permitted within
the required buffer.
(e) Existing vegetation within the required transition buffer shall
be preserved, as determined appropriate. It shall be
supplemented with shade-tolerant naturalistic massed
plantings where necessary to provide screening of adjoining
land uses.
(f) Irrigation shall be provided for all buffer plantings and sodded
lawn areas in a manner appropriate for the specific plant
species. A growth guarantee of two growing seasons shall be
provided and all dead or dying plants shall be replaced by the
applicant, as required, to maintain the integrity of the site
plan.
(10) Landscape plantings. A minimum of 30% of the plantings proposed
shall be indigenous to the region.
(11) Landscape plan content. A landscape plan shall be submitted with
each major site plan or major subdivision application. In addition to
the major site plan or subdivision submission requirements, the
landscape plan shall include and identify the following information:
(a) Existing and proposed underground and aboveground utilities
such as site lighting, transformers, hydrants, manholes, valve
boxes, etc., existing wooded areas, rock outcroppings and
existing and proposed water bodies.
(b) Location of individual existing trees noted for preservation
within the area of development and 30 feet beyond the limit of
the disturbance. Trees four inches in diameter (measured 4 1/2
feet above the existing ground level) shall be located and
identified by name and diameter unless the wooded area is
§ 255-105 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 255-105
250:642
shown with a specific limit line. In this case, specimen trees
shall be located within 30 feet of the line. Indicate all existing
vegetation to be saved or removed.
(c) Existing and proposed topography and location of all
landscaped berms.
(d) Location, species and sizes of all proposed shade trees,
ornamental trees, evergreen trees and shrubs and areas for
lawns or any other ground cover. Different graphic symbols
shall be used to show the location and spacing of shade trees,
ornamental trees, evergreen trees, shrubs and ground cover.
The size of the symbol must be representative of the size of the
plant shown to scale.
(e) A plant schedule indicating botanical name, common name,
size at time of planting (caliper, height and spread), quantity,
root condition and any special remarks (spacing, substitutions,
etc.) for all plant material proposed. Plants within the plant
schedule shall be keyed to the landscape plan utilizing the first
letter of the botanical plant name.
(f) Planting and construction details and specifications.
B. Lighting.
(1) All lighting fixtures and foot-candle standards for parking areas
and recreation facilities should be consistent with the standards
outlined by the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America
(IESNA) and regulations of the Borough of Old Tappan.
(2) A lighting plan prepared by a qualified individual shall be provided
with site plan applications.
(3) The intensity, shielding, direction and reflecting of lighting shall be
subject to site plan approval by the approving authority.
(4) All parking areas, walkways, building entrances, and driveways
required for uses in this zone shall be adequately illuminated
during the hours of operation that occur after sunset. Any adjacent
residential zone or use shall be shielded from the glare of
illumination from site lighting and automobile headlights.
C. Sidewalks.
(1) In public rights-of-way. Sidewalks shall be required along adjoining
public rights-of-way, as required by RSIS standards or as deemed
appropriate by the Board.
(2) Within the development, sidewalks shall be required in accordance
with the RSIS standards or as deemed appropriate by the Board.
§ 255-105 YARD WASTE § 255-105
250:643
§ 255-106. Application requirements; process.
§ 255-107. Low- and moderate-income (Mount Laurel) housing
requirements.
The following requirements as to the density and distribution of low- and
moderate-income dwelling units shall apply.
D. Relief from any required site design standard enumerated under this
section, shall be considered a design standard exception pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:550-51(b)61 and not a variance.
A. Application requirements.
(1) An applicant for development in the AH-2 Zone must submit a site
plan indicating the manner in which the site is to be developed.
Said plan shall include all the data required by ordinance for site
plan review unless otherwise waived by the Board.
(2) The application shall contain, in addition to the site plan
application checklist provisions, a report detailing the following:
(a) The total number of dwelling units by bedroom count and
housing type. The density and intensity of use of the entire
tract shall be noted.
B. Application process. Notwithstanding the provisions of § 255-106A.
above, it is the intent of this article for the Planning Board to expedite
its review of any application submitted for this zone within the time
frames established under N.J.S.A. 40:550-1 et seq.62 It is further the
intent of this article to not require off-site or off-tract improvements for
development, unless the need for such improvements arise from the
development within the Zone, nor shall the approving authority require
items deemed as "cost-generating" as defined by N.J.A.C. 5:93-10.1 et.
seq.63
A. Low- and moderate-income (Mount Laurel) housing requirements:
(1) Market-rate and minimum low- and moderate-income housing setaside:
The total number of housing units shall not exceed 26 units
and shall consist of the following:
(a) Market rate units which shall not exceed 20 units.
(b) Minimum number of affordable housing units shall be no less
than six units, which shall all be rental.
(2) All low- and moderate-income housing units shall be in
conformance with the latest applicable rules for affordable housing
61.Editor's Note: So in original.
62.Editor's Note: So in original.
63.Editor's Note: The provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:93-10.1 expired on October 16, 2016.
§ 255-105 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 255-107
250:644
as determined by the Council on Affordable Housing, the courts
or other applicable authority, as determined appropriate, including
such issues as phasing of building low- and moderate-income units
in concert with market rate units.
(3) Bedroom distribution of low- and moderate-income housing units.
Subject to the most current applicable COAH or other rules, the
bedroom distribution of low- and moderate-income units for
affordable units constructed in the AH-2 Zone shall be as follows:
(a) No more than 20% of the low- and moderate-income units shall
be one-bedroom units.
(b) At least 20% of the low- and moderate-income units shall be
three-bedroom units.
(c) At least 30% of the low- and moderate-income units shall be
two-bedroom units.
(4) Low- and moderate-income unit split. The distribution of
inclusionary affordable units to be provided as part of this
development shall be in accordance with those requirements as set
forth by COAH rules or otherwise deemed appropriate by the court.
(5) Procedures regarding affirmative marketing of low- and moderateincome
units and other requirements of inclusionary development
units are subject to and determined by COAH rules or other rules
determined appropriate by the court.
§ 255-107 YARD WASTE § 255-107
250:645
Part III, Board of Health
Chapter 259
GENERAL PROVISIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adoption of Code by Mayor and Council — See
Ch. 1, Art. I.
§ 255-107 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 255-107
259:646
ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code by Board of Health
[Adopted 10-16-2002]
§ 259-1. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the Board of Health of the
Borough of Old Tappan of a general and permanent nature, as revised,
codified and consolidated into chapters and sections by General Code
Publishers Corp. and consisting of Chapters 259 through 306, are hereby
approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as Part III of the "Code of the
Borough of Old Tappan," hereinafter known and referred to as the "Code."
§ 259-2. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede the 1975 Code and all other
general and permanent ordinances of the Board of Health enacted prior to
the enactment of this Code, except such ordinances as are expressly saved
from repeal or continued in force and effect hereinafter.
§ 259-3. When effective.
All provisions of this ordinance and the Code shall take effect 30 days after
the date of the first publication.
§ 259-4. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Secretary of the Board of Health and shall remain there for use and
examination by the public until final action is taken on this ordinance; and if
this ordinance shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified as provided by
law, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Secretary
of the Board of Health, to be made available to persons desiring to examine
the same during all times while the said Code is in effect.
§ 259-5. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the Board of
Health to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Borough of Old
Tappan" shall be understood and intended to include such additions and
amendments. Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the
Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided
hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing the said Code, as
amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 259-6. Publication; filing.
The Secretary of the Board of Health, pursuant to law, shall cause this
Adopting Ordinance to be published, in the manner required, in a
§ 259-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 259-6
259:647
newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. Sufficient copies of the
Code shall be maintained in the office of the Secretary for inspection by
the public at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and
publication of this adopting ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of
the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered
to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 259-7. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Secretary, or someone authorized and directed by
the Secretary, to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing
the Code required to be filed in the Secretary's office for the use of the
public. All changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to
the effective date of this codification, which shall be adopted specifically
as part of the Code, shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by
reference until such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements
to said Code book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted
therein.
§ 259-8. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code, or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Board of
Health to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this
ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to a fine of not less than $5 nor
more than $500.
§ 259-9. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part
thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not
be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other section or
parts thereof.
§ 259-10. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other section or parts thereof.
§ 259-11. Inconsistent ordinances repealed.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions
contained in the Code adopted by this ordinance are hereby repealed;
provided, however, that such repeal shall only be to the extent of such
inconsistency, and any valid legislation of the Board of Health of the
Borough of Old Tappan which is not in conflict with the provisions of the
Code shall be deemed to remain in full force and effect.
§ 259-6 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 259-12
259:648
§ 259-12. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 259-11 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
§ 259-13. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
A. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance, or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
B. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision, or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
C. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending,
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
D. Any agreement, franchise, license, right, easement or privilege
heretofore granted or conferred.
E. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property, or any lawful contract or obligation.
F. Any provisions of an ordinance or resolution of the Board of Health
creating employments, positions or offices and fixing salaries and duties
therefor which are not provided in the Code hereby adopted and which
are not in conflict or inconsistent therewith, or any ordinance
pertaining to the salaries and compensation of Board of Health officers
and employees.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances of the Board of Health for
adoption and revision as part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4,
certain grammatical changes and other minor changes were made in
one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the Board of Health
that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the
ordinances so changed had been previously formally amended to read
as such.
B. In addition, the changes, amendments or revisions as set forth below
are made herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this
ordinance. (Chapter and section number references are to the
ordinances as they have been renumbered and appear in the Code.)
(1) References throughout the Board of Health portion of the Code to
the "Revised General Ordinance of the Borough of Old Tappan"
have been changed to the "Code of the Borough of Old Tappan."
§ 259-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 259-13
259:649
§ 259-14. (Reserved)
(2) Chapter 259, Article II, is amended by deleting former Section
BH:1-1, Construction and Severability, as its provisions are covered
under this Adopting Ordinance.
§ 259-13 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 259-14
259:650
ARTICLE II
Definitions
[Adopted 5-26-1975 as Sec. BH:1-2 of the 1975 Code]
§ 259-15. Word usage and definitions.
A. Generally. Unless another or different meaning is expressly indicated,
such words or phrases shall be given the meaning expressed herein, or,
if no such meaning is given, their generally accepted meaning,
according to the approved usage of the language, shall be applied.
B. Specific enumeration. In addition to the definitions provided in Chapter
1 of this Code, the following words and phrases as used in these Board
of Health ordinances shall have the following meanings:
BOARD — The Board of Health of the Borough of Old Tappan.
FISH — Includes every part of any marine or water-dwelling animal.
FOOD — Includes any article used for food or beverage for man or other
animals, and every ingredient therein, including, without limitation,
all confectionery, condiments, flavorings and other components of any
such article.
FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — Includes any bakery, confectionery,
cannery, packing house, slaughterhouse, dairy, creamery, cheese
factory, restaurant, hotel, grocery, meat market, fish market,
delicatessen or other place or vehicle used in the production,
preparation, transportation or handling of food intended for sale or
distribution.
GARBAGE — The accumulation of animal or vegetable matter, or both,
liquid or otherwise, that tends to decay.
HEALTH OFFICER — The Health Officer, executive officer or other
officer duly appointed or designated by the Board to enforce this Code
or supervise work on behalf of the Board.
KENNEL — Includes any building, yard, enclosure, premises or lot of
ground used as a commercial establishment for the keeping, raising,
breeding or boarding of dogs or other animals.
NUISANCE — Any condition which is dangerous to human life or health
or that which renders air, water, soil or any type of food hazardous or
injurious to human life or health, and as otherwise herein defined.
POULTRY — Chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys, guinea fowl, pigeons,
pheasants and all other fowl or winged animals kept, raised or sold for
human consumption or for production of eggs.
PUBLIC PLACE — Includes any public place, as well as any restaurant,
and every other establishment or place where food or beverage is sold
or offered for sale to the public for consumption on the premises, and
any camp, tourist home or public recreation place or any other place
§ 259-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 259-15
259:651
of business where toilet facilities or water for drinking or culinary
purposes is available for the use of the public.
REGISTRAR — The person duly appointed as Registrar of Vital
Statistics by the Board.
REGULATIONS — Includes any regulations, whether general or special,
which the Board may from time to time lawfully adopt and issue.
RESTAURANT — Includes any restaurant, coffee shop, cafeteria, shortorder
cafe, lunch room, lunch wagon, or other mobile food vendor,
diner, soda fountain, snack bar, luncheonette, tavern, bar, grill, cocktail
lounge, hotel, club, boardinghouse, sandwich stand, refreshment stand
and every other place or establishment in which food or beverage is
sold for consumption on or near the premises or at the time.
RUBBISH — Includes all coal or wood ashes, all loose material and dirtlike
substance and all waste material accumulated from buildings or the
cleaning of buildings.
SANITARY INSPECTOR — Includes every officer appointed by the
Board to aid in the enforcement of the sanitary laws of this state or to
aid in the enforcement of the rules, regulations and ordinances of the
Board of Health, excepting the Health Officer, Secretary, Registrar or
other persons performing principally clerical duties in the office of the
Board.
SMALL ANIMAL — Includes rabbits, mink, cats, dogs, guinea pigs,
rodents and any other small animal kept or raised for commercial
purposes or kept and raised for sale or for the production of meat, fur
or wool, or kept and raised for exhibition or other purposes, or as a
source of supply for laboratories, provided that the term "small animal"
shall not apply if they total in the aggregate fewer than five in number.
STATE BOARD and STATE DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Public
Health Council or Department of Health, or any successor agency
thereto.
STREET — Includes every public street, avenue, sidewalk, gutter,
highway, park or public place in the Borough.
C. Technical and trade terms. Technical, trade or commercial words or
phrases, and words and phrases having a special or accepted meaning
in the law, shall be construed in accordance with such technical, trade,
commercial or special and accepted meaning.
§ 259-15 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 259-15
259:652
ARTICLE III
Penalties
[Adopted 5-26-1975 as Sec. BH:1-3 of the 1975 Code]
§ 259-16. General penalty.
§ 259-17. Collection of fees and penalties.
All fees and penalties collected under any provision of any chapter adopted
by the Board of Health shall be paid to the Borough Clerk.
§ 259-18. Revocation of license.
In addition, the Board of Health may, in its discretion, revoke for any period
not exceeding one year the license or permit of any offender who shall
be convicted of a second offense of violating any of the provisions of this
revision relating to the holding or exercise of such license or permit.
A. Any person violating any of the provisions of any chapter adopted by the
Board of Health of the Borough shall, upon conviction thereof, pay a
penalty of not less than $5 nor more than $500 for each offense.
Complaint shall be made in the Municipal Court of the Borough or
before such other judicial officer having authority under the laws of the
State of New Jersey. In addition, the Court shall have the power to
impose other penalties provided by N.J.S.A. 26:3-77 and 26:3-78.
B. Separate violation. Except as otherwise provided, each and every day in
which a violation of any of the provisions of any chapter adopted by the
Board of Health exists shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 259-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 259-18
259:653
Chapter 262
ADMINISTRATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Health — See Ch. 9, Art. III.
Penalties — See Ch. 259, Art. III.
Licensing provisions — See Ch. 282.
§ 262-1. Board of Health.
A. Organization. The Board shall organize annually on January 1 in each
year, or as soon thereafter as may be feasible, at which time it shall
elect, by a majority vote of all of the members of the Board and from its
members, a President and a Vice President.
B. Meetings; conduct of business; quorum.
(1) Regular meetings. Regular meetings shall be held each and every
month on such dates as may be decided upon at the organization
meeting.
(2) Special meetings. The President shall have the power to call special
meetings of the Board when necessary, and, in case of his neglect
or refusal to do so, it shall be lawful for any three members of the
Board to call any special meeting by written or printed notice to
each member, served personally or left at their places of residence
at least 24 hours prior to the time appointed for such meeting.
(3) Conduct of business. The Board shall determine and establish the
rules for its own proceedings.
(4) Quorum. A majority of the whole number of members of the Board
shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, but a
smaller number may meet and adjourn from time to time.
C. Board officers; powers and duties.
(1) President. The President shall be the chief executive officer of the
Board. He shall preside at all meetings of the Board and shall
appoint all committees and have all such other powers as may, by
law or by the provisions of this Code, be vested in him. During the
intervals between regular meetings, the President shall represent
the Board in all executive and judicial matters. He shall have the
power to appoint committees from among the members of the
Board and, with the consent of the Board, such other officers as
may from time to time be required to be appointed and provision
for whose appointment is not otherwise made in this Code.
§ 259-18 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 262-1
262:654
§ 262-2. Officials.
(2) Vice President. The Vice President shall assist the President in the
performance of his duties. In the absence, disability or
disqualification of the President, he shall serve in the place of the
President, with all of his powers and duties.
D. Board appointments. The President shall appoint, subject to
confirmation by a majority of the members of the Board, a Board
Secretary, a Health Officer, a Sanitary Inspector, a Registrar of Vital
Statistics, and such other officers and employees as he may from time
to time deem necessary. All such Board appointees shall hold their
respective offices until December 31 of the calendar year of their
appointment and until their respective successors are appointed and
shall qualify, except that the Registrar of Vital Statistics shall be
appointed in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 26:8-13.
E. Board Secretary. The Board Secretary, who shall be responsible to the
Board, shall keep the minutes of all the proceedings of the Board,
conduct all the official correspondence of the Board, maintain proper
copies of the same, tabulate and complete all reports required by any
superior authority, local, state or national, and make such other reports
as may be required or directed by the Board. He shall procure all books,
stationery and other supplies as may be required by the Board and shall
keep adequate records of all applications for permits and the action of
the Board, if any, thereon and all such other pertinent information as
may be necessary for a complete record of each such matter.
F. Board Attorney. The Board may appoint a Board Attorney to serve for a
term of one year. If appointed, he shall be the legal adviser of the Board
and shall, when required, attend its meetings. He shall, when ordered
to do so by the Board, represent it in all litigation to which it may be a
party and perform all such other legal services as may from time to time
be required of him by the Board.
G. Compensation. The salaries or other forms of compensation of the
above officers and employees shall be such as are fixed at the time of
their appointment, by resolution passed by a majority of all the
members of the Board.
A. Health Officer. The Health Officer, appointed as set forth in § 262-1D,
shall hold the necessary license and shall be responsible to the Board.
The Health Officer shall be the general agent of the Board for the
enforcement of its ordinances and the sanitary laws of the state.
B. Registrar of Vital Statistics. The Registrar of Vital Statistics, appointed
as set forth in § 262-1D, shall keep all the records of that office, as
required by the Bureau of Vital Statistics of the State of New Jersey. He
shall perform such other duties as may be required.
§ 262-1 ADMINISTRATION § 262-2
262:655
§ 262-3. Emergency powers of Health Officer.
Whenever the Health Officer finds that the public safety will not permit
delay, he may exercise one or more of the following powers without having
to resort to legal proceedings and without the necessity of giving notice or
holding any hearing which would otherwise be required under any provision
of this revision.
§ 262-4. Reports to Board; duties of appointees.
The Health Officer and Registrar of Vital Statistics shall make a written
report at each regular meeting of the Board. All of the above-named
appointees shall perform such duties as may be directed by the statutes
of the State of New Jersey, the provisions of this Code or as they may be
directed, from time to time, by their superior or the Board.
§ 262-5. Right of entry.
C. Sanitary Inspector. The Sanitary Inspector may be appointed in
accordance with § 262-1D. If appointed, he shall assist the Health
Officer and perform the duties of the Health Officer in his absence or at
his direction. He shall perform such other duties as may from time to
time be required.
D. Special health reporting officers. When appointed by the Board, there
shall be special health reporting officers of the Board who shall
promptly report to the Board every violation of health ordinances, rules
and regulations which may come within their observation or
knowledge. "Special health reporting officers" shall mean and include
regular and special patrolmen and superior officers of the Police
Department of the borough, the building subcode official, the plumbing
subcode official, the Health Officer, the Secretary of the Board, or any
other official authorized by the Board to enforce this Code.
A. Power to prevent the sale of food. The Health Officer may prohibit the
importation into the borough or the sale of any food, drink or other item
intended for human consumption or use from a source suspected of
being infected, contaminated, unsanitary, unhealthy or dangerous.
B. Power to seize and destroy unwholesome food. The Health Officer may
order the seizure and destruction of any food, drink or other item
intended for human consumption which is unwholesome or dangerous
or likely to cause sickness or injury to the persons who consume it.
A. Inspection of premises. The Board of Health, its agents and employees
shall have the right to inspect any premises in the borough if they have
reason to believe that any provision of this revision is being violated or
as part of a regular program of inspection.
B. Search warrant. If the owner or occupant of any premises refuses to
permit entry for the purpose of inspection, the Board or its agent may
§ 262-2 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 262-5
262:656
§ 262-6. Abatement of nuisances.
apply to the Municipal Judge for a search warrant. The application shall
be based upon an affidavit setting forth that the inspection is part of
a regular program of inspection or that conditions and circumstances
provide a reasonable basis for believing that a nuisance or unsanitary
or unhealthy condition exists on the premises. If the judge is satisfied
as to the matters set forth in the affidavit, he shall authorize the
issuance of a search warrant permitting access to and inspection of the
premises.
A. Notice to abate nuisance.
(1) Whenever anything declared by this chapter to be a nuisance or
any unsanitary or unhealthy condition is found on any premises
within the borough, notice shall be given to the owner or person in
control of the premises to remove or abate it within the time
specified, but not less than five days from the date of service in the
notice.
(2) Whenever anything declared by this chapter to be a nuisance or
any unsanitary or unhealthy condition is found on any public
property, highway or other public premises or place, notice shall be
given to the person in charge to remove or abate the same within
the time specified. If that person fails to comply with the notice
within the time specified, the Health Officer may remove or abate
such nuisance or condition in the manner provided for a like
condition existing on private premises or places.
B. Abatement by Health Officer. If the owner or person in control of the
premises, upon being notified as provided by Subsection A, does not
comply with the notice within the time specified and fails to remove or
abate the nuisance or condition, the Health Officer shall proceed to
abate the nuisance or condition or may cause it to be removed or abated
in a summary manner by such means as shall be deemed proper.
C. Recovery of costs.
(1) Whenever any cost or expense is incurred by the borough as a
result of the Health Officer abating or removing or causing to be
abated or removed any nuisance or unsanitary or unhealthy
condition, such costs and expense may be recovered in the
following manner:
(a) In all cases where practical and permitted by law, such costs
shall be certified to the tax assessment authority and shall be a
part of the taxes next assessed against the premises upon
which the nuisance or unsanitary or unhealthy condition was
located.
(b) Where it is impossible or impractical to proceed under
Subsection C(1)(a), the cost or expense shall be recovered in
§ 262-5 ADMINISTRATION § 262-6
262:657
§ 262-7. Power to make rules and regulations.
The Board may, by resolution, make rules and regulations which interpret
or amplify any provision of this chapter or for the purpose of making the
provisions of this chapter more effective. No regulation, however, shall be
inconsistent with, alter or amend any provision of this chapter, and no
regulation shall impose any requirement which is in addition to or greater
than the requirements that are expressly or by implication imposed by any
provision of this chapter.
Chapter 265
ANIMALS AND POULTRY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 91. Hunting — See Ch. 151.
an action at law in any court of competent jurisdiction. The
action shall be instituted by the Board in the name of the
borough, or ex rel the State of New Jersey.
(2) Regardless of how costs are actually recovered, they shall be in
addition to, and shall not affect the imposition of, any penalties for
the violation of this section.
§ 262-6 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 262-7
265:658
ARTICLE I
Keeping of Animals
§ 265-1. Purpose.
It is deemed to be in the interest of the residents of the borough to adopt a
code to regulate and control the keeping of animals in the borough for the
following reasons:
§ 265-2. Definitions.
§ 265-3. Domestic animals excluded.
Domestic cats and domestic dogs are specifically excluded from the
definitions of animals herein. For purposes of this exclusion:
A. Keeping of animals may foster the breeding of insects and rodents and
the germination of bacteria and other infectious microbes all of which
may cause diseases.
B. The keeping of animals may create foul and noxious odors as well as
disturbing noises.
C. The keeping of animals may result in the running at large of animals in
the community.
D. The keeping of animals may otherwise affect the public health, welfare
and safety.
A. An animal of Class I within the meaning of this article is a lion, tiger,
bear or any other animal of large size belonging to the biological order
of carnivores, or any other undomesticated mammal or reptile of large
size, except as provided.
B. An animal of Class II within the meaning of this article is a horse or any
other species of animal belonging to the biological order of
perissodactyla, or a cow or any other species of animal belonging to the
biological order of artiodactyla, provided that Class II be constituted
only of such animals of which the average weight for an adult of this
species is greater than 600 pounds.
C. An animal of Class III within the meaning of this article is a sheep or
goat or any other species of animal belonging to the biological order of
artiodactyla or any species of animal belonging to the biological order
of perissodactyla, provided that Class III be constituted only of such
animals of which the average weight for an adult of the species is less
than 600 pounds.
A. A domestic cat shall be a member of the felidae family long kept by man
as a pet but not including members of the felidae family that usually live
in a wild state.
§ 265-1 ANIMALS AND POULTRY § 265-3
265:659
§ 265-4. Class I animals prohibited.
No animal of Class I shall be kept or maintained in the borough.
§ 265-5. Class II and Class III animals regulated.
§ 265-6. Standards for maintenance of animals.
In the keeping or maintaining of an animal or animals of Class II and Class
III, the following rules and regulations shall be followed:
B. A domestic dog shall be a member of the canidae family long kept by
man as a pet but not including members of the canidae family usually
living in a wild state.
A. No animal or animals of Class II and Class III shall be kept or
maintained in the borough unless such animal or animals have a
building for their shelter and a fully enclosed corral or coop for their
containment. The running at large of such animal or animals is
specifically prohibited.
B. No building, stable, outhouse or accessory building used for housing an
animal or animals of Class II or Class III shall be located within less
than 50 feet from a property line of an adjoining property owner.
C. No animal or animals of Class II or Class III shall be kept, harbored,
grazed or otherwise maintained within less than 30 feet of a property
line of an adjoining landowner.
D. The keeping or maintaining of an animal or animals of Class II shall be
forbidden unless such animal is kept on a plot of land of sufficient area
so that there shall be 40,000 square feet for the first two animals and an
additional 40,000 square feet for each additional animal.
E. The keeping or maintaining of an animal or animals of Class III shall be
forbidden unless such animal is kept on a plot of land of sufficient area
so that there shall be 40,000 square feet for the first four animals and
an additional 40,000 square feet for each additional two animals.
A. All stables, buildings or accessory buildings shall be cleaned regularly
of all manure, feculent matter and waste.
B. All manure, feculent matter and waste shall be removed from the
premises or spread and treated with such chemicals and other
materials as shall be necessary to prevent odor and the attraction of
insects and rodents.
C. All stables, buildings or accessory buildings shall be fogged or sprayed
regularly with an insecticide which is designed to kill flies and insects.
D. All premises on which animals are kept shall be maintained to a
sanitary condition.
§ 265-3 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 265-7
265:660
§ 265-7. Conditions constituting a public nuisance; abatement.
§ 265-8. Existing uses.
§ 265-9. Animal health requirements.
Each animal shall be free from sickness and disease. Should the Board of
Health have reasonable cause to question the health of any animal, it shall
have the authority to require after notice to the owner an examination by a
doctor of veterinary medicine. Such examination shall be at the expense of
the owner.
§ 265-10. Permit required; application procedure; fee.
A. A public nuisance shall be deemed to exist in the following
circumstances:
(1) The keeping of animals in a manner that may foster the breeding of
insects and rodents and the germination of bacteria and other
infectious microbes, all of which may cause diseases.
(2) The keeping of animals in a manner that may create foul and
noxious odors as well as disturbing noises.
B. Noncompliance with §§ 265-4, 265-5 and 265-6 will be evidentiary that
a nuisance hereunder exists. A nuisance hereunder shall be subject to
abatement at the expense of the owner.
A. Any use existing on April 27, 1970, and not in compliance with
§ 265-5B, C, D and E herein may be continued as a preexisting use,
subject, however, to the provisions of § 265-7.
B. A preexisting use shall be deemed to have been abandoned if it is
discontinued for a period in excess of six months.
A. Permit required. A permit shall be required for any person desiring to
keep or maintain one or more animals in the borough of Class II or
Class III as herein defined.
B. Application; application requirements. Application for such permit shall
be made to the Health Officer of the borough.
C. The application form shall be provided by the Board of Health and shall
set forth:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) A description of the premises by lot and block number.
(3) The number and type of animals to be kept, owned or harbored at
the premises.
§ 265-7 ANIMALS AND POULTRY § 265-10
265:661
§ 265-11. Compliance required; revocation of permit.
§ 265-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall do an act or omit to do an act which is in violation of
any operative provision of this article shall be in violation of the law and,
upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a penalty or fine of not more
than $100. Upon conviction and failure to pay the amount of the penalty,
such person may be committed to county jail for a period not exceeding
90 days. Each day for which a violation of this article continues shall be
considered to be a separate violation hereunder.
(4) Illustration, by diagram, of the lands and buildings to be used by
the applicant and the relative position of the buildings and land to
be used in respect to the boundary lines of the applicant's property
and other buildings within the lot or plot and the relative position of
all other buildings on land immediately adjacent on all sides of the
land of the applicant.
D. Fee and term of permit. The fee for each permit issued shall be as set
forth in Chapter 282, § 282-3. Each permit shall expire on December 31
of each year, unless sooner revoked by the Board of Health.
A. Any person who now owns animals of Class II or Class III as herein
defined shall make application to the Board of Health for a permit
pursuant to and in accordance with the terms and provisions of this
article within 15 days after October 26, 1970. Any persons failing to
comply with the provisions of this section shall be deemed to be in
violation herein.
B. Any permit granted hereunder may be revoked by the Board of Health
for any violations of the provisions herein and for good cause shown
after five days' notice in writing to the person, firm or corporation to
whom or to which the permit was granted upon hearing of the charges
presented, and no permit so revoked shall be reissued except for good
and sufficient reason shown.
C. No permit shall be issued unless the applicant shall be in compliance
with the provisions of this article except as provided in § 265-8.
§ 265-10 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 265-12
265:662
ARTICLE II
Keeping of Live Poultry or Other Fowl
§ 265-13. License required.
No person shall keep or maintain any live poultry, or fowl, even for
noncommercial purposes, without first having obtained a license or permit
for that purpose from the Board covering the premises intended to be so
used.
§ 265-14. Regulations.
§ 265-15. Maintenance of coops and runs; inspection.
A. All live poultry shall be confined in coops or runs.
B. All coops and runs shall be located outside of and completely apart from
any building used wholly or in part for dwelling purposes, in which
people congregate or used as a food or eating establishment. No coop
or run shall be located within 50 feet of any dwelling unit or place
where people congregate, or within 200 feet of any food or eating
establishment, or within 10 feet of any property line.
C. All coops or runs shall be constructed in accordance with the
regulations now or hereafter in force under Chapter 255, Zoning.
D. All coops shall be provided with concrete floors. The floors of all coops
shall be kept clean and dry at all times.
E. A sufficient number of roosts to provide roosting space for each
individual specimen of poultry or fowl kept in the coop and a sufficient
number of properly placed drop boards beneath each roost to catch all
droppings excreted by the poultry or other fowl while on the roost shall
be provided.
F. All of the droppings shall be removed from each coop and buried,
removed from the premises, or otherwise disposed of in a manner
approved by the Board at least once each week.
G. All food for immediate consumption shall be placed in suitable feeding
troughs, or similar containers, and all other food shall be stored in ratproof
containers at all times. No poultry food shall be scattered about
any premises.
H. No person shall keep any crowing rooster or screaming or chattering
fowl.
I. No live poultry, pigeons or other fowl shall be permitted to fly or run at
large.
J. No persons shall keep more than one individual specimen of poultry or
fowl in any coop for each three square feet of usable floor space within
the coop.
§ 265-13 ANIMALS AND POULTRY § 265-15
265:663
§ 265-16. Construal of provisions.
The provisions of this article shall not be deemed to authorize the keeping
of live poultry for sale or for the preparation for sale.
A. All coops and runs and the entire surroundings of all such places shall
be kept clean at all times and shall be subject to periodic inspection by
the Health Officer or his representative.
B. Coops and runs shall be disinfected or otherwise treated, when so
directed by the Board.
§ 265-15 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 265-16
265:664
ARTICLE III
Keeping of Mink or Swine
§ 265-17. Prohibited acts.
No person shall keep or raise mink or swine.
§ 265-17 ANIMALS AND POULTRY § 265-17
265:665
Chapter 270
DRY-CLEANING ESTABLISHMENTS, COIN-OPERATED
§ 270-1. Establishment of code.
A code regulating the use, operation and maintenance of coin-operated drycleaning
establishments and licensure thereof; authorizing inspection of
dry-cleaning establishments and operations connected therewith; and fixing
penalties for violations thereof is hereby established pursuant to Chapter
188, Laws of 1950.64 A copy of the code is annexed to and made a part of
this chapter without the inclusion of the text herein.
§ 270-2. Title of code.
The code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "Coin-Operated Dry-Cleaning Establishment Code
of New Jersey (1962)."
§ 270-3. Copies of code on file.
Three copies of the Coin-Operated Dry-Cleaning Establishment Code of
New Jersey (1962) have been placed on file in the office of the Secretary of
the Board of Health and the Borough Clerk for the use and examination of
the public.
Chapter 274
FOOD AND BEVERAGE VENDING MACHINES
§ 274-1. Establishment of code.
A code regulating the use, operation and maintenance of food and beverage
vending machines and licensure thereof; prohibiting the sale or possession
with intent to sell through vending machines of adulterated or misbranded
foods or drinks; authorizing inspection of vending machines and operations
connected therewith; and fixing penalties for violations thereof is hereby
established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 et seq. A copy of the code is
annexed to and made a part of this chapter without the inclusion of the text
herein.
§ 274-2. Title of code.
The code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "Food and Beverage Vending Machine Code of New
Jersey (1961)."
64.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 et seq.
§ 265-17 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 274-3
270:666
§ 274-3. Copies of code on file.
Three copies of the Food and Beverage Vending Machine Code of New
Jersey (1961) have been placed on file in the offices of the Secretary of the
Board of Health and the Borough Clerk for the use and examination of the
public.
Chapter 277
FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS, RETAIL
§ 277-1. Establishment of code.
A code regulating retail food establishments and fixing penalties is hereby
established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 et seq. A copy of the code is
annexed to and made a part of this chapter without the inclusion of the text
herein.
§ 277-2. Title of code.
The code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "Retail Food Establishment Code of New Jersey
(1965)."
§ 277-3. Copies of code on file.
Three copies of the Retail Food Establishment Code of New Jersey (1965)
have been placed on file in the offices of the Secretary of the Board of
Health and the Borough Clerk for the use and examination of the public.
§ 277-4. Requirements for food handlers.
Chapter 279
A. Examination, certificate and filing required. No person shall hereafter
engage, nor shall any person employ or allow a person to work for him,
in the business of handling food intended for distribution or sale in the
borough for human consumption unless such person files with the
employer a medical certificate signed by a physician licensed to
practice medicine in the State of New Jersey showing that the person
has been examined under rules and regulations prescribed by the
Board of Health for the purpose of this code and that the examination
failed to show that such person was affected with an infectious disease
in a communicable stage or was harboring the causative agent of any
such disease. A copy of the certificate shall be filed with the Board of
Health.
B. Employers and owners. In case the employer or owner or other person
in charge of any such business is himself engaged in the handling of
such foods, this person shall file such certificate with the Board of
Health.
§ 274-3 FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS, RETAIL § 277-4
277:667
FOOD HANDLERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Food and beverage vending machines — See
Ch. 274.
Retail food establishments — See Ch. 277.
§ 279-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FOOD HANDLER — Any person working with packaged or unpackaged food
or beverages, food equipment or utensils or food-contact surfaces.
FOOD HANDLER CERTIFICATION — A certificate, degree or documentary
proof obtained for satisfactory completion of a minimum three-hour course
of instruction in safe food handling as approved by the Health Officer.
FOOD MANAGER CERTIFICATION — A certificate, degree or documentary
proof obtained when passing a food manager safety examination
administered by an agency accredited by the Conference of Food
Protection.
PERSON-IN-CHARGE (PIC) — The individual present at a retail food
establishment who is responsible for the operation at the time of inspection.
§ 279-2. Food safety certifications required.
A. Risk Level II Retail Food Establishments (as defined by N.J.A.C.
8:24-1.5). During all hours of operation, the person-in-charge is
required to hold a valid food manager certification as approved by the
Health Officer.
B. Risk Level III Retail Food Establishments (as defined by N.J.A.C.
8:24-1.5). During all hours of operation, the person-in-charge is
required to hold a valid food manager certification as approved by the
Health Officer. When additional personnel are engaged in the process of
food handling under the supervision of the person-in-charge, at least
one of said additional employees must hold a valid food handler
certification as approved by the Health Officer.
C. Supermarkets. The manager of each department that handles, stocks,
prepares, and/or packages foodstuffs (including but not limited to
bakery, deli, hot or cold food service, meat, produce and seafood
departments) must hold a valid food manager certification as approved
by the Health Officer.
D. Hotels, banquet or catering facilities. Personnel designated as the
manager or person-in-charge of each venue within a facility operating
under a single license must hold a valid food manager certification as
approved by the Health Officer.
§ 277-4 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 279-2
277:668
§ 279-3. Validity and nontransferability of food safety certifications.
§ 279-4. Enforcement and penalties.
Chapter 282
LICENSING PROVISIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licensing — See Ch. 158.
E. Other establishments, venues or situations not herein defined: as
determined by the Health Officer.
F. Risk Level IV Retail Food Establishments (as defined by N.J.A.C.
8:24-1.5) are required to have:
(1) During all hours of operation, the person-in-charge is required to
hold a valid food manager certification as approved by the Health
Officer.
(2) All food handlers employed by the establishment must hold a valid
food handler certification as approved by the Health Officer.
A. No person to whom a food manager or food handler certificate is issued
shall give, loan, transfer or permit same to be used by any other person
for any purpose whatsoever.
B. A food handler certificate shall, unless otherwise stated, be considered
valid for a period of three years from the date of issuance.
C. A food manager's certificate shall, unless otherwise stated, be
considered valid for a period of five years from the date of issuance.
A. Any establishment not in compliance with any provision of this chapter
shall be subject to fines and costs of not less than $100 nor more than
$1,000 per violation. In addition, the Board of Health may close the
establishment and suspend the retail food establishment license of any
person, partnership, corporation or establishment in violation of this
chapter for a period of not more than three days, pursuant to the
authority of the Board of Health to license and regulate retail food
establishments as provided by N.J.S.A. 26:3-31.
B. The Health Officer may require any food handler in any licensed retail
food establishment to obtain a food handler certification when such
violations occur in the establishment that support the need for
additional education on safe and proper food handling.
§ 279-2 LICENSING PROVISIONS § 282-1
282:669
§ 282-1. Application procedure for licenses, permits and
certificates.
§ 282-2. Suspension or revocation of license, permit or certificate.
A. Definition. The terms "license" and "permit" whenever used herein shall
be synonymous if, in the interpretation of any part hereof, such
synonym is required to carry out the manifest intent and purpose of this
Code.
B. Applications. All applications for licenses, permits or certificates shall
be made at the office of the Borough Clerk during regular office hours.
The fees for every license or permit shall be paid in advance at the time
of making the application therefor.
C. Investigation prior to issuance. The granting of any license, permit or
certificate may be withheld, at the direction of the Board, pending
examination, investigation or inspection of the person who, or the
premises which, may be the subject matter of the license, permit or
certificate under consideration.
D. Terms; transfer of license. All licenses, permits or certificates issued
under any chapter of this Code shall be valid only for the balance of the
calendar year in which they are issued, unless otherwise provided
herein. No such license, permit or certificate shall be transferable or
assignable.
E. Issuance of license; license identification. Upon the granting of any
license, permit or certificate, the Board shall furnish to the licensee,
permittee or certificate holder a suitable card, sign, placard, disc, plate
or other writing which shall convey the following information:
(1) The nature of such license, permit or certificate.
(2) The serial number of such license, permit or certificate.
(3) The name of the person to whom such license, permit or certificate
has been issued.
(4) The year in which such license, permit or certificate is issued.
(5) The premises or vehicle so licensed, if that is material or required.
(6) Such other information as the Board may deem pertinent.
F. Display of license. Every license, permit or certificate issued by the
Board shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the establishment,
premises or other place for which the same is issued and shall likewise
be so displayed on every vehicle or conveyance so licensed for the
period that the license, permit or certificate shall be in force, unless the
Board shall otherwise prescribe.
§ 282-1 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 282-2
282:670
A. Suspension. Every license, permit or certificate issued hereunder, at
any time during the term for which it was issued, may be suspended by
the Board, or in an emergency by the Health Officer, pending a hearing
to be granted the holder thereof pursuant to a notice to show cause to
the Board why the license, permit or certificate should not be
suspended further or revoked.
B. Complaint. No such license, permit or certificate shall be suspended
unless the Health Officer shall file with the Board a complaint or
charges evidencing one or more violations of the chapter under which
such license, permit or certificate was originally issued.
C. Duration of suspension. Every suspension so ordered shall
automatically terminate two weeks from the date thereof, unless the
continuance of such suspension shall be ordered by the Board. Such
suspension shall then continue only during the period of any such
continuance so ordered by the Board.
D. Termination of activity during suspension. During the period of any
such suspension, every license, permit or certificate so suspended shall
be ineffective and the holder thereof shall, during the entire period of
such suspension, cease the operation of any business or discontinue
every activity or use permitted under the license, permit or certificate
suspended.
E. Grounds for revocation. Any license, permit or certificate issued under
the provisions of these codes may be revoked at any time by the Board
for just cause or if the licensee, permittee or certificate holder, or any of
the employees, agents or servants of such licensee, permittee or
certificate holder, shall violate:
(1) Any of the provisions of these codes or any amendments or
supplements thereto; or
(2) The Sanitary Code of the Department of Health of the State of New
Jersey specifically applicable to the subject matter for or upon
which such license, permit or certificate was issued.
F. Hearing. Before any license, permit or certificate may be revoked, the
holder thereof shall be given a hearing and an opportunity to be heard
on the complaint made or violation charged against him.
G. Time and place of hearing. The time and place for such hearing shall be
fixed at the discretion of the Board, provided that an unreasonable
period of time shall not be permitted to elapse between the date of any
suspension and the date fixed for the hearing.
H. Notice. Notice of the time and place of any hearing held as set forth
herein shall be given by the Board to the holder of the license, permit or
certificate so involved, in writing, and served either personally or sent
to him by registered or certified mail, addressed to him at the address
stated in the license, permit or certificate.
§ 282-2 LICENSING PROVISIONS § 282-2
282:671
§ 282-3. Fees.
I. Failure to appear. A licensee, permittee or certificate holder who fails to
appear at the time and place fixed for the hearing shall not be entitled
to any further hearing and his license, permit or certificate may be
forthwith revoked.
A. Time of payment. All of the fees required to be paid under the terms of
this section shall cover only the balance of the calendar year during
which they are so paid or payable, unless otherwise provided. All fees
shall be due and payable before the granting of any license, permit or
certificate. All renewal fees shall be due and payable on or before
January 10 of each year for that calendar year.
B. Fees. Annual fees for licenses, permits or certificates are hereby fixed
as follows: [Amended 11-19-1997 by Ord. No. 6-97]
(1) Bakery license: $150. A "bakery" shall be any establishment which
fabricates or bakes food, including bread and pastries.
(2) Boardinghouse: $400.
(3) Nursing and/or convalescent homes: $400.
(4) Confectionery store: $50. A "confectionery store" shall be any
establishment making or selling confections, including candies and
ice cream.
(5) Food peddlers, all mobile concessions, including catering services
and trucks: $150. A "caterer" shall be defined as any establishment
which procures or prepares food products, for human consumption,
and shall include catering to homes and parties.
(6) Ice cream truck: $75.
(7) Meat market: $150. A "meat market" shall be any establishment
which sells any part of any animal, whether or not mixed with any
other substances.
(8) Milk truck license - route: $100.
(9) Miscellaneous retail food establishment:
(a) With refrigeration: $150.
(b) Without refrigeration: $100.
(10) Produce food stands: $50.
(11) Supermarket license: $600. A "supermarket" shall be any
establishment which sells or keeps for sale any meat, dairy
products, poultry, fish, vegetables or fruit for human consumption.
(12) Restaurant license:
§ 282-2 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 282-3
282:672
(a) Seasonal restaurant: $100.
(b) Permanent restaurant with seating capacity up to 49 people:
$150.
(c) Permanent restaurant with seating capacity of 50 people or
more: $250.
(d) Temporary retail food, one to seven days: $50.
(13) Laundry and dry-cleaning store: $100.
(14) Nursery school/child-care/day-care center: $200.
(15) Septic tank licenses:
(a) License fee for septic installers: $150.
(b) License for septic cleaners: $150.
(c) For the filing of an application and plans for a permit to locate
and construct an individual sewage disposal system: $250.
(d) For the filing of an application and plans for a permit to alter an
existing individual sewage disposal system (repair): $95.
(e) For each issuance of a permit to locate and construct or alter
an individual sewage disposal system: $5.
(f) For each reinspection of an individual sewage disposal system,
or the terms part thereof, caused by the failure of the
permittee to locate and construct or alter the same in
accordance with the terms of the aforesaid code, an inspection
fee of: $50.
(g) Percolation tests:
[1] Permit fee for the first hole on an acre: $100.
[2] Each additional hole on an acre: $25.
(h) Water sample:
[1] No written report fee: $20.
[2] Water sample with written report: $25.
(16) Swimming pool ("Swimming pool" shall mean any public pool or
swim club.):
(a) Public: $300.
(b) Community/read reports: $25.
(17)Keeping of poultry, pigeons and other fowl:
§ 282-3 LICENSING PROVISIONS § 282-3
282:673
Chapter 287
NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH
§ 287-1. Establishment of code.
A code defining and prohibiting certain matters, things, conditions or acts
as a nuisance; prohibiting certain noises or sounds; requiring the proper
heating of apartments; prohibiting lease or rental of certain buildings;
prohibiting spitting in or upon public buildings, conveyances or sidewalks;
authorizing the inspection of premises by an enforcing official; providing for
the removal or abatement of certain nuisances and recovery of expenses
incurred by the Board of Health in removing or abating such nuisances;
and prescribing penalties for violations is hereby established pursuant to
(a) For business: $100.
(b) For other than business purposes: $50.
(18)Kennel license:
(a) Less than 10 animals: $100.
(b) More than 10 animals: $200.
(19) For large animals, Class II or Class III, as provided in Chapter 265:
(a) One to three animals per premises: $50.
(b) Four to six animals per premises: $75.
(c) Seven animals or over per premises: $100.
(20) New business (category not otherwise specified): $50.
(21) Health club/tanning salon: $100.
(22) Ice machine: $25.
(23) Pet shop: $100.
(24) Vending machines, per machine: $15.
(25) Ice cream manufacturer: $100.
(26) Septic system abandonment filing fee: $25.
(27) Deck plan/in-ground pool review without septic review: $25.
(28) Building addition without septic review: $50.
(29) Recurring violation within a calendar year: $50.
(30) If a license is required and no specific fee is established, there shall
be a charge of $10.
§ 282-3 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 287-1
287:674
N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 et seq. A copy of the code is annexed to and made a part
of this chapter without the inclusion of the text herein.
§ 287-2. Title of code.
The code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey
(1953)."
§ 287-3. Copies of code on file.
Three copies of the Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey (1953) have
been placed on file in the offices of the Secretary of the Board of Health and
the Borough Clerk for the use and examination of the public.
Chapter 293
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS, INDIVIDUAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sanitary sewers — See Ch. 198.
§ 293-1. Establishment of code.
A code regulating the location, construction, use, maintenance, and method
of emptying or cleaning individual sewage disposal systems, and the
issuance of permits to locate, construct, empty or clean such systems, and
fixing penalties for the violation thereof, is hereby adopted pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1. A copy of the code is annexed hereto and made a part
hereof without inclusion of the text thereof herein.
§ 293-2. Title of code.
The code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "Individual Sewage Disposal System Code of New
Jersey (1963)."
§ 293-3. Copies of code on file.
Three copies of the Individual Sewage Disposal System Code of New Jersey
(1963) have been placed on file in the office of the Secretary of the Board of
Health and the Borough Clerk and shall remain on file in such office for the
use and examination of the public.
§ 287-1 SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS, INDIVIDUAL § 293-3
293:675
Chapter 296
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dumping, recycling and collection — See Ch.
209.
Littering — See Ch. 161.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 239.
§ 296-1. Establishment of code.
A code regulating the manner in which refuse may be stored, collected and
disposed of; declaring and defining certain conditions as nuisances; fixing
the responsibilities and duties of persons storing, collecting or disposing
of refuse; and providing for issuance of permits to collect refuse is hereby
established pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 et seq. A copy of
the code is annexed to and made a part of this chapter without the inclusion
of the text herein.
§ 296-2. Title of code.
The code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "Solid Waste Code of New Jersey (1959)."
§ 296-3. Copies of code on file.
Three copies of the Solid Waste Code of New Jersey (1959) have been placed
on file in the offices of the Secretary of the Board of Health and the Borough
Clerk for the use and examination of the public.
§ 296-4. Garbage, ashes and rubbish.
A. Dumping prohibited. No person shall dump, bury or allow to
accumulate any garbage, ashes, rubbish, condemned or spoiled animal
or vegetable substances, swill or any offensive or putrescible material
on any land or premises in the borough, except as may be specifically
authorized from time to time by the borough.
B. Garbage collection; license required. No person shall engage in the
business of collecting or disposing of or transporting any such
substances or materials without first having obtained a license therefor
from the Board. The application shall state:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The nature and extent of the business proposed to be conducted.
(3) The manner of collecting, transporting and disposing of the
substances and materials.
§ 293-3 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 296-4
296:676
Chapter 299
SWIMMING POOLS AND BATHING PLACES
§ 299-1. Swimming pools.
§ 299-2. Lake bathing places.
(4) A description of the vehicles to be used therefor.
C. Vehicle requirements. All vehicles used in the collecting, transporting
or disposing of such materials or substances shall have a closed,
watertight metal body and shall at all times be maintained and operated
in a clean and sanitary manner. Such vehicles shall be kept closed at all
times, except while actually being filled or emptied.
D. Responsibilities of owner. The owner, tenant, lessee and occupant of
every house, store or other building, or of any part thereof, or of any
other premises in the borough, shall be obligated to place, or cause to
be placed, in a metal watertight box or boxes, barrel or barrels, or other
receptacles, which shall have a tight cover and be kept tightly closed at
all times, all coal or wood ashes, plaster and all other household refuse
and decaying vegetable and animal substances upon his or their
premises. All such receptacles shall be kept in a place accessible for
emptying by licensed collectors and shall be maintained in a sanitary
condition.
E. Inspection of vehicles. All vehicles and receptacles mentioned in this
section shall be available for inspection by the Health Officer at all
reasonable hours.
A. Code established. A code regulating and controlling the location and
construction, alteration and operation of swimming pools, and the
issuance of permits to locate and construct, alter or operate swimming
pools, and declaring and defining certain swimming pools as nuisances
and fixing penalties for violation is hereby adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A.
26:3-69.1 et seq. A copy of the code is annexed to this chapter and made
a part of it without inclusion of the text.
B. Title of code. The code established and adopted by this chapter is
described and commonly known as the "Swimming Pool Code of New
Jersey (1970)."
C. Copies of code on file. Three copies of the Swimming Pool Code of New
Jersey (1970) have been placed on file in the offices of the Secretary of
the Board of Health and the Borough Clerk for the use and examination
of the public.
A. Adoption by reference. The Board of Health of the Borough of Old
Tappan hereby adopts by reference the provisions of the Lake Bathing
Place Bacteriological, Sanitary and Safety Guides prepared by the New
§ 296-4 SWIMMING POOLS AND BATHING PLACES § 299-2
299:677
Chapter 302
WATER SUPPLY
§ 302-1. Code established.
A code regulating the location, construction, alteration, use and supervision
of individual and semi-public water supplies, requiring certain permits,
providing for the inspection of such supplies, the fixing of fees and
prescribing penalties for violations is hereby adopted pursuant to R.S.
26:3-69.1, et seq. A copy of the code is annexed to and made a part of this
chapter without inclusion of the text herein.
§ 302-2. Title of Code.
The code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the Individual and Semi-public Water Supply Code of
New Jersey (1966).
§ 302-3. Public record.
Three copies of the Individual and Semi-public Water Supply Code of New
Jersey (1966) have been placed on file in the offices of the secretary of the
board of health and the borough clerk for the use and examination of the
public.
Chapter 306
WEED CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 97.
§ 306-1. Establishment of code.
A code declaring ragweed and poison ivy to be a nuisance; providing for
removal or abatement thereof and recovery of expenses incurred by the
Board of Health in removing or abating such nuisance; and prescribing
penalties for violations is hereby established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1
et seq. A copy of the code is annexed to this chapter and made a part of it
without the inclusion of the text.
Jersey State Department of Health, by reference, a copy of such guide
being attached hereto and made a part hereof.
B. Public record. Three copies of such guide have been placed and shall
remain on file in the office of the Board of Health for the use and
examination of the public.
§ 299-2 OLD TAPPAN CODE § 306-2
302:678
§ 306-2. Title of code.
The code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "Weed Control Code of New Jersey (1953)."
§ 306-3. Copies of code on file.
Three copies of the Weed Control Code of New Jersey (1953) have been
placed on file in the offices of the Secretary of the Board of Health and the
Borough Clerk for the use and examination of the public.
Appendix
Chapter A310
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
§ A310-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the terms defined above shall have the
meanings there indicated, and the following additional terms shall have the
following meanings:
ACT or CABLE TELEVISION ACT — That statute of the State of New Jersey
relating to cable television, known as the "Cable Television Act," N.J.S.A.
48:5A-1 et seq.
APPLICATION — Cablevision's application for renewal of municipal
consent, which application is on file in the Borough Clerk's office and
is incorporated herein by reference and made a part hereof, except as
modified, changed, limited or altered by this ordinance.
BOARD — The Board of Public Utilities of the State of New Jersey or its
successor agency.
BOROUGH — The governing body of the Borough of Old Tappan in the
County of Bergen and the State of New Jersey.
COMPANY — Cablevision of New Jersey, Inc. (Cablevision), the grantee of
rights under this ordinance.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
FEDERAL ACT — That federal statute relating to cable communications
commonly known as the "Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984," 47
U.S.C. Section 521 et seq. and the Telecommunications Act of 1996, or as
those statutes may be amended.
FEDERAL REGULATIONS — Those federal regulations relating to cable
television services, 47 C.F.R. Section 76.1 et seq. (and, to the extent
applicable, any other federal rules and regulations relating to cable
television, including but not limited to, those described in 47 C.F.R. Section
76.3), or as such regulations may be amended.
§ 306-2 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § A310-1
A310:679
STATE — The State of New Jersey.
STATE REGULATIONS — Those regulations of the State of New Jersey
Board of Public Utilities relating to cable television, N.J.A.C.14:17-1.1 et
seq. and N.J.A.C. 14:18-1 et seq., or as such regulations may be amended.
§ A310-2. Statement of findings.
A public hearing concerning the consent herein granted to Cablevision was
held after proper public notice pursuant to the terms and conditions of
the Act. Said hearing having been held and fully open to the public, and
the Borough having received all comments regarding the qualifications of
Cablevision to receive this consent, the Borough hereby finds Cablevision
possesses the necessary legal, technical, character, financial and other
qualifications to support municipal consent, and that Cablevision's
operating and construction arrangements are adequate and feasible.
§ A310-3. Grant of authority.
The Borough hereby grants to Cablevision its nonexclusive consent to place
and maintain in, upon, along, across, above, over, and under its highways,
streets, alleys, sidewalks, public ways, and public places in the municipality
poles, wires, cables, and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and
operation in the Borough of a cable television system, and for the provision
of any other service over such system as permitted under federal and state
law. Operation and construction, pursuant to said consent, is conditioned
upon prior approval of the Board of Public Utilities.
§ A310-4. Duration of franchise.
§ A310-5. Franchise territory.
The consent granted under this ordinance to Cablevision shall apply to the
entirety of the Borough and any property hereafter annexed.
A. The consent granted herein shall be nonexclusive and shall be for a
term of 10 years from April 26, 2000, the date of expiration of the prior
consent ordinance.
B. If Cablevision seeks successive consent, it shall, prior to the expiration
of this consent, apply for a municipal consent and certificate of approval
in accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-16 et seq., and applicable state and
federal rules and regulations. The company shall also petition the Board
for approval authorizing continued operation during the period
following expiration of the consent granted herein, and until such a
time that a decision is made by the Borough and the Board relative to
the renewal of said consent.
§ A310-1 OLD TAPPAN CODE § A310-6
A310:680
§ A310-6. Service area.
Cablevision shall be required to proffer video programming service along
any public right-of-way to any person's residence located in the franchise
territory at tariffed rates for standard and nonstandard installations. All
commercial installations shall be installed in accordance with the
company's line extension policy included in Cablevision's application.
§ A310-7. Franchise fee.
Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Cable Television Act,
Cablevision shall pay to the Borough, as an annual franchise fee, a sum
equal to 2% of the actual gross revenues received from all recurring
charges in the nature of subscription fees paid by subscribers for its cable
television reception services in the Borough or such amount as may be
mandated by federal or state law. In the event applicable law hereinafter
permits a larger franchise fee to be collected, but does not fix the amount
thereof, the Borough and the company shall negotiate in good faith with
respect to the amount thereof.
§ A310-8. Free service and equipment.
§ A310-9. Consideration.
In consideration for the rights granted by this ordinance, Cablevision shall
provide the Borough with a one-time grant of $19,000 to be used by the
municipality for cable and/or other telecommunications related purposes,
A. Cablevision shall provide, free of charge, one standard installation and
one outlet with monthly basic cable television service to the following
municipal buildings: Borough Hall, the Police Department, the Fire
House, the First Aid Corps, all state or locally accredited public and
private schools and all public libraries. Basic cable television service,
for purposes of this ordinance, shall consist of basic and family cable
packages.
B. When high-speed Internet access via cable modem service becomes
commercially available to residential customers within the Borough, the
company shall provide to the Borough, free of charge, one high-speed
cable modem and monthly Internet access service, including a standard
installation, to one municipally designated building. The Borough shall
be permitted, at its own cost, to network up to three additional personal
computer terminals in the designated building (four computers in total)
to the cable modem provided by the company. There will not be any
monthly service fees for the single high-speed cable modem and
monthly service provided to the Borough. When high-speed Internet
access via cable modem service becomes commercially available to
residential customers within the Borough, the company shall provide to
the Borough, free of charge, one high-speed cable modem and monthly
Internet access service, including a standard installation, to each public
school and municipal library in the Borough.
§ A310-6 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § A310-9
A310:681
including the support of PEG access related production and programming
efforts in the Borough.
§ A310-10. Construction/system requirements.
Cablevision shall perform construction and installation of its plant and
facilities in accordance with applicable state and federal law. The company
shall be subject to the following additional construction requirements with
respect to the installation of its plant and facilities in the Borough:
§ A310-11. Upgrading of system.
Cablevision agrees that the capabilities of the system shall be maintained
as technologically current throughout the duration of the franchise as other
cablevision systems in New Jersey of comparable size (measured by the
number of subscribers in the system) to the extent economically reasonable
and to the extent commercially practicable. Cablevision shall make Internet
service available to residents of the Borough to the extent that it is generally
made commercially available by Cablevision, on other than a trial or test
basis, elsewhere in the cable system. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
nothing herein shall obligate Cablevision to rebuild the system.
"Technologically current" is defined as the ability to support multiple analog
and digital television services, interactive service and other two-way
services.
A. In the event that Cablevision or its agents shall disturb any pavement,
street surfaces, sidewalks, driveways, sod, grass or other surfaces, it
shall, at its sole expense, within 30 days of such disturbance, restore
and replace such places or things so disturbed in as good a condition as
existed prior to the commencement of said work.
B. If at any time during the period of this consent the municipality shall
alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other way or place,
Cablevision, upon reasonable notice by the municipality, shall remove,
relay or relocate its equipment, at its expense.
C. Upon request of a person holding a building or moving permit issued by
the Borough, Cablevision shall temporarily move or remove appropriate
parts of its facilities so as to permit the moving or erection of buildings,
machinery or for the performance of other work. The expense of any
such temporary removal or relocation shall be paid to Cablevision by
the person requesting same, except when requested by the Borough of
Old Tappan, in which case Cablevision shall bear the cost.
D. During the exercise of its rights and privileges under this consent,
Cablevision shall have the authority to trim trees upon and overhanging
streets, alleys, sidewalks and public places of the Borough so as to
prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the
wires, cables, conduits and fixtures of the Cablevision's facilities.
Cablevision shall do so with such care as necessary so as not to injure
any such trees.
§ A310-9 OLD TAPPAN CODE § A310-12
A310:682
§ A310-12. Technical and customer service standards.
Cablevision shall comply with the technical quality and customer service
standards established for the cable industry under applicable federal and
state laws, rules and regulations.
§ A310-13. Local office or agent.
Cablevision shall establish and maintain during the entire term of this
consent a local area business office or agent for the purpose of receiving,
investigating and resolving complaints regarding the quality of service,
equipment malfunctions and similar matters. Said office shall be open daily
during normal business hours, and in no event less than 9:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m., Monday through Friday, excluding holidays.
§ A310-14. Designation of complaint officer.
The Office of Cable Television is hereby designated as the complaint officer
for the Borough pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 48:5A-26. All
complaints shall be reviewed and processed in accordance with N.J.A.C.
14:17-6.5.
§ A310-15. Liability insurance.
Cablevision agrees to maintain and keep in force and effect, at its sole cost,
at all times during the term of this consent, sufficient liability insurance
naming the Borough as an additional insured and insuring against loss
by any such claim, suit, judgment, execution or demand in the minimum
amounts of $1,000,000 for bodily injury or death to one person, and
$3,000,000 for bodily injury or death resulting from any one accident, plus
$3,000,000 for property damage. Cablevision shall file proper evidence
of such coverage with the Borough Clerk each year during the term of
this consent and shall notify the Borough of any changes in coverage or
nonrenewal. Cablevision shall not cancel coverage or permit its cancellation
without first giving the Borough 10 days' advance written notice.
§ A310-16. Rates.
Cablevision's rates for cable television service shall be subject to regulation
to the extent permitted by federal and state law. N.J.S.A. 48:5A-11.1 allows
for reduced or discounted rates for the elderly to be offered by Cablevision.
During the term of this consent, Cablevision shall continue its current
practice of offering reduced rates for senior citizens who meet the
requirements of the Pharmaceutical Assistance to Aged and Disabled
Program pursuant to N.J.S.A. 30:4D-21.
§ A310-17. Emergency uses.
Cablevision shall be required to have the capability to override the audio
portion of the system in order to permit the broadcasting of emergency
messages by the Borough pursuant to state and federal requirements.
§ A310-12 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § A310-17
A310:683
The company shall in no way be held liable for any injury suffered by
the Borough or any person, during an emergency, if for any reason the
municipality is unable to make full use of the cable system as contemplated
herein. The Borough shall utilize the state-approved procedures for such
emergency uses.
§ A310-18. Removal of facilities.
Upon expiration, termination or revocation of this ordinance, Cablevision,
at its sole cost and expense and upon direction of the Borough, shall
remove the cables and appurtenant devices constructed or maintained
in connection with the services authorized herein, unless Cablevision, its
affiliated entities or assignees should, within six months after such
expiration, termination or revocation, obtain certification from the FCC to
operate an open video system or any other federal or state certification to
provide telecommunications.
§ A310-19. Public, educational and governmental access.
§ A310-20. Annual report.
If requested by the Borough, Cablevision shall appear at an annual Council
meeting to present an annual report concerning its services, which shall
include, among other things, the number and nature of all service calls,
written complaints, line problems and the number and duration of all
service outages, as well to discuss changes, improvements, new procedures,
service responses and other topics requested.
§ A310-21. Incorporation of application.
All of the commitments contained in the application and any amendment
thereto submitted in writing to the Borough by Cablevision, except as
A. Cablevision shall continue to make available noncommercial public,
educational and governmental (PEG) access as described in the
application for municipal consent. Cablevision shall make access
available for noncommercial PEG programming. Cablevision shall
permit use of the public access studio and equipment for
noncommercial purposes by Borough residents. Upon request,
Cablevision will provide training to Borough residents biannually at the
Cablevision access studios free of charge.
B. The Borough agrees that Cablevision shall retain the right to use the
PEG access channel, or portion thereof, for non-PEG access
programming during times when the Borough is not utilizing the
channel for purposes of providing PEG access programming. In the
event that the company uses said PEG access channel for the
presentation of such other programming, the PEG programming shall
remain the priority use and the company's rights with respect to using
the channel for non-PEG programming shall be subordinate to the
Borough's provision of PEG access programming on such channel.
§ A310-17 OLD TAPPAN CODE § A310-21
A310:684
modified herein, are binding upon Cablevision as terms and conditions
of this consent. The application and any other writings submitted by
Cablevision in connection with this consent are incorporated into this
ordinance by reference and made a part hereof, except as specifically
modified, changed, limited, or altered by this ordinance, which shall govern
and control, or to the extent that they conflict with state or federal law.
§ A310-22. Level playing field.
§ A310-23. Consistency with applicable laws.
It is understood that should any state or federal agency or body modify,
change or alter any of its provisions with respect to cable television
generally, such modifications, changes or alterations shall be incorporated
into this consent, consistent with the applicable dates specified in the
change.
§ A310-24. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this
ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct
and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portion thereof.
A. In the event that another multichannel video program provider's
service within the Borough creates a significant competitive
disadvantage to Cablevision, the company shall have the right to
request from the Borough lawful amendments to its franchise that
relieve it of burdens which create the unfair competitive situation.
Should the company seek such amendments to its franchise, the parties
agree to negotiate in good faith appropriate changes to the franchise in
order to relieve the company of such competitive disadvantages. If the
parties can reach an agreement on such terms, the Borough agrees to
support the company's petition to the Board for modification of the
consent in accordance with N.J.S.A 48:5A-47 and N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7.
B. If the parties are unable to reach an agreement on appropriate
amendments to the franchise, the Borough acknowledges that the
company shall have the right to petition the Board directly for such
amendments in accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47 and N.J.A.C.
14:17-6.7; provided, however, the Borough shall be under no obligation
to support Cablevision's request for such relief from the Board.
C. Cablevision represents and acknowledges that as of the date of its
acceptance of this municipal consent, competition within the Borough
has not yet risen to the level of creating a significant competitive
disadvantage sufficient to enable the company to seek relief under this
section.
§ A310-21 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § A310-25
A310:685
§ A310-25. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect upon issuance of a certificate of approval as
issued by the Board of Public Utilities, but the consent term of the franchise
shall relate back to and run from the date of expiration of the previous
consent which expired on April 25, 2000.
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
744-01 7-16-2001 Subdivision of land amendment Ch. 218
746-01 7-16-2001 Police Department amendment Ch. 27, Art. I
754-01 8-20-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 255
757-01 Number not used
758-01 7-16-2001 Officers and employees
amendment; Alcoholic
beverage control amendment;
Building construction fees
amendment; Fees for public
documents amendment;
Recreation program fees;
Peddling and soliciting
amendment; Precious metals
and gems amendment; towing
amendment
Chs. 50; 85, Art.
I; 100, Art. I; 119,
Arts. I and III;
182; 188; 227
759-01 7-16-2001 Bond amendment NCM
760-01 Tabled
761-01 8-20-2001 Bond amendment NCM
762-01 8-20-2001 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
763-01 9-24-2001 Sewer easement NCM
764-01 9-24-2001 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 242
765-01 11-5-2001 Right-of-way agreement with
Rockland Electric Company
NCM
766-01 11-19-2001 Parks and recreational
facilities amendment
Ch. 179
767-01 11-19-2001 Shade trees amendment Ch. 234, Art. I
768-01 11-19-2001 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 242
§ A310-25 OLD TAPPAN CODE § DL-1
A310:686
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
769-01 12-17-2001 Bond amendment NCM
770-01 12-17-2001 Property maintenance Ch. 190
771-01 Not adopted
771R-01 Not adopted
771RR-01 1-5-2002 Board of Adjustment repealed;
Land use procedures
amendment; Zoning
amendment
Chs. 9, Art. I; 45;
255
772R-02 5-20-2002 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 45
773-02 2-19-2002 Eliminate references to Board
of Adjustment
Chs. 30 (repealed
by Ord. No.
1042-11); 205;
218; 234, Art. II;
242; 255
774-02 2-19-2002 Police Department amendment Ch. 27, Art. I
775-02 2-19-2002 Bond NCM
776-02 2-19-2002 Purchase of property NCM
777-02 2-19-2002 Recreation program fees
amendment
Ch. 119, Art. III
778-02 3-18-2002 Bond NCM
779-02 3-18-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 255
780-02 3-18-2002 Fire prevention amendment Ch. 131
781-02 3-18-2002 Police Department amendment Ch. 27, Art. I
782-02 3-18-2002 Salaries amendment NCM
783-02 3-18-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 255
784-02 4-15-2002 Dorotockey's Run declaration
of restriction
NCM
785-02 4-15-2002 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 242
786-02 4-15-2002 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 242
787-02 4-15-2002 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 242
788-02 5-20-2002 Massage and somatic therapies Repealed by Ord.
813-03
789-02 5-20-2002 Salaries amendment NCM
790-02 5-20-2002 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 242
791-02 6-3-2002 Fees amendments Chs. 85, Art. I;
119, Arts. I and
III
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A310:687
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
792-02 6-3-2002 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 242
793-02 6-17-2002 Board of Health amendment Ch. 9, Art. III
794-02 6-3-2002 Purchase of Central Avenue
property
NCM
795-02 7-15-2002 Sanitary sewers amendment Ch. 198
796-02 Central Avenue appropriation NCM
797-02 Bond NCM
798-02 Bond NCM
799-02 8-19-2002 Cable television franchise Ch. A310
800-02 8-19-2002 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 242
801-02 9-17-2002 Keeping of animals amendment Ch. 91, Art. I
802-02 Salaries amendment NCM
803-02 9-17-2002 Hike and bike appropriation NCM
804-02 10-21-2002 Deputy Borough Clerk Ch. 50, Art. V
Board of
Health
Ordinance
10-16-2002 Adoption of Code by Board of
Health
Ch. 259, Art. I
805-02 10-7-2002 Salaries amendment NCM
806-02 11-18-2002 Sanitary sewers amendment Ch. 198
807-02 11-18-2002 Fees for public documents
amendment
Ch. 119, Art. I
808-02 11-18-2002 Parks and recreational
facilities amendment
Ch. 179
809-02 11-4-2002 Bond amendment NCM
810-02 12-16-2002 Golf course fees amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 1039-11
811-02 Planning Board fees Tabled
812-02 12-16-2002 Golf Course Commission
amendment
Ch. 9, Art. V
813-03 3-18-2003 Zoning amendment; Massage
and somatic therapies repealed
Ch. 255; Ch. 165,
repealer only
814-03 2-18-2003 Fees for use of Borough
facilities
Ch. 119, Art. IV
815-03 3-18-2003 Special benefit assessment,
Robin Lane
NCM
816-03 3-18-2003 Officers and employees:
Defense and indemnification
Ch. 50, Art. XVII
§ DL-1 OLD TAPPAN CODE § DL-1
A310:688
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
817-03 3-18-2003 Officers and employees:
Purchasing Agent
Ch. 50, Art. XVIII
818-03 3-18-2003 Salaries NCM
819-03 3-18-2003 Bond NCM
820-03 3-18-2003 Supplemental appropriation for
2002 sewer project
NCM
821-03 4-21-2003 Salaries amendment NCM
822-03 5-19-2003 Police Department amendment Ch. 27
823-03 5-5-2003 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 242
824-03 6-16-2003 Fees amendments Chs. 45, 85, 100,
119
825-03 8-18-2003 Parks and recreational
facilities amendment
Ch. 179
826-03 8-18-2003 Mobile telephone usage Repealed by Ord.
853-04
827-03 8-18-2003 Bond NCM
828-03 9-15-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 255
829-03 9-15-2003 Drainage easement NCM
830-03 10-20-2003 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 242
831-03 10-20-2003 Parks and recreational
facilities amendment
Ch. 179
832-03 10-20-2003 Salaries amendment NCM
833-03 11-17-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 255
834-03 11-17-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 255
835-03 11-17-2003 Board of Recreation
Commissioners amendment
Ch. 9, Art. IV
836-03 12-15-2003 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 190
837-03 12-1-2003 Sanitary sewers amendment Ch. 198
838-03 12-15-2003 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 242
839-03 12-15-2003 Golf course fees amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 1039-11
840-04 Salary NCM
841-04 3-1-2004 Sanitary sewers amendment Ch. 198
842-04 3-15-2004 Social and Cultural Affairs
Committee
Ch. 75
843-04 3-15-2004 Towing amendment Ch. 227
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A310:689
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
844-04 4-19-2004 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 242
845-04 4-19-2004 Bond NCM
846-04 Bond NCM
847-04 5-17-2004 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 45
848-04 5-17-2004 Trees amendment Ch. 234
849-04 5-17-2004 Subdivision of land amendment Ch. 218
850-04 5-17-2004 Fees amendments Chs. 45, 50, 82,
85, 91, 119, 122,
125, 138, 182,
180, 205, 218,
234
851-04 5-17-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 255
852-04 8-16-2004 Fees amendment Chs. 100, 119
and 255
853-04 6-21-2004 Mobile telephone usage
repealer
Repealer only
854-04 6-21-2004 Open space referendum NCM
855-04 7-19-2004 Length of service awards
program
NCM
856-04 7-19-2004 Smoking prohibited in
recreational areas
Ch. 179, Art. III
857-04 8-16-2004 Certificate of continued
occupancy
Ch. 100, Art. III
858-04 9-20-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 255
859-04 9-7-2004 Various penalties amendment Chs. 82, 122,
131, 173 and 242
860-04 9-20-2004 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 242
861-04 9-20-2004 Street vacation NCM
862-04 9-7-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 255
863-04 10-18-2004 Keeping of animals repealer Ch. 91, Art. I,
repealer only
864-04 1-2-2005 Recreation program fees
amendment
Ch. 119, Art. III
865-04 11-1-2004 Street name change NCM
866-04 11-15-2004 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 45
867-04 11-15-2004 Open Space Advisory
Committee amendment
Ch. 53
§ DL-1 OLD TAPPAN CODE § DL-1
A310:690
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
868-04 11-15-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 255
869-04 11-1-2004 Bond amendment NCM
870-04 12-6-2004 Bond NCM
871-04 12-20-2004 Fees for public documents
amendment
Ch. 119, Art. I
872-04 12-20-2004 Sanitary sewers amendment Ch. 198
873-04 12-20-2004 Salaries amendment NCM
874-04 12-20-2004 Salaries amendment NCM
875-05 2-7-2005 NCM
876-05 2-22-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 255
877-05 3-21-2005 Salaries NCM
878-05 3-21-2005 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 45
879-05 Not adopted
880-05 4-4-2005 NCM
881-05 3-21-2005 Tree preservation and removal
amendment
Ch. 234, Art. II
882-05 4-18-2005 Building construction: hours of
construction amendment
Ch. 100, Art. IV
883-05 5-16-2005 Fees amendment Ch. 85, Art. I; Ch.
100, Art. I; Ch.
119, Art. IV
884-05 5-16-2005 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 242
885-05 7-18-2005 Police Department amendment Ch. 27, Art. I
886RR-05 11-21-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 255
887-05 9-19-2005 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 45
888-05 9-19-2005 Pet waste Ch. 91, Art. I
889-05 9-19-2005 Wildlife feeding Ch. 91, Art. III
890-05 9-19-2005 Recycling amendment; yard
waste
Chs. 209, Art. II;
250
891-05 9-19-2005 Storm sewers Ch. 212
892-05 9-19-2005 Flood damage prevention
amendment
Ch. 135
893-05 9-19-2005 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 242
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A310:691
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
894-05 10-17-2005 Alcoholic beverages:
consumption or possession in
open container on public or
private property
Ch. 85, Art. III
895-05 Tabled
896-05 10-17-2005 Salaries NCM
897-05 11-21-2005 Golf course fees amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 1039-11
898-05 12-5-2005 Trees amendment Ch. 234
899-05 12-19-2005 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 242
900-05 12-19-2005 Building construction:
administration amendment
Ch. 100, Art. I
901-05 12-19-2005 Alarms amendment Ch. 82
902-06 1-1-2006 Vandervoot Avenue renaming NCM
903-06 4-17-2006 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 45
904-06 3-20-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 255
905-06 4-3-2006 Exceed budget cap NCM
906-06 4-17-2006 Sanitary sewers amendment Ch. 198
907-06 4-3-2006 Salaries NCM
908-06 4-17-2006 Stormwater control Ch. 213
909-06 4-3-2006 Lighting nuisances Ch. 160
910-06 4-17-2006 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 242
911-06 5-15-2006 Special emergency NCM
912-06 5-15-2006 Sale of property NCM
913-06 7-10-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 255
914-06 6-19-2006 General penalty amendment;
alcoholic beverage control
amendment
Ch. 1, Art. III; Ch.
85, Art. I
915-06 7-24-2006 Parks and recreational
facilities amendment
Ch. 179
916-06 7-24-2006 Hours of construction
amendment; noise amendment
Ch. 100, Art. V;
Ch. 170
917-06 8-21-2006 Police Department amendment Ch. 27, Art. I
918-06 9-18-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 255
919-06 10-16-2006 LOSAP enrollment policy NCM
920-06 10-16-2006 Oakes Park appropriation NCM
§ DL-1 OLD TAPPAN CODE § DL-1
A310:692
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
921-06 10-16-2006 DeWolf Road appropriation NCM
922-06 12-4-2006 Affordable Housing Agency
amendment
Ch. 5
923-06 11-20-2006 Games of chance amendment Ch. 142
924-06 11-20-2006 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 45
925-06 12-4-2006 Bond NCM
926-06 12-4-2006 Acquisition of Bonnabel
property
NCM
927-06 12-4-2006 Fire Department amendment Ch. 27, Art. II
928-06 12-18-2006 Design Review Committee
amendment; Grant Advisory
Committee amendment; Open
Space Advisory Committee
amendment; Social and
Cultural Affairs Committee
amendment
Ch. 30 (repealed
by Ord. No.
1042-11); Ch. 34
(repealed by Ord.
No. 1042-11); Ch.
53; Ch. 75
929-06 1-6-2007 Subdivision of land amendment Ch. 218
930-06 2-5-2007 Sale of property NCM
BH1-06 2-21-2007 Food handlers Repealed by Ord.
No. BH1-17
931-07 3-5-2007 Salaries NCM
932-07 3-19-2007 Alcoholic beverage control
amendment; licensing of dogs
and cats amendment; fees for
public documents amendment,
golf course fees amendment
Ch. 85, Art. I; Ch.
91, Art. II; Ch.
119, Arts. I and II
(repealed by Ord.
No. 1039-11)
933-07 3-19-2007 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 242
934-07 3-19-2007 Parks and recreational
facilities amendment
Ch. 179
935-07 3-19-2007 Building construction:
administration amendment
Ch. 100, Art. I
936-07 3-19-2007 Tobacco restrictions in school
zone
Ch. 202, Art. I
937-07 3-19-2007 Sale of property NCM
938-07 4-9-2007 Salaries NCM
939-07 3-19-2007 Sale of property NCM
940-07 4-23-2007 Sanitary sewers amendment Ch. 198
941-07 4-23-2007 Mayor amendment Ch. 50, Art. III
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A310:693
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
942-07 5-7-2007 Subdivision of land amendment Ch. 218
943-07 4-23-2007 Maple Street improvements NCM
944-07 4-23-2007 Hike 'n Bike appropriation NCM
945-07 5-21-2007 Fees for public documents
amendment; golf course fees
amendment
Ch. 119, Arts. I
and II
946-07 5-21-2007 Salaries NCM
947-07 6-4-2007 Appropriation NCM
948-07 6-18-2007 Appropriation NCM
949-07 6-18-2007 Criminal history background
checks
Ch. 50, Art. XIX
950-07 7-2-2007 Salaries NCM
951-07 8-20-2007 Bond NCM
952-07 7-16-2007 Appropriation amendment NCM
953-07 9-4-2007 Salaries NCM
954-07 9-4-2007 Appropriation NCM
955-07 10-1-2007 Retail businesses: hours of
operation amendment
Ch. 194, Art. I
956-07 12-6-2007 Bond NCM
957-07 10-1-2007 Fire Department amendment Ch. 27, Art. II
958-07 11-19-2007 Salaries NCM
959-08 1-22-2008 Recreation program fees Ch. 119, Art. III
960-08 2-4-2008 Salaries amendment NCM
961-08 2-19-2008 Appointed officers amendment;
Borough Administrator
amendment
Ch. 50, Arts. II
and XIV
962-02 4-7-2008 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
963-08 4-7-2008 Salaries NCM
964-08 4-21-2008 Defense and indemnification Ch. 25
965-08 4-21-2008 Police Department amendment Ch. 27, Art. I
966-08 4-21-2008 Salaries amendment NCM
967-08 4-21-2008 Appropriation NCM
968-08 5-5-2008 Salaries amendment NCM
969-08 6-2-2008 Street vacation NCM
970-08 6-2-2008 Appropriation NCM
971-08 6-2-2008 Appropriation NCM
§ DL-1 OLD TAPPAN CODE § DL-1
A310:694
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
972-08 6-2-2008 Appropriation amendment NCM
973-08 9-2-2008 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 242
974-08 10-6-2008 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 242
975-08 11-3-2008 Appropriation NCM
976-08 11-3-2008 Bond NCM
977-08 12-1-2008 Salaries amendment NCM
978-08 1-3-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 255
979-09 1-20-2009 Parks and recreational
facilities amendment
Ch. 179
980-09 2-2-2009 Salaries amendment NCM
981-09 3-2-2009 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 242
982-09 3-16-2009 Appropriation NCM
983-09 3-16-2009 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
984-09 4-6-2009 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 242
985-09 4-20-2009 Defined Contribution
Retirement Program
Ch. 60, Art. II
986-09 4-20-2009 Bond NCM
987-09 6-1-2009 Appropriation NCM
988-09 6-1-2009 Nonbinding referendum for
Open Space Trust Fund annual
levy
NCM
989-09 6-15-2009 Salaries NCM
990-09 7-20-2009 Recycling amendment Ch. 209, Art. II
991-09 8-17-2009 Fire Department amendment Ch. 27, Art. II
992-09 9-21-2009 Bond NCM
993-09 10-19-2009 Appropriation NCM
994-09 10-19-2009 Salaries amendment NCM
995-09 11-2-2009 Appropriation amendment NCM
996-09 12-7-2009 Fire prevention amendment Ch. 131
997-09 12-7-2009 Building construction:
administration amendment
Ch. 100, Art. I
998-09 12-7-2009 Recreation program fees
amendment
See Ch. 119, Art.
III
999-09 12-7-2009 Approval of 2010 recreation
program fees
See Ch. 119, Art.
III
1000-09 1-3-2010 Golf course fees amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 1039-11
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A310:695
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1001-10 1-19-2010 Fees: fire inspection reports
and pictures
Ch. 119, Art. IV
1002-10 2-1-2010 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 242
1003-10 2-16-2010 Fire Department amendment Ch. 27, Art. II
1004-10 2-16-2010 Length of service awards
program amendment
NCM
1005-10 2-16-2010 Sanitary sewers amendment Ch. 198
1006-10 2-16-2010 Golf Course Commission
amendment
Ch. 9, Art. V
1007-10 2-16-2010 Bond NCM
1008-10 3-15-2010 Salaries NCM
1009-10 3-15-2010 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
1010-10 4-19-2010 Salaries amendment NCM
1011-10 5-3-2010 Bond NCM
1012-10 5-17-2010 Recreation program fees
amendment
See Ch. 119, Art.
III
1013-10 6-7-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 255
1014-10 6-9-2010 Refunding bond NCM
1015-10 7-28-2010 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 242
1016-10 7-28-2010 Appropriation NCM
1017-10 8-16-2010 Appropriation amendment NCM
1018-10 8-16-2010 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 242
1019-10 9-8-2010 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 242
1020-10 9-20-2010 Salaries amendment NCM
1021-10 10-4-2010 Golf course fees amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 1039-11
1022-10 11-1-2010 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 45
1023-10 11-15-2010 Appropriation NCM
1024-10 12-6-2010 Fees for public documents
amendment
Ch. 119, Art. I
1025-10 1-18-2011 Salaries NCM
1026-11 2-22-2011 Appropriation NCM
1027-11 2-22-2011 Alcoholic beverage control
amendment
Ch. 85, Art. I
1028-11 3-7-2011 Appropriation amendment NCM
1029-11 3-21-2011 Salaries amendment NCM
§ DL-1 OLD TAPPAN CODE § DL-1
A310:696
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1030-11 3-21-2011 Board of Health amendment Ch. 9, Art. III
1031-11 4-4-2011 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
1032-11 4-18-2011 Appropriation; bond NCM
1033-11 5-2-2011 Municipal Court amendment Ch. 22
1034-11 7-18-2011 Stormwater control
amendment
Ch. 213
1035-11 7-18-2011 Salaries amendment NCM
1036-11 8-15-2011 Board of Health amendment Ch. 9, Art. III
1037-11 9-19-2011 Building construction:
administration amendment
Ch. 100, Art. I
1038-11 11-21-2011 Work and excavations within
streets
Ch. 214, Art. I
1039-11 11-21-2011 Golf course fees Repealed by Ord.
No. 1053-13
1040-11 12-5-2011 Licensing of dogs and cats
amendment
Ch. 91, Art. II
1041-11 2-6-2012 Meeting attendance policy for
boards, commissions and
committees
Ch. 1, Art. IV
1042-11 1-1-2012 Design Review Committee
repealer; Grant Advisory
Committee repealer
Ch. 30, reference
only; Ch. 34,
reference only
1043-12 3-19-2012 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
1044-12 3-19-2012 Salaries NCM
1045-12 4-2-2012 Bond NCM
1046-12 5-7-2012 Arts and Entertainment
Committee
Ch. 75
1047-12 5-21-2012 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 242
1048-12 6-18-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 255
1049-12 8-20-2012 Bond NCM
1050-12 9-17-2012 Verizon communications
facilities consent renewal
NCM
1051-12 10-1-2012 Soil removal amendment Ch. 205
1052-12 11-19-2012 Appropriation NCM
1053-13 1-22-2013 Golf course fees Repealed by Ord.
No. 1062-13
1054-13 Abandoned
1055-13 4-1-2013 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A310:697
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1056-13 4-1-2013 Salaries NCM
1057-13 4-1-2013 Appropriation NCM
1058-13 7-15-2013 Salaries amendment NCM
1059-13 7-15-2013 Fertilizer Ch. 120
1060-13 9-3-2013 Salaries amendment NCM
1061-13 12-2-2013 Recreation program fees Repealed by Ord.
No. 1076-15
1062-13 12-2-2013 Golf course fees Repealed by Ord.
No. 1075-14
1063-13 1-6-2014 Brush, grass and weeds
amendment
Ch. 97
1064-13 1-21-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 255
1065-13 1-6-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 255
1066-14 4-7-2014 Salaries NCM
1067-14 4-7-2014 Appropriation NCM
1068-14 4-7-2014 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
1069-14 4-21-2014 Tree preservation and removal
amendment
Ch. 234, Art. II
1070-14 5-19-2014 Bond NCM
1071-14 8-18-2014 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 242
1072-14 8-18-2014 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 242
1073-14 9-15-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 255
1074-14 9-2-2014 Parks and recreational
facilities amendment; smoking
in and upon public buildings,
public properties and public
parks and recreation facilities
Ch. 179; Ch. 202,
Art. II
1075-14 10-20-2014 Golf course fees Repealed by Ord.
No. 1091-15
1076-15 1-20-2015 Recreation program fees Repealed by Ord.
No. 1112-17
1077-15 2-17-2015 Appropriation NCM
1078-15 2-17-2015 Fire Police Ch. 32
1079-15 4-6-2015 Bond NCM
1080-15 4-6-2015 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
1081-15 6-15-2015 Salaries NCM
1082-15 7-20-2015 Building construction:
administration amendment
Ch. 100, Art. I
§ DL-1 OLD TAPPAN CODE § DL-1
A310:698
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1083-15 7-20-2015 Recreation program fees Repealed by Ord.
No. 1112-17
1084-15 8-17-2015 Appropriation NCM
1085-15 9-8-2015 Appropriation NCM
1086-15 9-21-2015 Salaries NCM
1087-15 9-21-2015 Salaries NCM
1088-15 10-19-2015 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
1089-15 11-2-2015 Alcoholic beverages: alcoholic
beverage control amendment
Ch. 85, Art. I
1090-15 1-3-2016 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 45
1091-15 1-3-2016 Golf course fees Repealed by Ord.
No. 1104-16
1092-15 1-3-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 255
1093-16 4-4-2016 Bond NCM
1094-16 4-4-2016 Appropriation NCM
1095-16 4-4-2016 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
1096-16 4-4-2016 Salaries NCM
1097-16 5-2-2016 Salaries NCM
1098-16 5-2-2016 Recreation program fees
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 1112-17
1099-16 5-2-2016 Bond NCM
1100-16 7-18-2016 LOSAP amendment NCM
1101-16 8-15-2016 Salaries amendment NCM
1102-16 9-19-2016 Appropriation NCM
1103-16 Withdrawn
1104-16 12-5-2016 Golf course fees Repealed by Ord.
No. 1107-17
1105-16 12-5-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 255
1106-17 2-21-2017 Appropriation NCM
1107-17 2-21-2017 Golf course fees Repealed by Ord.
No. 1118-17
1108-17 4-3-2017 Salaries NCM
1109-17 4-3-2017 Bond NCM
1110-17 4-3-2017 Bond NCM
1111-17 4-3-2017 Fire Department amendment Ch. 27, Art. II
1112-17 4-3-2017 Recreation program fees Ch. 119, Art. III
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A310:699
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1113-17 4-3-2017 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
1114-17 4-17-2017 Sanitary sewers amendment Ch. 198
1115-17 4-17-2017 Towing amendment Ch. 227
1116-17 5-15-2017 Bamboo Ch. 94
BH1-17 5-17-2017 Food handlers Ch. 279
1117-17 8-21-2017 Bond NCM
1118-17 12-4-2017 Fees: Golf Course Fees
Amendment
Ch. 119, Art. II
1119-17 1-2-2018 Sanitary Sewers Amendment Ch. 198
1120-18 3-19-2018 Taxation: Totally Disabled
Veterans and Surviving
Spouses Tax Exemption
Ch. 220, Art. I
1121-18 4-2-2018 Salary and Compensation NCM
1122-18 4-2-2018 Exceed Budget; Cap Bank NCM
1123-18 4-2-2018 Bond NCM
1124-18 4-2-2018 Bond NCM
1125-18 4-2-2018 Appropriation NCM
1126-18 4-2-2018 Noise Amendment Ch. 170
1127-18 5-21-2018 Fees: Environmental
Commission - Community
Garden Fees
Ch. 119, Art. V
1128-18 6-18-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 255
1129-18 7-16-2018 Peddling and Soliciting
Repealer
Ch. 182
1130-18 7-16-2018 Appropriation NCM
1131-18 9-4-2018 Salaries NCM
1132-18 10-1-2018 Bond NCM
1133-18 10-15-2018 Appropriation NCM
1134-18 10-15-2018 Salaries NCM
1135-18 11-19-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 255
1136-18 11-19-2018 Fees: Recreation Program Fees
Amendment
Ch. 119, Art. III
1137-18 11-19-2018 Appropriation NCM
1138-19 2-19-2019 Subdivision of Land
Amendment
Ch. 218
1139-19 2-4-2019 Fees: Golf Course Fees
Amendment
Ch. 119, Art. II
§ DL-1 OLD TAPPAN CODE § DL-1
A310:700
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1140-19 2-4-2019 Salaries NCM
1141-19 3-4-2019 Fees: Recreation Program Fees
Amendment
Ch. 119, Art. III
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A310:701

ZONING
Borough of Old Tappan
Zoning, Area and Bulk Schedule for Old Tappan, New Jersey
[Amended 2-22-2005 by Ord. No. 876-05; 11-21-2005 by Ord. No. 886RR-05]
Improved
Lot
Coverage
(%)
Floor
Area
Ratio
(FAR)8
Maximum Height of Building Minimum Yards Interior Lots Minimum Yards, Corner Lots
Minimum Lot Dimensions to Ridge Line Side Yards6 Front and Rear Yards7
Coverage Principal Building Accessory Front Rear Each- Side Yards (2 Required)
Type of Zone
Area
(square feet)
Width
(feet)
Depth
(feet)
Maximum
(%) (stories) (feet) (feet)
Depth
(feet)
Depth
(feet)
Sum-Both
(feet)
Minimum
(feet)
Side Street
Side
Interior Lot
Side
RA-40 40,000 150 200 15 30 0.16 2 1/2 35 14 50 50 50 20 50 20
RA-40-CC 40,000 1501
2001
151
301
0.16 2 1/2 35 14 501
501
501
201
501
201
RA-30-LA 12,500-17,999
18,0004
100
120
125
150
25
25
50 0.26 2 1/2 35
35
14
14
35
40
30
35
30
40
15
20
35
40
15
20
RA-25 25,000 125 175 20 40 0.22 2 1/2 35 14 40 40 35 10 40 10
RA-25-CC 26,000 1252
1752
202
402
0.22 2 1/2 35 14 402
402
352
102
402
102
RA-25-NL 25,000 100 140 25 40 0.22 2 1/2 35 15 40 40 35 10 40 10
RA-15 15,000 100 125 25 50 0.26 2 1/2 35 14 35 30 25 10 35 10
RA-10 10,000 100 100 30 55 0.28 2 1/2 35 14 35 25 25 10 30 10
Conditional Use ––
Planned
Residential
435,000 200 300 25 60 –– 3 35 14 50 50 50 25 50 25
RB-130 SingleFamily
25,000 125 175 20 –– –– 2 1/2 35 14 40 40 35 10 40 10
Low- and
ModerateIncome Housing
130,000 150 200 25 60 –– 3 35 14 40 40 50 25 40 20
B1 30,0003
1503
200 25
20
70
70
––
––
1
2
25 14 ––
4
25 30 15 25 15
B2 40,000 150 200 25
20
70
70
––
––
1
2
25 14 100 50 30 50 305
ES 100,000 200 300 10 25 –– 2 1/2 35 12 60 100 60 30 60 30
NOTES:
1
In an approved residential cluster development, the dimensions of the RA-25 District shall apply.
2
In an approved residential cluster development, the dimensions of the RA-15 District shall apply.
3 Where more than one business use at grade level is planned, and a structure is to include more than one such use, an additional 25 feet of frontage and 10,000 square feet of lot area for each use shall be required for each
minimum lot.
4 One hundred feet north side of Old Tappan Road; 45 feet south side of Old Tappan Road.
5 Fifty feet if interior lot line abuts residential zone.
6 Two required.
7 As for interior lots, side yards two required.
8 Refer to Table B for FAR of oversize parcels.
255:A1 09 - 01 - 2014