Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Violations and Penalties
[Adopted 12-17-1974 by Ord. No. 74-10 (Ch. 1, Art. III, of the 1986
Code)]
§ 1-1. Persons punishable as principals.
§ 1-2. General penalty. [Added 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
A. Any person who aids, abets, counsels, commands, induces or procures
another to violate any of the ordinances of the Borough of Penns Grove
shall be punishable as a principal.
B. Any person who willfully causes another to violate any of the ordinances
of the Borough of Penns Grove shall be punishable as a principal.
A. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of the Code of
the Borough of Penns Grove for which no other penalty is provided in
the Code or by statute shall be punishable by one or more of the
following: imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding 90
days, a fine not exceeding $2,000, or a period of community service not
exceeding 90 days.
B. The court before which any person is convicted of violating any
ordinance of the Borough shall have power to impose any fine, term of
imprisonment, or period of community service not less than the
minimum and not exceeding the maximum fixed in such ordinance.
C. Any person convicted of the violation of any ordinance may, in the
discretion of the court by which he was convicted, and in default of the
payment of any fine imposed therefor, be imprisoned in the county jail,
or place of detention provided by the municipality, for any term not
exceeding 90 days, or be required to perform community service for a
period not exceeding 90 days.
D. Except as otherwise provided, each and every day in which a violation
of any provision of this Code or any other ordinance of the Borough
exists shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-2
1:3

ARTICLE II
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5
§ 1-3. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the Borough of Penns Grove
of a general and permanent nature adopted by the Mayor and Council of the
Borough of Penns Grove, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters
and sections by General Code, and consisting of Chapters 1 through 450,
are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as the "Code of the
Borough of Penns Grove," hereinafter known and referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-4. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, except
such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or
continued in force.
§ 1-5. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
§ 1-6. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Borough Clerk and shall remain there for use and examination by the public
until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this ordinance shall be
adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk of the Borough of Penns
Grove by impressing thereon the Seal of the Borough, as provided by law,
and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Clerk of the
Borough, to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same
during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-7. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the governing
body to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Borough of Penns
Grove" shall be understood and intended to include such additions and
amendments. Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the
Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided
hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as
amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-8
1:5
§ 1-8. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the Borough of Penns Grove, pursuant to law, shall cause
this Adopting Ordinance to be published, in the manner required, in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. Sufficient copies of the
Code shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk for inspection by the
public at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and
publication of this Adopting Ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of
the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered
to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-9. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk or someone authorized and directed by
the Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the
Code required to be filed in his or her office for the use of the public. All
changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the
Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until
such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code
book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-10. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the Clerk, or an authorized agent of the Clerk, upon the payment of a fee
authorized by the Borough. The Clerk shall also arrange for procedures for
the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-11. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Borough of
Penns Grove to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section or
any part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to one or more
of the following: a fine of not more than $2,000, imprisonment for not more
than 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, in the
discretion of the Judge imposing the same.
§ 1-12. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed
to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts
thereof.
§ 1-8 PENNS GROVE CODE § 1-13
1:6
§ 1-13. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-14. Inconsistent ordinances repealed.
A. Except as provided in § 1-15, Ordinances saved from repeal, below, all
ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions
contained in the Code adopted by this ordinance are hereby repealed;
provided, however, that such repeal shall only be to the extent of such
inconsistency, and any valid legislation of the Borough of Penns Grove
which is not in conflict with the provisions of the Code shall be deemed
to remain in full force and effect.
B. Repeal of specific ordinances. The Mayor and Council of the Borough of
Penns Grove have determined that the following ordinances are no
longer in effect and hereby specifically repeal the following legislation:
(1) Article 2 of Chapter 3 of the 1968 Revised Ordinances (Chapter 79,
Article II, of the 1986 Code), Sale to Persons Under Legal Age.
(2) Article 3 of Chapter 6 of the 1968 Revised Ordinances (Chapter 141
of the 1986 Code), Gasoline Stations.
(3) Article 1 of Chapter 10 of the 1968 Revised Ordinances (Chapter
123 of the 1986 Code), Fire Prevention.
(4) Ordinance No. 73-4 (Chapter 165 of the 1986 Code), Parental
Responsibility.
(5) Ordinance No. 77-7 (Chapter 5 of the 1986 Code), Bills, Payment
of.
(6) Ordinance adopted March 1, 1978, by Board of Health (Chapter
230 of the 1986 Code), Food and Beverage Vending Machines.
(7) Ordinance adopted March 1, 1978, by Board of Health (Chapter
240 of the 1986 Code), Solid Waste.
(8) Ordinance No. 81-2 (Chapter 10 of the 1986 Code), Credit
Searches.
(9) Ordinance No. 85-9 (Chapter 45, Art. III, of the 1986 Code), Deputy
Tax Collector.
(10) Ordinance No. 88-10 (Chapter 107 of the 1986 Code), Certificates
of Registration.
(11) Ordinance No. 88-17 (Chapter 53 of the 1986 Code), Recycling
Committee.
§ 1-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:7
§ 1-15. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-14 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
(12) Ordinance No. 93-15 (Chapter 45, Art. VI, of the 1986 Code),
Maintenance Supervisor.
(13) Ordinance No. 94-20 (Chapter 50, Art. III, of the 1986 Code), Fees
for Police Reports and Other Information.
(14) Ordinance No. 94-22 (Chapter 45, Art. VII, of the 1986 Code), Tax
Assessor Clerk.
(15) Ordinance No. 94-26 (Chapter 45, Art. VIII, of the 1986 Code),
Assistant to General Assistance Director.
(16) Ordinance No. 95-17 (Chapter 45, Art. X, of the 1986 Code),
Housing and Urban Development Special Program Coordinator.
(17) Ordinance No. 95-18 (Chapter 45, Art. XI, of the 1986 Code),
Housing and Urban Development Special Program Coordinator -
Certifying Agent.
(18) Ordinance No. 95-20 (Chapter 45, Art. XII, of the 1986 Code),
Borough Administrator.
(19) Ordinance No. 96-28 (Chapter 154, Art. I, of the 1986 Code),
Loitering on Borough Property.
(20) Ordinance No. 98-18 (Chapter 92, Art. II, of the 1986 Code),
Bicycle Helmets.
(21) Ordinance No. 2005-26, Administrative Enforcement Officer.
(22) Ordinance No. 2006-22, Brush, Grass, Trash and Weeds.
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to April 18, 2017.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
§ 1-14 PENNS GROVE CODE § 1-15
1:8
§ 1-16. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of
the Borough's indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges or the approval
of the municipal budget.
J. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
K. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
L. Any ordinance adopting or amending the Zoning Map.
M. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain grammatical
changes and other minor changes were made in one or more of said
ordinances. It is the intention of the Mayor and Council that all such
changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so changed
had been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the changes, amendments or revisions as set forth in
Schedule A attached hereto and made a part hereof are made herewith,
to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance. (Chapter
and section number references are to the ordinances as they have been
renumbered and appear in the Code.)1
C. The following changes are made throughout the Code: references to the
Planning Board Secretary are amended to "Municipal Land Use
Secretary"; "Land Use Board" is amended to "Planning Board"; and
"Construction Official" is amended to "Construction Code Official."
1. Editor's Note: Schedule A is on file at the office of the Borough Clerk.
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-16
1:9
Chapter 6
AMBULANCE SQUAD
§ 6-1. Establishment.
There shall be recognized by the Borough of Penns Grove an ambulance
squad, pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:5-2 and 40A:14-26, named
the "Penns Grove Ambulance Squad."
§ 6-2. Composition.
The Ambulance Squad shall consist of those officers and members named in
the bylaws of the Penns Grove Ambulance Squad.
§ 6-3. General powers and duties.
It shall be the responsibility of all members of the Penns Grove Ambulance
Squad to provide emergency rescue and first aid to those in need in the
Borough of Penns Grove.
§ 6-4. Adoption of rules and regulations.
§ 6-5. Compensation; insurance coverage. [Amended 2-17-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-1; 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
The officers and members of the Ambulance Squad shall receive financial
compensation for their services at the discretion of the Borough Council.
Notwithstanding the volunteer status of the Penns Grove Ambulance Squad,
the Borough of Penns Grove shall maintain, other than workers'
compensation, casualty and liability insurance coverage on behalf of said
volunteer organization in consideration for its charitable service.
Chapter 21
CONTRACTS
A. The membership of the Ambulance Squad of the Borough of Penns
Grove shall have the right and authority from time to time to adopt and
amend bylaws which will provide for the orderly regulation of the
Ambulance Squad of the Borough of Penns Grove. The Borough Council
may approve bylaws adopted by the voting members of the Ambulance
Squad of the Borough of Penns Grove.
B. The Borough Council shall have the right and authority from time to
time to make further rules and regulations, in addition to any approval
of the bylaws of the Ambulance Squad of the Borough of Penns Grove,
concerning the Ambulance Squad of the Borough of Penns Grove by
resolution. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
§ 1-16 PENNS GROVE CODE § 6-5
1:10
ARTICLE I
Awarding of Public Contracts
[Adopted 3-1-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-1 (Ch. 48 of the 1986 Code)]
§ 21-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUSINESS ENTITY — A business entity whose contributions are regulated
by this article means:
CAMPAIGN COMMITTEE —
A. An individual, including the individual's spouse and any child/children;
A firm, corporation, professional corporation, partnership, limited
liability company, organization, association, and any other manner and
kind of business entity;
B.
Any person who owns 10% or more of the equity or ownership or
income interests in a person or entity as defined in Subsections A and
B above and his or her spouse and child/children;
C.
All partners or officers of such an entity, in the aggregate, and their
spouses and child/children;
D.
Any person, subcontractor, subsidiary, corporation, firm, partnership,
limited liability company, organization or association which has
received, or indefeasibly acquired the right to receive, from a person
described in Subsection A above more than $100,000 in compensation
or income of any kind (including, by way of illustration and not
limitation, wages, salaries, sums paid to independent contractors,
benefits, dividends, profit-sharing, pension contributions, deferred
contributions, stock, stock options or gifts) in any twelve-month period
prior to the award of, or during the term of, a contract subject to this
article; and
E.
All persons who are an "affiliate" of a business entity as defined in
Subsections A, B and E above, as such term is used in 11 U.S.C.
§ 101(2).
F.
A. Every candidate for Borough of Penns Grove elective municipal office;
Every candidate committee established by or for the benefit of a
candidate for the Borough of Penns Grove elective municipal office;
B.
Every joint candidate committee established in whole or in part by or
for the benefit of a candidate for the Borough of Penns Grove elective
municipal office;
C.
D. Every political party committee of the Borough of Penns Grove; and
§ 21-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-1
1:11
CONTRACT FOR PROFESSIONAL OR EXTRAORDINARY SERVICES —
All contracts for "professional services" and "extraordinary unspecifiable
services" as such terms are used in N.J.S.A. 40A:11-5.
CONTRIBUTION — Has the meaning prescribed in N.J.A.C. 19:25-1.7. By
way of illustration and not limitation, this definition includes pledges, loans
and in-kind contributions.
§ 21-2. Prohibition on awarding public contracts to certain
contributors.
Every political committee, continuing political committee, or other form
of association or organization that regularly engages in the support of
candidates for the Borough of Penns Grove municipal elective offices
or Borough of Penns Grove municipal political parties or political party
committees. The terms in the foregoing subsection have the meaning
prescribed in N.J.A.C. 19:25-1.7. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-5]
E.
A. To the extent that it is not inconsistent with state or federal law, the
Borough of Penns Grove and any of its departments, instrumentalities
or purchasing agents shall not enter into any agreement or otherwise
contract to procure "professional services," as such term is defined at
N.J.S.A. 40A:11-2(6) and used at N.J.S.A. 40A:11-5(1)(a)(i), and/or
banking, insurance or other consulting service (hereinafter
"professional services"), nor "extraordinary unspecified services," as
such term is defined at N.J.S.A. 40A:11-2(7) and used at N.J.S.A.
40A:11-5(1)(a)(ii), and/or media, public relations, lobbying, parking
garage management or other consulting and/or management service
(hereinafter "extraordinary unspecified services"), from any business
entity if such business entity has solicited or made any contribution to a
candidate, candidate committee or joint candidate committee of any
candidate for elective municipal office in the Borough of Penns Grove or
a holder of public office having ultimate responsibility for the award of a
contract, or to any Borough of Penns Grove political committee or
political party committee, or to any Borough of Penns Grove political
committee that regularly engages in the support of Borough of Penns
Grove municipal elections and/or Borough of Penns Grove municipal
candidates, candidate committees, joint candidate committees, political
committees, political parties, or political party committees (hereinafter
"PAC") in excess of the thresholds specified in Subsection C within one
calendar year immediately preceding the date of the contract or
agreement.
B. No business entity which submits a proposal for or enters into
negotiations for the rendition of professional services or extraordinary
unspecified services shall knowingly solicit or make any contribution to
a candidate, candidate committee or joint candidate committee of any
candidate for elective municipal office in the Borough of Penns Grove or
a holder of public office having ultimate responsibility for the award of a
contract, or to any Borough of Penns Grove political committee or
§ 21-1 PENNS GROVE CODE § 21-2
1:12
political party committee, or any PAC, between the time of first
communication between that business entity and the municipality
regarding a specific agreement for professional services or
extraordinary unspecified services and the later of the termination
of negotiations or rejection of any proposal or the completion of the
performance or specified time period of that contract or agreement.
C. Monetary thresholds.
(1) The monetary thresholds of this article are:
(a) A maximum of $300 per calendar year each for any purpose to
any candidate or candidate committee for Mayor or governing
body, or $500 per calendar year to any joint candidate
committee for Mayor or governing body, or $300 per calendar
year to a political committee or political party committee of the
Borough of Penns Grove; and
(b) Five hundred dollars maximum per calendar year to any PAC.
(2) However, for each business entity party to a contract for
professional or extraordinary unspecified services as defined in
Subsection A, or engaged in negotiations for a contract defined in
Subsection A, when each business entity's contribution is
aggregated with all persons defined in the definition of "business
entity" in § 21-1, Definitions, above, by virtue of its affiliation to that
business entity party, the maximum shall be $2,500 to all Borough
of Penns Grove candidates, candidate committees, joint candidate
committees, and holders of public office having ultimate
responsibility for the award of a contract, all Borough of Penns
Grove political committees and political party committees as
described herein combined, without violating Subsection A.
[Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
D. For purposes of this section, the office that is considered to have
ultimate responsibility for the award of the contract shall be:
(1) The Borough of Penns Grove Mayor or governing body, if the
contract requires approval or appropriation from the Mayor or
governing body; or
(2) The Mayor of the Borough of Penns Grove, if the contract requires
approval of the Mayor, or if a public officer who is responsible for
the award of a contract is appointed by the Mayor.
E. Rules regarding subcontractors. No person may be awarded a
subcontract to perform under a contract subject to this article if the
subcontractor would be disqualified by Subsection A from receiving the
contract at the time that the subcontract is awarded, nor may any
person who would be disqualified by Subsection A from receiving the
contract perform substantially all of obligations described in a contract
for professional or extraordinary services that is subject to this article.
§ 21-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-3
1:13
§ 21-3. Contributions made prior to effective date.
No contribution or solicitation of contributions made prior to the effective
date of this article shall be deemed to give rise to a violation of this article.
§ 21-4. Contract renewal.
No contract subject to this article may be renewed, extended, or materially
modified unless the resulting renewal, extension, or modification would be
allowable under the provisions of this article if it were an initial contract.
§ 21-5. Contribution statement by business entity.
§ 21-6. Return of excess contributions.
A business entity that is a party to a contract for professional services or
extraordinary unspecified services may cure a violation of § 21-2 of this
article if, within 30 days after the date on which the applicable New Jersey
Election Law Enforcement Commission (ELEC) report is published, said
business entity notifies the municipality in writing and seeks and receives
reimbursement of the contribution from the recipient of such contribution.
A. Prior to awarding any contract or agreement to procure professional
services or extraordinary unspecified services from any business entity,
the Borough of Penns Grove or its purchasing agents and departments,
as the case may be, shall receive a sworn statement from said business
entity which is the intended recipient of said contract that he/she/it has
not made a contribution in violation of § 21-2 of this article. The
Borough of Penns Grove, its purchasing agents and departments shall
be responsible for informing the Borough Council that the
aforementioned sworn statement has been received and that the
business entity is not in violation of this article, prior to awarding the
contract or agreement.
B. A business entity shall have a continuing duty to report to the Borough
of Penns Grove any contributions that constitute a violation of this
article that are made during the negotiation, proposal process or the
duration of a contract. The Borough of Penns Grove, its purchasing
agents and departments shall be responsible for informing the
governing body within 10 business days after receipt of said report
from the business entity, or at the next Borough Council meeting
following receipt of said report from the business entity, or whichever
comes first.
C. The certification required under this section shall be made prior to
entry into the contract or agreement with the Borough of Penns Grove,
or prior to the provision of services or goods, as the case may be, and
shall be in addition to any other certifications that may be required by
any other provision of law.
§ 21-3 PENNS GROVE CODE § 21-7
1:14
§ 21-7. Exemptions.
The contribution limitations prior to entering into a contract in § 21-2A do
not apply to contracts which are awarded to the lowest responsible bidder
after public advertising for bids and bidding therefor within the meaning of
N.J.S.A. 40A:11-4 or are awarded in the case of an emergency under N.J.S.A.
40A:11-6. There is no exemption for contracts awarded pursuant to a "fair
and open process" under N.J.S.A. 19:44A-20 et seq.
§ 21-8. Violations and penalties.
A. It shall be a material breach of the terms of a Borough of Penns Grove
agreement or contract for professional services or extraordinary
unspecified services when a business entity that is a party to such
agreement or contract has:
(1) Made or solicited a contribution in violation of this article;
(2) Knowingly concealed or misrepresented a contribution given or
received;
(3) Made or solicited contributions through intermediaries for the
purpose of concealing or misrepresenting the source of the
contribution;
(4) Made or solicited any contribution on the condition or with the
agreement that it will be recontributed to a candidate, candidate
committee or joint candidate committee of any candidate for
elective municipal office in the Borough of Penns Grove, or a holder
of public office having ultimate responsibility for the award of a
contract, or any Borough of Penns Grove political committee or
political party committee, or any PAC;
(5) Engaged or employed a lobbyist or consultant with the intent or
understanding that such lobbyist or consultant would make or
solicit any contribution which, if made or solicited by the
professional business entity itself, would subject that entity to the
restrictions of this article;
(6) Funded contributions made by third parties, including consultants,
attorneys, family members, and employees;
(7) Engaged in any exchange of contributions to circumvent the intent
of this article; or
(8) Directly or indirectly, through or by any other person or means,
done any act which if done directly would subject that entity to the
restrictions of this article.
B. Furthermore, any business entity that violates Subsection A(1) through
(8) shall be disqualified from eligibility for future Borough of Penns
Grove contracts for a period of four calendar years from the date of the
violation.
§ 21-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-8
1:15
§ 21-9. Right to file charges or pursue civil action.
In addition to any rights that were heretofore available, or which may
hereafter be available, to citizens, taxpayers, or associations to challenge
violations of this article, every person aggrieved by a violation of this article
or any taxpayer or resident of the Borough of Penns Grove has the right,
consistent with the rules of court, to file charges in a court of competent
jurisdiction and/or to pursue a civil action for a violation of this article
in a court of competent jurisdiction and to seek and obtain declaratory,
injunctive, or other legal or equitable relief, including but not limited to
attorney fees and costs, arising from or related to a violation of this article.
§ 21-10. Severability.
If any provision of this article, or the application of any such provision to any
person or circumstances, shall be held invalid, the remainder of this article,
to the extent it can be given effect, or the application of such provision
to persons or circumstances other than those to which it is held invalid,
shall not be affected thereby, and to this extent the provisions of this article
are severable. The drafters of this article, the persons signing the petition
in support of this article, and the persons who cast votes in favor of this
article declare that they would have supported this article and each section,
subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or provision or application thereof,
irrespective of the fact that any one or more other sections, subsections,
sentences, clauses, phrases, or provisions or applications thereof may be
held invalid.
C. Any person who knowingly, purposely, or recklessly violates any
provision of this article, or who conspires with another person to violate
any provision of this article, or who, with the purpose of promoting or
facilitating a violation of this article, solicits another person to commit
it, or aids or agrees or attempts to aid another person in planning or
committing it, shall be subject to punishment including fines and/or
imprisonment as fixed by law for violations of the ordinances of the
Borough of Penns Grove.2
2. Editor's Note: See § 1-2, General penalty.
§ 21-8 PENNS GROVE CODE § 21-10
1:16
Chapter 25
COURT, MUNICIPAL
§ 21-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-10
1:17

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted as Ch. 14 of the 1968 Revised Ordinances (Ch. 38, Art. I,
of the 1986 Code)]
§ 25-1. Establishment.
A Municipal Court for the Borough of Penns Grove is established as of
January 1, 1949, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 264 of the Laws of
1948 (N.J.S.A. 2A:8-1 et seq.), as amended and supplemented.3
§ 25-2. Name.
The name of the Municipal Court shall be the "Municipal Court of the
Borough of Penns Grove."
§ 25-3. Seal.
The Municipal Court shall have a Seal which shall bear the impress of the
name of the Court.
§ 25-4. Appointment and term of Judge. [Amended 6-17-1986 by
Ord. No. 86-5]
There shall be a Judge of the Municipal Court, who shall be appointed by
the Mayor and with the advice and consent of the Borough Council and who
shall serve for a term of three years from the date of his appointment and
until his successor is appointed and qualified.
§ 25-5. Compensation of Judge. [Amended 6-17-1986 by Ord. No.
86-5]
The Judge of the Municipal Court shall receive an annual salary, which may
be fixed from time to time by ordinance and shall be paid in the same
manner as the salaries of other municipal officers are paid, and which shall
be in lieu of all fees, costs and any other allowances whatsoever.
§ 25-6. Jurisdiction. [Amended 6-17-1986 by Ord. No. 86-5]
Said Municipal Court and the Judge thereof shall have, possess and exercise
all the functions, powers, duties and jurisdiction conferred by the provisions
of Chapter 264 of the Laws of 1948 (N.J.S.A. 2A:8-1 et seq.), as amended
and supplemented, or by any other law.4
3. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 2A:8-1 was repealed by P.L. 1993, c. 293. See now N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1 et
seq.
4. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 2A:8-1 was repealed by P.L. 1993, c. 293. See now N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1 et
seq.
§ 25-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-7
1:19
§ 25-7. Appointment and term of Administrator. [Amended
10-19-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-22; 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
There shall be an Administrator for said Municipal Court, who shall be
appointed by the Mayor and with the advice and consent of the Borough
Council and who shall serve for a term of three years from the date of
appointment and until a successor is appointed and qualified.
§ 25-8. Compensation of Administrator. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-5]
The Administrator shall receive an annual salary, which may be fixed from
time to time by ordinance and shall be paid in the same manner as the
salaries of other municipal officers are paid.
§ 25-7 PENNS GROVE CODE § 25-8
1:20
ARTICLE II
Assistant Court Administrator
[Adopted 11-17-1987 by Ord. No. 87-10 (Ch. 38, Art. II, of the 1986
Code); amended 10-19-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-21; 7-5-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-5]
§ 25-9. Position established.
The position of Assistant Court Administrator be and hereby is created.
§ 25-10. Term.
The appointment of the Assistant Court Administrator shall be for three
years or until his successor is appointed and qualified.
§ 25-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-10
1:21

ARTICLE III
Public Defender
[Adopted 11-5-1997 by Ord. No. 97-19 (Ch. 38, Art. III, of the 1986
Code)]
§ 25-11. Application fee.
The Judge of the Municipal Court of the Borough of Penns Grove can set a
fee for access to the Public Defender of not more than $200 unless it is the
defendant's first appearance before this Court.
§ 25-12. Reduction or elimination of fee.
The Judge of the Municipal Court can reduce or eliminate the fee at his
discretion based on his or her determination of indigency.
§ 25-13. Payment prior to service.
Until the application fee is paid, the Public Defender will not be assigned
under any circumstances.
§ 25-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-13
1:23

ARTICLE IV
Requests for Discovery
[Adopted 12-21-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-27]
§ 25-14. Submission of requests for discovery.
All requests for discovery in matters pending in the Borough of Penns Grove
Municipal Court shall be submitted through the Municipal Prosecutor.
§ 25-15. Fees. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
The following fees shall be payable by the requestor to the Borough of Penns
Grove for the discovery provided:
A. Standard fees.
(1) The records clerk, Municipal Prosecutor, or a private prosecutor in
a cross complaint case may charge a fee for a copy or copies of
discovery. The fee assessed for discovery embodied in the form of
printed matter shall be $0.05 per letter size page or smaller, and
$0.07 per legal size page or larger.
(2) If the Prosecutor and/or records clerk can demonstrate that the
actual costs for copying discovery exceed the rates set forth in
Subsection A(1) above, the Prosecutor and/or clerk shall be
permitted to charge a reasonable amount equal to the actual costs
of copying. The actual copying costs shall be the costs of materials
and supplies used to copy the discovery, but shall not include the
costs of labor or other overhead expenses associated with making
the copies, except as provided for in Subsection B below.
(3) Electronic records and nonprinted materials shall be provided free
of charge, but the records clerk and/or Prosecutor may charge for
the actual costs of any needed supplies such as computer discs.
B. Special service charge for printed copies. Whenever the nature, format,
manner of collation, or volume of discovery embodied in the form of
printed matter to be copied is such that the discovery cannot be
reproduced by ordinary document copying equipment in ordinary
business size, or is such that it would involve an extraordinary
expenditure of time and effort to copy, the Prosecutor may charge, in
addition to the actual copying costs as provided for in Subsection A(2)
above, a special service charge that shall be reasonable and shall be
based upon the actual direct costs of providing the copy or copies. The
requesting party shall have the opportunity to review and object to the
charge prior to it being incurred.
C. Special service charge for electronic records. If the requesting party
and/or defendant requests an electronic record in a medium or format
not routinely used by the Prosecutor, not routinely developed or
maintained by the Prosecutor, or requiring a substantial amount of
§ 25-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-15
1:25
§ 25-16. Certain costs to be paid by requestor.
Where the discovery must be obtained from an entity other than that of the
Borough of Penns Grove, e.g., another police department, the actual costs
paid to the other entity shall be paid by the requestor.
manipulation or programming of information technology, the
Prosecutor may charge, in addition to the actual cost of duplication,
a special charge that shall be reasonable and shall be based on the
cost for any extensive use of information technology, or the labor cost
of personnel providing the service that is actually incurred by the
Prosecutor or attributable to the Prosecutor for the programming,
clerical, and supervisory assistance required, or both. The requesting
party and/or defendant shall have the opportunity to review and object
to the charge prior to it being incurred.
D. Actual postage for any discovery sent by mail.
E. For the envelope for any discovery sent by mail: $0.25.
F. Photographs will be photocopied at the rates established herein. If
requests are made for duplicate photographs, the actual cost of making
the photographs shall be charged.
G. Duplication of videotapes constitutes an extraordinary duplication
process and will be charged at the rate of $5 per videotape.
§ 25-15 PENNS GROVE CODE § 25-16
1:26
Chapter 36
DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION
§ 36-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DEFENSE — Refers to the means by which such public employee may
respond to any suit, allegation, or cause of action. The Borough of Penns
Grove shall provide the defense of any action, suit or proceeding, whether
civil, criminal, administrative or investigative, including a cross action,
counterclaim or cross complaint, against any public employee because of
any act or omission of that employee in the scope of his or her employment
and shall defray all costs of defending such action, including reasonable
counsel fees and expenses, together with costs of appeal, if any, excepting
actions, suits or proceedings brought by the Borough of Penns Grove
against any such employee. Expressly exempted from this chapter providing
defense and indemnification to public employees of the Borough of Penns
Grove are any charges, allegations, or actions of whatever nature asserted
by the Borough of Penns Grove against its own employees.
INDEMNIFICATION — To secure against loss or damage which may occur
in the future or to provide compensation for or to repair loss or damage
already suffered; to insure; to save harmless.
PUBLIC EMPLOYEE — Includes any employee of the Borough of Penns
Grove and shall include any elected or appointed official, counsel or special
counsel, or any officer, employee or servant, whether or not compensated,
who is authorized to perform any act or service for the Borough of Penns
Grove. The term "public employee" shall also include persons formerly
holding office or employment, provided the events giving rise to a cause
of action or claim hereunder conform to the requirement herein
established.[Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
§ 36-2. Findings.
The Mayor and Council for the Borough of Penns Grove find as follows:
A. The State of New Jersey, through the passage of the Tort Claims Act, as
amended and supplemented from time to time (N.J.S.A. 59:1-1 et seq.),
has determined the circumstances under which claims may be made
against public entities and their officials, employees and servants.
B. Said Tort Claims Act also specifies under what circumstances a public
entity may defend and indemnify its officials, employees and servants.
C. The Mayor and Council for the Borough of Penns Grove hereby provide,
under certain circumstances, for the defense and indemnification of its
officers, employees and servants in the good faith performance of their
duties and responsibilities.
§ 25-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 36-2
1:27
§ 36-3. Indemnification.
§ 36-4. Limit of obligation.
By common law and this express provision to this chapter, the Borough of
Penns Grove's authority to indemnify is limited to acts by public employees
D. Such defense and indemnification are especially appropriate for
members of appointed boards who serve the Borough of Penns Grove
without monetary compensation.
E. The indemnification of municipal employees is also expressly designed
to avoid a conflict between the employer and the employee when claims
are lodged. The Supreme Court for the State of New Jersey has noted
that because the law does not require, but does permit, indemnification
of local public entity employees, conflicts of interest may arise in the
absence of such indemnification where an entity and an employee are
both sued for compensatory damages in, for example, a civil rights
action and both employ the same attorney to defend. Likewise, the
court pointed out such conflict could arise because the employee is
liable for punitive damages and the entity is not. (See Petition for
Review of Opinion 552, 102 N.J. 194.) Accordingly, this indemnification
policy is also intended to increase the efficiency and reduce the costs of
defending the Borough of Penns Grove and its employees and agents in
the event of such actions.
A. Whenever a civil action shall be brought against any person holding an
office, position or employment with the Borough of Penns Grove for any
action or omission arising out of or in the course of the performance of
the duties of such office, position or employment, the Borough of Penns
Grove shall indemnify and provide payment of any damage award not
otherwise covered by any policy of insurance of the Borough of Penns
Grove. Note, however, that the Borough of Penns Grove does not, by
indemnifying its employees against damages, indirectly or directly
waive any immunity against any claims.
B. Whenever a civil action shall be brought against any person holding an
office, position or employment with the Borough of Penns Grove for any
action or omission arising out of or in the course of the performance of
the duties of such office, position or employment, the Borough of Penns
Grove shall provide payment of that portion of any costs of defense of
said action not covered by the Borough's policy of insurance. Whenever
any insurance policy whose purpose is to provide the defense and
indemnification of the Borough of Penns Grove or its public employees
is in dispute, the Borough of Penns Grove will stand in the place of the
insurance carrier, subject to all rights of subrogation, to provide for the
defense and indemnification of its employees as specified herein. Said
public employee has an affirmative duty, to be eligible for said defense
and indemnification, to cooperate with the Borough of Penns Grove in
any and all of its efforts to resolve any disputed insurance coverage.
§ 36-2 PENNS GROVE CODE § 36-4
1:28
that are within the scope of their employment and which are not criminal,
fraudulent, malicious or instances of willful misconduct. Additionally, the
Borough of Penns Grove will not provide the means for defense nor
indemnify any public employee in those instances where the Borough of
Penns Grove has initiated the charges or action. In the event any such
public employee is charged with criminal charges and he or she is later
acquitted, any application to recover the cost of his or her defense is
expressly conditioned upon the ultimate determination of administrative
charges which may or may not arise out of the same conduct or behavior.
Notwithstanding all of the above, in the event the Borough of Penns Grove
elects to assert such administrative charges and even if the employee
should thereafter prevail, all such claims for reimbursement for costs of
defense will be subjected to the controlling statutory and common law as
opposed to this chapter. (Note: The "..., or may not, ..." clause addresses
those instances wherein an officer is suspended on unrelated charges, but
the proceeding is tolled by a parallel criminal action.)
Chapter 47
ETHICS, CODE OF
§ 47-1. Conflicts of interest; prohibited acts.
A. No Borough official or employee or member of his/her immediate family
shall have an interest in a business organization or engage in any
business, transaction, or professional activity which is in substantial
conflict with the proper discharge of his/her duties in the public
interest;
B. No Borough official or employee shall use or attempt to use his/her
official position to secure unwarranted privileges or advantages for
himself/herself or others;
C. No Borough official or employee shall act in his/her official capacity in
any matter where he/she, a member of his/her immediate family, or a
business organization in which he/she has an interest has a direct or
indirect financial or personal involvement that might reasonably be
expected to impair his/her objectivity or independence of judgment;
D. No Borough official or employee shall undertake any employment or
service, whether compensated or not, which might reasonably be
expected to prejudice his/her independence of judgment in the exercise
of his/her official duties;
E. No Borough official or employee, member of his/her immediate family,
or business organization in which he/she has an interest shall solicit or
accept any gift, favor, loan, political contribution, service, promise of
future employment, or other thing of value based upon an
understanding that the gift, favor, loan, contribution, service, promise,
or other thing of value was given or offered for the purpose of
§ 36-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-1
1:29
§ 47-2. Annual financial disclosure statement.
All Borough officials shall annually file a financial disclosure statement. The
statements shall be filed with the Borough Clerk and shall constitute an
open public record. The statements shall contain the following information:
influencing him/her, directly or indirectly, in the discharge of his/her
official duties. This provision shall not apply to the solicitation or
acceptance of contributions to the campaign of an announced candidate
for elective public office, if the Borough official has no knowledge or
reason to believe that the campaign contribution, if accepted, was given
with the intent to influence the Borough official in the discharge of his/
her official duties;
F. No Borough official or employee shall use, or allow to be used, his
public office or employment, or any information, not generally available
to the members of the public, which he receives or acquires in the
course of and by reason of his office or employment, for the purpose of
securing financial gain for himself, any member of his immediate family,
or any business organization with which he is associated;
G. No Borough official or employee or business organization in which he/
she has an interest shall represent any person or party other than the
Borough in connection with any cause, proceeding, application or other
matter pending before any agency in the Borough in which he/she
serves. This provision shall not be deemed to prohibit one Borough
employee from representing another Borough employee where the
Borough agency is the employer and the representation is within the
context of official labor union or similar representational
responsibilities;
H. No Borough official shall be deemed in conflict with these provisions if,
by reason of his participation in the enactment of any ordinance,
resolution or other matter required to be voted upon or which is subject
to executive approval or veto, no material or monetary gain accrues to
him/her as a member of any business, profession, occupation or group,
to any greater extent than any gain could reasonably be expected to
accrue to any other member of such business, profession, occupation or
group;
I. No elected Borough official shall be prohibited from making an inquiry
for information on behalf of a constituent, if no fee, reward or other
thing of value is promised to, given to or accepted by the official or a
member of his/her immediate family, whether directly or indirectly, in
return therefor; and
J. Nothing shall prohibit any Borough official or employee, or members of
his/her immediate family, from representing himself/herself, or
themselves, in negotiations or proceedings concerning his/her, or their,
own interests.
§ 47-1 PENNS GROVE CODE § 47-2
1:30
§ 47-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUSINESS ORGANIZATION — Any corporation, partnership, firm,
enterprise, franchise, association, trust, sole proprietorship, union or other
legal entity.
GOVERNING BODY — The Penns Grove Mayor and Council.
INTEREST — The ownership or control of more than 10% of the profits,
assets or stock of a business organization, but shall not include the control
of assets in a nonprofit entity or labor union.
§ 47-4. Jurisdiction of Local Finance Board.
A. Each source of income, earned or unearned, exceeding $2,000 received
by the Borough official or a member of his/her immediate family during
the preceding calendar year. Individual client fees, customer receipts or
commissions on transactions received through a business organization
need not be separately reported as sources of income. If a publicly
traded security is the source of income, the security need not be
reported unless the Borough official or member of his/her immediate
family has an interest in the business organization;
B. Each source of fees and honorariums having an aggregate amount
exceeding $250 from any single source for personal appearances,
speeches or writings received by the Borough official or a member of
his/her immediate family during the preceding calendar year;
C. Each source of gifts, reimbursements or prepaid expenses having an
aggregate value exceeding $400 from any single source, excluding
relatives, received by the Borough official or a member of his/her
immediate family during the preceding calendar year;
D. The name and address of all business organizations in which the
Borough official or a member of his/her immediate family had an
interest during the preceding calendar year; and
E. The address and brief description of all real property in the state in
which the Borough official or a member of his/her immediate family
held an interest during the preceding calendar year.
A. This chapter is intended to be consistent with the Code of Ethics for
Local Government Ethics Law under jurisdiction of the Local Finance
Board as set forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:9-22.1 et seq.
B. Any person alleging that a Borough official or employee has engaged in
conduct which is in violation of this chapter may file a written and
signed complaint with the Local Finance Board in the Division of Local
Government Services of the New Jersey Department of Community
Affairs.
§ 47-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-4
1:31
Chapter 55
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Ambulance Squad — See Ch. 6.
Alarms — See Ch. 170.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 247.
§ 47-4 PENNS GROVE CODE § 47-4
1:32
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 5-4-1971 (Ch. 15, Art. I, of the 1986 Code)]
§ 55-1. Fire protection.
Fire protection within the Borough of Penns Grove may be provided by one
or more companies as the Borough Council may from time to time approve
by resolution.
§ 55-2. Composition and organization of company. [Amended
6-17-1986 by Ord. No. 86-5]
§ 55-3. Membership requirements.
Each applicant for membership in a volunteer fire company shall comply
with the statutory requirements as to citizenship, character, age and health.
§ 55-4. Membership application procedure.
Applications for membership in said fire companies, after their preliminary
approval by the fire company, shall be forwarded to the Borough Council
with the fire company's endorsement and recommendation for appointment.
The Borough Council shall thereupon consider such appointment.
§ 55-5. Exempt fireman certificates.
Exempt fireman certificates shall be awarded pursuant to the laws of the
State of New Jersey.
§ 55-6. Funding.
The Borough Council may, from time to time, appropriate, turn over or pay
said company such amounts as it deems necessary and proper for the fire
protection of the Borough of Penns Grove.
A. A company shall consist of as many officers and members as said
company shall from time to time provide by its bylaws, as approved by
the Borough Council.
B. Said company shall be a duly organized volunteer fire company
organized under the provisions of Chapter 8, Fire Companies, of Title
15 of the New Jersey Revised Statutes.
§ 55-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-6
1:33

ARTICLE II
Junior Firemen's Auxiliary
[Adopted 2-18-1975 by Ord. No. 75-1 (Ch. 15, Art. II, of the 1986
Code)]
§ 55-7. Establishment.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-95, there is hereby established an Auxiliary to
the Penns Grove Volunteer Fire Department, to be known as the "Junior
Firemen's Auxiliary."
§ 55-8. Membership requirements. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-5]
No person shall be eligible for membership in the Junior Firemen's Auxiliary
who is less than 14 or more than 21 years of age. Persons between the ages
of 14 and 21 shall be required to obtain permission to join the Auxiliary
from their parents or guardian. Such permission shall be in writing and
acknowledged or proved in the manner required by law for deeds to real
estate to be recorded.
§ 55-9. Maximum number per company.
The maximum limit of members of the Auxiliary shall be 20 for each fire
company at any given period.
§ 55-10. Application required; approval of applicant; probation.
§ 55-11. Medical examination required.
All applicants must have properly certified medical examinations, including
chest x-rays, prior to their acceptance into the probationary period.
§ 55-12. Training.
The rules and regulations for the training of the Auxiliary shall be as set
forth in the New Jersey State Safety Basic Training Manual. The training
subjects to be covered are as follows:
A. All applicants to the Auxiliary must present a duly executed application
form, and said applicants shall not be approved until after acceptance
by the Fire Department and subsequently by the governing body of the
municipality.
B. After the applicant has been approved for membership in the Auxiliary,
he shall be placed upon a six-month probationary period, during which
time he shall be observed by appropriate members of the Fire
Department for his interest, activity and behavior. Before being given
permanent status in said Auxiliary, the Fire Department shall review the
report of the probationary period.
§ 55-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-12
1:35
§ 55-13. Duties.
A. Oil burners and electrical services.
B. Resuscitators and inhalators.
C. Portable hand tools.
D. Basic first aid.
E. Scott and MSA air packs.
F. Application of fire streams.
G. Drivers' education for those at least 17 years of age.
H. Proper nozzles.
I. Hose laying and advancing.
J. Portable hand extinguishers.
K. Ventilators and ladders.
L. Fire pump operations.
A. Auxiliary members will be educated, trained and observed while being
drilled and will be eligible to participate in appropriate fire-fighting
operations.
B. No junior fireman will be required to perform duties which would
expose him to the same degree of hazard as a regular member of the
Volunteer Fire Department.
§ 55-12 PENNS GROVE CODE § 55-13
1:36
Chapter 68
HEALTH, BOARD OF
§ 68-1. Establishment.
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 26:3-1 et seq., there is hereby
established in the Borough a Board of Health.
§ 68-2. Membership; terms; appointments to increase membership.
[Amended 12-23-1969]
§ 68-3. Appointments.
Appointments to the Board of Health shall be made by the Mayor and
confirmed by the Council.
§ 68-4. Vacancies.
All vacancies on the Board of Health shall be filled for the unexpired term
and shall be made in the same manner as original appointments.
§ 68-5. Adoption of rules, regulations and ordinances.
The Board of Health shall adopt rules, regulations or ordinances for its
government and that of its officers and employees, not inconsistent with the
law or State Sanitary Code.
A. The Board of Health shall consist of seven members and one alternate
member. Said alternate member shall serve in the event of the absence
of one or more of the regular members of the Board at any meeting of
the Board of Health of the Borough of Penns Grove. [Amended
3-2-1994 by Ord. No. 93-5]
B. The terms of the members of the Board of Health shall be four years
from January 1 of the year of the appointment of the full term. No more
than two members' terms shall expire at the same time.
C. In order to increase the membership of the Board of Health from the
present five members to seven members, pursuant to this section, the
appointive authority shall, on January 1, 1970, appoint one member for
a term of two years, appoint one member for a term of three years and
appoint one member for a term of four years. The expiration date of the
terms of the present members of the Board of Health will not be
affected. Subsequently, after January 1, 1970, all appointments shall be
for four years.
§ 55-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 68-6
1:37
§ 68-6. President.
The members of the Board of Health shall elect a President from among its
members, which President shall hold office for a term of one year or until
his successor is qualified.
§ 68-7. Staff. [Amended 6-17-1986 by Ord. No. 86-5]
§ 68-8. Limitation on debt.
The Board of Health shall not contract any debts of any kind beyond the
amount of the appropriations first made for its use by the Mayor and
Council.
Chapter 73
HOUSING AUTHORITY
§ 73-1. Establishment.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq., the Local
Redevelopment and Housing Law, there shall be in the Borough of Penns
Grove a body corporate and politic to be known as the "Housing Authority
of Penns Grove."
§ 73-2. Membership; appointment; terms; compensation.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-17, the Housing Authority shall consist of
seven members known as "Commissioners." The Council shall appoint five
A. The Board of Health shall appoint a Registrar of Vital Statistics and a
Clerk, and it may also appoint such other officers or assistants as said
Board of Health may deem necessary. All appointees of said Board of
Health shall be governed by the rules of said Board, and they may be
removed for cause by said Board.
B. The police officers of this Borough shall be special sanitary inspectors,
and they shall promptly report to the Board of Health every violation of
the health ordinances of this Borough which may come within their
observation or knowledge.
C. The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Penns Grove shall appoint a
Health Recording Officer who will be responsible for contacting
property owners within the Borough who are in violation of the health
ordinances of the Borough. If the Health Recording Officer does not
obtain compliance from the property owner in question, it will be the
Officer's responsibility to forward this matter to the County Health
Board so that a summons may be issued. This appointment will be made
on a yearly basis and will be incorporated by reference into Chapter
103 of the Code of the Borough of Penns Grove. [Added 6-16-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-13]
§ 68-6 PENNS GROVE CODE § 73-2
1:38
Commissioners of the Housing Authority, and the Commissioners first
appointed by said Council shall be designated to expire December 31,
1963, December 31, 1964, December 31, 1965, December 31, 1966, and
December 31, 1967, respectively, but thereafter Commissioners so
appointed shall hold office for terms of five years, except that all vacancies
shall be filled for the unexpired term. All Commissioners shall hold office
until their successors have been appointed and qualified. A sixth member of
the Housing Authority shall be appointed by such state authority as is by law
designated to make such appointment, and such member shall hold office
at the pleasure of the state authority appointing him. A seventh member,
also having a five-year term, shall be appointed by the Mayor. The member
appointed by the state authority shall be entitled to all the privileges of
membership on such authority. Not more than one Commissioner may be an
officer or employee of the Borough of Penns Grove. A Commissioner shall
receive no compensation for his/her services but shall be entitled to the
necessary expenses, including travel expenses, incurred in the discharge of
his/her duties.
§ 73-3. Powers.
The Housing Authority shall have such powers as are set forth under
N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-22 or as it may be amended.
Chapter 85
LAND USE PROCEDURES AND FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Site plan review — See Ch. 375.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 400.
Zoning — See Ch. 450.
§ 73-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 73-3
1:39

Part 1
[Adopted 3-1-1977 By GOerdn.e Nraol. P7r7o-c1e(dCuhre. s30, Part 1, Of The 1986
Code)]
ARTICLE I
Planning Board
§ 85-1. Establishment; membership. [Amended 2-21-1978 by Ord.
No. 78-2; 6-17-1986 by Ord. No. 86-5]
There is hereby established pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 291,5 in the Borough of
Penns Grove a Planning Board of nine members, consisting of the following
four classes:
§ 85-2. Terms.
A. Class I: the Mayor.
B. Class II: one of the officials of the municipality other than a member of
the governing body to be appointed by the Mayor, provided that if there
is an Environmental Commission, the member of the Environmental
Commission who is also a member of the Planning Board, as required
by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1, shall be deemed to be the Class II Planning Board
member if there are both a member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment
and a member of the Board of Education among the Class IV or
alternate members.
C. Class III: a member of the governing body to be appointed by it.
D. Class IV: six other citizens of the municipality and two alternate
members to be appointed by the Mayor. The members of Class IV shall
hold no other municipal office, except that one member may be a
member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment or Historic Preservation
Commission. No member of the Board of Education may be a Class IV
member of the Planning Board, except that in the case of a ninemember
board, one Class IV member may be a member of the Board of
Education. A member of the Environmental Commission who is also a
member of the Planning Board, as required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1, shall
be a Class IV Planning Board member unless there are among the Class
IV or alternate members of the Planning Board both a member of the
Zoning Board of Adjustment and a member of the Board of Education,
in which case the member of the Environmental Commission shall be
deemed to be the Class II member of the Planning Board. [Amended
7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
A. The term of the member composing Class I shall correspond with his
official tenure. The terms of the members composing Class II and Class
III shall be for one year or terminate at the completion of their
respective terms of office, whichever occurs first, except for a Class II
5. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 85-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-2
1:41
§ 85-3. Vacancies.
If a vacancy of any class shall occur otherwise than by expiration of term, it
shall be filled by appointment as above provided for the unexpired term.
§ 85-4. Officers; Municipal Land Use Secretary. [Amended 4-1-1997
by Ord. No. 97-8]
member who is also a member of the Environmental Commission. The
term of a Class II or a Class IV member who is also a member of the
Environmental Commission shall be for three years or terminate at the
completion of his term of office as a member of the Environmental
Commission, whichever comes first. [Amended 2-21-1978 by Ord.
No. 78-2; 6-17-1986 by Ord. No. 86-5]
B. The term of a Class IV member who is also a member of the Board of
Adjustment or the Board of Education shall terminate whenever he is no
longer a member of such other body or at the completion of his Class IV
term, whichever occurs first.
C. The terms of all Class IV members first appointed pursuant to this Part
1 shall be so determined that, to the greatest practicable extent, the
expiration of such terms shall be evenly distributed over the first four
years after their appointments as determined by resolution of the
governing body; provided, however, that no term of any member shall
exceed four years, and further provided that nothing herein shall affect
the term of any present member of the Planning Board, all of whom
shall continue in office until the completion of the terms for which they
were appointed for terms of four years, except as otherwise herein
provided. All terms shall run from January 1 of the year in which the
appointment was made. The alternates in Class IV shall be appointed
for terms of two years, as provided in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23.1, and shall be
designated by the Mayor, at the time of their appointment, as "Alternate
No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2." [Amended 6-17-1986 by Ord. No. 86-5]
A. The Planning Board shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from the
members of Class IV.
B. Position established. There is hereby created the position of Municipal
Land Use Secretary.
(1) Duties of Municipal Land Use Secretary. Said Municipal Land Use
Secretary shall perform all duties formerly done by the Planning
Board Secretary and aid the Zoning Official in his/her duties as set
forth herein and elsewhere. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-5]
(2) The compensation of the Municipal Land Use Secretary shall be
prescribed by the annual Salary Ordinance. [Amended 7-5-2017
by Ord. No. 2017-5]
§ 85-2 PENNS GROVE CODE § 85-4
1:42
§ 85-5. Attorney.
There is hereby created the office of Planning Board Attorney. The Planning
Board may annually appoint, fix the compensation of or agree upon the rate
of compensation of the Planning Board Attorney who shall be an attorney
other than the Municipal Attorney.
§ 85-6. Experts and staff.
The Planning Board may also employ or contract for the services of experts
and other staff and services as it may deem necessary. The Board shall not,
however, exceed, exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by
the governing body for its use.
§ 85-7. Powers and duties.
The Board shall adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary
to carry into effect the provisions and purposes of this Part 1. In the
issuance of subpoenas, administration of oaths and taking of testimony, the
provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law of 1953 (N.J.S.A.
2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall apply. It shall also have the following powers and
duties:
(3) The appointment will be for one year and will be included in the
provisions of § 103-1A(12).
(4) This appointment will be made by the Mayor and Council with the
review and input of the Planning Board. [Amended 7-5-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-5]
A. To make and adopt and from time to time amend a master plan for the
physical development of the municipality, including any areas outside
its boundaries which in the Board's judgment bear essential relation to
the planning of the municipality, in accordance with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28.
B. To administer the provisions of Chapter 400, Subdivision of Land,
Chapter 375, Site Plan Review, and site plan review provisions of
Chapter 450, Zoning, of the Borough Code in accordance with the
provisions of said ordinances and the Municipal Land Use Law, P.L.
1975, c. 291, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
C. To approve conditional use applications in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 450, Zoning, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67.
D. To participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans
required by state or federal law or regulations.
E. To assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuous planning
process.
§ 85-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-7
1:43
F. To annually prepare a program of municipal capital improvement
projects projected over a term of six years, and amendments thereto,
and recommend the same to the governing body, if requested by the
governing body.
G. To consider and make report to the governing body within 35 days after
referral as to any proposed development regulation submitted to it
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26a and also pass upon
other matters specifically referred to the Planning Board by the
governing body pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26b.
H. Variances.
(1) When reviewing applications for approval of subdivision plats, site
plans or conditional uses, to grant: [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-5]
(a) Variances pursuant to Section 57c of P.L. 1975, c. 291,6 from lot
area, lot dimensional, setback and yard requirements,
provided that such relief from lot area requirements shall not
be granted for more than one lot.
(b) Direction pursuant to Section 25 of said Act7 for issuance of a
permit for a building or structure in the bed of a mapped street
or public drainageway, flood control basin or public area
reserved pursuant to Section 23 of said Act.8
(c) Direction pursuant to Section 27 of said Act9 for issuance of a
permit for a building or structure not related to a street.
(2) Whenever relief is requested pursuant to this subsection, notice of
a hearing on the application for development shall include
reference to the request for a variance or direction for issuance of a
permit as the case may be.
I. To perform such other advisory duties as are assigned to it by ordinance
or resolution of the governing body for the aid and assistance of the
governing body or other agencies or officers.
J. Additional powers of Planning Board. The Planning Board shall also
exercise the powers previously granted to the Borough of Penns Grove
Zoning Board of Adjustment. To that end, the Planning Board shall have
the authority to: [Added 10-20-1998 by Ord. No. 98-16]
(1) Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that
there is error in any order, requirement, decision or refusal made
by an administrative officer or based on or made in the
6. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c.
7. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34.
8. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32.
9. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36.
§ 85-7 PENNS GROVE CODE § 85-7
1:44
enforcement of Chapter 450, Zoning. An appeal to the Board
pursuant to this subsection shall stay all proceedings in
furtherance of the decision which was appealed unless the officer
from whose action the appeal is taken certifies to the Board after
the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him that, by reason
of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause
imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall
not be stayed other than by order of the Superior Court of New
Jersey upon notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and
on due cause shown.
(2) Hear and decide, in accordance with the provisions of any such
ordinance, requests for interpretation of the Zoning Map or
ordinance or for decisions upon other special questions upon which
the Board is authorized to pass by a zoning or official map
ordinance in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
(3) Where, by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape
of a specific piece of property or by reason of exceptional
topographic conditions or by reason of other extraordinary and
exceptional situation or condition of such piece of property, the
strict application of any regulation in Chapter 450, Zoning, would
result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to, or
exceptional and undue hardship upon, the developer of such
property, grant, upon an application or an appeal relating to such
property, a variance from such strict application of such regulation
so as to relieve such difficulties or hardship; provided, however,
that no variance shall be granted under this subsection to allow a
structure or use in a district restricted against such structure or
use.
(4) Grant a variance to allow a structure or use in a district restricted
against such structure or use in particular cases and for special
reasons, but only by the affirmative vote of at least 2/3 of the fully
authorized membership of the Board. No variance or other relief
may be granted under the provisions of this subsection unless such
variance or other relief can be granted without substantial
detriment to the public good and will not substantially impair the
intent and purpose of the zone plan and Chapter 450, Zoning. The
Class I and Class III members of the Planning Board shall not
participate in or vote upon any application for a use variance
brought under this subsection pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d.
(5) Direct the issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 for a
building or structure in the bed of a mapped street or public
drainageway or flood control basin or public area reserved on the
Official Map.
(6) Direct the issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36 for a
building or structure on a lot not abutting a street as required by
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-35.
§ 85-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-8
1:45
§ 85-8. (Reserved)10
§ 85-9. Applications for development. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-5]
Applications for development within the jurisdiction of the Planning Board
pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1975, c. 291,11 shall be filed with the
Municipal Land Use Secretary. The applicant shall file at least 10 days
before, but no more than four days before, the date of the monthly meeting
of the Board six copies of a sketch plat; six copies of an application for minor
subdivision approval; six copies of an application for major subdivision
approval; or six copies of an application for a site plan review, conditional
use approval or planned development, if such applications are provided
for or required by ordinance of this municipality. At the time of filing the
application, but in no event less than 10 days prior to the date set for
hearing, the applicant shall also file all plot plans, maps or other papers
required by virtue of any provision of this Part 1 or any rule of the Planning
Board. The applicant shall obtain all necessary forms from the Municipal
Land Use Secretary. The Municipal Land Use Secretary shall inform the
applicant of the steps to be taken to initiate applications and of the regular
meeting dates of the Board.
§ 85-10. Citizens Advisory Committee.
The Mayor may appoint one or more persons as a Citizens Advisory
Committee to assist or collaborate with the Planning Board in its duties, but
such person or persons shall have no power to vote or take other action
required of the Board. Such person or persons shall serve at the pleasure of
the Mayor.
§ 85-11. Review of applications by Environmental Commission.
Whenever the Environmental Commission has prepared and submitted to
the Planning Board an index of the natural resources of the municipality,
the Planning Board shall make available to the Environmental Commission
an informational copy of every application for development to the Planning
Board. Failure of the Planning Board to make such informational copy
available to the Environmental Commission shall not invalidate any hearing
or proceeding.12
10.Editor's Note: Original § 30-8, Time limits for approvals, was repealed 7-5-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-5. See now Ch. 400, Subdivision of Land.
11.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
12.Editor's Note: Former Art. II, Zoning Board of Adjustment, which immediately followed
this section, was repealed 10-20-1998 by Ord. No. 98-16, effective 1-1-1999. As of that
date, the Borough of Penns Grove Zoning Board of Adjustment shall no longer exist and
all applications and matters pending before the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be
transferred to the Borough of Penns Grove Planning Board for disposition.
§ 85-8 PENNS GROVE CODE § 85-11
1:46
ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ 85-12. Conflicts of interest. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-5]
No member of the Planning Board shall act on any matter in which he has,
either directly or indirectly, any personal or financial interest. Whenever
any such member shall disqualify himself from acting on a particular matter,
he shall not continue to sit with the Board on the hearing of such matter nor
participate in further discussion or decision relating thereto.
§ 85-13. Meetings.
§ 85-14. Minutes.
Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept and shall include
the names of the persons appearing and addressing the Board and of the
persons appearing by attorney, the action taken by the Board, the findings,
if any, made by it and reasons therefor. The minutes shall thereafter be
made available for public inspection during normal business hours at the
office of the administrative officer. Any interested party shall have the
right to compel production of the minutes for use as evidence in any legal
proceeding concerning the subject matter of such minutes. Such interested
party may be charged a fee for reproduction of the minutes for his use as
provided for in the rules of the Board.
A. Meetings of the Planning Board shall be scheduled no less often than
once a month, and any meeting so scheduled shall be held as scheduled
unless canceled for lack of applications for development to process.
[Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
B. Special meetings may be provided for at the call of the Chairman or on
the request of any two Board members, which shall be held on notice to
its members and the public in accordance with all applicable legal
requirements.
C. No action shall be taken at any meeting without a quorum being
present.
D. All actions shall be taken by majority vote of a quorum except as
otherwise required by any provision of P.L. 1975, c. 291, or the
Sunshine Law.13
E. All regular meetings and all special meetings shall be open to the
public. Notice of all such meetings shall be given in accordance with the
requirements of the Open Public Meetings Law, P.L. 1975, Chapter
231.14
13.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. and 10:4-6 et seq., respectively.
14.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
§ 85-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-15
1:47
§ 85-15. Adoption of fees. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
Fees for applications or for the rendering of any service by the Planning
Board or any other member of its administrative staff which is not otherwise
provided by ordinance may be provided for and adopted as part of the rules
of the Board, and copies of said rules or of the separate fee schedule shall
be available to the public.
§ 85-16. Hearings.
§ 85-17. Notice.
Whenever a hearing is required on an application for development pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. or pursuant to the determination of the
municipal agency in question, the applicant shall give notice thereof as
follows:
A. Rules. The Planning Board shall make rules governing the conduct of
hearings before such body, which rules shall not be inconsistent with
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. or of this Part 1. [Amended
7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
B. Oaths. The officer presiding at the hearing or such person as he may
designate shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to
compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant
evidence, including witnesses and documents presented by the parties,
and the provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law, P.L.
1953, c. 38 (N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq.), shall apply.
C. Testimony. The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application for
development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the presiding
officer, and the right of cross-examination shall be permitted to all
interested parties through their attorneys, if represented, or directly, if
not represented, subject to the discretion of the presiding officer and to
reasonable limitations as to time and number of witnesses.
D. Evidence. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the
hearing, but the Board may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly
repetitious evidence.
E. Records. The Planning Board shall provide for the verbatim recording
of the proceedings by either stenographic, mechanical or electronic
means. The Board shall furnish a transcript or duplicate recording in
lieu thereof on request to any interested party at his expense.
A. Public notice shall be given by publication in the official newspaper of
the municipality at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing.
B. Notice shall be given to the owners of all real property, as shown on the
current tax duplicate or duplicates, located within 200 feet in all
directions of the property which is the subject of such hearing and
whether located within or without the municipality in which applicant's
§ 85-15 PENNS GROVE CODE § 85-17
1:48
land is located. Such notice shall be given by serving a copy thereof on
the owner as shown on said current tax duplicate or his agent in charge
of the property or by mailing a copy thereof by certified mail to the
property owner at his address as shown on said current tax duplicate.
A return receipt is not required. Notice to a partnership owner may be
made by service upon any partner. Notice to a corporate owner may be
made by service upon its president, a vice president, secretary or other
person authorized by appointment or by law to accept service on behalf
of the corporation.
C. Notice of all hearings on applications for development involving
property located within 200 feet of an adjoining municipality shall be
given by personal service or certified mail to the clerk of such
municipality, which notice shall be in addition to the notice required to
be given pursuant to Subsection B of this section to the owners of lands
in such adjoining municipality which are located within 200 feet of the
subject premises.
D. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the County
Planning Board of a hearing on an application for development of
property adjacent to an existing county road or proposed road shown on
the Official County Map or on the County Master Plan, adjoining other
county land or situate within 200 feet of a municipal boundary.
E. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Commissioner of Transportation of a hearing on an application for
development of property adjacent to a state highway.
F. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the State
Planning Commission of a hearing on an application for development of
property which exceeds 150 acres or 500 dwelling units. Such notice
shall include a copy of any maps or documents required to be on file
with the Municipal Clerk pursuant to Section 6b of P.L. 1975, c. 291.15
[Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
G. All notices hereinabove specified in this section shall be given at least
10 days prior to the date fixed for hearing, and the applicant shall file
an affidavit of proof of service with the Board holding the hearing on the
application for development.
H. Any notice made by certified mail as hereinabove required shall be
deemed to be complete upon mailing in accordance with the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-14.
I. Form of notice. All notices required to be given pursuant to the terms of
this Part 1 shall state the date, time and place of the hearing, the nature
of the matters to be considered and identification of the property
proposed for development by street address, if any, or by reference to
lot and block numbers as shown on the current tax duplicate in the
Municipal Tax Assessor's office and the location and times at which any
15.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10b.
§ 85-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-17
1:49
§ 85-18. List of property owners to be furnished. [Amended
7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12c, the administrative officer
of the municipality shall, within seven days after receipt of a request
therefor and upon receipt of payment of a fee as prescribed in § 85-28, make
and certify a list from the current tax duplicate of names and addresses
of owners to whom the applicant is required to give notice pursuant to
§ 85-17B.
§ 85-19. Decision procedure.
§ 85-20. Publication of decision. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-5]
A brief notice of every final decision shall be published in the official
newspaper of the municipality. Such publication shall be arranged by the
Municipal Land Use Secretary without separate charge to the applicant.
Said notice shall be sent to the official newspaper for publication within 10
days of the date of any such decision.
§ 85-21. Proof of payment of taxes. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-5]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-39 and 40:55D-65, every
application for development submitted to the Planning Board shall be
accompanied by proof that no taxes or assessments for local improvements
are due or delinquent on the property which is the subject of such
application, or if it is shown that taxes or assessments are delinquent on
said property, any approvals or other relief granted by the Board shall be
conditioned upon either the prompt payment of such taxes or assessments
or the making of adequate provision for the payment thereof in such manner
that the municipality will be adequately protected.
maps and documents for which approval is sought are available as
required by law.
A. Each decision on any application for development shall be set forth in
writing as a resolution of the Board which shall include findings of fact
and legal conclusions based thereon.
B. A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the Board within 10 days of the
date of decision to the applicant or, if represented, then to his attorney
without separate charge. A copy of the decision shall also be mailed to
all persons who have requested it and who have paid the fee prescribed
by the Board for such service. A copy of the decision shall also be filed
in the office of the Municipal Clerk, who shall make a copy of such filed
decision available to any interested party upon payment of a fee
calculated in the same manner as those established for copies of other
public documents in the municipality.
§ 85-17 PENNS GROVE CODE § 85-21
1:50
ARTICLE III
Appeals
[Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
§ 85-22. Appeals to Planning Board.
An appeal to the Planning Board, in its capacity to exercise the powers and
duties of the Zoning Board of Adjustment pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-25c,
may be taken by any interested party affected by any decision of the
administrative officer of the municipality based on or made in the
enforcement of Chapter 450, Zoning. Such appeal shall be taken in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-72.
§ 85-23. Appeals to governing body.
An appeal from any decision of the Planning Board granting a use variance
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d may be taken to the
governing body in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-17.
§ 85-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-23
1:51

ARTICLE IV
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 85-24. Statutory definitions. [Amended 6-17-1986 by Ord. No.
86-5]
Whenever a term is used in this Part 1 or in Chapter 450, Zoning, as
amended, or in Chapter 400, Subdivision of Land, as amended, which is
defined in P.L. 1975, c. 291,16 such term is intended to have the meaning set
forth in the definition of such term found in said statute, unless a contrary
intention is clearly expressed from the context of said ordinances.
§ 85-25. Readoption and continuance of subdivision regulations.
Pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1975, c. 291, the substantive provisions
of the existing Land Subdivision Ordinance of the Borough of Penns Grove,
as amended, and the development regulations set forth therein are hereby
readopted and shall continue in full force and effect and shall be read in
pari materia with this Part 1.17
§ 85-26. Pending applications.
All applications for development filed prior to the effective date of this Part
1 may be continued, but any appeals arising out of decisions made on any
such application shall be governed by the provisions of Article III of this Part
1.
§ 85-27. Copy to be filed with County Planning Board.
Immediately upon adoption of this Part 1, the Municipal Clerk shall file a
copy of this Part 1 with the County Planning Board as required by law.
The Clerk shall also file with said County Planning Board copies of all
other ordinances of the municipality relating to land use, such as Chapter
400, Subdivision of Land, Chapter 450, Zoning, and Chapter 375, Site Plan
Review.
16.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
17.Editor's Note: See Ch. 400, Subdivision of Land. Original § 4, Zoning Ordinance readopted
and continued as interim ordinance, which immediately followed this section, was
repealed 6-17-1986 by Ord. No. 86-5.
§ 85-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-27
1:53

Part 2
[Adopted 2-6-1979 By Ord. NoF. e7e9s-2 (Ch. 30, Part 2, Of The 1986
Code)]
ARTICLE V
Fees and Other Charges
[Amended 7-18-1989 by Ord. No. 89-14]
§ 85-28. Schedule of fees and escrow. [Amended 4-1-2008 by Ord.
No. 2008-6]
The following fees shall be charged an applicant by a municipal agency for
the review of an application for development:
A. Site plan review, preliminary.
(1) Application fee: $200.
(2) Escrow account: $500 per acre, with a minimum deposit of $1,500
for legal and engineering review.
B. Site plan review, final.
(1) Application fee: $200.
(2) Escrow account: $250 per acre, with a minimum deposit of $750 for
legal and engineering review.
C. Subdivision review.
(1) Minor subdivisions.
(a) Application fee: $100.
(b) Escrow account: $500 for legal and engineering review.
(2) Major subdivisions, preliminary plat.
(a) Application fee.
[1] Nine lots or fewer: $200.
[2] Ten lots or more: $200.
(b) Escrow account: $400 per lot with a minimum deposit of
$2,000 for legal and engineering review.
(3) Major subdivisions, final plat.
(a) Application fee: $200.
(b) Escrow account: $200 per lot with a minimum deposit of
$1,000 for legal and engineering review.
D. Variance applications: $200; escrow: $1,000.
§ 85-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-28
1:55
§ 85-29. Escrow funds. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
Fees as set forth above are nonrefundable and are to cover the
administrative costs incurred by the Borough in processing applications.
The escrow accounts are to pay the cost of professional review by the
Engineer, Solicitor and other professionals employed by the approving
authority to review and make recommendations on an application for
development. At the time of submitting an application to the municipal
agency, the applicant may be required to execute an escrow agreement
to cover all necessary and reasonable costs incurred for technical and
professional review. The amounts specified for escrow are estimates which
shall be paid prior to certification of a complete application. In the event
that more than the amounts specified for escrow are required to pay the
reasonable costs incurred, the applicant shall, prior to being permitted to
take the next step in the approval procedure or, in any event, prior to
obtaining certificates of occupancy for any element of the project, pay all
additional sums required. In the event that the amounts posted are more
than those required, the excess funds shall be returned to the applicant
within 14 days of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the project.
§ 85-30. Payment; accounting. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-5]
E. Conditional use: $200; escrow: $500.
F. Continued use permit: $50; escrow: $300.
G. Change of use permit: $200; escrow: $1,000.
H. Special exceptions: $200; escrow: $500.
I. Appeal to Borough Council: $200; escrow: $500.
J. Transcript: $2.50 per page.
K. Specialized expert testimony. When the applicant intends to present
specialized expert testimony which is beyond the expertise of the staff
and consultants serving the approving authority, the applicant shall
increase the professional review escrow account by a minimum of $750
for each such expert who will testify, in order to enable the approving
authority to hire expert consultants to review this testimony.
L. Application for zoning permit: $10. If the zoning permit shall be in
connection with a solar array, as set forth in Article XIII of Chapter 450,
Zoning, of the Code of the Borough of Penns Grove, then the fee set
forth in § 450-103C of the Code of the Borough of Penns Grove shall be
applicable for a zoning permit. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-5]
M. Two-hundred-foot listing: $10.
§ 85-28 PENNS GROVE CODE § 85-30
1:56
A. All fees shall be paid by the applicant to Municipal Land Use Secretary,
unless otherwise specified, at the time the application is submitted or
an appeal is filed.
B. The Municipal Land Use Secretary shall maintain an itemized account
for each applicant and shall, upon the request of the applicant, supply a
copy of said account.
§ 85-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-30
1:57
Chapter 92
MEETINGS
§ 92-1. Rules applicable to governing body members.
Members of the Penns Grove governing body shall observe order and
decorum during Borough Council meetings. A member of the governing
body shall neither, by conversation or otherwise, delay or interrupt the
proceedings of the Council nor disturb any member while speaking nor
refuse to obey the orders of the officer presiding over the meeting. Council
members shall inform the officer presiding over the meeting before leaving
their seats during a Council meeting.
§ 92-2. Borough staff.
Members of the Borough staff shall observe the same rules of order and
decorum applicable to the governing body in § 92-1 above.
§ 92-3. Defamatory and threatening language prohibited.
Any person(s) making personal, defamatory or profane remarks or who
willfully utters loud, threatening or abusive language or engages in any
disorderly conduct which disturbs or disrupts the orderly conduct of any
meeting shall be called to order by the officer presiding over the meeting.
If such conduct continues, the officer presiding over the meeting, at his
discretion, may order such person removed from that meeting.
§ 92-4. Length of presentation; governmental issues.
Persons addressing governing body shall be allowed a maximum of three
minutes for their presentations and may comment on any governmental
issue that a member of the public feels may be of concern to the residents
of the community.
§ 92-5. Disorderly conduct.
No person in the audience shall engage in disorderly conduct such as hand
clapping, stamping of feet, whistling, using profane language, shouting or
other similar demonstrations which may disturb the peace and order of the
meeting.
§ 92-6. Repeated disturbance; removal from meeting.
All persons shall, at the request of the officer presiding over the meeting,
be silent. If, after receiving a warning, a person persists in disturbing the
meeting, the officer presiding over the meeting may order that person to
leave the meeting. If he does not remove himself, the officer presiding over
the meeting may remove him.
§ 85-30 PENNS GROVE CODE § 92-7
1:58
§ 92-7. Resisting removal.
Any person who resists removal shall be charged with violating N.J.S.A.
2C:33-8, Disrupting meetings and processions.
§ 92-8. Videotaping meetings.
The governing body will permit the videotaping of meetings provided the
following guidelines are complied with:
§ 92-9. Rules of conduct.
Borough Council meetings shall be conducted pursuant to Robert's Rules of
Order.
Chapter 103
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 36.
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 47.
Personnel policies — See Ch. 110.
A. All videotaping is to be conducted from designated locations.
B. All video cameras must be privately owned and have self-contained
recording devices with built-in lighting and power sources.
C. A person shall not operate more than one video camera at a time.
§ 92-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-9
1:59

ARTICLE I
Appointed Officials
[Adopted as Ch. 2 of the 1968 Revised Ordinances (Ch. 45, Art. I, of
the 1986 Code)]
§ 103-1. Appointed officials. [Amended 1-28-1969; 6-17-1986 by
Ord. No. 86-5; 2-7-1989 by Ord. No. 89-2; 5-7-1991 by Ord. No. 91-2;
4-1-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8; 6-16-1998 by Ord. No. 98-10; 6-16-1998
by Ord. No. 98-13; 10-19-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-17; 10-19-2004 by
Ord. No. 2004-18; 10-19-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-19; 10-19-2004 by
Ord. No. 2004-20; 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
A. In addition to the elected officials of the Borough, the following
positions are created and shall be filled by appointment of the Mayor
and confirmed by a majority of the Council:
(1) Auditor.
(2) Borough Clerk.
(3) Construction Code Official.
(4) Deputy Borough Clerk.
(5) Animal Control Officer.
(6) Engineer.
(7) Housing Officer.
(8) Solicitor.
(9) Tax Search Officer.
(10) Treasurer.
(11) Chief Financial Officer.
(12) Municipal Land Use Secretary.
(13) Health Recording Officer.
B. The appointment of said persons shall be for one year or until their
successor is appointed and qualified, except that:
(1) The Borough Clerk shall be appointed for a term of three years.
(2) The appointment of the Deputy Borough Clerk shall be for three
years or until his successor is appointed and qualified.
C. The Municipal Judge and Municipal Court Administrator shall be
appointed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 25 of the
Borough Code.
§ 103-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-2
1:61
§ 103-2. Powers and duties of Deputy Clerk. [Added 1-28-1969 by
Ord. No. 69-1; amended 6-17-1986 by Ord. No. 86-5; 7-5-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-5]
The Deputy Borough Clerk shall assist and aid the Borough Clerk and in the
absence of the Borough Clerk shall respectively perform all acts and duties
required and authorized by law of such Borough Clerk.
§ 103-3. Powers and duties of Chief Financial Officer. [Added
2-7-1989 by Ord. No. 89-2]
The duties and responsibilities of the Chief Financial Officer shall be those
as set forth presently under Section 5, P.L. 1988, c. 110,18 N.J.S.A.
52:27BB-26 et seq., and N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.1 et seq., as they may from time
to time be amended.
18.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.10.
§ 103-2 PENNS GROVE CODE § 103-3
1:62
ARTICLE II
Housing Inspector
[Adopted 3-5-1985 by Ord. No. 85-2 (Ch. 45, Art. II, of the 1986
Code)]
§ 103-4. Positions established.
There are hereby created and established in and for the Borough of Penns
Grove, Salem County, New Jersey, two positions for which the title is
"Housing Inspector."
§ 103-5. Supervision.
Said position is subordinate to that of the Housing Officer. The Housing
Inspector will receive assignments from and be accountable to the Housing
Officer.
§ 103-6. Compensation. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
The sole compensation to be made to the Housing Inspector is $75 for each
inspection completed.
§ 103-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-6
1:63

ARTICLE III
Assistant to Treasurer
[Adopted 2-21-1995 by Ord. No. 95-1 (Ch. 45, Art. IV, of the 1986
Code); amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
§ 103-7. Position established.
There is hereby created the position of Assistant to the Treasurer.
§ 103-8. Duties.
Said Assistant shall work with the Treasurer and assist in the Tax Office, as
needed.
§ 103-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-8
1:65

ARTICLE IV
Hearing Authority
[Adopted 3-23-1992 by Ord. No. 92-6 (Ch. 45, Art. V, of the 1986
Code)]
§ 103-9. Authority designated.
The Council of the Borough of Penns Grove be and hereby is designated as
the hearing authority for disciplinary matters concerning employees of the
Borough.
§ 103-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-9
1:67

ARTICLE V
Safety Coordinator
[Adopted 10-17-1995 by Ord. No. 95-16 (Ch. 45, Art. IX, of the 1986
Code)]
§ 103-10. Position established.
The position of Safety Coordinator is hereby established within the Borough
of Penns Grove.
§ 103-11. Appointment.
The appointment to this position shall be by the Mayor and Council with the
appointee serving at the pleasure of the Mayor and Council.
§ 103-12. Duties.
The duties of the Safety Coordinator shall be the administration of safety
regulations for the Borough of Penns Grove.
§ 103-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-12
1:69

ARTICLE VI
Deputy Registrar
[Adopted 1-15-2002 by Ord. No. 2001-19 (Ch. 45, Art. XIII, of the
1986 Code)]
§ 103-13. Position established.
There is hereby created nunc pro tunc, as of January 1, 2002, the position
of Deputy Registrar within the Borough of Penns Grove.
§ 103-14. Duties.
Said Deputy Registrar shall assist and aid the Registrar of Vital Statistics
and, in the absence of the Registrar of Vital Statistics, shall perform all
acts and duties required and authorized by law of such Registrar of Vital
Statistics.
§ 103-15. Compensation. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
The rate of compensation to be paid to the Deputy Registrar shall be
established by ordinance.
§ 103-16. Term.
Appointment is made by the Registrar of Vital Statistics with a term of office
for three years per N.J.S.A. 26:8-17.
§ 103-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-16
1:71
Chapter 110
PERSONNEL POLICIES
§ 103-16 PENNS GROVE CODE § 103-16
1:72
ARTICLE I
Hiring Preferences
[Adopted 12-16-1997 by Ord. No. 97-20; amended in its entirety
12-21-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-16 (Ch. 54 of the 1986 Code)]
§ 110-1. Hiring preference for Borough residents.
It is the policy of the Borough of Penns Grove to give preference for
employment to those applicants residing in the Borough of Penns Grove at
the time of hiring over nonresidents, in the event the resident applicants
and nonresident applicants are otherwise equally qualified.
§ 110-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-1
1:73

ARTICLE II
Defined Contribution Retirement Program
[Adopted 6-21-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-9]
§ 110-2. Eligible positions.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 43:15C-2, the following positions are deemed to be
eligible for and may participate in the Defined Contribution Retirement
Program:
§ 110-3. Exempt positions.
Individuals serving in the following positions are exempt from Defined
Contribution Retirement Program membership, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
43:15C-2:
§ 110-4. Legislative authority.
This article shall be implemented, construed and subject to the aforesaid
Chapter 92 of the Laws of 2007 (N.J.S.A. 43:15C-1 et seq.), as amended from
time to time, and any regulations or guidance documents from the Local
Finance Board or the Division of Pensions and Benefits.
§ 110-5. Filing.
A copy of this article shall be filed with the Director of the Division of
Pensions and Benefits of the New Jersey Department of the Treasury.
A. Borough Solicitor.
B. Borough Engineer.
C. Borough Prosecutor.
D. Municipal Court Judge.
E. Borough Auditor.
A. Tax Collector.
B. Chief Financial Officer.
C. Construction Code Official.
D. Tax Assessor.
E. Registered Municipal Clerk.
F. Licensed Uniform Subcode Inspector.
§ 110-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-5
1:75
Chapter 116
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 110-5 PENNS GROVE CODE § 110-5
1:76
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 2-1-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-219; amended in its entirety
9-15-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-13 (Ch. 50, Art. I, of the 1986 Code)]
§ 116-1. Establishment, mission and purpose.
§ 116-2. Composition; line of authority; jurisdiction.
A. There is hereby established a Police Department in the Borough of
Penns Grove, County of Salem and State of New Jersey, pursuant to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118 et seq. This article is intended to ratify
the existence and operation of the Police Department which has
historically operated within and served the Borough of Penns Grove and
at the same time satisfy the statutory requirements of the legislation
amended in 1981 and 1988 respectively.
B. The mission and purpose of this Police Department are generally
threefold: to preserve life and property; to provide a general police
service for the residents of the Borough of Penns Grove, Salem County,
State of New Jersey; to enforce federal, state, county and municipal
laws, statutes and ordinances; and as hereinafter may be more
expressly defined.
A. Said Police Department will be governed by one Appropriate Authority
and shall consist of one Chief of Police. In addition, the Police
Department shall consist of no more than one lieutenant, four
sergeants, two detectives, four corporals, four patrolmen, three special
patrolmen and other civilian employees as deemed necessary and
appropriate by the Appropriate Authority in his/her discretion and
judgment, with the approval of the governing body. The Appropriate
Authority and/or the governing body may, from time to time, leave one
or more of the above positions vacant as he/she or it sees fit. The
express purpose for naming these offices is to establish a statutory line
of authority from all police employees to higher elected authority as
required by law and to provide the organizational framework for future
growth and/or attrition or reduction in force as may become applicable.
Whenever any such office, including the office of Chief of Police, is
intentionally left vacant, it will be deemed not to exist and will be
bypassed in the chain of command (e.g., if the governing body chose to
no longer have sergeants of police, then all civilian employees,
patrolmen and detectives would answer directly to a lieutenant or the
next higher rank in lieu thereof). The Appropriate Authority, with the
approval of the governing body, may thereafter recreate or resurrect an
office that has been so abolished by naming a person to fill said office.
No person may be appointed to the Penns Grove Borough Police
Department until he or she has satisfied all statutory requirements and
19.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. I, General Provisions, adopted
6-15-1971, as amended.
§ 116-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116-2
1:77
has complied with the selection process and standards established
by the rules and regulations adopted by the Appropriate Authority
to govern the Police Department. [Amended 6-8-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-7; 10-18-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-11; 7-5-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-5]
B. Jurisdiction.
(1) Appropriate authority. Said Police Department shall come under
the jurisdiction of the Appropriate Authority, which position is
hereby created pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118. Said Appropriate
Authority shall be the Mayor. The Appropriate Authority shall be
responsible directly to the governing body. The Chief of Police shall
be directly responsible to the Appropriate Authority for the day-today
operation of the Police Department pursuant to policies
established by said Appropriate Authority. The Appropriate
Authority is hereby vested with the duty of and shall be responsible
for the promulgation, adoption, updating, and/or ratification of
rules and regulations for police personnel which shall be known as
the "Rules and Regulations for the Police Department of the
Borough of Penns Grove" (N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118). In the absence of
the appointment of a full-time professional Director of Public Safety
and/or a Police Director, the Chairman of the Police Committee or
his/her designee shall have the title of Police Director. [Amended
2-7-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-1]
(2) Hearing authority. [Amended 6-8-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-7]
(a) In the event a collective bargaining agreement is not
controlling and disciplinary proceedings are brought against
any member of the Police Department of the Borough of Penns
Grove below the rank of Chief of Police, the Police Committee
or its designee shall be the sole hearing authority in charge of
all such proceedings. The decision of the hearing authority
shall be final and binding. The right of appeal shall be to the
New Jersey Superior Court pursuant to law. [Amended
7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
(b) In the event of any disciplinary proceedings against the Chief
of Police of the Borough of Penns Grove, the Police Committee
of the Borough of Penns Grove shall be designated as the
hearing authority and in charge of all such proceedings. The
decision of said hearing authority shall be final and binding.
The right of appeal shall be to the New Jersey Superior Court
pursuant to law.
(c) In the event a designated hearing authority is utilized pursuant
to Subsection B(2)(a) above and the designated hearing
authority is to be an officer within the Penns Grove Borough
Police Department (e.g., Chief of Police), only a person of
§ 116-2 PENNS GROVE CODE § 116-2
1:78
greater rank than the person charged may be so designated for
that purpose.
(3) Charging authority.
(a) In the event a Penns Grove Borough Police Department officer
is to be charged in a disciplinary action and said employee is
subordinate to the rank of the Chief of Police, only the Chief of
Police or his designee may initiate such charges (N.J.S.A.
40A:14-118). In the event the office of the Chief of Police has
been abolished through intentional vacancy, then the
Appropriate Authority or his/her designee shall function as the
charging authority. Failure to initiate charges when the same
are indicated may constitute a neglect or dereliction of duty
[Gauntt v. Bridgeton, 194 N.J. Super. 468, 477 A.2d 381 (App.
Div. 1984)], but the function of the charging authority may not
be circumvented. [Amended 6-8-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-7;
7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
(b) In the event the Chief of Police for the Borough of Penns Grove
is to be charged in a disciplinary action, the Appropriate
Authority shall be the charging authority. The Appropriate
Authority is hereby empowered to name a designated special
counsel to function as an alternative charging authority
without prior Council approval in an emergency. This is
necessitated by the statutory time lines involved in the
charging process. Notwithstanding this authority, at the
earliest opportunity the Appropriate Authority shall inform
Council of the action that he has taken and obtain its approval.
[Amended 6-8-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-7]
(c) Any person(s), whether police officer, special counsel, or the
Appropriate Authority, who serves in an investigative capacity
and/or as the charging authority relevant to a Penns Grove
Borough Police Department disciplinary action may not
thereafter be designated as or serve as the hearing authority in
that same disciplinary action. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-5]
(4) Appeals. [Amended 6-8-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-7]
(a) Any employee seeking to appeal disciplinary charges shall do
so in writing submitted to the office of the Chief of Police. Said
appeal shall be filed within five days, not including Saturdays,
Sundays and holidays, of the date said charges were served
upon said employee. When charges are filed against the Chief
of Police, he shall, within five days, not including Saturdays,
Sundays and holidays, file said appeal with the Police
Committee of the Borough of Penns Grove. In the event an
appeal is filed by any employee, the hearing authority shall
schedule a hearing in accordance with the provisions of this
§ 116-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116-2
1:79
article and state statute. A preliminary notice of disciplinary
action served on any employee shall contain the date, time and
location for a prospective hearing as required by statute. That
hearing date may be postponed at the discretion of the hearing
authority within the statutory time lines. Any postponement
beyond the statutory thirty-day time line would generally
require a waiver of the thirty-day rule by the employee and a
formal request for said postponement. However, all employees
are put on notice that a failure to submit the required written
request for an appeal would constitute an act of
insubordination and may affect the employee's rights
pertaining to said statutory time lines, the discovery
proceedings, as well as other legal rights and remedies
appurtenant thereto.
(b) Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary contained in
this article, the grievance procedure respecting disciplinary
charges, and any appeals thereof, against any member of the
Police Department shall follow that established in any
collective bargaining agreement between the Borough of
Penns Grove and any employee of the Police Department
covered under such collective bargaining agreement.
C. Special law enforcement officers. The Appropriate Authority shall, with
the approval and consent of the Borough Council, appoint special law
enforcement officers as he/she or it may deem necessary. They shall be
a part of the Police Department established herein and subject to all the
laws, rules and regulations governing the same. Pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:14-146.8 et seq., the term of said appointment shall be at the
discretion of the governing body. The personnel referred to in this
subsection shall be compensated at such hourly rate as designated in
the Borough's Salary Ordinance. Said personnel shall serve at the
compensation, if any, established by ordinance or as modified or
changed by the governing body. [Amended 6-8-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-7; 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
D. Civilian employees. The Appropriate Authority shall, with the approval
and consent of the governing body, appoint such civilian members of
the Police Department to serve in the services division as he/she or it
may deem necessary. Said members are to serve as school crossing
guards and/or to provide dispatching services, clerical duties and
logistical duties in support of the Police Department. Such civilian
employees will serve in the job classifications created for that purpose,
but not necessarily limited to the same.
E. Graphic table of organization.
(1) A graphic table of organization (TO) shall be maintained by the
police administration to show the following:
§ 116-2 PENNS GROVE CODE § 116-2
1:80
(a) The Penns Grove Borough Police Department divisional
structure.
(b) The Penns Grove Borough Police Department personnel
structure.
(2) The express function of each position will be as defined within the
Rules and Regulations of the Penns Grove Borough Police
Department promulgated by the Appropriate Authority, but is not
necessarily limited to the same.
F. Monthly reports to the Appropriate Authority. The Chief of Police shall
submit monthly reports to the Appropriate Authority in such form as
shall be prescribed by said Authority on the operation of the force
during the preceding month and make such other reports as may be
requested by said Appropriate Authority.
G. Policies established by the Appropriate Authority to govern day-to-day
operations. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118, the Chief of Police, if such
office is filled, shall be directly responsible to the Appropriate Authority
for the efficiency and routine day-to-day operations thereof and he shall
pursuant to policies established by the Appropriate Authority perform
his assigned duties. Therefore, the Appropriate Authority shall issue
whatever operations orders, general orders, or standard operating
policies are deemed appropriate and necessary for the operation of the
Department. Other than for emergency directives, any such operational
policies promulgated by the Chief of Police shall require ratification by
the Appropriate Authority. All such policies will be submitted to the
Appropriate Authority and will take effect 10 days later absent a
response from the Appropriate Authority to the contrary. This will
hereafter be referred to as the "ten-day review rule."
H. External investigations. The governing body may appoint a committee
and/or designate special counsel to conduct investigations of the
operation of the police force and may delegate to such committee or
special counsel any and all lawful powers of inquiry. The Appropriate
Authority or its designee, or any other elected or appointed official
within the municipality, or special counsel appointed by the governing
body, may examine the operations of the force or the performance of
any officer or member thereof. In conducting any such external
investigation or examination, the investigating or examining authority
shall not be bound by those internal affairs investigation guidelines or
regulations governing the Police Department in conducting its own
internal investigation.
I. Emergency directives. Nothing herein contained shall infringe upon or
limit the power or duty of the Appropriate Authority to act to provide for
the health, safety or welfare of the municipality in an emergency
situation through special emergency directives (N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118).
J. Hours of employment. [Amended 6-8-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-7]
§ 116-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116-2
1:81
(1) The hours of employment of sworn and/or uniformed members of
the Police Department shall not exceed eight consecutive hours in
any one day or 40 hours in any one week, provided that, in case of
an emergency, the officer, board, or other official having charge or
control of the Police Department or police system shall have full
authority to summon and keep on duty any and all such members
during the period of emergency. The 40 hours per week
requirement may, with approval of the Appropriate Authority, be
satisfied over an extended work period as provided by § 7K of the
Fair Labor Standards Act.
(2) Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary contained in this
article, the hours of employment for uniformed members of the
Police Department shall follow the hours of employment
established in any collective bargaining agreement between the
Borough of Penns Grove and any employee of the Police
Department covered under such collective bargaining agreement.
K. Appointments.
(1) All members of the Police Department shall be appointed by the
Appropriate Authority, with the advice and consent of the
governing body, and are to hold their offices as provided by law.
(2) No person shall be appointed as a member of the Police
Department in the Borough of Penns Grove who has failed, prior
thereto, to have duly executed and signed a written application for
such employment, upon a form supplied by the Borough Clerk,
requiring relevant data to be submitted by the applicant therein,
and shall have also indicated therein his willingness to undergo a
required preemployment physical examination and a
preemployment psychiatric examination.
(3) Appointments to new positions or offices or to fill vacancies shall
also be subject to state laws.
L. Qualifications.
(1) Each applicant shall comply with all the laws of the State of New
Jersey pertaining thereto. No person shall be given or accept a
permanent appointment as a police officer in the Borough unless he
has first been given a probationary or temporary appointment to
such office for a period of one year after successfully completing a
police training course at a school approved and authorized by the
Police Training Commission in the Department of Law and Public
Safety of the State of New Jersey, pursuant to the provisions of
Chapter 56 of the Laws of 1961 and amendments thereto.20
(2) No person shall be appointed to the Police Department as a regular
or probationary member unless, at the time of making application,
20.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:17B-66 et seq.
§ 116-2 PENNS GROVE CODE § 116-2
1:82
§ 116-3. Rules and regulations.
he is between the age of 18 and 35 years of age, except as
otherwise provided by law. The applicant shall be a citizen of
the United States of America and the State of New Jersey, and
preference shall be given to those applicants who have been
residents of the Borough of Penns Grove for a period of at least six
months prior to the date of application.
M. Oath of allegiance. Each member of the Police Department shall, before
entering upon the performance of his duties, take and subscribe an oath
to bear true faith and allegiance to the government established in this
state, to support the Constitutions of the United States of America and
the State of New Jersey and to faithfully, impartially and justly
discharge and perform all the duties of his office. Such oath or
affirmation shall be filed with the Borough Clerk.
A. The Appropriate Authority pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118 is hereby
authorized to update, adopt and promulgate rules and regulations for
the governing of the Police Department and for the discipline of its
members with a view to making the Police Department and all members
thereof efficient, vigilant and effective in the service of the Borough of
Penns Grove. Said rules and regulations will be in manual form and
shall be called the "Rules and Regulations of the Police Department for
the Borough of Penns Grove" and shall govern the conduct of and be
binding upon the entire membership of said Police Department,
including the Chief and all subordinates as listed in § 116-2 hereof. Said
Rules and Regulations shall provide for penalties and forfeitures for
violations thereof.
B. The Rules and Regulations, which shall include all parts of the Police
Ordinance of the Code of the Borough of Penns Grove, shall be
distributed in manual form as follows: A serialized copy will be issued to
and signed for by each employee of the Police Department for the
Borough of Penns Grove. The Chief may not amend or change these
rules except through action taken by the Appropriate Authority. A copy
will be maintained by the Borough Clerk for the personnel designated
as special officers and to provide public access to the same.
C. All members and employees who are assigned a manual shall be
responsible for its maintenance and care. Said manuals shall remain the
property of the Borough of Penns Grove, County of Salem, State of New
Jersey, and, upon separation from police service, each person is bound
to return the same. Each person will be responsible for the security of
his/her manual, and loss of the same will constitute neglect of duty and
will result in disciplinary action. All manuals shall be kept current, and
supplementary pages concerning additions, revisions or amendments
shall be promptly and properly inserted. No Police Department
operating policies will be inserted as part of this manual unless and
until properly assimilated and endorsed by the Appropriate Authority.
§ 116-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116-3
1:83
D. Each police officer and each civilian employee is duty bound to
thoroughly familiarize himself/herself with the provisions of the Police
Manual. Failure to comply shall be considered neglect of duty.
E. In the event neglect of duty is charged against a member for failure to
observe the rules and regulations or Department procedures or orders,
ignorance of any provision of this manual will not be accepted as an
excuse.
§ 116-3 PENNS GROVE CODE § 116-3
1:84
ARTICLE II
Police Clerk
[Adopted 4-3-1973 by Ord. No. 73-3 (Ch. 50, Art. II, of the 1986
Code)]
§ 116-4. Position established.
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-139 there is hereby
created in the Borough of Penns Grove the position of Police Clerk.
§ 116-5. Powers and duties.
The duties of said Clerk shall be typist, file clerk, general clerical work,
keeping of necessary records, preparation of required reports, assisting the
Chief of Police in the operation of his office and maintenance of records and
reports and, when required by the Chief, may fill in as a dispatcher.
§ 116-6. Compensation.
The salary of the Clerk shall be as set forth in the salary ordinances of the
Borough which designate the salary of other Borough employees.
§ 116-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116-6
1:85
Chapter 120
PRISON LABOR PROGRAM
§ 120-1. Program established.
A prison labor program, which utilizes labor provided by prisoners from the
Salem County Jail in accordance with the work release program utilized by
the jail, is established.
§ 120-2. Utilization of prison labor.
Department heads of the Borough of Penns Grove may utilize the work
services of prisoners who are participants in the work release program at
the Salem County Jail to supplement, but not replace, the usual activities
of employees of the Borough of Penns Grove in situations involving an
extraordinary need. Prior to utilization of prison labor by any department
head, as aforesaid, a detailed prison labor policy statement shall be
prepared by the department head and presented to the committee of the
Borough Council having oversight responsibility for the activities of the
particular department. No prison labor may be utilized by any department
head without prior written approval by Borough Council of a comprehensive
prison labor policy statement. Said prison labor policy statement must
include an insurance risk assessment and describe specifically aspects of
the policy designed to address and, if possible, rectify any significant risk of
injury or insurable loss.
§ 120-3. Agreement with County of Salem required.
No prison labor may be utilized by the Borough of Penns Grove, or any of its
departments or employees, without there being a lawfully adopted, binding
written agreement between the Borough of Penns Grove and the County
of Salem describing the full nature of an agreement for the provision of
prison labor by the Salem County Jail through the work release program.
Any such prison labor agreement between the Borough of Penns Grove and
the County of Salem must meet all applicable legal requirements and be
properly executed by an officer or officers authorized by law to execute
agreements on behalf of the respective entities.
Chapter 124
PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT
§ 124-1. Department established.
There shall be established and maintained in the Borough of Penns Grove a
Public Works Department.
§ 116-6 PENNS GROVE CODE § 124-2
1:86
§ 124-2. Composition.
The Public Works Department may, as the Council shall determine by
resolution or ordinance, consist of the following personnel:
§ 124-3. Appointment of employees.
Members of the Public Works Department shall be appointed as follows:
§ 124-4. Disciplinary action.
Disciplinary action against any member of the Public Works Department
shall be taken pursuant to the provisions of the Penns Grove Borough
A. Administrative Supervisor.
B. Road Supervisor.
C. Regular employees.
D. Certified Public Works Manager.
A. The Administrative Supervisor shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject
to the approval of the Council, for three years or until his successor is
appointed and qualified. [Amended 10-19-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-18]
B. The Road Supervisor shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to the
approval of the Council, for three years or until his successor is
appointed and qualified. [Amended 10-19-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-17]
C. The Certified Public Works Manager shall be appointed by the Mayor,
subject to the approval of Council, for three years or until his successor
is appointed and qualified. [Amended 10-19-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-19]
D. The Administrative Supervisor, Road Supervisor and the Certified
Public Works Manager positions will be incorporated by reference into
the list of appointed officials listed in Chapter 103 of the Code of the
Borough of Penns Grove.
E. All regular employees shall initially be appointed for a six-month
probationary period by the Mayor, upon the recommendation of the
Borough Council, and after such probationary period, or extension
thereof, shall automatically be promoted to regular employee or
dismissed.
F. The Road Supervisor may from time to time hire part-time employees as
circumstances may dictate. All part-time hirings must be approved by
the Councilperson who chairs the Public Works Department, and the
Chief Financial Officer must be notified immediately.
§ 124-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 124-4
1:87
Personnel Policy. Any appeal of said disciplinary action will proceed in
accordance with the Penns Grove Borough Personnel Policy.
§ 124-5. Powers and duties.
Chapter 132
RECORDS
A. Administrative Supervisor. The Administrative Supervisor is the
administrative head of the Public Works Department and shall be
responsible for all time records, vehicle maintenance, pump
maintenance and repair, equipment inventory, recycling
documentation, all commercial driver's license credentials and
scheduled tests and any other duties that may be requested by the
Mayor and Council.
B. Road Supervisor. The Road Supervisor shall be responsible for all work
site activities, including street maintenance and road repair, trash
collection and recycling, dispatching work detail on a daily basis,
repairs of Borough vehicles and equipment and any other duties that
may be requested by the Mayor and Council.
C. Regular employees. Regular employees' duties are governed by the
provisions of the Penns Grove Borough Personnel Policy. All employees
must recognize they serve the public and conduct themselves in a
courteous, respectful and sober manner.
D. The Certified Public Works Manager will oversee the entire Public
Works Department in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:9-154.6a et seq.
§ 124-4 PENNS GROVE CODE § 124-5
1:88
ARTICLE I
Public Access to Records
[Adopted by Ord. No. 2006-27 (Ch. 18 of the 1986 Code); amended
in its entirety 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
§ 132-1. Policy.
It is hereby declared to be the public policy of this Borough to recognize
the public's general right to know pursuant to the Open Public Records Act
(N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq.). All records kept in the course of official duties
by any Borough officer or employee shall be deemed to be "government
records," as that term is defined by N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1.1, and such records
shall be subject to inspection by the public unless exempt under the statute
or other regulation, common law practice, executive order of the Governor,
rules of court, federal law or judicial decision.
§ 132-2. Custodian of records.
In accordance with N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1.1, the Municipal Clerk is designated as
the custodian of records.
§ 132-3. Inspection and copying of public records.
A. Any person seeking to inspect, examine or copy a public record of this
municipality shall make application in writing to the Municipal Clerk,
during regular business hours. All requests for public records shall be
as specific as possible, including the type of record and date created, if
known.
B. The Municipal Clerk shall promptly comply with a request to inspect,
examine, copy or provide a copy of a government record. If the Clerk is
unable to comply with a request for access, he or she shall inform the
requestor of the specific basis for such inability to comply.
C. In those instances where the nature of the request or the record itself
leads the Municipal Clerk to doubt whether or not the record is a
"government record" as defined by law or is a record exempt from
disclosure, the Clerk shall request an opinion from the Municipal
Attorney. A copy of the request shall be forwarded to the Attorney, who,
after review and investigation, shall issue an opinion and note such
opinion on the request and promptly return it to the Municipal Clerk.
D. If any part of a particular record is exempt from public access pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq., the Clerk shall delete, redact or excise from a
copy of the record that portion which is exempt from access and shall
promptly permit access to the remainder of the record.
E. If the record requested is temporarily unavailable because it is in use or
in storage, the Clerk shall so advise the requestor and shall make
arrangements to make a copy of the record available.
§ 132-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-3
1:89
§ 132-4. Time limits for compliance.
Unless a shorter time period is otherwise provided by statute, regulation
or executive order, the Clerk shall grant access to a government record or
deny a request for access to a record as soon as possible, but not later than
seven business days after receiving the request, provided that the record
is currently available and not in storage or archived. In the event that the
Clerk fails to respond within seven business days after receiving a request,
the failure to respond shall be deemed a denial of the request, unless the
requestor has elected not to provide a name, address or telephone number,
or other means of contacting the requestor. If the requestor has elected
not to provide a name, address, or telephone number, or other means of
contacting the requestor, the Clerk shall not be required to respond until
the requestor reappears before the custodian seeking a response to the
original request. If the government record is in storage or archived, the
requestor shall be so advised within seven business days after the Clerk
receives the request. The requestor shall be advised by the Clerk when the
record can be made available. If the record is not made available by that
time, access shall be deemed denied.
§ 132-5. Posting of appeals procedure.
The Clerk shall post prominently in public view, in or adjacent to the Clerk's
office, a statement that sets forth in clear, concise and specific terms the
right to appeal a denial of or failure to provide access to a government
record and the procedure by which an appeal may be filed.
§ 132-6. Viewing of government records; removal prohibited.
F. If a request for access to a government record would substantially
disrupt municipal operations, the Clerk may deny access to the record
after attempting to reach a reasonable solution with the requestor that
accommodates the interests of the requestor and the municipality.
G. As required by N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5e, immediate access shall be granted for
access to budgets, bills, vouchers, contracts (including collective
negotiations agreements and individual employment contracts), and
public salary and overtime information.
A. Upon the approval of a request to view, inspect, examine or copy a
record, the record and the requestor shall remain in the presence of the
Municipal Clerk or his or her authorized representative at all times.
Under no circumstances shall any government record be removed from
the office where it is normally kept unless accompanied by the
custodian or his or her authorized representative.
B. In the event that the nature of a request to view records requires that
the Clerk or other municipal employee observe or monitor such viewing
for a period of time exceeding one hour, the requestor shall be
responsible for reimbursing the municipality for time spent by the Clerk
or other employee.
§ 132-3 PENNS GROVE CODE § 132-7
1:90
§ 132-7. Procedures and fees for purchasing copies of public
records.
Copies of records may be purchased for the fee prescribed by law or
regulation. If a fee is not prescribed by law or regulation, the fee shall be
the actual cost of duplicating the record; provided, however, that where the
actual cost for duplication of a record exceeds the rates below, the actual
cost shall be imposed.
A. Standard-sized paper documents:
(1) Per letter size page or smaller: $0.05.
(2) Per legal size page or larger: $0.07.
B. Police reports and photographs.
(1) Police accident reports: same as Subsection A above, if requested
and picked up in person.
(2) Police accident reports, when copies are requested other than in
person: $5, as established by N.J.S.A. 39:4-131.
C. Electronic records.
(1) Copy of electronic document or database: $3 for copying existing
files to a CD. Any requests for software conversions shall be subject
to the special service charge described below. For security reasons,
the use of a CD provided by the requestor is prohibited.
D. A special service charge shall be imposed, in addition to the actual cost
of duplicating the record, where the nature, format, manner of collation
or volume of printed matter is such that it cannot be reproduced by
ordinary document-copying equipment in ordinary business size or
where such record involves an extraordinary expenditure of time and
effort to accommodate the request. The fee shall be assessed on a caseby-
case basis using the standards and criteria established by the
Government Records Council as may be amended from time to time.
The requestor shall have the opportunity to review and object to the
special service charge prior to it being incurred.
E. Applicable postage shall be added for any and all records requested by
mail.
F. A deposit shall be paid prior to filling any anonymous request where it is
estimated that the information requested will cost in excess of $5 to
reproduce. The amount of the deposit shall equal the total estimated
cost of filling the request.
§ 132-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-7
1:91
Chapter 135
RECREATION COMMITTEE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 332.
§ 135-1. Committee established.
There is hereby created and established in and for the Borough of Penns
Grove a Recreation Committee.
§ 135-2. Membership; terms.
Said Recreation Committee will consist of nine members, with five members
to be appointed by the Mayor and Council for five years, two members to be
appointed for three years, and two members, who must be serving on the
Borough Council, to be appointed for a term of two years.
§ 135-3. Authority to expend funds.
Said Recreation Committee shall have the authority to expend funds from
the recreation budget subject to the approval of the Borough Council.
Chapter 141
REDEVELOPMENT
§ 141-1. Authority of governing body.
The governing body of the Borough of Penns Grove shall be responsible for
all redevelopment within the Borough of Penns Grove as provided for under
N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq.
Chapter 147
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
[The salaries and compensation of all officers and employees of the
Borough of Penns Grove are set forth from time to time by ordinance
of the Mayor and Council. A copy of the currently effective Salary
Ordinance is on file in the office of the Borough Clerk and available
for examination during office hours.]
Chapter 151
SEWERAGE AUTHORITY
§ 132-7 PENNS GROVE CODE § 151-1
1:92
§ 151-1. Establishment.
There is hereby created and established in and for the Borough of Penns
Grove, Salem County, New Jersey, a public body corporate and politic under
the name and style of the "Penns Grove Sewerage Authority" pursuant to
the provisions of the Sewerage Authorities Law of the State of New Jersey,
being N.J.S.A. 40:14A-1 et seq.
§ 151-2. Powers and duties.
The Penns Grove Sewerage Authority, hereby created, shall have and
exercise all of the powers and rights and perform all of the duties of a
sewerage authority as defined in said Sewerage Authorities Law and in any
and all statutes heretofore or hereafter enacted supplementing, amending
or revising said Sewerage Authorities Law.
§ 151-3. Copy to be filed.
A copy of this chapter, duly certified by the Borough Clerk, shall be filed by
said Borough Clerk in the office of the Secretary of State of the State of New
Jersey forthwith upon final passage hereof.21
§ 151-4. Need for contract.
The Borough of Penns Grove in the County of Salem, New Jersey, does
hereby determine that it will be economical and otherwise advantageous
to it, to the Penns Grove Sewerage Authority and to the residents and
property owners of the Borough for the Borough and said Authority to enter
into a contract providing for and relating to the treatment and disposal
of sewage and other wastes originating in the Borough by means of a
sanitary sewerage system acquired or constructed by said Authority and the
cost and expense of such treatment and disposal; which contract, among
other things, shall obligate said Authority to continue with the operation
and development of said sewerage system and obligate the Borough to
pay to said Authority such sum or sums of money as may be necessary to
provide for deficits which might result if said Authority failed to receive the
revenues expected to be derived from the operation of its properties, all
substantially on the terms of the contract authorized by this chapter.
§ 151-5. Authorization to execute contract.
The Borough of Penns Grove in the County of Salem, New Jersey, shall
enter into a contract with the Penns Grove Sewerage Authority providing
for and relating to the treatment and disposal of sewage and other wastes
and the cost and expense of such treatment and disposal, and the Mayor
shall be and he hereby is authorized and directed on behalf of the Borough
to execute said contract under the corporate Seal of the Borough, which
shall be affixed and attested by the Borough Clerk, and to deliver the same.
21.Editor's Note: Original § 20.1-4, Compensation, which immediately followed this section,
was repealed 6-17-1986 by Ord. No. 86-5.
§ 151-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-5
1:93
Chapter 154
SHADE TREE COMMISSION
§ 154-1. Creation; jurisdiction; membership. [Amended 7-5-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-5]
The regulation, planting, care and control of shade and ornamental trees
and shrubbery upon and in the streets, highways, public places, parks and
parkways of the Borough of Penns Grove, except state highways, unless
the State Department of Transportation shall assent thereto, and except
county highways, parks and parkways, if a County Shade Tree Commission
is operative and gives assent thereto, shall be exercised by and under the
authority of the Borough of Penns Grove Shade Tree Commission, which is
hereby created. The Commission shall consist of five members appointed
by the Mayor (or other chief executive), who shall be residents of the
municipality and shall serve without compensation except as hereinafter
provided.
§ 154-2. Appointment; terms of office. [Amended 6-17-1986 by Ord.
No. 86-5]
The first Commissioners shall be appointed within 60 days after the
effective date of this chapter, and their terms of office shall commence
upon the day of their appointment and be for the respective periods of
one, two, three, four and five years, with the term of each appointee being
designated in his appointment. All subsequent appointments, except to fill
vacancies, shall be for the full term of five years to take effect on January
1 next succeeding such appointment. In the event that the membership of
any Commission is increased, the new members shall be appointed in such
manner that the terms shall expire in accordance with the foregoing.
§ 154-3. Organization; compensation of Secretary.
The Commission shall organize within 30 days after the appointment of
its total membership for the remainder of the then calendar year and
thereafter annually by the election of one of its members as Chairman
and the appointment of a Secretary, who need not be a member. The
salary of the Secretary, who may be compensated even if a member of the
Commission, shall be fixed by the governing body of the municipality.
§ 154-4. Vacancies.
Any vacancy occurring by reason of the death, resignation or removal of any
Commissioner shall be filled for the unexpired term by the Mayor or other
chief executive of the municipality.
§ 151-5 PENNS GROVE CODE § 154-5
1:94
§ 154-5. Powers and duties.
The Shade Tree Commission organized under this chapter shall have power
to:
§ 154-6. Costs to be borne by owner; exceptions.
A. Exercise full and exclusive control over the regulation, planting and
care of shade and ornamental trees and shrubbery now located or
which may hereafter be planted in any public highway, park or parkway,
except such as are excluded pursuant to § 154-1 of this chapter,
including the planting, trimming, spraying, care and protection thereof.
B. Regulate and control the use of the ground surrounding the same, so far
as may be necessary for their proper growth, care and protection.
C. Move or require the removal of any tree or part thereof dangerous to
public safety.
D. Care for and control such parks and parkways; encourage
arboriculture; and make, alter, amend and repeal, in the manner
prescribed for the passage, alteration, amendment and repeal of
ordinances by the governing body of the municipality, any and all
ordinances necessary or proper for carrying out the provisions hereof.
E. Administer treatment to or remove any tree situated upon private
property which is believed to harbor a disease or insects readily
communicable to neighboring healthy trees in the care of the
municipality and enter upon private property for that purpose, with the
consent of the owner thereof, provided that the suspected condition is
first confirmed by certificate issued by or on behalf of the New Jersey
Department of Agriculture.
A. Except as hereinafter provided, the initial cost of all trees planted by
the Commission, the cost of planting the same, the cost of the posts and
boxes or guards used for the protection thereof and the cost of the
removal of any tree or part thereof dangerous to public safety shall, if
the Commission shall determine, in accordance with uniform rules and
regulations promulgated for this purpose, be a charge upon the real
estate in front of which such tree or trees shall be planted or removed
as an improvement thereof. Such cost, if it is so determined that it is to
be paid by the owner, shall, unless paid directly to the Commission, be
certified by it to the Collector of Taxes of the municipality, shall
thereupon become and be a lien upon said real estate, shall be included
in the next tax bill rendered to the owner or owners thereof and be
collected in the same manner as other taxes against that property.
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
(1) A planting to replace a tree or trees theretofore planted by the
Commission.
§ 154-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 154-6
1:95
§ 154-7. Notice of planting and removal; emergencies.
In every case where the property of an abutting owner will be chargeable
with the cost of the planting of any shade tree or trees, the Commission
shall give notice of the meeting at which it is proposed to consider said
planting by publishing the notice at least once, not less than 20 days before
the meeting, in a newspaper circulating in the municipality and by personal
service of a copy of the notice upon the abutting owner at least 10 days
before the meeting. The notice shall specify the street, streets or portions
thereof on which such planting is proposed and require all persons who
may object thereto to present their objections in writing to the Chairman
of the Commission at or before the meeting. Before final action shall be
taken, all objections so filed shall be considered. The Commission shall give
reasonable notice of its intention to remove or cause the removal of a tree
or part of a tree dangerous to public safety, unless public safety requires
immediate removal, in which case no notice shall be necessary.
§ 154-8. Public improvements; authority of County Park
Commission.
§ 154-9. Annual appropriation.
(2) A planting in connection with Arbor Day exercises or other
educational demonstration.
A. No statute giving any person or state, county or municipal board, body
or official power or authority to lay any sidewalk along or to open,
construct, curb or pave any street or to do any similar act shall be
construed to permit or authorize any interference with or injury to a
highway shade tree without the consent of the Shade Tree Commission
within whose jurisdiction such tree shall be located. In all cases, such
Commission shall reasonably cooperate with such person, board, body
or official for the general public good.
B. Nothing in this chapter contained shall be held to take away or diminish
any of the powers or authority of any County Park Commission over the
trees or shrubbery in any county park or parkway within its jurisdiction
or to give any other commission or board any power or authority with
respect to such trees or shrubbery.
A. During the month of December in each year, the Shade Tree
Commission shall certify to the governing body of the municipality the
estimated sum necessary for the proper conduct of its work during the
ensuing fiscal year, which shall include the sums estimated to be
expended for such of the following items as it is anticipated
expenditures will be made for, namely:
(1) Purchase of trees and shrubbery.
(2) Purchase of necessary equipment and materials and the cost of
services for the prudent promotion of the work.
§ 154-6 PENNS GROVE CODE § 154-9
1:96
§ 154-10. Enforcement of ordinances.
§ 154-11. Disposition of moneys.
All moneys collected, either as fines or penalties, for any violation of a
rule or regulation of a Shade Tree Commission or as a charge against real
estate, under any provision of this chapter, shall be forthwith paid over to
the custodian of the municipal funds.
§ 154-12. Nonliability.
Nothing in this chapter contained shall be construed to make the
Commission or any member thereof responsible for the death or injury of
any person or for any injury to any property or highway tree or shrub.
§ 154-13. Adoption of ordinances, rules and regulations.
The Shade Tree Commission is hereby authorized and empowered to
promulgate such ordinances and written rules and regulations as may be
necessary, pursuant to statute and for the proper interpretation of this basic
chapter, for administration and enforcement, provided that such ordinances
and regulations do not conflict with this chapter and conform to the general
standards prescribed by this chapter.
B. The governing body of the municipality shall annually appropriate such
sum as it may deem necessary for said purposes.
A. The Commission may prescribe a fine for violation of its ordinances in
an amount not exceeding $1,500 for each violation, and the Municipal
Court of the Borough of Penns Grove shall have jurisdiction in actions
for the violation of such ordinances and they shall be enforced by like
proceedings and process as that provided by law for the enforcement of
ordinances of the municipality. The officers authorized by law to serve
and execute process in the Municipal Court shall be the officers to serve
and execute any process issued out of the Municipal Court for violations
of the ordinances of the Commission. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-5]
B. A copy of any ordinance of the Commission, certified to under the hand
of its Secretary or Chairman, shall be received in any court of this state
as full and legal proof of the existence of the ordinance and that all
requirements of law in relation to the ordaining, publishing or making
of the same, so as to make it legal and binding, have been complied
with, unless the contrary shall be shown.
§ 154-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 154-13
1:97
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 170
ALARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 247.
§ 170-1. Responsibility for proper functioning.
Any person, firm or corporation that owns, operates or maintains any alarm
device or local alarm designed to summon the Police Department, Fire
Department or other municipal agency to any location in response to any
type of alarm signal shall be responsible for the proper functioning of said
equipment.
§ 170-2. False alarm penalties.
Any alarm activated by inadvertence, negligence or unintentional act of
someone other than an intruder or a fire, and including alarms caused by a
malfunction of the alarm device or relevant equipment, shall be deemed a
false alarm, and there shall be assessed the following penalties:
§ 170-3. Service fee for connection to Police or Fire Department.
Each person, firm or corporation that maintains an alarm device which
is connected to the Penns Grove police station or Penns Grove Fire
Department shall pay a service fee for this privilege of $5 per month or
portion of a month beginning on July 1, 1988. Payment for false alarms shall
be paid within 30 days of notice thereof.
§ 170-4. Disconnection for failure to pay; reactivation. [Amended
7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
In the event that the assessment for false alarms or the payment of monthly
fees as set forth hereinabove is not paid within 30 days of the date due, a
notice will be sent by the Police Department or Fire Department notifying
the person responsible of such delinquency. If payment is not made within
10 days of said notice, the Chief of Police or Fire Chief shall have the
A. For the first and second false alarm in any given calendar year, a
warning shall be issued.
B. For the third and subsequent false alarms in the same calendar year, a
fine of not less than $100 nor more than $500 shall be paid to the
Borough of Penns Grove. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
§ 154-13 PENNS GROVE CODE § 170-4
1:98
authority to disconnect said system. The cost to have said system
reactivated shall be $35 per reactivation.
Chapter 173
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
§ 170-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-4
1:99

ARTICLE I
Licensing and Sale
[Adopted as Art. 1 of Ch. 3 of the 1968 Revised Ordinances (Ch. 79,
Art. I, of the 1986 Code)]
§ 173-1. Purpose.
This article is for the purpose of fixing license fees and regulating the sale
of alcoholic beverages in the Borough of Penns Grove, County of Salem
and State of New Jersey, in accordance with the provisions of an act of the
Legislature titled "An Act Concerning Alcoholic Beverages," N.J.S.A. 33:1-1
et seq., as amended and supplemented, and in accordance with rules and
regulations promulgated or to be promulgated by the State Director of
Alcoholic Beverage Control, applicable hereto, and in accordance with the
rules and regulations existing herein or hereafter adopted by competent
municipal authority not inconsistent with said act or said rules and
regulations of said State Director.
§ 173-2. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful to sell or distribute alcoholic beverages otherwise than
as provided in this article and/or said act of the Legislature or rules of the
Director.
§ 173-3. Designation of issuing authority.
The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Penns Grove, County of Salem,
being the governing body of said municipality, shall constitute the authority
for the distribution or issuance of licenses hereunder.
§ 173-4. License fees; method of payment.
§ 173-5. Limitation on number of licenses.
A. The license fees to be paid hereunder shall be as follows: [Amended
7-5-1983 by Ord. No. 83-4; 5-7-1996 by Ord. No. 96-15; 4-4-2000
by Ord. No. 2000-4; 4-20-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-5]
(1) A fee in the amount of $622.08 per annum is hereby fixed for the
issuance of plenary retail consumption licenses.
(2) A fee in the amount of $311.04 per annum is hereby fixed for the
issuance of plenary retail distribution licenses.
(3) A fee in the amount of $180 per annum is hereby fixed for the
issuance of club licenses.
B. All license fees shall be paid in cash or by certified check to the order of
the Clerk of the Borough of Penns Grove at the time of filing of the
application for a license.
§ 173-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-5
1:101
§ 173-6. Clerk to sign licenses.
The Borough Clerk is hereby designated as the proper person to sign all
licenses on behalf of the Council of the Borough of Penns Grove.
§ 173-7. Legal hours of sale.
A. The number of licenses to be issued and outstanding in the Borough of
Penns Grove is limited as follows:
(1) Plenary retail consumption licenses: eight.
(2) Plenary retail distribution licenses: two.
(3) No seasonal retail consumption license shall be issued.
B. The limitation of the number of licenses shall not prohibit renewal of
licenses outstanding on the effective date of this article or the transfer
of such licenses or the renewal of licenses transferred.
A. Plenary retail consumption. [Amended 9-18-1978 by Ord. No.
78-10; 6-17-1986 by Ord. No. 86-5; 12-6-1994 by Ord. No. 94-27;
12-3-1996 by Ord. No. 96-27]
(1) The time permitted to sell, serve, deliver or allow, permit or suffer
the sale, service or delivery of any alcoholic beverage or permitted
for the consumption of any alcoholic beverage on a licensed
premises shall be as follows:
(a) On a weekday (Monday through Saturday), between the hours
of 7:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. of the following day.
(b) On Sundays, between the hours of 12:00 noon and 9:00 p.m.,
except: [Amended 4-20-1999 by Ord. No. 99-5]
[1] Super Bowl Sunday, when closing will be extended to
11:00 p.m.; or
[2] If New Year's Eve falls on a Sunday, the closing time will be
extended to 2:00 a.m. of the following Monday.
(2) The right of consumption of alcoholic beverages purchased on the
premises prior to the time when sales must cease will be extended
by 1/2 hour past closing time (it being the specific intention of this
subsection that sales must cease at the specified time and
consumption must cease 1/2 hour thereafter).
B. No licensee shall sell, serve, deliver or allow, permit or suffer the sale,
service or delivery of any alcoholic beverages on any day of the week
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m., other than New Year's
Day as set forth in Subsection A, and the right of consumption of
alcoholic beverages purchased on the premises prior to the 2:00 a.m.
closing shall be extended until 2:30 a.m. (it being the specific intention
§ 173-5 PENNS GROVE CODE § 173-7
1:102
§ 173-8. Display of license.
Every license shall be exposed to public view in a conspicuous place in the
place licensed, and any omission so to do shall be presumptive evidence that
the place where alcoholic beverages are being sold is unlicensed.
§ 173-9. Rooms to be open to view; exceptions.
No alcoholic beverages shall be sold in any room other than such as is open
to public view through a door or window, and no screens or other articles
shall be so placed as to obstruct persons outside from looking into the place,
provided that this rule shall not apply to clubs or fraternal organizations.22
§ 173-10. Keg registration. [Added 9-18-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-10]
of this subsection that sales must cease at 2:00 a.m. and consumption
must cease at 2:30 a.m.). [Amended 12-15-1970]
C. During the hours that sales or consumption is hereinabove prohibited,
the entire licensed premises shall also be closed, but this closing of
premises shall not apply to hotels, restaurants, as defined in N.J.S.A.
33:1-1t, or clubs as set forth in N.J.S.A. 33:1-12, Subsection 5.
D. An exception to the foregoing legal hours of sale shall be that licensees
are permitted to conduct business as usual on the day known as "Super
Bowl Sunday" during the hours from 4:00 p.m. until 11:30 p.m. [Added
1-21-1992 by Ord. No. 92-3]
A. Definitions. For purposes of this section the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
BEER KEG — Any brewery-sealed, single container that contains not
less than seven gallons of malt liquor.
RETAILER — A holder of a license under this article to sell alcoholic
beverages under this section.
B. Standards. No retailer shall sell beer kegs unless that retailer affixes an
identification label or tag to each beer keg. An identification label or tag
shall consist of paper, plastic, metal or another durable material that is
not easily damaged or destroyed. Identification labels used may contain
a nonpermanent adhesive material in order to apply the label directly to
an outside surface of the beer keg at the time of sale. Identification tags
shall be attached to beer kegs at the time of sale with nylon ties or
cording, wire ties or other metal attachment devices, or another
durable means of tying or attachment of the tag to the beer keg. The
identification information contained on the label or tag shall include the
licensed retailer's name, address and telephone and a unique beer keg
number assigned by the retailer that sold the beer keg and attached the
22.Editor's Note: Original § 3.1-10, Election day - sales prohibited, which immediately
followed this section, was repealed 6-17-1986 by Ord. No. 86-5.
§ 173-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-10
1:103
identification label or tag. The retailer shall be responsible for the
complete and thorough removal of the entire identification label or
tag and any adhesive or attachment devices of the label or tag. The
identification label or tag must be kept on file with the retailer for not
less than 90 days from the date of return.
C. Identification required. A retailer may not sell a beer keg unless the
beer keg has an attached identification label or tag complying with the
standards established under Subsection B of this section.
D. Retailers to keep records.
(1) A retailer who sells a beer keg must at the time of the sale record:
(a) The number of the purchaser's driver's license, governmentissued
identification card, military identification card, or a
valid United States or foreign passport;
(b) The date and time of the purchase;
(c) The beer keg identification number required under Subsection
C of this section; and
(d) The purchaser's signature.
(2) The record must be retained for not less than 90 days after the date
of sale.
E. Access to records. A retailer required to retain records under
Subsection D of this section must make the records available during the
regular business hours for inspection by a peace officer or an agent or
employee of the New Jersey Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
F. Violations.
(1) A person required to record information under Subsection D of this
section may not knowingly make a materially false entry in the
book or register required under that subsection. In a prosecution
under this subsection, it is a defense for the defendant to prove by a
preponderance of the evidence that the defendant reasonably and
in good faith relied upon the identification provided by the
purchaser of a beer keg.
(2) No person other than a retailer, a licensed wholesaler of malt
beverages, a peace officer or an agent or employees of the New
Jersey Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control may intentionally
remove identification placed on a beer keg in compliance with
Subsection D. No person may intentionally deface or damage
identification on a beer keg to make it unreadable.
(3) Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this section
may, upon conviction, by subject to a fine of up to $2,000, be
sentenced to jail for up to 90 days or be required to perform
§ 173-10 PENNS GROVE CODE § 173-10
1:104
§ 173-11. Inspections.
All licensed premises shall be subject to examination and inspection by the
police and by any other constituted authorities at any time.
§ 173-12. Violations and penalties.
community service for up to 90 days at the discretion of the court.
Each and every violation shall constitute a separate offense.23
[Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
A. Unless otherwise provided in N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq. or this article, any
person who shall sell or distribute any alcoholic beverage without
having complied with or in violation of any of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction in the Municipal Court, be subject to a
penalty as provided in § 1-2 of this Code. [Amended 6-17-1986 by
Ord. No. 86-5; 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
B. Any license issued pursuant to this article may be suspended or revoked
for violation of any of the provisions of this article or for violations of
any of the provisions of said act or any of the rules or regulations
provided by the State Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
23.Editor's Note: Original § 79-10, Gambling prohibited, and § 79-11, Slot machines
prohibited, which immediately followed this section, were repealed 7-5-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-5.
§ 173-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-12
1:105

ARTICLE II
Consumption on Public and Private Property
[Adopted 12-17-1974 by Ord. No. 74-9; amended in its entirety
12-7-1982 by Ord. No. 82-13 (Ch. 79, Art. III, of the 1986 Code)]
§ 173-13. Purpose.
This article is enacted for the purpose of prohibiting the possession and
consumption of alcoholic beverages in public parks, playgrounds, recreation
areas, and private conveyances on public areas and public ways and,
further, prohibiting the consumption and possession of alcoholic beverages
on private property without the express written permission of the owner.
§ 173-14. Consumption restricted.
No person shall consume or offer to another for consumption or possess
with the intent to consume any alcoholic beverages in or upon any public
building, park, playground or recreational area nor in, on or upon public
lands, streets, roads, alleys, rights-of-way or sidewalks or upon any land or
building owned or occupied by the municipal government, unless previously
authorized by the Borough Council.
§ 173-15. Private conveyances.
No person shall consume or offer to another for consumption or possess
with the intent to consume any alcoholic beverage in any private
conveyance while such conveyance is located in or on any public street,
road, lane, alley, right-of-way, public parking lot or any other property. For
the purposes of the application of this section, it shall be irrelevant whether
such private conveyance is in motion, stopped or parked.
§ 173-16. Private property.
No person shall consume or offer to another for consumption or possess
with the intent to consume any alcoholic beverage while in or upon private
property, not his or her own, without having the express permission of
the owner or other person authorized to grant such permission nor in a
private conveyance while such conveyance is on private property without
the express permission of the owner or other person authorized to grant
such permission.
§ 173-17. Transportation.
No person shall have in his or her possession any alcoholic beverage in any
of the places where consumption of the same is prohibited in §§ 173-14,
173-15 and 173-16 above, except in the process of transporting the same
within the original closed container to a place where consumption is
lawfully permitted.
§ 173-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-18
1:107
§ 173-18. Beverages in other than original containers or open
containers.
Possession of any intoxicating beverages in other than the original
container or in an original container which has been opened or on which the
seal has been broken shall raise the presumption that such beverage was
intended for consumption.
§ 173-19. Interpretation.
§ 173-20. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-17-1986 by Ord. No.
86-5; 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
Each and every person violating any of the provisions of this article, upon
conviction, shall be subject to a penalty as provided in § 1-2 of this Code.
§ 173-21. Additional remedies.
In regard to any conviction relating to this article, when the Municipal
Court suspends the imposition of a defendant's sentence or a portion
thereof or sentences him to be placed on probation, the Municipal Court
may attach such reasonable conditions authorized by N.J.S.A. 2C:45-1,
including the performance of community-related services and the
imposition of conditions reasonably related to the rehabilitation of the
A. For the purposes of this article, a person shall be deemed to be in
possession of an alcoholic beverage within the meaning of this article if
he intends to or does exercise custody, control or dominion over such
alcoholic beverage; provided, however, that actual physical or manual
possession is not required if the intention to exercise such custody,
control or dominion over the alcoholic beverage is manifested from the
direct or circumstantial evidence where it is reasonable to infer that the
capacity to do so exists. Possession, custody or control need not be
exclusive but may be jointly exercised by two or more persons. A person
shall be presumed to be jointly in possession, custody or control of the
alcoholic beverage if the owner or person in physical control of the
alcoholic beverage is in close proximity to him, and the alcoholic
beverage is not sealed or has been partially consumed.
B. For the purposes of this article, any fluid suitable for human
consumption and having alcoholic content of more than 1/2 of 1% by
volume, including alcohol, beer, ale, naturally fermented wine, treated
wine, blended wine, fortified wine, sparkling wine, distilled liquors,
blended distilled liquors and any other brewed, fermented or distilled
liquors, if for use for beverage purposes, shall be considered an
alcoholic beverage.
C. For the purposes of this article, a private conveyance shall be any
automobile, van, truck, motorcycle, moped, trail bike or any other such
vehicle.
§ 173-18 PENNS GROVE CODE § 173-21
1:108
defendant, including but not limited to alcoholic rehabilitation programs or
other such programs related to alcoholic education or rehabilitation.
§ 173-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-21
1:109

ARTICLE III
Underage Consumption
[Adopted 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-6]
§ 173-22. Legislative authority.
Senate No. 692 was duly passed by both houses of the New Jersey
Legislature and signed into law by the Governor on June 26, 2000, to
become effective immediately (P.L. 2000, c. 33). This legislation amends
N.J.S.A. 40:48-1.2 to provide a new section authorizing a municipality to
enact an ordinance making it unlawful for any person under the legal age
to, without legal authority, knowingly possess or knowingly consume an
alcoholic beverage on private property and providing for the assessment of
penalties, including the suspension, revocation or postponement of certain
driving privileges. The Borough of Penns Grove is of the opinion that such
an ordinance is in the public interest and will promote public safety and will
contribute to the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community
at large.
§ 173-23. Underage consumption prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person under the legal age to, without legal
authority, knowingly possess or knowingly consume an alcoholic beverage
on private property.
§ 173-24. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person violating the provisions of this article shall, in accordance
with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-1.2, as amended, be punished by a
fine of $250 for a first offense and $350 for any subsequent offense.
B. In addition to the fine authorized for this offense, the court may
suspend or postpone for six months the driving privilege of the
defendant. Upon the conviction of any person and the suspension or
postponement of that person's driver's license, the court shall forward a
report to the Division of Motor Vehicles stating the first and last day of
the suspension or postponement period imposed by the court pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:48-1.2, as amended. If a person at the time of the
imposition of sentence is less than 17 years of age, the period of license
postponement, including a suspension or postponement of the privilege
of operating a motorized bicycle, shall commence on the day the
sentence is imposed and shall run for a period of six months after the
person reaches the age of 17 years.
C. If a person at the time of the imposition of a sentence has a valid
driver's license issued by this state, the court shall immediately collect
the license and forward it to the Division of Motor Vehicles along with
the report. If for any reason the license cannot be collected, the court
shall include in the report the complete name, address, date of birth,
§ 173-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-24
1:111
§ 173-25. Exceptions.
eye color, and sex of the person, as well as the first and last date of the
license suspension period imposed by the court.
D. The court shall inform the person orally and in writing that if the person
is convicted of operating a motor vehicle during the period of license
suspension or postponement, the person shall be subject to the
penalties set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:3-40. A person shall be required to
acknowledge receipt of the written notice in writing. Failure to receive
a written notice or failure to acknowledge in writing the receipt of a
written notice shall not be a defense to a subsequent charge of a
violation of N.J.S.A. 39:3-40.
E. If a person convicted under this article is not a New Jersey resident, the
court shall suspend or postpone, as appropriate, the nonresidential
driving privilege of the person based on the age of the person and
submit it to the Division of Motor Vehicles on the required report. The
court shall not collect the license of a nonresident convicted under this
article. Upon receipt of a report for the court, the Division of Motor
Vehicles shall notify the appropriate officials in the licensing
jurisdiction of the suspension or postponement.
A. Nothing contained in this article is intended, nor shall it be construed,
as prohibiting an underage person from consuming or possessing an
alcoholic beverage in connection with a religious observance, ceremony
or rite or consuming or possessing an alcoholic beverage in the
presence of and with the permission of a parent, guardian or relative
who has attained the legal age to purchase and consume alcoholic
beverages.
B. As used in the preceding Subsection A, the following terms shall have
the meaning set forth:
GUARDIAN — A person who has qualified as a guardian of the underage
person pursuant to testamentary or court appointment.
RELATIVE — The underage person's grandparent, aunt or uncle, sibling
or any other person related by blood or affinity.
C. Nothing contained in this article is intended nor shall it be construed as
prohibiting possession of alcoholic beverages by any such person while
actually engaged in the performance of employment by a person who is
licensed under Title 33 of the Revised Statutes, or while actively
engaged in the preparation of food while enrolled in a culinary arts or
hotel management program at a county vocational school or postsecondary
educational institution; provided, however, that this article
shall not be construed to preclude the imposition of a penalty under
N.J.S.A. 40:48-1.2 or 33.1-81 or any other section of law against a
person who is convicted of unlawful alcoholic beverage activity on or at
premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages.
§ 173-24 PENNS GROVE CODE § 173-26
1:112
§ 173-26. Exemption from prosecution.
Underage persons reporting the need for medical assistance shall be
exempt from prosecution according to N.J.S.A. 40:48-1.2a.
§ 173-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-26
1:113
Chapter 177
AMUSEMENT DEVICES
§ 177-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMERCIAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any machine which may be
operated for entertainment or amusement in public, whether the machine
is coin operated or not or whether or not it registers a score or tallies. This
definition shall include, but not be limited to, pinball machines, bowling
machines, mechanical grab machines, billiard tables and electronic games.
The above listing is intended to be typical and shall not be construed as
exclusive.
JUKEBOX — A coin-operated phonograph where the choice of numerous
songs is available.
LICENSED PREMISES — Premises on which are located three or more
commercial amusement devices which are used by the public, subject to the
following exclusions:
OPERATOR — Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or association in
whose place of business three or more commercial amusement devices are
placed or kept for operation or use by the public.
VENDING MACHINE — Any coin-operated machine from which consumable
items are dispensed when coins or currency is inserted into the machine.
§ 177-2. Prerequisites to licensing.
Any fraternal, charitable organization or private business which is
licensed for the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages need not
apply for a premises license; however, said organization or business
shall not be exempt from the annual license fee as set forth below for
each machine on the premises.
A.
No portion of this chapter shall apply to an individual operating any
type of amusement device, vending machine or jukebox, which
operation is confined to that individual's private dwelling and not
operated for profit.
B.
No portion of this chapter shall apply to the operation of any type of
amusement device, vending machine or jukebox which is located in the
Borough as part of a carnival, circus, fair or similar form of temporary
entertainment.
C.
A. No license shall be granted for any premises where no emergency fire
exit is provided.
§ 173-26 PENNS GROVE CODE § 177-2
1:114
§ 177-3. License applications.
All license applicants must be at least 18 years of age and shall submit in
writing to the Borough Clerk of Penns Grove the following information:
B. No license shall be issued unless the premises has been inspected as to
fire prevention and fire safety and approved by the Fire Marshal for
such use.
C. No license shall be granted hereunder for any premises where the
applicant or any officer or stockholder of an applicant corporation shall
have been convicted of a crime, disorderly persons offense or a
violation of a Borough ordinance involving gambling; provided,
however, that the Borough Council may, in its discretion, grant the
license when such conviction shall have preceded the date of the
application by five years or more or, upon application by the applicant
for a removal of the disqualification, the Borough Council may, in its
discretion, grant a license hereunder.
D. No license shall be issued to any person until all federal and state laws
and Borough ordinances relating to the premises have been complied
with.
E. No commercial amusement device, vending machine or jukebox shall be
operated unless the owner or operator of said machine shall have first
paid the required fee, received the required license and displayed the
license as set forth hereinafter.
A. The name and address of the applicant and whether the applicant is an
individual, partnership or corporation.
B. The age of the applicant, of each partner if a partnership and of each of
the principal officers of the corporation if the applicant is a corporation.
C. The prior criminal record of the applicant, if any, setting forth the date
or dates of conviction, the nature of the violation and the jurisdiction in
which the violation occurred. If the applicant is a partnership, the same
information shall be supplied for each partner, and if the applicant is a
corporation, this information shall be supplied for each of the principal
officers of said corporation.
D. A full description of the device or devices to be used by the applicant
and made available to the public.
E. The street number and description of the area where the machines are
to be operated stating the floor or floors of the premises and attaching a
sketch of the rooms or areas involved. Such sketch shall be drawn to
scale with the scale set forth on the sketch and shall designate all exits,
windows and storage spaces to be used in the operation.
F. A sketch showing the location of all structures and designating the
owners of said structures within 200 feet of the proposed operation.
§ 177-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 177-3
1:115
§ 177-4. License fees.
§ 177-5. Application review.
The Borough Clerk shall then submit the completed application to the
Mayor and Council for review at their next regular meeting, wherein a
determination shall be made as to whether or not the applicant has
complied with all regulations.
§ 177-6. Proximity to school and church premises.
No commercial amusement device, as defined herein, shall be located
within 1,000 feet of any school premises or 500 feet of any church premises.
§ 177-7. Transferability of license.
No license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be transferable from one
place to another, from one operator to another or from one machine to
another.
Such sketch shall also designate prominent landmarks within the twohundred-
foot radius; be drawn to scale, with the scale set forth in the
sketch; and show all streets and proposed areas of off-street parking to
be utilized by the general public for said operation.
A. An operator of a licensed premises shall be charged a fee of $1,000 per
annum, which fee shall be submitted with the application for the
operation of the premises. Once an operator's application has been
approved by the Mayor and Council, the Borough Clerk shall issue a
license, which license shall be prominently displayed on the premises.
B. A fee of $15 per annum shall be charged for each commercial
amusement device located on the premises for any portion of the
calendar year beginning January 1 and ending December 31. For each
machine for which a fee is paid, the Borough Clerk shall issue an annual
license, which license must be displayed on said machine in a
prominent location, readily visible to members of the public and
enforcing officials. Each such license shall be nontransferable and shall
designate thereon an identification number or serial number of the
machine for which it has been issued.
C. A fee of $15 per annum shall be paid for the operation of each vending
machine or jukebox located on any premises for any portion of a
calendar year beginning January 1 and ending December 31. For each
machine for which a fee is paid, the Borough Clerk shall issue an annual
license, which license must be displayed on said machine, readily
visible to the public and any enforcing official. Each such license shall
be nontransferable and shall designate thereon an identification
number or serial number of the machine for which it has been issued.
[Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
§ 177-3 PENNS GROVE CODE § 177-8
1:116
§ 177-8. Renewal of license; hearing on objections.
§ 177-9. General regulations for operation. [Amended 7-5-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-5]
A. An operator shall annually renew a premises license by filing notice
with the Borough Clerk between October 1 and November 1 of any
calendar year preceding the calendar year for which said license is to
be renewed. The notice shall be accompanied by payment of the annual
fee.
B. The annual fee for each commercial amusement device, vending
machine and jukebox shall be due and payable on or before January 10
of the calendar year in which the said machines are operated. A fee for
any new or replacement machines shall be payable when said machines
are brought to the operator's premises, and there shall be no refund or
credit given for any machines removed from the premises during any
portion of the calendar year.
C. Any objections to the renewal of an operator's license shall be filed with
the Borough Clerk. All objections shall be in writing and signed by the
individual or entity making the objection. A hearing on the objection to
renewal shall be held upon at least 10 days' notice to the licensee and
the person objecting on or before October 1 in the year immediately
preceding the year for which the operator seeks renewal. Notice of the
hearing shall be published at least once in a newspaper circulating
within the Borough, no less than 10 days prior to the hearing. All
hearings shall be conducted by the Mayor and Council at a special
meeting convened solely for the purpose of hearing objections and
deciding the issue of renewal. If a majority of the Mayor and Council
determines that the operator has violated the terms and provisions of
this chapter and that such violations are likely to continue, then the
operator's license shall not be renewed. In rendering its decision, the
Mayor and Council shall set forth in writing their findings of fact,
conclusions and reasons therefor. A copy of their decision shall be sent
to the operator and person or persons who filed objections within 20
days of the hearing's conclusion. Any licensee shall be entitled to
continue the operation of the licensed premises pending the decision of
the Mayor and Council.
A. All commercial amusement devices, vending machines and jukeboxes
accessible to the public on any licensed premises shall be arranged so
as to permit a clear view of the interior of the room or rooms involved
from the exterior of the operator's premises at all times.
B. No operation of any commercial amusement device in a licensed
premises shall be permitted between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 9:00
a.m.
§ 177-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 177-9
1:117
§ 177-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-17-1986 by Ord. No.
86-5; 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
Any operator violating this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to a
penalty as provided in § 1-2 of this Code.
Chapter 181
ANIMALS
C. Shooting galleries where guns or firearms are used for a consideration
to win a prize or otherwise shall not be licensed or permitted within the
limits of the Borough.
D. No operator shall offer or permit to be offered any prizes or awards,
whether in cash or otherwise, as an inducement to the use of said
machines.
E. No operator shall permit any person using a commercial amusement
device to operate the same for any gambling purpose prohibited by law.
In the event that it is determined, judicially or by admission of the
operator, that any commercial amusement device is being operated as a
gambling device, the machine may be confiscated and destroyed or sold
at public auction, and the license of the operator may be revoked after a
hearing.
F. No operator shall permit any minor under the age of 16 years,
unaccompanied by a parent, on the business premises while school is in
session nor to remain on the premises after 9:00 p.m.
G. No operator shall permit the noise level on any licensed premises to
interfere with the reasonable use of any adjacent structures.
H. Every commercial amusement device, vending machine and jukebox
required to be licensed under this chapter shall have permanently
affixed thereto an individual identification number or serial number,
which number shall not be transferable from one machine to another.
All such identification or serial numbers shall be located on said
machines immediately adjacent to the location on such machine where
the machine's license shall be displayed. The identification number or
serial number and license shall both be in such a position that they may
be readily reviewed and compared by members of the public and
enforcing officials.
§ 177-9 PENNS GROVE CODE § 177-10
1:118
ARTICLE I
Dogs and Cats
§ 181-1. Definitions and word usage.
§ 181-2. Licensing; fee.
A. The words hereinafter defined shall have the meanings herein indicated
for the purpose of this article as follows:
CAT — Any cat, male or female.
DOG — Any dog, bitch or spayed bitch.
DOG OR CAT OF LICENSING AGE — Any dog or cat which has attained
the age of seven months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
KENNEL — Any establishment wherein or whereon the business of
boarding or selling dogs and cats or breeding dogs and cats for sale is
carried on, except a pet shop.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a dog or cat, includes
every person having a right of property in such dog or cat and every
person who has such dog or cat in his keeping.
PERSON — An individual, firm, partnership, corporation or association
of persons.
PET SHOP — Any room or group of rooms, cage or exhibition pen, not
part of a kennel, wherein dogs and cats for sale are kept or displayed.
POUND — An establishment for the confinement of dogs and cats
seized, either under the provision of this article or otherwise.
SHELTER — Any establishment where dogs and cats are received,
housed and distributed without charge.
B. Word usage.
(1) The words "and" and "or" may be used interchangeably, and either
of the two may be applicable, whichever is the more conducive
towards the effectuating of this article.
(2) Personal pronouns shall mean either the singular or the plural,
whichever is applicable and conducive towards the effectuating of
this article.
A. No person shall keep or harbor any dog or cat within the Borough of
Penns Grove without first obtaining a license therefor, to be obtained
upon application to the Clerk of the Borough of Penns Grove by the
owner with payment of the prescribed fee, and no person shall keep or
harbor any dog or cat in said Borough except in compliance with the
provisions of this article.
B. Any person who shall own, keep or harbor a dog or cat of licensing age
shall, in the month of January of each year, apply for and procure from
§ 181-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-2
1:119
§ 181-3. Disposition of fees.
All fees or moneys that are received for this article shall be forwarded to the
Clerk of the Borough of Penns Grove to be deposited in an account hereby
the Clerk of the Borough of Penns Grove a license and official metal
registration tag for each such dog or cat so owned, kept or harbored
and shall place upon each dog or cat a collar or harness with the
registration tag securely fastened thereto.
C. The person applying for the license and registration tag shall pay a fee
of $15 for each dog or cat for the registration and tag, unless such
person shall present, at the time of application, a certificate signed by a
licensed veterinarian stating that the dog or cat has been spayed or
neutered, in which case the fee to be paid shall be $12. The fee for
renewal of said license and tag shall be the same as the original fee and
be due the month of January of each year. [Amended 4-4-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-7]
D. Dogs used for guides for blind persons and commonly known as "Seeing
Eye" dogs shall be licensed and registration issued as other dogs
heretofore provided for, except that the owner or keeper of such dog
shall not be required to pay any fee therefor.
E. The application shall state the breed, sex, age, color and marking of the
dog or cat for which license and registration are sought and whether it
is of a long- or short-haired variety; also, the name and street or post
office address of the owner and the persons who shall keep or harbor
such dog or cat. The information on said application and the
registration number issued for the dog or cat shall be preserved for
three years by the Clerk of the Borough. In addition, he shall forward
similar information to the State Department of Health each month on
forms furnished by said Department. Registration numbers shall be
issued in the order of the application.
F. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the Borough of
Penns Grove any dog or cat licensed in another state for the current
year and bearing a registration tag and permit said dog or cat to be
kept within the Borough of Penns Grove for a period of more than 90
days shall immediately apply for a license and registration tag for said
dog or cat.
G. Any person who shall bring into the Borough of Penns Grove any
unlicensed dog or cat and shall keep the same or permit the same to be
kept within the Borough for a period of more than 10 days shall
immediately apply for a license and registration tag for said dog or cat.
H. Any person who does not obtain a dog or cat license and registration
tag within the time required under this article shall be assessed a late
fee of $10. This late fee shall be in addition to any penalties set forth in
§ 181-8. [Amended 4-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-7]
§ 181-2 PENNS GROVE CODE § 181-3
1:120
referred to as the "Canine and Feline Control Account" at the end of each
and every month; provided, however, that the registration tag fees shall be
forwarded to the State Department of Health within 30 days. This Canine
and Feline Control Account will be utilized in conjunction with the existing
dog and cat account appropriated by the Mayor and Council.
§ 181-4. Animal Control Officer.
§ 181-5. Impounding of animals. [Amended 9-21-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-16]
A. The Borough Council shall have the power to appoint a certified Animal
Control Officer, whose duty it shall be to enforce the provisions of this
article and to impound unlicensed dogs and cats running at large in
violation of the provisions of this article.
B. The Animal Control Officer of the Borough shall promptly after
February 1 of each year cause a canvass to be made of all dogs and cats
owned, kept or harbored within the limits of the Borough of Penns
Grove and shall report to the Clerk of the Borough, the Board of Health
of the Borough and the State Department of Health the results thereof
or setting in separate columns the names and addresses of persons
owning, keeping or harboring such dogs and cats and the number of
licensed dogs and cats, together with a complete description of each
said licensed dog and cat.
A. The Animal Control Officer of the Borough of Penns Grove shall take
into custody and impound and dispose of as provided in this section:
(1) Any dog off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or
harboring said dog which said official or his agent or agents have
reason to believe is a stray dog.
(2) Any dog off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or
harboring said dog without a current registration tag on his collar.
(3) Any female dog in season off the premises of the owner or of the
person keeping or harboring said dog.
(4) Any dog or other animal which is suspected to be rabid.
(5) Any dog or other animal off the premises of the owner reported to,
or observed by, a certified Animal Control Officer to be ill, injured
or creating a threat to public health, safety or welfare, or otherwise
interfering with the enjoyment of property.
B. If any animal so seized wears a collar or harness having inscribed
thereon or attached thereto the name and address of any person or a
registration tag, or the owner or the person keeping or harboring said
animal is known, the Animal Control Officer shall serve on said person a
notice, in writing, stating that the animal has been seized and will be
liable to be offered for adoption or destroyed if not claimed within seven
§ 181-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-5
1:121
§ 181-6. Running at large. [Amended 9-21-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-16]
§ 181-7. Barking and howling.
No person who owns, keeps, harbors or possesses any dog or dogs or any
cat or cats shall suffer or permit such dog or dogs or such cat or cats
to annoy neighbors and other persons living in his immediate vicinity by
loud or continued barking or howling. When a complaint shall be made in
writing, under oath, by two or more persons that such barking or howling is
continued for unreasonable periods of time to the annoyance and discomfort
of the complainants and their neighbors, so that it can be established that
such barking or howling is a nuisance to the immediate neighborhood, then
such owner or keeper shall cause such barking or howling to immediately
cease or terminate. Should such barking or howling again occur, the owner
days after the service of the notice in accordance with N.J.S.A.
4:19-15.16. A notice under this section may be served either by
delivering it to the person on whom it is to be served or by leaving it at
the person's usual or last known place of abode, or at the address given
on the collar, or by forwarding it by post in a prepaid letter addressed to
that person at his usual or last known place of abode, or to the address
given on the collar.
C. Any officer or agent authorized or empowered to perform any duty
under this article is hereby authorized to go upon any premises to seize
and impound when such officer is in immediate pursuit of such dog or
cat, except upon the premises of the owner of the dog or cat if said
owner is present and forbids the same.
D. No person shall hinder, molest or interfere with anyone performing any
duty which he is authorized or empowered to perform under this
article.
A. No person owning, keeping or harboring any animal shall allow, permit
or suffer it or permit it to run at large upon another's lands, whether
public or private, without first obtaining the owner's consent. Dogs and
cats, when off the property of their owner or keeper, shall at times be
under leash and within the actual physical control of such owner or
keeper and not merely within such person's call. Nothing in this article
shall be construed to limit or prohibit the normal use of hunting dogs in
appropriate areas during the normal hunting season.
B. The Animal Control Officer or his agent shall take into custody and
impound or cause to be taken into custody and impounded, and
thereafter destroyed or offered for adoption as provided in § 181-5B,
any dog running at large in the Borough of Penns Grove. This shall
include any dog off the premises of the owner or the person keeping or
harboring such dog unless said dog is restrained on a leash as
hereinbefore provided.
§ 181-5 PENNS GROVE CODE § 181-7
1:122
or keeper of such dog or cat shall be deemed to have violated the provisions
of this section and shall be subject to the penalty set forth for this article.
§ 181-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-5]
Unless otherwise provided in N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.19, any person who shall
violate any of the provisions of any part of this article, hereby referred to as
the "Dog and Cat Ordinance," shall, upon conviction by the Municipal Court,
be subject to a penalty as provided in § 1-2 of this Code.
§ 181-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-8
1:123

ARTICLE II
Keeping of Certain Animals
§ 181-9. Prohibited acts.
No person, firm or corporation shall keep pigs, hogs or chickens within the
limits of the Borough.
§ 181-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-5]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof by the Municipal Court, be subject to a penalty as
provided in § 1-2 of this Code.
§ 181-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-10
1:125

ARTICLE III
Dangerous and Vicious Dogs
[Added 7-1-1997 by Ord. No. 97-12]
§ 181-11. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — The Borough's certified Animal Control
Officer or, in the absence of such an officer, the Chief of Police or his
designee.
DOG — Any dog or dog hybrid.
DOMESTIC ANIMAL — Any cat, dog or livestock other than poultry.
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG — Any dog or dog hybrid declared
potentially dangerous by the Municipal Court pursuant to § 181-16.
VICIOUS DOG — Any dog or dog hybrid declared vicious by the Municipal
Court pursuant to § 181-15.
§ 181-12. Seizure and impoundment.
A. The Animal Control Officer shall seize and impound a dog when the
officer has reasonable cause to believe that the dog:
(1) Attacked a person and caused death or serious bodily injury, as
defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1b, to that person;
(2) Caused bodily injury, as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1a, to a person
during an unprovoked attack and poses a serious threat of harm to
persons or domestic animals;
(3) Engaged in dogfighting activities as described in N.J.S.A. 4:22-24
and 4:22-26; or
(4) Has been trained, tormented, badgered, baited or encouraged to
engage in unprovoked attacks upon persons or domestic animals.
B. The dog shall be impounded until the final disposition as to whether the
dog is vicious or potentially dangerous. Subject to the approval of the
Animal Control Officer, the dog may be impounded in a facility or other
structure agreeable to the owner. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-5]
C. The Animal Control Officer shall document all evidence relating to the
decision to seize and impound the dog, including statements from
witnesses, complainants or victims regarding the dog concerning
specific incidents in detail and including the date or dates and the
name, address and telephone number of such witnesses, complainants
or victims; police reports; observations of the Animal Control Officer;
and other relevant information.
§ 181-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-13
1:127
§ 181-13. Notice of seizure and impoundment; hearing; destruction
of dog.
§ 181-14. Settlement agreements.
Notwithstanding any provision in this article or in N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 et seq.
to the contrary, the Borough and the owner of the dog may settle and
dispose of the matter at any time in such manner and according to such
terms and conditions as may be mutually agreed upon in writing signed
by both parties. Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary,
neither the Borough nor any of its officers, employees or agents shall have
any liability by virtue of having entered into any settlement agreement
pursuant to this section, or for any action or inaction related to the entry
into such agreement, for any injuries or damages caused thereafter by
the dog. The Borough may, as a condition of the settlement agreement,
also require that the owner of the dog hold the Borough and its officers,
employees and agents harmless for any legal expenses or fees incurred in
defending against any such cause of action brought against the Borough
notwithstanding the prohibition against such causes of action set forth in
N.J.S.A. 4:19-21.1. For the purposes of settlement agreements made under
A. The Animal Control Officer shall notify the Municipal Court immediately
that he has seized and impounded a dog pursuant to § 181-12 and that a
hearing is required. The Animal Control Officer shall, through a
reasonable effort, attempt to determine the identity of the owner of any
dog seized and impounded pursuant to § 181-12. If its owner cannot be
identified within seven days, that dog may be humanely destroyed.
[Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
B. The Animal Control Officer shall, within three working days of the
determination of the identity of the owner of a dog seized and
impounded pursuant to § 181-12, notify, by certified mail, return receipt
requested, the owner concerning the seizure and impoundment and
that, if the owner wishes, a hearing will be held to determine whether
the impounded dog is vicious or potentially dangerous. This notice shall
also require that the owner return within seven days, by certified mail
or hand delivery, a signed statement indicating whether he wishes the
hearing to be conducted or, if not, to relinquish ownership of the dog, in
which case the dog may be humanely destroyed. If the owner cannot be
notified by certified mail, return receipt requested, or refuses to sign
for the certified letter, or does not reply to the certified letter with a
signed statement within seven days of receipt, the dog may be
humanely destroyed.
C. In the event that the owner requests a hearing, the Animal Control
Officer shall promptly notify the Municipal Court Administrator and the
Municipal Court Prosecutor. The Animal Control Officer shall be
responsible to provide the Municipal Court Prosecutor with all evidence
relating to the dog in question, including the name, address and
telephone number of witnesses who should be subpoenaed for the
hearing and their probable testimony.
§ 181-13 PENNS GROVE CODE § 181-14
1:128
this section, the Animal Control Officer is authorized to negotiate and
execute such agreements on behalf of the Borough, provided that prior
thereto the same is approved by the Council committee which oversees the
Animal Control Officer and the proposed settlement agreement is reviewed
and approved by the Borough Attorney.
§ 181-15. Finding to declare dog vicious.
§ 181-16. Finding to declare dog potentially dangerous.
A. The Municipal Court shall declare the dog vicious if it finds, by clear
and convincing evidence, that the dog:
(1) Killed a person or caused serious bodily injury, as defined in N.J.S.A.
2C:11-1b, to a person; or
(2) Has engaged in dogfighting activities as described in N.J.S.A.
4:22-24 and 4:22-26.
B. The dog shall not be declared vicious for inflicting death or serious
bodily injury, as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1b, upon a person if the dog
was provoked. The Borough shall bear the burden of proof to
demonstrate that the dog was not provoked.
C. If the Municipal Court declares a dog to be vicious, and no appeal is
made of this ruling pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-25, the dog shall be
destroyed in a humane and expeditious manner, except that no dog may
be destroyed during the pending of an appeal.
A. The Municipal Court shall declare a dog to be potentially dangerous if it
finds, by clear and convincing evidence, that the dog:
(1) Caused bodily injury as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1a to a person
during an unprovoked attack and poses a serious threat of bodily
injury or death to a person;
(2) Killed another domestic animal and:
(a) Poses a threat of serious bodily injury or death to a person; or
(b) Poses a threat of death to another domestic animal; or
(3) Has been trained, tormented, badgered, baited or encouraged to
engage in unprovoked attacks upon persons or domestic animals.
B. A dog shall not be declared potentially dangerous for:
(1) Causing bodily injury as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1a to a person if
the dog was provoked; or
(2) Killing a domestic animal if the domestic animal was the aggressor.
C. For the purposes of Subsection B(1) of this section, the Borough shall
bear the burden of proof to demonstrate that the dog was not provoked.
§ 181-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-17
1:129
§ 181-17. Order and schedule for compliance for potentially
dangerous dog.
If the Municipal Court declares the dog to be potentially dangerous, it shall
issue an order and a schedule for compliance which, in part:
A. Shall require the owner to comply with the following conditions:
(1) To apply, at his own expense, to the dog registrar or other Borough
official designated to license dogs pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.2 for
a special municipal potentially dangerous dog license, municipal
registration number and red identification tag issued pursuant to
§ 181-23 of this article. The owner shall, at his own expense, have
the registration number tattooed upon the dog in a prominent
location. A potentially dangerous dog shall be impounded until the
owner obtains a municipal potentially dangerous dog license,
municipal registration number and red identification tag.
(2) To display, in a conspicuous manner, a sign on his premises warning
that a potentially dangerous dog is on the premises. The sign shall
be visible and legible from 50 feet of the enclosure required
pursuant to Subsection A(3) of this section.
(3) To immediately erect and maintain an enclosure for the potentially
dangerous dog on the property where the potentially dangerous
dog will be kept and maintained, which has sound sides, top and
bottom to prevent the potentially dangerous dog from escaping by
climbing, jumping or digging and within a fence of at least six feet
in height separated by at least three feet from the confined area.
The owner of a potentially dangerous dog shall securely lock the
enclosure to prevent the entry of the general public and to preclude
any release or escape of a potentially dangerous dog by an
unknowing child or other person. All potentially dangerous dogs
shall be confined in the enclosure or, if taken out of the enclosure,
securely muzzled and restrained with a tether approved by the
Animal Control Officer and having a minimum tensile strength
sufficiently in excess of that required to restrict the potentially
dangerous dog's movements to a radius of no more than three feet
from the owner and under the direct supervision of the owner.
(4) The dog in question must be spayed or neutered within 10 days of
that determination.
B. May require the owner to maintain liability insurance in an amount
determined by the Municipal Court to cover any damage or injury
caused by the potentially dangerous dog. The liability insurance, which
may be separate from any other homeowner policy, shall contain a
provision requiring the Borough to be named as an additional insured
for the sole purpose of being notified by the insurance company of any
cancellation, termination or expiration of the liability insurance policy.
§ 181-17 PENNS GROVE CODE § 181-18
1:130
§ 181-18. Appeals.
The owner of the dog, or the Animal Control Officer, may appeal any final
decision, order or judgment, including any conditions attached thereto, of
the Municipal Court pursuant to this article by filing an appeal with the
Superior Court, Law Division, in accordance with the rules governing the
courts of the State of New Jersey pertaining to appeals from courts of
limited jurisdiction. The Superior Court shall hear the appeal by conducting
a hearing de novo in the manner established by those rules for appeals from
courts of limited jurisdiction.
§ 181-19. Liability of owner for costs of impoundment and
destruction.
§ 181-20. Right to convene hearing for subsequent actions of dog.
If the Municipal Court finds that the dog is not vicious or potentially
dangerous, the Municipal Court shall retain the right to convene a hearing
to determine whether the dog is vicious or potentially dangerous for any
subsequent actions of the dog.
§ 181-21. Duties of owner of potentially dangerous dog.
The owner of a potentially dangerous dog shall:
A. If a dog is declared vicious or potentially dangerous and all appeals
pertaining thereto have been exhausted, the owner of the dog shall be
liable to the Borough for the costs and expenses of impounding and
destroying the dog. The owner shall incur the expense of impounding
the dog in a facility other than the municipal pound, regardless of
whether the dog is ultimately found to be vicious or potentially
dangerous.
B. If the dog has bitten or exposed a person within 10 days previous to the
time of euthanasia, the Animal Control Officer shall cause its head to be
transported to the New Jersey Department of Health laboratory for
rabies testing.
A. Comply with the provisions of this article in accordance with a schedule
established by the Municipal Court, but in no case more than 60 days
subsequent to the date of determination.
B. Notify the Animal Control Officer, the Borough Police Department and
the dog registrar if a potentially dangerous dog is at large or has
attacked a human being or killed a domestic animal.
C. Notify the Animal Control Officer, the Borough Police Department and
the dog registrar within 24 hours of the death, sale or donation of a
potentially dangerous dog.
D. Prior to selling or donating the dog, inform the prospective owner that
the dog has been declared potentially dangerous.
§ 181-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-21
1:131
§ 181-22. Violations and penalties; enforcement.
The owner of a potentially dangerous dog who is found by clear and
convincing evidence to have violated this article, or any rule or regulation
adopted pursuant thereto, or to have failed to comply with a court's order
shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 per day of the violation,
and each day's continuance of the violation shall constitute a separate and
distinct violation. The Municipal Court shall have jurisdiction to enforce this
section. The Animal Control Officer is authorized to seize and impound any
potentially dangerous dog whose owner fails to comply with the provisions
of this article, or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto or a
court's order. The Municipal Court may order that the dog so seized and
impounded be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner.
§ 181-23. Registration number, identification tag and license;
telephone number to report violations.
§ 181-24. License fee for potentially dangerous dog.
Each person who shall own, possess, keep or harbor any potentially
dangerous dog or dogs shall obtain an annual license for each dog and
shall have the same registered and numbered with the dog registrar and for
such license shall pay the sum of $700 as a license fee for each and every
potentially dangerous dog.
E. Upon the sale or donation of the dog to a person residing in a different
municipality, notify the State Department of Health and the licensing
authority, police department or force and animal control officer of that
municipality of the transfer of ownership and the name, address and
telephone of the new owner. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-5]
F. In addition to any license fee required pursuant to § 181-2, pay a
potentially dangerous dog license fee to the Borough as provided by
§ 181-24.
A. The dog registrar shall issue a potentially dangerous dog registration
number and red identification tag along with a municipal potentially
dangerous dog license upon a demonstration of sufficient evidence by
the owner to the Animal Control Officer that he has complied with the
Court's orders. The last three digits of each potentially dangerous dog
registration number issued will be the three-number code assigned to
the Borough in the regulations promulgated pursuant to N.J.S.A.
4:19-33. The Animal Control Officer shall verify, in writing, compliance
to the dog registrar or other official designated to license dogs in the
Borough.
B. The Animal Control Officer shall publicize a telephone number for
reporting violations of this article. The telephone number and any
changes in this number shall be reported immediately to the New
Jersey Department of Health.
§ 181-21 PENNS GROVE CODE § 181-25
1:132
§ 181-25. Inspection to determine continuing compliance.
The Animal Control Officer shall inspect the enclosure and the owner's
property at least monthly to determine continuing compliance with
§ 181-17A(2) and (3) of this article.
§ 181-26. Disposition of fines and fees.
All fines and fees collected or received by the Borough pursuant to § 181-22
or 181-24 of this article shall be deposited in a special account and used by
the Borough to administer and enforce the provisions of this article.
§ 181-27. Dogs used for law enforcement activities excluded.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to dogs used for law
enforcement activities.
§ 181-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-27
1:133

ARTICLE IV
Feeding of Wildlife
[Added 2-7-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-2]
§ 181-28. Purpose. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the feeding of unconfined wildlife in
any public park or on any other property owned or operated by the Borough
of Penns Grove, so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to
prescribe penalties for failure to comply.
§ 181-29. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
FEED — To give, place, expose, deposit, distribute, or scatter any edible
material with the intention of feeding, attracting, or enticing wildlife.
Feeding does not include baiting in the legal taking of fish and/or game.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
WILDLIFE — All animals that are neither human nor domesticated.
§ 181-30. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall feed, in any public park or on any other property owned or
operated by the Borough of Penns Grove, any wildlife, excluding confined
wildlife (for example, wildlife confined in zoos, parks or rehabilitation
centers, or unconfined wildlife at environmental education centers).
§ 181-31. Enforcement.
§ 181-32. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.
A. This article shall be enforced by the Police Department and/or other
municipal officials of the Borough of Penns Grove.
B. Any person found to be in violation of this article shall be ordered to
cease the feeding immediately.
§ 181-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-32
1:135

ARTICLE V
Feeding of Waterfowl
[Added 5-1-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-8]
§ 181-33. Definitions.
The following words, as used herein, shall have the definitions and
meanings set forth herein:
FEED — To give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any edible
material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing waterfowl.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
WATERFOWL — A general term referring to all undomesticated birds
commonly known as "geese," "ducks," "brants," "swans," "river and sea
ducks," "gulls" and similar species.
WATERWAYS — A general term referring to lakes, ponds, streams, creeks
and stormwater basins.
§ 181-34. Prohibited acts.
§ 181-35. Enforcement.
§ 181-36. Violations and penalties.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to feed waterfowl on any publicly
owned land or waterways within the Borough.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to feed waterfowl on any privately
owned land or waterways which are publicly accessed within the
Borough.
A. This article shall be enforced by the Borough of Penns Grove Police
Department.
B. Notice of violation shall be by issuance of a Municipal Court summons.
A. Any person violating this article shall be subject to a warning for the
first violation. It is not the intent of the Borough to penalize people for
feeding waterfowl but to discourage people from doing so.
B. A person violating this article for a second and subsequent time shall be
subject to fine of not less than $25 nor more than $1,000 or a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days, or both a fine and community
service. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
§ 181-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-36
1:137
Chapter 192
BICYCLES AND PLAY VEHICLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 432. Motorized recreational vehicles — See Ch.
436.
§ 181-36 PENNS GROVE CODE § 181-36
1:138
ARTICLE I
Roller Skates, Skateboards and Coasters
[Adopted 5-18-1982 by Ord. No. 82-4; amended in its entirety
2-19-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-3 (Ch. 180 of the 1986 Code)]
§ 192-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COASTER — A footboard mounted upon two or more sets of wheels and
controlled by an upright steering handle. The user, usually in an upright
position, propels this device. (Note: Other name for this device is "scooter.")
NEGLIGENT MANNER — To endanger or likely to endanger any person
and/or property, including the operator of the device.
ROLLER SKATES — A pair of shoes mounted upon two sets of wheels and
is most often propelled by the user in an upright, standing position or
kneeling. (Note: Roller blades use the same concept; difference is a line of
wheels that are mounted on the shoes.)
SKATEBOARD — A footboard mounted upon four or more wheels and
usually propelled by the user who sometimes stands, sits, kneels, or lies
upon the device while it is in motion.
§ 192-2. Prohibited areas.
§ 192-3. Negligent operations of devices.
§ 192-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating this article shall be punishable with the penalties as
follows:
A. It shall be unlawful to use skateboards, roller skates and/or coasters on
the following prohibited areas: North and South Broad Street (including
sidewalk), East and West Main Street (including sidewalk), South and
North Virginia Avenue (Route 130) and/or all school properties.
B. Prohibited areas must be clearly posted by signs.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a skateboard, roller skates
and/or coaster in a negligent manner upon any roadway, sidewalk and/
or publicly owned parking lot (note: school property included).
B. It shall be unlawful for any person using a skateboard, roller skates
and/or coaster to hold onto a motor vehicle while said motor vehicle is
in motion.
A. First offense: verbal warning and/or notification to a parent if operator
is a juvenile.
§ 192-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-4
1:139
B. Second offense: operator, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine not
exceeding $100.
C. Third offense: operator, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine not
exceeding $100, together with confiscation of the device used in
violation of this article for a period of five to 10 days.
§ 192-4 PENNS GROVE CODE § 192-4
1:140
ARTICLE II
Bicycle Registration
[Adopted 6-17-1986 by Ord. No. 86-3 (Ch. 92, Art. I, of the 1986
Code)]
§ 192-5. Registration required.
It shall be unlawful for any resident of the Borough of Penns Grove to
operate or cause to be operated any bicycle or other two-wheeled vehicle,
not otherwise required to be licensed, upon any street or other public area
within the limits of the Borough of Penns Grove unless said bicycle or
vehicle is registered and marked as herein provided.
§ 192-6. Registration procedure; identification mark.
§ 192-7. Destruction of identification mark or registration
certificate prohibited.
No person shall willfully deface or destroy the identification mark or
registration certificate of any bicycle registered in the Borough under this
article.
§ 192-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the terms of this article shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine not in excess of $200.
A. Registration shall be made by the owner, within 45 days after the
effective date of this article or within 30 days after acquisition of the
bicycle by the owner, with the Borough Police Department on forms
provided. Such registration shall be serially numbered on files of the
Police Department and remain valid as long as one retains ownership.
B. Registration fee is required in the amount of $2. Upon registration, the
Borough Police Department shall cause a permanent identification
mark to be affixed to the bicycle, and the owner shall be required to
show the bicycle to be in a safe mechanical condition. [Amended
10-18-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-12]
§ 192-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-8
1:141
Chapter 198
BRUSH, GRASS, WEEDS AND DEBRIS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unfit and abandoned buildings — See Ch. 206.
Littering, dumping and outdoor
storage — See Ch. 298.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 347.
Solid waste — See Ch. 382.
§ 192-8 PENNS GROVE CODE § 192-8
1:142
ARTICLE I
General Regulations
[Adopted as Art. 2 of Ch. 5 of the 1968 Revised Ordinances (Ch. 96
of the 1986 Code)]
§ 198-1. Prohibited acts. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
It shall be unlawful for any owner or owners, occupant or occupants of any
lands lying within the Borough of Penns Grove to allow, permit or maintain
any brush, weeds, dead or dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious growths,
poisonous and noxious plants detrimental to health, filth, garbage, trash
and debris or any accumulation of dead weeds, grass or brush upon said
occupied or unoccupied lot or land or on or along the sidewalk or street
adjacent to the same.
§ 198-2. Dumping. [Added 9-7-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-13]
No person or persons, firm or corporation shall deposit, throw, spill or
dump dirt, mud, gravel, sand, stone, cement, trees, stumps, brush, grass,
weeds, wood, metal, iron, plastic, manure, fertilizer, ashes, coal, cinders,
refuse, garbage or debris or other material upon any highway, street, road,
lane or alley, or portion thereof, within the limits of the Borough; nor
shall any person or persons, firm or corporation throw, deposit, spill or
dump the same upon any public or private land within the limits of the
Borough without the permission of the owner thereof; nor shall any person
or persons, firm or corporation cause or permit the same to be done.
§ 198-3. Enforcement. [Added 9-7-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-13]
The Board of Health, Department of Public Works, and Construction Code
and Housing and Zoning Officials shall have equal authority and
responsibility for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of
this article as follows:
A. Whenever a Borough official charged with enforcement of this article
determines that there is or has been a violation of any provision of this
article, he or she shall give notice of such violation to the person,
persons or entities listed as owners of the subject property on the
records of the Borough Tax Assessor in accordance with Subsection C
below and to any known operator or occupant. The notice shall direct
that the violation be removed, abated, cured, prevented or desisted
within 10 days of the date of service of the notice, exclusive of the date
of service, or summons issued for such violation. The Borough official or
his/her designee may extend the time for compliance with the notice of
violation for up to 30 additional days, provided that, in his/her
judgment, the abatement, removal, prevention, cessation or cure of the
condition violated cannot reasonable be effected within the ten-day
period. In the event that the condition violated is not abated, removed,
cured, prevented and desisted from or otherwise fully remedied within
the specified period as set forth in the notice, a summons may then be
§ 198-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-3
1:143
§ 198-4. Immediate danger posed by unsafe conditions. [Added
9-7-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-13; amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-5]
Where the violations or conditions existing on the premises of any private
or commercial property are of such a nature as to constitute an immediate
threat to life and limb unless abated without delay, or of such a nature as to
cause interference with poles, wires, cables, conduits, and other electronic
conductors and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation of
electrical services, telephone services, cable communications systems or
other utility, the Borough official charged with enforcement of this article
may either abate the violation or condition immediately or order the owner,
occupant or operator to correct the violation or condition within a period
of time not to exceed three days. Upon failure to do so, the Borough
official may abate the condition immediately and the Borough may seek
reimbursement of all costs, fees, expenses, or other charges associated with
the abatement in accordance with § 198-6 of this article.
§ 198-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-17-1986 by Ord. No.
86-5; 4-21-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-4; 9-7-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-13]
filed in the Municipal Court by the Borough against the person,
persons, entity or entities so notified. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-5]
B. Whenever a Borough official charged with enforcement of this article
determines that an owner or occupant has habitually and repeatedly
violated this article, the Borough official shall not be required to
provide the property owner, operator or occupant of the subject
property with a ten-day period to remove, abate, cure, prevent or desist
as provided in Subsection A of this section. A property owner, operator
or occupant of a subject property shall be deemed to have habitually
and repeatedly violated this article when the Borough official charged
with enforcement of this article has, within a twelve-month period,
issued to the property owner, operator or occupant two or more notices
of a violation in accordance with Subsection A.
C. In the event of a violation of this article, notice of said violation shall be
served upon the property owner, operator and occupant of the subject
property as determined from the records of the Borough Tax Assessor
and other reliable sources of information either personally or by mail.
In the event of service by mail, it shall be made by registered or
certified and by regular mail. Service by regular mail shall be
considered valid. If all of the mailings are returned undeliverable,
service shall be accomplished by posting the notice at the subject
property. Service may also be made by personal service of the notice
upon the owner, operator or occupant or upon a member of the family of
the owner over 14 years of age residing in the same dwelling as the
owner.
§ 198-3 PENNS GROVE CODE § 198-5
1:144
§ 198-6. Removal by Borough; costs to become lien. [Amended
9-7-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-13]
Upon the failure of any owner or owners, occupant or occupants of any
premises to remove any brush, weeds, dead or dying trees, stumps, roots,
obnoxious growths, poisonous or noxious plants, filth, garbage, trash and
debris in accordance with this article, the Borough official charged with
enforcement of this article may, in his or her sole discretion, cause the same
to be removed and the cost thereof shall be certified to the governing body
of the Borough, which shall examine the certificate and, if found correct,
shall cause the cost as shown thereon to be charged against said lands and
shall be added to and become and form part of the taxes next to be assessed
and levied upon such lands, the same to bear interest at the same rate as
taxes, and shall be collected and enforced by the same officer or officers
and in the same manner as taxes.
§ 198-7. Additional remedies. [Amended 9-7-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-13]
The imposition and collection of the fine imposed by this article shall not
bar the right of the Borough to collect the cost of removal in the manner as
required in this article, and the remedy shall be cumulative.
A. Any owner or owners, occupant or occupants of any premises
neglecting to remove any brush, weeds, dead or dying trees, stumps,
roots, obnoxious growths, poisonous and noxious plants detrimental to
health, filth, garbage, trash and debris or any accumulation of dead
weeds, grass or brush from said lands and premises in the Borough
within 10 days after being notified to remove the same by or through
the Borough official charged with enforcement of this article shall, upon
conviction before the Judge of the Municipal Court, be subject to a fine
not less than $100 nor exceeding $2,000 or imprisonment for not more
than 90 days, or both.
B. Any owner or owners, occupant or occupants of any premises
neglecting to remove any brush, weeds, dead or dying trees, stumps,
roots, obnoxious growths, poisonous and noxious plants detrimental to
health, filth, garbage, trash and debris or any accumulation of dead
weeds, grass or brush from said lands and premises in the Borough on a
habitual or repeated basis as set forth in § 198-3B shall, upon conviction
before the Judge of the Municipal Court, be subject to a fine not less
than $100 nor exceeding $2,000 or imprisonment for not more than 90
days, or both, for each instance in which the Borough was caused to
remove the same pursuant to § 198-6.
C. For purposes of sentencing, each violation of this article shall be
treated as a separate offense.
§ 198-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-8
1:145
§ 198-8. Consensual liens. [Added 8-15-1995 by Ord. No. 95-12;
amended 9-7-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-1324]
If a property owner agrees that brush, weeds, dead or dying trees, stumps,
roots, obnoxious growths, poisonous or noxious plants, filth, garbage, trash
and/or debris should be removed from his property but cannot afford said
removal, the owner(s) may apply to the Mayor and Council for removal by
the Borough of Penns Grove. If the application is accepted by the Mayor
and Council, the costs of removal shall be determined and a mortgage and
mortgage note shall be signed by the owner(s) and the Mayor in the amount
of the costs of removal, plus costs to be determined for recording and
preparation of documents. The mortgage shall be recorded as a lien against
the property and shall be at an interest rate of 8%. Payment shall be due in
full upon the sale or other transfer of ownership of the property.
24.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 198-8 PENNS GROVE CODE § 198-8
1:146
ARTICLE II
Alleys
[Adopted 5-18-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-7 (Ch. 80 of the 1986 Code)]
§ 198-9. Maintenance of alleys.
The owner, tenant, occupant or person in charge of property adjoining an
alley designated for municipal use pursuant to this article shall not allow,
permit or maintain any brush, weeds, dead or dying trees, stumps, roots,
garbage, trash, or debris on or upon an alley adjoining or traversing over
the property of said owner, tenant, occupant or person in charge.
§ 198-10. Notice of violation.25
In the event that an owner, tenant, occupant or other person in charge of
property adjoining an alley fails to maintain said alley in accordance with
the provisions of § 198-9 of this article, the Borough of Penns Grove or the
Housing Officer shall provide written notice to said owner, tenant, occupant
or person in charge of the property. Said notice shall inform the owner,
tenant, occupant or person in charge of the property as to the violation
of the provisions of this article and direct that said violation be corrected
within 10 days of the date that said notice is served. The notice required
pursuant to this section shall be served either personally or by certified
mail, return receipt requested.
§ 198-11. Violations and penalties.26
Any owner, tenant, occupant or other person in charge of property who
fails or neglects to remove any brush, weeds, dead or dying trees, stumps,
roots, garbage, trash, or debris on or upon an alley designated for municipal
purposes pursuant to this article within 10 days after written notification to
remove the same shall be subject to a penalty as provided in § 1-2 of this
Code.
§ 198-12. Removal by Borough.27
Upon the failure of any owner, tenant, occupant or other person in charge
of property to remove any brush, weeds, dead or dying trees, stumps,
roots, garbage, trash, or debris from an alley designated for municipal use
pursuant to this article, said items shall be removed by the Borough of
Penns Grove. The Penns Grove Housing Officer shall certify the cost of
removal to the Borough of Penns Grove Council. Upon examination of said
certificate, the Borough of Penns Grove Council, if it finds the certificate to
be correct, shall cause the cost as shown thereon to be charged against said
25.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
26.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
27.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 198-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-12
1:147
lands, and such additional assessment shall be added to and become a part
of the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon said lands, the same to bear
interest at the same rate as taxes, and shall be collected and enforced by
the Borough of Penns Grove Tax Collector.
§ 198-13. Remedies not exclusive.
The imposition and collection of a fine or other penalty pursuant to § 198-11
hereof shall not bar the Borough of Penns Grove from all the rights and
remedies permitted pursuant to § 198-12 hereof.
§ 198-14. Applicability.
This article shall apply to any and all alleys located within the Borough of
Penns Grove and dedicated for municipal use.
§ 198-12 PENNS GROVE CODE § 198-14
1:148
Chapter 203
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 400.
§ 203-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Borough of Penns
Grove 911 Locatable Mailing Address System."
§ 203-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for a uniform Borough-wide system
for assigning street numbers to all principal buildings in the Borough to
assist fire and rescue companies, law enforcement agencies and other
organizations in the timely and efficient provision of their services to the
residents and businesses of the Borough.
§ 203-3. Administration.
A. The 911 Coordinator, appointed annually, is hereby designated as the
agent responsible for the administration, implementation and
enforcement of this chapter.
B. The agent shall establish street address numbers in accordance with
guidelines established herein as follows:
(1) Street addresses shall be assigned by the agent to each lot on new
final subdivision plats at the time of recordation. The agent shall
then notify the respective developer of these addresses.
(2) The agent shall undertake a systematic renumbering program for
streets within the Borough in accordance with the policies and
guidelines established herein. In the interim, as building permit
applications are filed for development on parcels along streets
which have not yet been systematically renumbered, the agent
shall determine and assign an appropriate street address number
for such development prior to approval of such building permit.
C. As street address numbers are determined and assigned by the agent as
provided above, such number shall be recorded on an Official 911 Map
to be maintained by the agent and kept available for reference in the
office of the 911 Coordinator and in the office of the Clerk. No building
permit shall be approved until a street address has been determined
and assigned from the map.
§ 198-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-3
1:149
§ 203-4. Determination of street address numbers.
Street address numbers shall be determined in accordance with the
following:
D. Property owners or current occupants shall be notified of their street
address numbers as assigned by the systematic renumbering program.
The agent shall notify residents in writing of the change to their address
due to the renumbering. The property owner shall be responsible for
telephoning the Bell Atlantic New Jersey business office to report his
new address in order to incorporate this information into the 911
system.
E. Within 60 days after the receipt of written notification of change or
assignment of address, the owner or occupant shall affix/display the
assigned number as prescribed herein.
F. It shall be the duty of such owner or occupant, upon affixing the new
number, to remove any different address number. The initial set of new
numbers shall be supplied by the Borough. The cost of additional or
replacement numbers shall be the responsibility of the property owner.
A. One correct name shall be used for each street in the Borough, and
where two separate and noncontiguous streets within the Borough have
the exact same name, a distinctive prefix or suffix shall be assigned to
distinguish the streets or a new name shall be assigned to one street. If
two existing streets have names that have resulted in confusion due to
any similarity and a name change is not practical, the property
numbering on the streets shall be made to contrast significantly as an
added safety measure. Numbering by the mile post system may be used
as an alternative, if possible. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-5]
B. Each property with frontage on or access to any street shall be assigned
an official property number, except where one or more buildings or lots
are located on an unnamed private road, lane or way having access to a
street. In that situation, only one official number shall be assigned,
followed by a letter beginning with "A" and continuing alphabetically.
C. Official property numbers shall proceed from a logical point of origin
and shall be in proper numerical sequence in relation to the numbers
assigned to other lots with frontage on or access to the same street.
D. Odd numbers shall be assigned to properties situated on the northerly
and easterly sides of the street and even numbers assigned to
properties on the southerly and westerly sides of the street. There shall
be sufficient flexibility so that the numbering system may accommodate
maximum density as allowed by zoning regulations now in effect. If
existing lot frontage is less than the minimum zoned frontage, the
numbering shall compress to accommodate the existing lot frontage.
§ 203-3 PENNS GROVE CODE § 203-4
1:150
E. Only those properties which have a principal structure shall be
assigned a street address. Numbers shall be reserved for vacant parcels
a minimum of every 18 feet, with the exception of less than the
minimum zoned frontage as described in Subsection D. In plotted
subdivisions, consecutive street numbers shall be assigned to
consecutive lots rather than prescribed intervals. Additional numbers
shall be reserved for oversized lots within subdivisions based on zoning
district frontage requirements to accommodate potential future
divisions.
F. If a county route is comprised of two or more streets that have separate
names, then the name assigned by the Borough shall be used in the
addressing, the 911 database and on the 911 Map and street signs.
Where applicable, the county route number shall also be listed in the
911 data bank. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
G. Signs.
(1) On every major access road that enters the Borough, signs shall be
erected stating "entering Borough of Penns Grove." If the street
name changes or the property numbering is not in sequence on any
street that crosses a municipal boundary, the street name shall stay
the same and the property numbering shall remain in sequence.
The sign shall face traffic as it enters the Borough of Penns Grove.
[Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
(2) All municipal, county and state roads within the Borough shall have
a street sign as in accordance with the Official Map of the Borough
of Penns Grove.
H. Any new street shall have a unique name which shall be registered in
the office of the 911 Coordinator for entry into the database prior to the
issuance of a construction permit.
I. If a large lot has more than one available property number and it
contains a building, then the property number that best describes the
location of the driveway or access point shall be assigned.
J. In multifamily, commercial, industrial and similar development
situations where density of development may render the abovedescribed
addressing intervals ineffective, a building or building group
may be assigned a single number, and a numerical or alphabetical suffix
may be assigned to each dwelling unit, business or establishment
within such building or building group.
K. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to require the
renumbering of existing streets merely because the existing even and
odd numbers are transposed, nor shall it be required that streets within
existing subdivisions be renumbered unless a substantial problem with
existing addresses has been identified by the agent.
§ 203-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-4
1:151
§ 203-5. Size and location of street address numbers.
L. Where major roads enter the Borough from another jurisdiction, street
address numbers shall be assigned as a continuation of the numbering
series used in that jurisdiction.
M. The Borough shall, after implementation and adoption of the 911
locatable mailing address system, forward a correct version of the
Official Municipal Tax Map and House Numbering Map, where
available, to each United States post office serving the Borough and to
all emergency services. The Borough shall take any steps which it
deems necessary to inform the residents and businesses of the changes
in their addresses. The residents or businesses are responsible for
making the address corrections at their delivering postal facility and all
other notifications. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
N. The legal name of the Borough shall appear on the bottom line of all
mailing addresses within the Borough, and the name of the postal
facility shall not be used unless it is exactly the same as the municipal
name. The existing five-digit zip code that presently delivers the mail
shall be incorporated into the address and remain unchanged.
[Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
O. Mailing address.
(1) The standard three-line 911 locatable mailing address shall appear
as follows when mail is delivered in to the location:
Resident or Business Name
333 Street Name Apt., Suite, etc.
Municipal Name, NJ Zip Code
(2) The standard three-line 911 locatable mailing address shall appear
as follows for a location when the occupant receives mail delivered
to a post office box within a postal facility:
Resident or Business Name
333 Street Name, Municipal Name
P.O. Box 333
Post Office Name, NJ Zip Code
P. In applying the guidelines specified herein, the agent shall have the
authority to make minor adjustments and modifications to ensure a
logical and efficient street address system.
A. Street address numbers for residences shall not be less than five inches
in height and shall be of a durable and clearly visible material. The
numbers shall be conspicuously placed above or at the side of the main
§ 203-4 PENNS GROVE CODE § 203-5
1:152
§ 203-6. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
Chapter 206
BUILDINGS, UNFIT AND ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass, weeds and debris — See Ch.
198.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 223
Littering, dumping and outdoor
storage — See Ch. 298.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 347.
Rental property — See Ch. 359.
entrance door so that the number is discernible from the street.
Whenever a building is more than 100 feet from the street or when the
entrance is not visible from the street, the number must be displayed on
a post situated at a vehicle entry point (lane) or a pedestrian walkway
to the property.
B. Street address numbers or letters shall be five-inch contrasting black
plastic material, or of a contrasting color to the background if the
residence is dark in color, to the background on which they are
mounted.
C. All commercial and industrial structures shall display street address
numbers of not less than five inches in height as follows:
(1) When possible, the number shall be displayed over the main
entrance to the structure.
(2) There shall be no other wording or numbers within two feet of the
building number.
A. Enforcement.
(1) Whenever the agent has reason to believe there has been a
violation of any provision of this chapter, he shall give notice of
such violation to the person failing to comply and order said person
to take corrective measures within 30 days of the date of
notification.
(2) If such person fails to comply with the duly issued order, the agent
shall initiate necessary actions to terminate the violation, including
obtaining criminal warrants, applying to courts of competent
jurisdiction for injunctive relief or other appropriate actions.
B. Penalties. Any violation of any provision of this chapter shall be
punishable by a fine of not less than $10 nor more than $250 per day.
Each day following notification of such violation shall constitute a
separate violation.
§ 203-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-6
1:153

ARTICLE I
Unfit Buildings
[Adopted as Ch. 12 of the 1968 Revised Ordinances (Ch. 100 of the
1986 Code)]
§ 206-1. Findings.
A resolution has been adopted finding that there exist in the Borough
of Penns Grove dwellings which are unfit for human habitation due to
dilapidation, defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other
calamities, lack of ventilation, light or sanitary facilities or due to other
conditions rendering such dwellings unsafe or unsanitary or dangerous or
detrimental to the health or safety or otherwise inimical to the welfare of
the residents of the Borough of Penns Grove.
§ 206-2. Appointment of Construction Code Official. [Amended
9-2-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-13]
The Construction Code Official is hereby appointed by the Borough Council
to exercise the powers prescribed by this article.
§ 206-3. Complaints; hearing. [Amended 6-17-1986 by Ord. No.
86-5; 9-2-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-13]
Whenever a petition is filed with the Construction Code Official by a public
authority or by at least five residents of the Borough of Penns Grove
charging that any building is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or
use or whenever it appears to the Construction Code Official (on his/her
own motion) that any building is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or
use, the Construction Code Official shall, if his/her preliminary investigation
discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause to be served upon the
owner of and parties in interest in such building a complaint stating the
charges in that respect and containing a notice that a hearing will be held
before the Construction Code Official (or his/her designated agent) at a
place therein fixed not less than seven days nor more than 30 days after
the serving of said complaint; that the owner and parties in interest shall
be given the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in
person, or otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the
complaint; and that the rules of evidence prevailing in the courts shall not
be controlling in hearings before the Construction Code Official.
§ 206-4. Order to repair or remove. [Amended 6-20-1989 by Ord.
No. 89-12; 9-2-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-13]
If, after such notice and hearing, the Construction Code Official determines
that the building under consideration is unfit for human habitation or
occupancy or use he shall state in writing his findings of fact in support of
such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner
thereof and parties in interest an order:
§ 206-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 206-4
1:155
§ 206-5. Repair or closure by Construction Code Official; posting of
property. [Amended 9-2-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-13]
If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or improve or, at
the option of the owner, to vacate and close the building, the Construction
Code Official may cause such building to be repaired, altered or improved,
or to be vacated and closed. The Construction Code Official may cause to
be posted on the main entrance of any building so closed a placard with the
following words: "This building is unfit for human habitation or occupancy
or use; the use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful."
§ 206-6. Demolition by Construction Code Official. [Amended
9-2-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-13]
If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the
building, the Construction Code Official may cause such building to be
removed or demolished or may contract for the removal or demolition
thereof after advertisement for, and receipt of, bids therefor.
§ 206-7. Costs to become lien. [Amended 6-17-1986 by Ord. No.
86-5; 9-2-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-13]
A. Requiring the repair, alteration or improvement of said building to be
made by the owner, within a reasonable time, which time shall be set
forth in the order, or, at the option of the owner, to vacate or have said
building vacated and closed within the time set forth in the order; and
B. If the building is in such a condition as to make it dangerous to the
health and safety of persons on or near the premises, and the owner
fails to repair, alter or improve said building within the time specified in
the order, then the owner shall be required to remove or demolish said
building within a reasonable time as specified in said order of removal.
A. The amount of the cost of the filing of legal papers, expert witnesses'
fees, search fees and advertising charges incurred in the course of any
proceeding taken under this article determined in favor of the
municipality, and such cost of such repairs, alterations or
improvements, or vacating and closing, or removal or demolition, if any,
or the amount of the balance thereof remaining after deduction of the
sum, if any, realized from the sale of materials derived from such
building or from any contract for removal or demolition thereof, shall be
a municipal lien against the real property upon which such cost was
incurred. If the building is removed or demolished by the Construction
Code Official, he/she shall sell the materials of such building. There
shall be credited against the cost of the removal or demolition thereof,
including the clearance and, if necessary, leveling of the site, the
proceeds of any sale of such materials or any sum derived from any
contract for the removal or demolition of the building. If there are no
such credits or if the sum total of such costs exceeds the total of such
credits, a detailed statement of the aforesaid costs and the amount so
§ 206-4 PENNS GROVE CODE § 206-7
1:156
§ 206-8. Causes for determination. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-5]
The Construction Code Official may determine that a dwelling is unfit for
human habitation if he finds that conditions exist in such dwelling which
are dangerous or injurious to the health or safety of the occupants of such
dwelling, the occupants of neighboring dwellings or the residents of the
Borough. Such conditions may include the following (without limiting the
generality of the foregoing): defects therein increasing the hazards of fire,
accident or other calamities; lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary
facilities; dilapidation; disrepair; structural defects; or uncleanliness.
§ 206-9. Administration.
Process and procedure for the administration of this article shall be
governed by N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.3 through 40:48-2.12 and any amendments
that may be made thereto.
§ 206-10. Powers and duties of Construction Code Official.
[Amended 9-2-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-13]
The Construction Code Official shall have the right to exercise such powers
as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes
due shall be filed with the Municipal Tax Assessor or other custodian of
the records of tax liens and a copy thereof shall be forthwith forwarded
to the owner by registered mail. If the total of the credits exceed such
costs, the balance remaining shall be deposited in the Superior Court
by the Construction Code Official, shall be secured in such manner as
may be directed by such Court, and shall be disbursed according to
the order or judgment of the Court to the persons found to be entitled
thereto by final order or judgment of such Court. Any owner or party
in interest may, within 30 days from the date of the filing of the lien
certificate, proceed in a summary manner in the Superior Court to
contest the reasonableness of the amount or the accuracy of the costs
set forth in the municipal lien certificate.
B. If an actual and immediate danger to life is posed by the threatened
collapse of any fire-damaged or other structurally unsafe building, the
Construction Code Official may, after taking such measures as may be
necessary to make such building temporarily safe, seek a judgment in
summary proceedings for the demolition thereof.
C. Nothing in this article shall be construed to impair or limit in any way
the power of the Borough of Penns Grove to define and declare
nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement, by summary
proceedings or otherwise, nor is anything in this article intended to
limit the authority of the enforcing agency or Construction Code Official
under the State Uniform Construction Code Act, P.L. 1975, c. 217
(N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.), or any rules or regulations adopted
thereunder.
§ 206-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 206-10
1:157
and provisions of this article, including the following powers in addition to
the others herein granted:
A. To investigate the dwelling conditions in the Borough in order to
determine which dwellings therein are unfit for human habitation.
B. To administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence.
C. To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations,
provided that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the
least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession.
§ 206-10 PENNS GROVE CODE § 206-10
1:158
ARTICLE II
Abandoned Properties
[Adopted 8-12-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-8]
§ 206-11. Inventory of abandoned properties.
§ 206-12. Criteria.
The criteria to be used to deem properties as being abandoned shall be as
set forth in the Abandoned Properties Rehabilitation Act of the State of New
Jersey, including specifically as set forth in N.J.S.A. 55:19-81 and 55:19-82.
Any and all legal rights of the Borough and interested parties shall be in
accordance with said Act.
§ 206-13. Procedure to create and maintain list.
The abandoned list shall be created and maintained in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 55:19-55, 55:19-57, 55:19-103 and other applicable authority.
§ 206-14. Remedies.
A. The Borough Council may direct the Public Officer to identify
abandoned property for the purpose of establishing an abandoned
property list throughout the Borough, or within those parts of the
Borough as the Council may designate. Each item of abandoned
property as identified shall include the tax block and lot number, the
name of the owner of record, if known, and the street address of the lot.
B. For purposes of this Article II, the Public Officer shall be the Penns
Grove Housing Officer.
A. The Council may, at its option, require that the sale of a tax sale
certificate or any subsequent assignment in transfer of a tax sale
certificate held by the Borough related to an abandoned property be
subject to the express condition that the purchaser or assignee shall be
obligated to perform and conclude rehabilitation or repairs necessary
to remove the property from the abandoned property list in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 55:19-56.
B. A purchaser of a tax sale certificate for a property on the abandoned
property list may institute a foreclosure action at any time after the
expiration of six months in accordance with N.J.S.A. 55:19-58.
C. The Council may authorize the institution of a summary action in the
Superior Court to obtain possession, control, or title of abandoned
property in need of rehabilitation in accordance with N.J.S.A. 55:19-84
through 55:19-99.
D. The Council may authorize special tax sales in accordance with N.J.S.A.
55:19-101.
§ 206-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 206-14
1:159
E. The Council may authorize eminent domain of abandoned property in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 55:19-102.
§ 206-14 PENNS GROVE CODE § 206-14
1:160
ARTICLE III
Vacant Property Registration
[Adopted 3-3-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-2]
§ 206-15. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the following terms are defined as set forth
herein:
MUNICIPAL OFFICER — The Housing Officer or such official as may be
designated by the Mayor and Council.[Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-5]
OWNER — Includes any private title holder, any agent of a private title
holder having authority to act with respect to a vacant property, any
foreclosing entity that has filed a notice with the Municipal Clerk pursuant
to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51 (P.L. 2008, c. 127, Sec. 17, as
amended by P.L. 2009, c. 296), or any other entity determined by the
Municipal Officer of the Borough of Penns Grove to have authority to act
with respect to the property. This article exempts any municipal, county or
state owner of a vacant building or structure.
VACANT PROPERTY — Any building or structure which is not at present
legally occupied or at which all lawful business or construction operations
or residential or other occupancy has substantially ceased, and which is
in such condition that it cannot legally be reoccupied without repair or
rehabilitation, including but not limited to any property meeting the criteria
for abandoned property in N.J.S.A. 55:19-81; provided, however, that any
habitable property where all building systems are in sound working order,
where the building and grounds are maintained in good condition, and
which is being actively marketed by its owners for sale or rental shall not be
deemed a vacant property for purposes of this article.[Amended 7-5-2017
by Ord. No. 2017-5]
§ 206-16. Registration required.
A. Effective on April 1, 2015, the owner of any vacant property as defined
herein shall, within 30 days after the building becomes vacant property
or within 30 days after assuming ownership of the vacant property,
whichever is later, or within 10 days of receipt of notice by the
municipality, file a registration statement for such vacant property with
the Municipal Officer on forms provided for that purpose by the
Municipal Officer along with any fee required by this article. Failure to
receive notice by the municipality shall not constitute grounds for
failing to register the property.
B. Each property having a separate tax block and lot number shall be
registered separately.
C. The registration shall include the information required under this
section, the insurance certificate required by § 206-20 of this article, as
§ 206-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 206-16
1:161
well as any additional information that the Municipal Officer may
reasonably require.
D. The registration shall remain valid for one year from the date of
registration. The owner shall be required to renew the registration
annually as long as the building or structure remains a vacant property
and shall pay a registration or renewal fee in the amount prescribed in
§ 206-18 for each vacant property registered.
E. The Municipal Officer may establish for purposes of efficient
administration that all registrations shall be renewed by a single date in
each year, which date shall be established by the Municipal Officer, in
which case the initial registration fee shall be prorated for registration
statements received less than 10 months prior to that date.
F. Any owner of vacant property who submits plans to the Municipal
Officer that completely rehabilitate or restore the property to
productive use and occupancy within the twelve-month period following
the date of the initial property registration shall be exempt from
payment of the registration fee if the Municipal Officer deems the
rehabilitation or restoration project may be complete in that twelvemonth
period but shall comply with all other provisions of this article. In
the event that the property has not been restored to productive use and
occupancy at the end of the twelve-month period, the owner shall be
liable for any fee waived. The Municipal Officer may extend the waiver
of the registration fee for not more than one additional year in response
to a written request by the owner where the Municipal Officer finds that
compelling conditions outside the owner's control made it impossible
for the owner to restore the property within the initial twelve-month
period.
G. Where the owner is an entity experienced in rehabilitation or
redevelopment of vacant properties, and where the property subject to
this article is being held for a project of rehabilitation or redevelopment
consistent with municipal plans and ordinances, and where by virtue of
financing, marketing or other conditions that project may require more
than one year for realization, the Municipal Officer may extend the
waiver of the registration fee on an annual basis without limitation upon
written request by the owner as long as the Municipal Officer finds that
the owner is making reasonable progress toward completion of the
project. The owner shall provide the Municipal Officer with such
documentation, which may include plans, financing applications,
applications for land use approval or other evidence of progress.
H. The owner shall notify the Municipal Officer within 30 days of any
change in the registration information by filing an amended registration
statement on a form provided by the Municipal Officer for such
purpose.
I. The registration statement shall be deemed prima facie proof of the
statements therein contained in any administrative enforcement
§ 206-16 PENNS GROVE CODE § 206-16
1:162
§ 206-17. Designation of agent and service of notices.
§ 206-18. Fees.
proceeding or court proceeding instituted by the Borough against the
owner or owners of the building.
A. At any time after filing a registration statement or a renewal of a
registration statement, the owner of any vacant property shall provide
access to the Borough to conduct exterior and interior inspections of
the building to determine compliance with municipal codes, on
reasonable notice to the property owner or the designated agent.
B. An owner who is a natural person may designate himself or herself as
agent or as the individual responsible for maintaining the property.
C. By designating an authorized agent under the provision of this section,
the owner consents to receive any and all notices of code violations
concerning the registered vacant property and all process in any court
proceeding and administrative enforcement proceeding brought to
enforce code provisions concerning the registered building by service
of the notice or process on the authorized agent. Any owner who has
designated an authorized agent under the provisions of this section
shall be deemed to consent to the continuation of the agent's
designation for the purpose of this section until the owner notifies the
Municipal Officer in writing of a change of authorized agent or until the
owner files a new annual registration statement. [Amended 7-5-2017
by Ord. No. 2017-5]
D. Any owner who fails to register a vacant property under the provisions
of this article shall further be deemed to consent to receive, by posting
at the building, any and all notices of code violations and all process in
an administrative proceeding brought to enforce code provisions
concerning the building.
A. The registration and renewal fee for each building or structure shall be
as follows:
(1) Initial registration: $250 or prorated amount per § 206-16 of this
article.
(2) First renewal: $400.
(3) Second renewal: $750.
(4) Any subsequent renewal: $100 or 5% of assessed value, whichever
is higher.
B. At least 50% of all fee income resulting from the application of this
article shall be deposited in a trust fund that shall be used for the sole
purpose of carrying out municipal activities with respect to vacant and
distressed properties, including but not limited to code enforcement,
§ 206-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 206-18
1:163
§ 206-19. Maintenance requirements.
The owner of any structure that has become vacant property, and any
person responsible for maintaining any such building that has become
vacant, shall within 30 days of the structure becoming vacant or 30 days of
the owner taking title to the property:
§ 206-20. Insurance.
abatement of nuisance conditions, stabilization, rehabilitation, and
other activities designed to minimize blight and/or promote further
productive reuse of properties.
A. Enclose and secure the structure as provided in the applicable code of
the Borough of Penns Grove or as set forth in rules and regulations
adopted by the Municipal Officer to supplement those codes;
B. Ensure that the grounds of the structure, including yards, fences,
sidewalks, walks and driveways, are well maintained and kept free from
trash or debris;
C. Post a sign affixed to the structure with the name, address and
telephone number of the owner and the owner's authorized agent for
the purpose of service of process, and the name, address and telephone
number of the entity responsible for maintenance of the property, which
may be the same as the authorized agent. The sign shall be at least
eight inches by 24 inches in dimension, shall include the words "to
report problems with this building, call..." and shall be placed in a
location where it is clearly legible from the nearest public street
sidewalk; and
D. Maintain the structure in a secure and closed condition, keep the
grounds in a clean and well-maintained condition, and ensure that the
sign is visible and intact until the building is again occupied or
demolished or until repair or rehabilitation of the building is complete.
A. The owner of any vacant property shall acquire or otherwise maintain
liability insurance, in an amount of not less than $300,000 for buildings
designed primarily for one- to four-unit residential use and not less than
$1,000,000 for any other building, including but not limited to buildings
designed for multifamily, manufacturing, storage or commercial uses,
covering any damage to any person or any property caused by any
physical condition of or in the building.
B. Any insurance policy acquired or renewed after the building has
become vacant shall provide for written notice to the Municipal Officer
within 30 days of any lapse, cancellation or change in coverage. The
owner shall attach evidence of the insurance to the owner's registration
statement. Any registration statement submitted that does not include
such evidence shall not be deemed to be a valid registration.
§ 206-18 PENNS GROVE CODE § 206-21
1:164
§ 206-21. Information procedure.
The Borough of Penns Grove shall establish a procedure by which citizens
can provide the Municipal Officer with information on unkempt or
unregistered properties that may be subject to this article.
§ 206-22. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this article or of the rules and
regulations issued hereunder shall be fined not less than $100 and not
more than $1,000 for each offense. Every day that a violation continues
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. Fines assessed under
this article shall be recoverable from the owner and shall be a lien on
the property. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
B. For purposes of this section, failure to file a registration statement
within 30 days after a building becomes vacant property or within 30
days after assuming ownership of a vacant property, whichever is later,
or within 10 days of receipt of notice by the municipality, failure to
provide correct information on the registration statement, failure to
comply with the provisions of § 206-19 or 206-20 of this article, or such
other matters as may be established by the rules and regulations of the
Municipal Officer shall be deemed to be violations of this article.
§ 206-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 206-22
1:165
Chapter 213
CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 223. Rental property — See Ch. 359.
§ 213-1. Definitions. [Amended 9-3-1985 by Ord. No. 85-12;
6-17-1986 by Ord. No. 86-5]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DWELLING UNIT — A room or group of rooms which forms a single unit
to be occupied by one or more persons for living, sleeping, cooking and
eating. For the purposes of this chapter, a dwelling unit is not a building or
structure to which the provisions of regulations for the New Jersey Uniform
Construction Code and the State Uniform Construction Code Act, N.J.S.A.
52:27D-119 et seq., concerning the issuance of certificates of occupancy are
applicable.
OCCUPIED — A dwelling unit shall be considered occupied when a tenant
moves furniture or other belongings into the dwelling unit in anticipation of
residing therein.
TENANT — Any person occupying a unit which is not also occupied by the
owner(s) of record is considered a tenant.[Added 5-6-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-4]
§ 213-2. Certificate; when required and not required. [Amended
3-20-1990 by Ord. No. 90-4; 3-15-1994 by Ord. No. 94-7]
A. A certificate of occupancy is not required to be obtained by a person,
persons, association, partnership or corporation or other entity or any
combination thereof who or which owns, manages, conducts or
operates a dwelling unit upon the transfer of title thereto to any other
person, persons, association, partnership, corporation or other entity or
any combination thereof.
B. No person, persons, association, partnership or corporation or other
entity or any combination thereof who or which owns, manages,
conducts or operates a dwelling unit shall occupy, rent, lease, let or
sublet or permit the same to be tenant or owner occupied or re-rented
without first securing from the Housing Officer of the Borough a
certificate of occupancy for said dwelling unit. [Amended 5-6-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014-4]
C. No person, persons, association, partnership or corporation or other
entity or any combination thereof who or which owns, manages,
conducts, or operates a commercial property shall rent, lease, let,
§ 206-22 PENNS GROVE CODE § 213-2
1:166
§ 213-3. Application; inspection; outstanding taxes and charges.
[Added 2-19-1980 by Ord. No. 80-2; amended 10-7-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-15]
Applications to secure a certificate of occupancy shall be made to the
Housing Officer's office upon approved form, submitting all required
information. Upon making of said application, the Housing Officer shall
arrange for inspection of the dwelling structure to determine that its
condition complies with the regulations governing zoning, building,
plumbing, electrical, health and safety, fire or fire prevention, minimal
housing standards, and any rules and regulations established pursuant
thereto of this chapter. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued to the
owner of any building or structure whose real property taxes and water and
sewer charges are not current, except when the application results from a
change of ownership of the dwelling or structure, in which case the Housing
Officer may issue a conditional certificate of occupancy, with a condition
being payment of all taxes and sewer and water charges by the settlement
agent at the transfer of title.
§ 213-4. Notice to purchaser required. [Added 5-4-1982 by Ord. No.
82-3]
Any person, group of persons, association, partnership or corporation or
any combination thereof selling or otherwise transferring legal title to real
property, located in whole or in part within the limits of the Borough
of Penns Grove, on which is situate a dwelling unit as defined herein,
shall, prior to or at the time of transfer of title, provide the purchaser or
transferee with written notice of the requirement to secure a certificate of
occupancy as set forth in § 213-2 hereof and file evidence of such notice to
the purchaser or transferee with the Borough Housing Officer within five
days of the date of said transfer of title.
§ 213-5. Requirements for issuance; correction of violations.
[Amended 5-19-1987 by Ord. No. 87-5; 3-19-1996 by Ord. No. 96-6;
5-6-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-4]
sublet, occupy, or permit the same to be occupied or re-rented without
first securing from the Housing Officer of the Borough of Penns Grove
a certificate of occupancy for said commercial property. [Added
10-7-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-15; amended by Ord. No. 2004-5]
A. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for a dwelling unit unless the
condition of the same complies with all of the ordinances of the
Borough now in existence or hereafter enacted or adopted pertaining to
building, plumbing, electrical, zoning, health, safety, fire or fire
prevention and minimum housing standards and all departmental
regulations established pursuant to said ordinances or laws.
B. The owner of the inspected property shall be responsible for the
correction of violations as indicated in the written notification by the
§ 213-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-5
1:167
§ 213-6. Enforcement.
The Housing Officer of the Borough of Penns Grove shall be the officer who
has the duty to enforce this chapter.
§ 213-7. Inspection fees. [Amended 2-19-1980 by Ord. No. 80-2;
3-5-1985 by Ord. No. 85-1; 11-6-1990 by Ord. No. 90-15; 10-7-2003
by Ord. No. 2003-15; 5-6-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-4]
All applicants for the issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall be charged
$50 per dwelling unit for the initial inspection and the first reinspection. A
fee of $25 will be charged for each additional reinspection necessary, said
charges being payable to the Borough of Penns Grove.
§ 213-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-17-1986 by Ord. No.
86-5; 5-6-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-4]
Any person, group of persons, association, partnership or corporation or
any combination thereof who or which shall violate any of the terms of this
chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor
in excess of $2,000 or imprisonment for a term not in excess of 90 days, or
both.
§ 213-9. Repealer; construal of provisions.
All other ordinances or parts of other ordinances, to the extent that any
such ordinances or parts of any ordinances are inconsistent with the
provisions hereof, are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed or construed in any
manner to affect, repeal or invalidate the required procedures for
application for the issuance of a certificate of occupancy pursuant to the
provisions of the regulations for the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code
and the State Uniform Construction Code Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
Chapter 217
CHECKS, RETURNED
§ 217-1. Violations.
Any person, corporation, partnership or business entity who or which issues
or passes a check or similar sight order for the payment of money to the
Borough of Penns Grove, which instrument is not honored by the bank,
Housing Officer or his representative to the owner. Upon correction
of the violations, the owner of the inspected property shall notify, in
writing, the Housing Officer in order that a reinspection for the purpose
of requiring correction of the earlier violations may be made. This
procedure shall be followed and repeated until all violations have been
corrected.
§ 213-5 PENNS GROVE CODE § 217-1
1:168
savings and loan institution or other entity upon which it is drawn, shall be
in violation of this section.
§ 217-2. Service charge. [Amended 10-15-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-3]
A fee of $20 shall be imposed for each violation of the foregoing section.
This penalty shall be imposed regardless of whether the violator
subsequently submits full payment for the amount of the original check or
similar sight order.
Chapter 223
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unfit and abandoned buildings — See Ch. 206.
Certificates of occupancy — See Ch. 213.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 347.
§ 223-1. Transfer of jurisdiction.
The Borough of Penns Grove, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq. and
N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.3, hereby relinquishes its jurisdiction for the administration
and enforcement of the Uniform Construction Code and hereby transfers
jurisdiction for the administration and enforcement of the Uniform
Construction Code to the Department of Community Affairs of the State of
New Jersey. The transfer of jurisdiction pursuant to this section shall not
take effect until the expiration of 120 calendar days from the date a certified
copy of this section is forwarded to the Department of Community Affairs or
until the Department of Community Affairs shall exercise its jurisdiction to
enforce the Uniform Construction Code, whichever is sooner.
§ 223-2. Records and files.
The Borough of Penns Grove shall deliver or make available to the
Department of Community Affairs any and all records and files of the
municipality necessary for the Department to carry out is function, and the
Department is hereby authorized to transfer such records and files to a
location designated by the Department.
Chapter 229
CURFEW
§ 229-1. Prohibited acts by minors; exceptions. [Amended 2-7-1989
by Ord. No. 89-3; 7-7-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-9]
§ 217-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 229-1
1:169
§ 229-2. Prohibited acts by parents; exceptions. [Amended 2-7-1989
by Ord. No. 89-3]
It shall be unlawful for the parent or parents, guardian or other adult
person having the care or custody of a minor under the age of 18 years to
permit such minor to loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in or remain in or be
upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds, public
places, public buildings, places of amusement and entertainment, places of
business carried on for profit to which the public is invited, vacant lots or
other public places, either on foot or in any vehicle, within the confines
of the Borough between the hours set forth in § 229-1 hereof; provided,
however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to any such
minor accompanied by his parent or parents, guardian or other adult person
having the care or custody of the minor or where the minor is upon an
emergency errand or legitimate business directed by his parent or parents,
guardian or other adult person having the care or custody of the minor.
§ 229-3. Prohibited acts by establishment owners.
It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator of any establishment as
described in §§ 229-1 and 229-2 of this chapter to suffer or permit such
minor to loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in or remain in or be upon
the premises and all other places as set forth in §§ 229-1 and 229-2 of
this chapter during the times therein set forth, subject to the provisions
contained in said §§ 229-1 and 229-2.
§ 229-4. General exceptions. [Amended 2-7-1989 by Ord. No. 89-3]
A. It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of 18 years to loiter,
idle, wander, stroll or play in or remain in or be upon the public streets,
highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds, public places, public
buildings, places of amusement and entertainment, places of business
carried on for profit to which the public is invited, vacant lots or other
public places, either on foot or in any vehicle, within the confines of the
Borough between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following
day; provided, however, that the provisions of this subsection shall not
apply to any such minor accompanied by his parent or parents,
guardian or other adult person having the care or custody of such
minor.
B. It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of 18 years to be in any
public place during the hours when the minor is required to be in
attendance at either a public or nonpublic school unless the minor is
accompanied by a parent or guardian or is carrying written permission
from the minor's educational authority allowing the minor to be in a
public place. [Added 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
A. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any minor under the
age of 18 years who shall be gainfully employed, who shall be a bona
fide student of a school of evening instruction, who shall be in
§ 229-1 PENNS GROVE CODE § 229-4
1:170
§ 229-5. Responsibilities of police.
§ 229-6. Responsibilities of Chief of Police.
Upon receipt of the report required in the preceding section, it shall be the
duty of the Chief of Police to serve a formal notice upon all persons whose
names appear in the report of the apprehending officer or official, or in
any inquiry made as a result of such report, who have or seem to have any
legal or moral responsibility for the well-being of the minor child involved
attendance at a function sponsored by a religious or school organization
or who shall be in attendance at a properly supervised recreational
program during the time necessarily required to travel between the
place of assembly and such minor's place of residence.
B. Should an emergency arise necessitating a minor child under the age of
18 years being dispatched upon an errand requiring his presence upon
any street, highway, road or roadway or any other place or area open to
the public during the hours to which the use thereof by such
unattended minor child is prohibited by this chapter, such child shall
have in his possession a note or message in writing signed by a person
of his household over the age of 21 years stating the nature of the
errand, the necessity therefor, the place or destination at which the
mission is to be accomplished, the time such message was executed and
the approximate time required for the errand. Any abuse of the purpose
or spirit of this subsection shall constitute a violation of the provisions
of this chapter.
A. Every member of the Police Department of the Borough and all other
officials charged with law enforcement within the Borough are hereby
authorized, empowered and directed to enforce the provisions of this
chapter, and it shall be a part of their official duty and obligation to the
Mayor and Council and the public at large to follow the directives
prescribed in this section.
B. It shall be the duty of the apprehending officer or official to take the
minor child into protective custody. He shall then make a complete
record of the circumstances under which the child was first seen and
discovered in an apparent violation of the provisions of this chapter, and
such record shall include the name and address of the minor child and
the names and addresses of all persons who have either legal or moral
responsibility for the minor child's well-being and the category of such
responsibility (i.e., parent, guardian, custodian, etc.). Upon completion
of a record of all salient facts available, the apprehending official shall
see that the minor is safely transported to his place of residence. In all
cases the apprehending official shall report the facts within 24 hours to
the Chief of Police of the Borough, who in turn shall cause all pertinent
allegations, facts and circumstances to be recorded as a permanent
record for future reference. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-5]
§ 229-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 229-6
1:171
that there has been a violation of this chapter. The notice prescribed shall
be captioned "Notice of First Violation of Curfew Ordinance" and shall
contain all pertinent facts in any given case. Such notice may be served
personally by any member of the Police Department or mailed by registered
letter. For the purposes of this chapter, such notice, when duly produced
and admitted as evidence in the Municipal Court of the Borough, shall
constitute an unequivocal basis for proceeding with a trial in which a second
or subsequent violation hereof is the offense charged.
§ 229-7. Presumption of parental knowledge of violation. [Added
10-20-70; amended 6-17-1986 by Ord. No. 86-5]
Upon the establishment of the fact that § 229-1 has been violated a second
or subsequent time by a minor and that the parent, parents, legal guardian
or other adult person having the care or custody of said minor has been
served or notified of a first violation of this chapter, then it shall be
conclusively presumed that the parent, parents, legal guardian or other
adult person having the care or custody of such minor knowingly permitted
such minor to violate the terms of this chapter.
§ 229-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-7-1989 by Ord. No.
89-3; 7-7-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-9]
Upon the second or subsequent violation of the provisions of this chapter
by either a minor child under the age of 18 years or by any parent, legal
guardian or otherwise duly authorized and accredited custodian having
lawful care or custody of such minor child, or owner or operator of a
business establishment, the Chief of Police of the Borough shall cause
an appropriate summons to be issued calling for the appearance of the
minor child and all persons who appear to have either a legal or moral
responsibility for the care and welfare of such child, and any of the persons
in any of the categories specified in this section shall, upon conviction of any
violation of this chapter in the Municipal Court of the Borough, be required
to perform community service and may be subject to a fine of up to $1,000.
If both a juvenile and a juvenile's parent or guardian violate this chapter,
they will be required to perform community service together.28
Chapter 236
DRUG-FREE SCHOOL ZONES
§ 236-1. Adoption of map.
In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of L. 1988, c. 44 (N.J.S.A.
2C:35-7), the Drug Free School Zone Map was produced on or about
November 15, 1991, by DiPrinzio and Vincequerra, Inc. of 123 East Kings
28.Editor's Note: Original § 113-9, Supplementary provisions, which immediately followed
this section and was added 4-3-1973 by Ord. No. 73-4, was repealed 7-5-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-5.
§ 229-6 PENNS GROVE CODE § 236-1
1:172
Highway, Woodbury, New Jersey, at the request of Mayor and Council,
which was memorialized by Ordinance No. 92-1. In accordance with and
pursuant to the authority of L. 1988, c. 44 (N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7), the Drug-
Free School Zone Map was updated on July 28, 2005, by Mark Brunermer,
Engineer of Sickles & Associates, Inc., of 833 Kings Highway, Woodbury,
New Jersey, 08096, Professional Engineers. Said map is titled "Borough
of Penns Grove, 1,000 Feet Safe Zone Map, Borough of Penns Grove,
Salem County, New Jersey, Comprehensive Drug Reform Act of 1986" and
is hereby approved and adopted as an official finding and record of the
location and areas within the municipality of property which is used for
school purposes and which is owned by or leased to any elementary or
secondary school or school board, and the areas on or within 1,000 feet of
such school property.29
§ 236-2. Continuation of map as official record.
The Drug-Free School Zone Map approved and adopted pursuant to § 236-1
of this chapter shall continue to constitute an official finding and record as
to the location and boundaries of areas on or within 1,000 feet of property
owned or leased to any elementary or secondary school or school board
which is used for school purposes until such time, if any, that this chapter
shall be amended to reflect any additions or deletions with respect to the
location and boundaries of school property and drug-free school zones.
§ 236-3. Notification of changes to properties used by schools.
The school board, or the chief administrative officer in the case of any
private or parochial school, is hereby directed and shall have the continuing
obligation to promptly notify the Municipal Engineer and the Municipal
Attorney of any changes or contemplated changes in the location and
boundaries of any property owned by or leased to any elementary or
secondary school or school board and which is used for school purposes.
§ 236-4. Original map to be on file; copies.
The Clerk of the Borough is hereby directed to receive and to keep on file
the original of the map approved and adopted pursuant to § 236-1 of this
chapter and to provide at a reasonable cost a true copy thereof to any
person, agency or court which may from time to time request such a copy,
along with a certification that such copy is a true copy of the map approved
and adopted herein and kept on file. It is hereby further directed that a true
copy of such map and of this chapter shall be provided without cost to the
County Clerk and to the office of the Salem County Prosecutor.
§ 236-5. Use of map as evidence; use of other documents.
The following additional matters are hereby determined, declared, recited
and stated:
29.Editor's Note: A copy of the map is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 236-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 236-5
1:173
A. It is understood that the map approved and adopted pursuant to § 236-1
of this chapter was prepared and is intended to be used as evidence in
prosecutions arising under the criminal laws of this state and that
pursuant to state law such map shall constitute prima facie evidence of
the following:
(1) The location of elementary and secondary schools within the
municipality;
(2) The boundaries of the real property which is owned by or leased to
such schools or a school board;
(3) That such school property is and continues to be used for school
purposes; and
(4) The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within 1,000
feet of school property.
B. All of the property depicted on the map approved and adopted herein as
school property was owned by (or leased to) a school or school board
and was being used for school purposes as of July 9, 1987, that being
the effective date of L. 1987, c. 101 (N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7).
C. Pursuant to the provisions of L. 1988, c. 44, a prosecutor is not
precluded from introducing or relying upon any other evidence or
testimony to establish a violation of the offense defined in that statute,
including use of a map or diagram other than the one approved and
adopted pursuant to § 236-1 of this chapter. The failure of the map
approved herein to depict the location and boundaries of any property
which is, in fact, used for school purposes and which is owned by or
leased to any elementary or secondary school or school board, whether
the absence of such depiction is the result of inadvertent omission or
the result of any changes in the location and boundaries of such
property which have not yet been incorporated into a revised approved
map, shall not be deemed to be an official finding and record that such
property is not owned by or leased to a school or school board, or that
such property is not used for school purposes.
D. All of the requirements set forth in L. 1988, c. 44, concerning the
preparation, approval and adoption of a Drug-Free School Zone Map
have been complied with.
§ 236-5 PENNS GROVE CODE § 236-5
1:174
Chapter 247
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 55.
Alarms — See Ch. 170.
Unfit and abandoned buildings — See Ch. 206.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 223.
Hazardous substances — See Ch. 278.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 347.
§ 236-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 236-5
1:175

ARTICLE I
Smoke Detectors and Carbon Monoxide Detectors
[Adopted 3-20-1984 by Ord. No. 84-6 (Ch. 186 of the 1986 Code)]
§ 247-1. System required.
Each dwelling or each unit of dwelling space, contained in any dwelling,
shall be equipped with an automatic fire warning system (smoke detector)
equipped with automatic smoke- and/or gas-detection devices primarily
intended for the protection of life.
§ 247-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DWELLING — Includes any building or structure in which any unit of
dwelling space is owner occupied, rented, offered for rent, available for rent
or otherwise to one or more individuals, family units or any other tenants
who live independently of each other. A dwelling includes, but is not limited
to, single-family structures, apartment buildings and rooming houses.
UNIT OF DWELLING SPACE or DWELLING UNIT — Any room or rooms
or suite or apartment or structure which is occupied or intended to be
occupied for sleeping or dwelling purposes by one or more persons,
together with all the privileges, services, furnishings, furniture, equipment,
facilities and improvements connected with the use or occupancy thereof.
§ 247-3. Compliance.
Compliance with this article shall be in conformity with the sections which
hereinafter follow.
§ 247-4. Minimum requirements. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-5]
Each dwelling or unit of dwelling space shall provide the following:
A. Smoke detectors shall not be any older than 10 years. Carbon monoxide
detectors shall not be any more than five years old. Combination smoke
and carbon monoxide detectors shall not be more than seven years old.
B. Smoke detectors shall be located:
(1) On the ceiling or wall outside of each separate sleeping area in the
immediate vicinity of bedrooms (manufacturer's installation
instructions shall be followed).
(2) In each room used for sleeping purposes.
(3) In each story within a dwelling unit, including basements and
cellars but not including crawl spaces and uninhabitable attics. In
dwellings or dwelling units with split levels and without an
§ 247-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 247-4
1:177
§ 247-5. Responsibilities of owners and occupants.
§ 247-6. Powers and duties of enforcement officials.
intervening door between the adjacent levels, a smoke alarm
installed on the upper level shall suffice for the adjacent lower level
provided that the lower level is less than one full story below the
upper level.
C. Carbon monoxide detectors shall be installed and maintained in the
immediate vicinity of all sleeping areas.
D. All systems shall be maintained in an operable condition at all times in
accordance with the International Fire Code.
E. Smoke detectors shall not be within 36 inches from the end of a ceiling
fan blade or heating/air conditioner register.
F. Any low-voltage monitored fire alarm system with remote batteries
shall be inspected by an approved certified fire alarm contractor and a
report in accordance with NFPA 72 given to the inspector at time of
inspection.
A. The owner of any dwelling shall be responsible for the installation of the
aforesaid warning system in all units of dwelling space contained within
said dwelling. The owner shall make a report on all such installations to
the office of the Borough of Penns Grove Housing Officer, according to a
form prescribed by said office.
B. It shall be the duty of every occupant of any unit of dwelling space in a
dwelling to test the fire warning system from time to time. If the fire
warning system is a battery-operated system, it shall be the duty of the
owner of the dwelling to replace the battery or batteries for each fire
warning system on a yearly basis with new, unused batteries of the
proper size and type as specified by the manufacturer of the system. If
any inspection conducted by an occupant of any unit of dwelling space
in a dwelling reveals that the fire warning system is inoperable, then, in
that event, the occupant shall file a written report of said inoperability
with the owner of the dwelling, as well as the Housing Officer of the
Borough of Penns Grove. Within 14 days of the filing of said report with
the owner of the dwelling, the owner shall inspect the fire warning
system and place the same into operation, replacing said system if
necessary. It shall also be the duty of every owner of any unit of
dwelling space in a dwelling to inspect the fire warning system at the
commencement of any new leasehold term and maintain the proper
functioning of the fire warning system as hereinbefore described. The
owner of every owner-occupied dwelling shall inspect the fire warning
system from time to time and maintain its operability.
§ 247-4 PENNS GROVE CODE § 247-6
1:178
§ 247-7. Time limit to complete installation.
It is hereby required that all owners of dwellings, as herein described,
complete installation of the required fire warning systems within 30 days of
the effective date of this article.
§ 247-8. Violations and penalties.
Failure by the responsible party to install and maintain the required fire
warning system, as hereinbefore described, is punishable by a fine of not
more than $50 per day for each such violation. A violation affecting more
than one unit of dwelling space shall be considered a separate violation as
to each such unit of dwelling space.
A. It shall be the duty of the Housing Officer to ensure that the
responsibilities for each rental unit of dwelling are performed as
required.
B. Notwithstanding any other statutes or ordinances, it shall be the duty of
the Borough of Penns Grove Housing Officer or Construction Code
Official, where appropriate, to ensure compliance with this article
before a certificate of occupancy is issued for any dwelling or unit of
dwelling space.
§ 247-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 247-8
1:179
Chapter 252
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 223.
Site plan review — See Ch. 375.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 387.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 400.
Zoning — See Ch. 450.
§ 252-1. Statutory authorization, findings of fact, purpose and
objectives.
A. Statutory authorization. The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has
in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et seq. delegated the responsibility to local
governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote public
health, safety, and general welfare of their citizenry.
B. Findings of fact.
(1) The flood hazard areas of the Borough of Penns Grove are subject
to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property,
health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and
governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood
protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which
adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
(2) These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in areas of special flood hazard which increase flood
heights and velocities and, when inadequately anchored, cause
damage in other areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed,
elevated or otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute
to the flood loss.
C. Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the
public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and
private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions
designed to:
(1) Protect human life and health;
(2) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood-control
projects;
(3) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general
public;
(4) Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
§ 247-8 PENNS GROVE CODE § 252-1
1:180
§ 252-2. Definitions.
(5) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, and bridges
located in areas of special flood hazard;
(6) Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize
future flood blight areas;
(7) Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area
of special flood hazard; and
(8) Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
D. Methods of reducing flood losses. In order to accomplish its purposes,
this chapter includes methods and provisions for:
(1) Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health,
safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards or which
result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or
velocities;
(2) Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of
initial construction;
(3) Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels,
and natural protective barriers which help accommodate or
channel floodwaters;
(4) Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development
which may increase flood damage; and
(5) Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which
will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood
hazards in other areas.
A. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in
common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AH ZONE — Areas subject to inundation by one-percent annual chance
shallow flooding (usually areas of ponding) where average depths are
between one and three feet. Base flood elevations (BFEs) derived from
detailed hydraulic analyses are shown in this zone.
AO ZONE — Areas subject to inundation by one-percent annual chance
shallow flooding (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain) where average
depths are between one and three feet.
§ 252-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-2
1:181
APPEAL — A request for a review of the Borough Engineer's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a
variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO or AH Zone on
a community's Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM) with a onepercent
annual or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of
one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where
the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be
evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — Land in the floodplain within
a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in
any given year. It is shown on the FIRM as Zone V, VE, V1-30, A, AO,
A1-A30, AE, A99, or AH.
BASE FLOOD — A flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The flood elevation shown on a
published Flood Insurance Study (FIS) including the Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM). For Zones AE, AH, AO, and A1-30 the elevation
represents the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has
a one-percent or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year. For Zones VE and V1-30 the elevation represents the
stillwater elevation (SWEL) plus wave effect (BFE = SWEL + wave
effect) resulting from a flood that has a one-percent or greater chance
of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support
of the building and is intended through its design and construction to
collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage
to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
COASTAL A ZONE — The portion of the special flood hazard area
(SFHA) starting from a Velocity (V) Zone and extending up to the
landward limit of the moderate wave action delineation. Where no V
Zone is mapped, the Coastal A Zone is the portion between the open
coast and the landward limit of the moderate wave action delineation.
Coastal A Zones may be subject to wave effects, velocity flows, erosion,
scour, or a combination of these forces. Construction and development
in Coastal A Zones is to be regulated the same as V Zones/coastal highhazard
areas.
COASTAL HIGH-HAZARD AREA — An area of special flood hazard
extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune
along an open coast and any other area subject to high-velocity wave
action from storms or seismic sources.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures,
§ 252-2 PENNS GROVE CODE § 252-2
1:182
mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations, or storage of equipment or materials located within the
area of special flood hazard.
DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM) — The official map
on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the
areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to
the community.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A non-basement building built, in the case of
a building in an area of special flood hazard, to have the top of the
elevated floor or, in the case of a building in a coastal high-hazard
area or Coastal A Zone, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal
structural member of the elevated floor elevated above the base flood
elevation plus freeboard by means of piling, columns (posts and piers),
or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water and adequately anchored
so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a
flood up to the magnitude of the base flood. In an area of special flood
hazard, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means
of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to
facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters. In areas of coastal
high hazard and Coastal A Zones, "elevated building" also includes a
building otherwise meeting the definition of "elevated building" even
though the lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls.
EROSION — The process of the gradual wearing away of land masses.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are
to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which
the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report in which the
Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles as well as
the Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) and the water surface elevation of the
base flood.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial
or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters
from any source.
(2)
§ 252-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-2
1:183
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special
purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance
and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power.
The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination
thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage
prevention and reduction.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water
and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FREEBOARD — A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a
flood level for purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends
to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to
flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood
and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the
hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the
ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed or existing
walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
LIMIT OF MODERATE WAVE ACTION (LIMWA) — Inland limit of the
area affected by waves greater than 1.5 feet during the base flood. Base
flood conditions between the V Zone and the LIMWA will be similar to
but less severe than those in the V Zone.
Listed individually on the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
(1)
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(2)
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by
the Secretary of the Interior; or
(3)
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary
of the Interior; or
(a)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
(b)
(4)
§ 252-2 PENNS GROVE CODE § 252-2
1:184
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable
solely for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an
area other than a basement is not considered a building's lowest floor
provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure
in violation of other applicable non-elevation design requirements of 44
CFR 60.3.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a recreational
vehicle.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME
SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into
two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain regulation
adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to
such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are
to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring
of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of the
floodplain management regulations adopted by the municipality.
PRIMARY FRONTAL DUNE — A continuous or nearly continuous
mound or ridge of sand with relatively steep seaward and landward
slopes immediately landward and adjacent to the beach and subject
to erosion and overtopping from high tides and waves from coastal
storms. The inland limit of the primary frontal dune occurs at the point
where there is a distinct change from the relatively steep slope to a
relatively mild slope.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is built on a single
chassis, 400 square feet or less when measured at the longest
horizontal projections, designed to be self-propelled or permanently
towable by a light-duty truck, and designed primarily not for use as a
permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational,
camping, travel, or seasonal use.
SAND DUNES — Naturally occurring or man-made accumulations of
sand in ridges or mounds landward of the beach.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — For other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L.
No. 97-348), includes substantial improvements and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other
§ 252-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-2
1:185
§ 252-3. General provisions.
improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start
means either the first placement of permanent construction of a
structure on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or footings, the
installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond
the stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation,
such as clearing, grading and filling, nor does it include the installation
of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for a
basement, footings or piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary
forms, nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory
buildings, such as garages or sheds, not occupied as dwelling units
or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or
a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its condition
before damage would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter
that permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be
prohibited by this chapter.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with this chapter. A new or substantially improved
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR
60.3(b)(5), (c)(4) or (10) or (e)(2), (4) or (5) is presumed to be in
violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code
enforcement officer and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
(1)
Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure.
(2)
§ 252-2 PENNS GROVE CODE § 252-3
1:186
A. Lands to which this chapter applies. This chapter shall apply to all areas
of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the Borough of Penns
Grove, Salem County, New Jersey.
B. Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.
(1) The areas of special flood hazard for the Borough of Penns Grove,
Community No. 340419, are identified and defined on the following
documents prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency:
(a) A scientific and engineering report, "Flood Insurance Study,
Salem County, New Jersey (All Jurisdictions)," dated June 16,
2016.
(b) Flood Insurance Rate Map for Salem County, New Jersey (all
jurisdictions) as shown on Index and Panel(s) 34033C0051C,
34033C0052C, 34033C0053C, and 34033C0054C, whose
effective date is June 16, 2016.
(2) The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part
of this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study, maps and advisory
documents are on file at 1 State Street, Penns Grove, New Jersey.
C. Penalties for noncompliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be
constructed, relocated to, extended, converted, or altered without full
compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable
regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter by failure to
comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions
and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails
to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof,
be fined not more than $2,000 or imprisoned for not more than 90 days,
or both, for each violation and in addition shall pay all costs and
expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent
the Borough of Penns Grove from taking such other lawful action as is
necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
D. Abrogation and greater restrictions. This chapter is not intended to
repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions. However, where this chapter and other ordinance,
easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever
imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
E. Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all
provisions shall be:
(1) Considered as minimum requirements;
(2) Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
(3) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
§ 252-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-3
1:187
§ 252-4. Administration.
F. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
(1) The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is
considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and
will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by
man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land
outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within
such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages.
(2) This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Borough of
Penns Grove, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal
Insurance Administration for any flood damages that result from
reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully
made thereunder.
A. Establishment of development permit. A development permit shall be
obtained before construction or development begins, including
placement of manufactured homes, within any area of special flood
hazard established in § 252-3B. Application for a development permit
shall be made on forms furnished by the Borough Engineer and may
include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing
the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question;
existing or proposed structures; fill; storage of materials; drainage
facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following
information is required:
(1) Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all structures;
(2) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has
been floodproofed;
(3) Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet
the floodproofing criteria in § 252-5B(2); and
(4) Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development.
B. Designation of the local administrator. The Borough Engineer is hereby
appointed to administer and implement this chapter by granting or
denying development permit applications in accordance with its
provisions.
C. Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. Duties of the Borough
Engineer shall include but not be limited to:
(1) Permit review. The Borough Engineer shall:
§ 252-3 PENNS GROVE CODE § 252-4
1:188
(a) Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
(b) Review all development permits to determine that all
necessary permits have been obtained from those federal,
state or local governmental agencies from which prior
approval is required.
(c) Review all development permits in the coastal high-hazard and
Coastal A Zone area of the area of special flood hazard to
determine if the proposed development alters sand dunes so as
to increase potential flood damage.
(d) Review plans for walls to be used to enclose space below the
base flood level in accordance with § 252-5C(2)(d).
(2) Use of other base flood data. When base flood elevation data has
not been provided in accordance with § 252-3B, Basis for
establishing the areas of special flood hazard, the Borough
Engineer shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood
elevation data available from a federal, state or other source in
order to administer § 252-5B(1), Specific standards, residential
construction, and § 252-5B(2), Specific standards, nonresidential
construction.
(3) Information to be obtained and maintained.
(a) The Borough Engineer shall obtain and record the actual
elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new or substantially improved
structures and whether or not the structure contains a
basement.
(b) For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures
the Borough Engineer shall:
[1] Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean
sea level); and
[2] Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in
Subsection A(3).
(c) In coastal high-hazard and Coastal A Zone areas, certification
shall be obtained from a registered professional engineer or
architect that the provisions of § 252-5C(2)(a) and (b)[1] and
[2] are met.
(d) The Borough Engineer shall maintain for public inspection all
records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter.
(4) Alteration of watercourses. The Borough Engineer shall:
§ 252-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-4
1:189
(a) Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department
of Environmental Protection, Dam Safety and Flood Control
Section, and the Land Use Regulation Program prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence
of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.
(b) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so the flood-carrying
capacity is not diminished.
(5) Substantial damage review. The Borough Engineer shall:
(a) After an event resulting in building damages, assess the
damage to structures due to flood and non-flood causes.
(b) Record and maintain the flood and non-flood damage of
substantial damage structures and provide a letter of
substantial damage determination to the owner and the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, Dam Safety
and Flood Control Section.
(c) Ensure substantial improvements meet the requirements of
§ 252-5B(1), Specific standards, residential construction, and
§ 252-5B(2), Specific standards, nonresidential construction.
(6) Interpretation of firm boundaries. The Borough Engineer shall
make interpretations, where needed, as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where
there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and
actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the
boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the
interpretation as provided in Subsection D.
D. Variance procedure.
(1) Appeal board.
(a) The Borough of Penns Grove Planning Board as established by
the Mayor and Council shall hear and decide appeals and
requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter.
(b) The Borough of Penns Grove Planning Board shall hear and
decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any
requirement, decision, or determination made by the Borough
Engineer in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.
(c) Those aggrieved by the decision of the Borough of Penns Grove
Planning Board, or any taxpayer, may appeal such decision to
the Superior Court of the State of New Jersey, as provided by
law.
(d) In passing upon such applications, the Borough of Penns Grove
Planning Board shall consider all technical evaluations, all
§ 252-4 PENNS GROVE CODE § 252-4
1:190
relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this
chapter, and:
[1] The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands
to the injury of others;
[2] The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
[3] The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents
to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the
individual owner;
[4] The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
[5] The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
[6] The availability of alternative locations for the proposed
use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
[7] The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
[8] The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan and floodplain management program of that area;
[9] The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
[10] The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of
wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
[11] The costs of providing governmental services during and
after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of
public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical,
and water systems and streets and bridges.
(e) Upon consideration of the factors of Subsection D(1)(d) and the
purposes of this chapter, the Borough of Penns Grove Planning
Board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances
as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.
(f) The Borough Engineer shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions, including technical information, and report any
variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon
request.
(2) Conditions for variances.
(a) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or
§ 252-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-4
1:191
§ 252-5. Provisions for flood hazard reduction.
less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, providing
items in Subsection D(1)(d)[1] to [11] have been fully
considered. As the lot size increases beyond the 1/2 acre,
the technical justification required for issuing the variance
increases.
(b) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of
historic structures upon a determination that the proposed
repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's
continued designation as a historic structure and the variance
is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character
and design of the structure.
(c) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood
hazard, to afford relief.
(d) Variances shall only be issued upon:
[1] A showing of good and sufficient cause;
[2] A determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
[3] A determination that the granting of a variance will not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to
public safety, or extraordinary public expense, create
nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public as
identified in Subsection D(1)(d), or conflict with existing
local laws or ordinances.
(e) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given
written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built
with a lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation and
that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the
increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor
elevation.
A. General standards. In all areas of special flood hazard, compliance with
the applicable requirements of the Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C.
5:23) and the following standards, whichever is more restrictive, is
required:
(1) Anchoring.
(a) All new construction to be placed or substantially improved
and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure.
§ 252-4 PENNS GROVE CODE § 252-5
1:192
(b) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral
movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to
be limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground
anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and
local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
(2) Construction materials and methods.
(a) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to
flood damage.
(b) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
(3) Utilities.
(a) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters
into the system;
(b) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters
into the systems and discharge from the systems into
floodwaters;
(c) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during
flooding; and
(d) For all new construction and substantial improvements the
electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
(4) Subdivision proposals.
(a) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
(b) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical, and water systems located and constructed to
minimize flood damage;
(c) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to
flood damage; and
§ 252-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-5
1:193
(d) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed new development which contain
at least 50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).
(5) Enclosure openings. All new construction and substantial
improvements having fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor
that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or
storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to
flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic
flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of
floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be
certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or must
meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings in at least two exterior walls of
each enclosed area, having a total net area of not less than one
square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding, shall be provided.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
covering or devices provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
B. Specific standards. In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood
elevation data has been provided as set forth in § 252-3B, Basis for
establishing the areas of special flood hazard, or in § 252-4C(2), Use of
other base flood data, the following standards are required:
(1) Residential construction.
(a) For Coastal A Zone construction see Subsection C, Coastal
high-hazard area and Coastal A Zone.
(b) New construction and substantial improvement of any
residential structure located in an A or AE Zone shall have the
lowest floor, including basement, together with the attendant
utilities and sanitary facilities, elevated at or above the base
flood elevation plus one foot or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14,
Table 2-1, whichever is more restrictive.
(c) Require within any AO or AH Zone on the municipality's FIRM
that all new construction and substantial improvement of any
residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including
basement, together with the attendant utilities and sanitary
facilities, elevated above the depth number specified in feet
plus one foot above the highest adjacent grade (at least three
feet if no depth number is specified) and require adequate
drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
§ 252-5 PENNS GROVE CODE § 252-5
1:194
(2) Nonresidential construction.
(a) In an area of special flood hazard, all new construction and
substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other
nonresidential structure located in an A or AE Zone (for
Coastal A Zone construction see Subsection C, Coastal highhazard
area and Coastal A Zone) shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, together with the attendant utilities and
sanitary facilities, either:
[1] Elevated to or above the base flood elevation plus one foot
or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1, whichever is
more restrictive, and require within any AO or AH Zone on
the municipality's DFIRM to elevate above the depth
number specified in feet plus one foot above the highest
adjacent grade (at least three feet if no depth number is
specified) and require adequate drainage paths around
structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away
from proposed structures; or
[2] Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level plus one
foot or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 6-1,
whichever is more restrictive, the structure is watertight
with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water; have structural components capable of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of
buoyancy; and be certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of
practice for meeting the applicable provisions of this
subsection. Such certification shall be provided to the
official as set forth in § 252-4C(3)(b)[2].
(3) Manufactured homes.
(a) Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with
Subsection A(1)(b).
(b) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within an area of special flood hazard shall:
[1] Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
[2] Be constructed to minimize flood damage;
[3] Have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to
flood damage; and
[4] Be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the top
of the lowest floor is at or above the base flood elevation
plus one foot or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1,
whichever is more restrictive.
§ 252-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-5
1:195
C. Coastal high-hazard area and Coastal A Zone. Coastal high-hazard
areas (V or VE Zones) and Coastal A Zones are located within the areas
of special flood hazard established in § 252-3B. These areas have
special flood hazards associated with high-velocity waters from tidal
surges and hurricane wave wash; therefore, the following provisions
shall apply:
(1) Location of structures.
(a) All buildings or structures shall be located landward of the
reach of the mean high tide.
(b) The placement of manufactured homes shall be prohibited,
except in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision.
(2) Construction methods.
(a) Elevation. All new construction and substantial improvements
shall be elevated on piling or columns so that:
[1] The bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of
the lowest floor (excluding the piling or columns) is
elevated to or above the base flood elevation plus one foot
or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 4-1, whichever is
more restrictive; and
[2] With all space below the lowest floor's supporting member
open so as not to impede the flow of water, except for
breakaway walls as provided for in Subsection C(2)(d).
(b) Structural support.
[1] All new construction and substantial improvements shall
be securely anchored on piling or columns.
[2] The pile or column foundation and structure attached
thereto shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or
lateral movement due to the effects of wind and water
loading values each of which shall have a one-percent
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year
(one-hundred-year mean recurrence interval).
[3] Prohibit the use of fill for structural support of buildings
within Zones VI-30, VE, V, and Coastal A on the
community's FIRM.
(c) Certification. A registered professional engineer or architect
shall develop or review the structural design specifications and
plans for the construction and shall certify that the design and
methods of construction to be used are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice for compliance with the
provisions of Subsection C(2)(a) and (b)[1] and [2].
§ 252-5 PENNS GROVE CODE § 252-5
1:196
(d) Space below the lowest floor.
[1] Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a
structure started after the enactment of this chapter shall
not enclose the space below the lowest floor unless
breakaway walls, open wood lattice work or insect
screening are used as provided for in this section.
[2] Breakaway walls, open wood lattice work or insect
screening shall be allowed below the base flood elevation
provided that they are intended to collapse under wind
and water loads without causing collapse, displacement or
other structural damage to the elevated portion of the
building or supporting foundation system. Breakaway
walls shall be designed for a safe loading resistance of not
less than 10 and no more than 20 pounds per square foot.
Use of breakaway walls which exceed a design safe
loading of 20 pounds per square foot (either by design or
when so required by local or state codes) may be permitted
only if a registered professional engineer or architect
certifies that the designs proposed meet the following
conditions:
[a] Breakaway wall collapse shall result from a water load
less than that which would occur during the base
flood; and
[b] The elevated portion of the building and supporting
foundation system shall not be subject to collapse,
displacement or other structural damage due to the
effects of wind and water load acting simultaneously
on all building components (structural and
nonstructural). Water loading values used shall be
those associated with the base flood. Wind loading
values used shall be those required by applicable state
or local building standards.
[3] If breakaway walls are utilized, such enclosed space shall
be used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or
storage and not for human habitation.
[4] Prior to construction, plans for any breakaway wall must
be submitted to the Construction Code Official or Building
Subcode Official for approval.
(3) Sand dunes. Prohibit man-made alteration of sand dunes within
Coastal A Zones, VE and V Zones on the community's DFIRM which
would increase potential flood damage.
§ 252-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-6
1:197
§ 252-6. When effective.
This chapter shall be effective upon publication of its approval and shall
remain in force until modified, amended or rescinded by Borough of Penns
Grove, Salem County, New Jersey.
Chapter 259
GAMBLING AND GAMES OF CHANCE
§ 259-1. Gambling in public places prohibited.
No person shall gamble or engage in a game of chance on any street,
avenue, road, highway, sidewalk or public place within the Borough of
Penns Grove.
§ 259-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GAMBLING — Staking or risking something of value upon the outcome
of a contest of chance or a future contingent event not under the actor's
control or influence, upon an agreement or understanding that the person
will receive something of value in the event of a certain outcome.
GAME OF CHANCE — Any contest, game, pool, gaming scheme or gaming
device in which the outcome depends in a material degree upon an element
of chance, notwithstanding that skill of the contestants or some other
persons may be a factor therein.
PLAYER — A person who engages in any form of gaming solely as a
contestant or bettor, without receiving or becoming entitled to receive any
profit therefrom other than personal gambling winnings.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the public has access and shall
include any street, highway, road, alley or sidewalk. It shall also include the
front of any store, shop, restaurant, tavern or other place of business and
public grounds, areas and parks, as well as parking lots or other vacant
private property not owned by or under the control of the person charged
with violating this chapter or, in the case of a minor, not owned or under the
control of his parent or guardian.
SOMETHING OF VALUE — Any money or property, any object or article
exchangeable for money or property, any form of credit or a promise directly
or indirectly contemplating transfer of money or property or of any interest
therein.
§ 259-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-5]
Any person convicted of a violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be
subject to a penalty as provided in § 1-2 of this Code.
§ 252-6 PENNS GROVE CODE § 259-4
1:198
§ 259-4. Lawfully sanctioned activities permitted.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent or prohibit any
participation in any lawfully sanctioned gambling or gaming activity, such
as but not limited to bingo, lotto or the New Jersey state lottery.
Chapter 263
GARAGE SALES
§ 263-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GARAGE SALE — Includes all sales titled "garage sale," "lawn sale," "attic
sale," "rummage sale," "flea market sale," "yard sale" or any similar casual
sale of tangible personal property which is advertised by any means
whereby the public at large is or can be made aware of said sale.
GOODS — Includes any goods, warehouse merchandise or other property
capable of being the object of a sale regulated hereunder.
PERSON — Includes individuals, partnerships, voluntary associations and
corporations.
§ 263-2. License required; fee.
§ 263-3. License limitations and display.
§ 263-4. Required information.
The information to be filed with the Clerk, pursuant to this chapter, shall be
as follows:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a garage sale in the
Borough without first filing with the Clerk the information hereinafter
specified and obtaining from such Clerk a license to do so, to be known
as a "garage sale license."
B. The fee for such license shall be $6. [Amended 6-15-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-9]
A. Such license shall be issued to any one person only twice within a
twelve-month period, and no such license shall be issued for more than
two consecutive calendar days.
B. Each license issued under this chapter must be prominently displayed
on the premises upon which the garage sale is conducted throughout
the entire period of the licensed sale.
A. The name of the person, firm, group, corporation, association or
organization conducting said sale.
§ 259-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 263-4
1:199
§ 263-5. Exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to or affect the following
persons or sales:
§ 263-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-5]
Any person, association or corporation conducting any such sale without
being properly licensed therefor or who or which shall violate any of the
other terms and regulations of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be
subject to a penalty as provided in § 1-2 of this Code.
Chapter 272
GRAFFITI
§ 272-1. Findings.
It has been determined that the use of spray paints and ink markers and
other methods to deface public and private property in the Borough of
Penns Grove has increased significantly in the past years. Such defacing of
B. The name of the owner of the property on which said sale is to be
conducted and the consent of the owner, if the applicant is other than
the owner.
C. The location at which sale is to be conducted.
D. The number of days of the sale.
E. The date and nature of any past sale.
F. The relationship or connection the applicant may have had with any
other person, firm, group, organization, association or corporation
conducting said sale and the date or dates of such sale.
G. Whether or not the applicant has been issued any other vendor's license
by any local, state or federal agency.
H. A sworn statement or affirmation by the person signing that the
information therein given is full and true and known to him to be so.
A. Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
B. Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officials.
C. Any person selling or advertising for sale an item or items of personal
property which are specifically named or described in the
advertisement and which separate items do not exceed five in number.
§ 263-4 PENNS GROVE CODE § 272-1
1:200
property causes a decline in property values and encourages racism and
prejudice which can lead to violent criminal acts. The existing laws have
failed to deter offenses within the Borough of Penns Grove requiring specific
prohibitions of such acts.
§ 272-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings as
indicated:
GRAFFITI — Any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, painting or other
defacement that is written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn,
painted or engraved on or otherwise affixed to any surface of public or
private property by any paint, spray paint, markers, chalk, dyes or any other
substance or method which defaces, obliterates, covers, alters, damages,
mars or destroys public or private property. It shall not include the
occasional and temporary marking on public streets or sidewalks with chalk
for traditional children's games.
INDELIBLE MARKER — Any felt-tip marker, china marker or similar device
or implement that contains a fluid which is not water-soluble and which may
have a flat or angled writing surface.
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 years.
SPRAY PAINT CONTAINER — Any container or other device which contains
paint or other pigmented substance, which is intended to expel the paint or
pigment without the aid of additional devices or substances, including an
aerosol spray paint, as it is commonly known.
§ 272-3. Prohibited conduct.
A. No person shall write, draw, paint, print or place, with ink, chalk or
other substance, graffiti or other markings, whether obscene or not and
whether intended to offend or not, on the real or personal property of
another, whether such property is publicly or privately owned, unless
the owner of said property shall have, prior to the drawing, writing,
printing or placing of such markings, specifically consented to the
same. Nor shall any person willfully or maliciously damage, deface, or
vandalize the property of another by inscribing or placing graffiti or any
other markings on a public or private street, or on public or private
property, whether real or personal.
B. Possession. No person shall possess a spray paint container or indelible
marker in any public building, public property or private property with
the intent to use the same to deface a building or property absent
permission to properly utilize the same.
C. Minors. It shall be illegal for any minor to possess any spray paint
container. Such spray paint container is hereby declared to be
contraband, and any police officer is authorized to seize the same from
any individual under the age of 18 in whose possession such spray paint
is found.
§ 272-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 272-4
1:201
§ 272-4. Violations and penalties.
§ 272-5. Removal of graffiti by property owner. [Amended 7-5-2017
by Ord. No. 2017-5]
A. Juvenile offenders. If, at the time of the offense charged, any person
apprehended for a violation of this chapter shall be under the age of 18
years, the Salem County Superior Court, Family Division, shall have
exclusive jurisdiction of the trial of such minor or minors, and such
minor or minors shall be surrendered to that Court, and the case,
including all papers, reports, and process thereto, shall be transferred
to said Court pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:4-11. [Amended 7-5-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-5]
B. Any person who violates the provisions of § 272-3 shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a minimum fine of $100, which said fine shall
not exceed $2,000 and/or imprisonment not exceeding 90 days, and as
an additional condition of sentencing, the Judge shall impose a
requirement to restore the property which has been damaged as a
result of the graffiti to the owner's satisfaction or make monetary
restitution to the owner for the cost of cleanup incurred by said owner.
A. Written notice. Whenever the Chief of Police and/or his/her designee
determines that there has been a violation of this chapter and that it is
necessary for an owner to remove graffiti from a building, structure or
exposed surface, the owner shall be provided written notice of the order
to remove graffiti. The order shall afford the owner the opportunity to
remove the graffiti within 90 days from the date that written notice of
the order is sent to the owner. The Department of Transportation,
however, shall be afforded 120 days from the date that written notice of
the order is sent to remove graffiti from property owned by the
Department of Transportation. The written notice shall contain a form
to be utilized by the property owner to inform the Borough that the
graffiti has been removed.
B. Method of service. Written notice of the order to remove the graffiti
shall be delivered to the owner by certified and regular mail.
C. An owner who has been ordered to remove graffiti shall respond to the
Borough by personal delivery or by certified mail of:
(1) Any objection to the order to remove graffiti, within 30 days of the
date of the order; or
(2) Notice that the graffiti has been removed, within 90 days of the
date of the order, or in the case of the Department of
Transportation, within 120 days of the date of the order.
D. If the owner does not receive a written withdrawal of the order within
the date of any objection, the order shall be deemed final. An owner that
objects to an order to remove graffiti may institute an action
§ 272-4 PENNS GROVE CODE § 272-5
1:202
§ 272-6. Sale of spray paint containers.
challenging the order before a court of competent jurisdiction within 60
days of the date of the order to remove graffiti.
E. If a property owner fails to undertake the removal of graffiti within 90
days of the date of the order to remove graffiti, or, in the case of the
Department of Transportation, within 120 days of the date of the order
to remove graffiti, unless an action challenging the order to remove
graffiti is still pending, the Borough shall have the right but not the
obligation to remove the graffiti from that property and present the
owner with a detailed itemization of the costs incurred by the Borough,
by certified and regular mail, for reimbursement by the owner. The
costs of removing the graffiti shall be assessed against the property as a
municipal lien, and the Borough may enforce the payment of such
assessment, together with interest, as a debt of the owner of the
property and shall have the right to institute an action at law for the
collection of the costs of removal of the graffiti. The Superior Court
shall have jurisdiction over any such action.
A. No person shall sell or offer for sale, transfer or offer to transfer any
spray paint container or indelible marker unless such spray paint
container or indelible marker is held for sale or transfer in an enclosed
device which is constructed to prevent removal of the merchandise
except by authorized attendants or is stored, out of sight, in such a way
as to prevent free access to the public.
B. No person or merchant shall sell or offer for sale or transfer any spray
paint container or indelible marker to a minor, unless the minor is
accompanied by a parent or legal guardian at the time of the purchase
of or transfer of property to said minor.
C. No person or merchant of any spray paint container or any hobby kit or
similar kits of any kind containing spray paint containers shall sell,
exchange or transfer in any manner said items to any individual without
requiring said individual to produce proper identification.
D. Fraudulent identification. No minor shall, at the time of purchase of any
spray paint container or indelible marker, furnish fraudulent evidence
of majority, including but not limited to a motor vehicle operator's
license, a registration certificate under the Federal Selective Service
Act, an identification card issued to a member of the armed forces or
any document issued by a federal, state, county or municipal
government.
E. Any person or merchant who sells any spray paint container or any
hobby kit or similar kits of any kind containing spray paint containers
shall keep a record of all purchases or exchanges of these items. The
record shall contain the full name and address of each person who
purchases or exchanges spray paint or hobby kits or similar kits
containing spray paint and the date of purchase and, in addition, shall
§ 272-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 272-6
1:203
Chapter 278
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass, weeds and debris — See Ch.
198.
Littering, dumping and outdoor
storage — See Ch. 298.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 347.
§ 278-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CLEANUP AND REMOVAL COSTS — All costs associated with a discharge
within the boundaries of the Borough of Penns Grove, which shall include
labor and material for the removal of hazardous substances or taking of
reasonable measures to prevent or mitigate damages to the public health,
contain a description of the spray paint container, including quantity,
brand name and color.
F. Any person or merchant required to keep record of purchases or
exchanges of spray paint containers pursuant to this section shall
maintain such records for a minimum period of one year from the date
of purchase or exchange and shall, upon reasonable request, allow the
inspection of such records by any law enforcement officer.
G. Posting of notice. Any person who owns, manages or operates a place of
business within the Borough of Penns Grove wherein aerosol or spray
containers of paint or indelible markers capable of defacing property
are sold shall conspicuously post a sign stating: "It is a crime to sell or
otherwise convey aerosol spray paint or wide tipped indelible markers
to persons under 18 years of age in the Borough of Penns Grove and is
punishable by fine up to $2,000 and imprisonment not to exceed 90
days."
H. Violations and penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this
section, either by failure to maintain said records as required, failure to
post notice, or by assuming a false identity or providing false
identification documents in connection with the purchase of spray paint
containers, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not to
exceed $2,000 or by imprisonment not to exceed 90 days or by a period
of community service not to exceed 90 days, or any combination
thereof. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues. [Amended
7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
§ 272-6 PENNS GROVE CODE § 278-1
1:204
safety or welfare of the residents of the Borough of Penns Grove, including
the lands, private and public, therein.
DISCHARGE — Any intentional or unintentional action or omission resulting
in the release, spill, leak, emission, dump or disposal of hazardous
substances into the waters or lands within the Borough of Penns Grove or
outside the Borough when damage may result to the waters or lands inside
the Borough.
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE — All elements and compounds, including
petroleum products, as set forth within N.J.S.A. 58:10-23.11b, as amended,
except that sewage and sewage sludge shall be considered "hazardous
substances" for the purpose of this chapter.
PERSON — Any individual, public or private corporation, companies,
association, societies, firms, partnerships or joint-stock companies.
§ 278-2. Assignment of liability.
Any person who has discharged or caused to be discharged, either
intentionally or unintentionally, directly or indirectly, a hazardous
substance, or who is in any way responsible for any hazardous substance
which has been or shall be discharged within the Borough, shall be strictly
liable, jointly and severally, without regard to fault, and shall be responsible
for all cleanup and disposal costs, including all wages (regular and
overtime) paid and all costs of medical and hospital treatment for injuries
incurred by the agents, servants and employees of the Borough. This section
shall not apply to discharge of hazardous substances pursuant to and in
compliance with the conditions of a federal or state permit.
§ 278-3. Parties responsible.
Reimbursement to the Borough for items expended and cost incurred shall
be made by the owner or operator of the vehicle responsible for or involved
in the hazardous material fire, leak or spill of hazardous material; the owner
or person responsible for the vessel containing the hazardous material
involved in such fire, leak or spill on public or private property, whether
stationary or in transit and whether accidental or through negligence; the
owner or person responsible for any property from which any leak or spill
of hazardous material emanates, whether accidental or through negligence;
and the person responsible for the hazardous material fire, leak or spill
of hazardous material on public or private property, whether accidental
or through negligence; and, further, this responsibility shall also apply to
all persons who have intentionally, unintentionally, directly or indirectly
discharged or caused to be discharged hazardous material substance within
the Borough of Penns Grove.
§ 278-4. Reimbursement for services of responders.
Any person causing or the owner of any vehicle causing or involved in
a hazardous material fire, leak or spill or release involving a hazardous
material must provide reimbursement for services rendered by or damage
§ 278-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 278-4
1:205
caused to any recovery company, towing company, fire department, rescue
department, or any other technical assistance called for by the Borough to
handle such incident. In the event of a vehicle having been responsible for
an incident, such vehicle shall be impounded until such time it is deemed
safe to proceed by the responsible official in conjunction and cooperation
with the Borough of Penns Grove.
§ 278-5. Hearing on assessment.
Upon assessment of cleanup and removal costs, the person assessed may,
within 10 days of receipt of such assessment, make a written request for a
hearing before the governing body exclusively upon the reasonableness of
the amount assessed.
§ 278-6. Time frame for payment; liability for collection costs.
Full reimbursement shall be made to the Borough by the person or persons
responsible not later than 45 days after receipt of an itemized invoice from
the Borough of Penns Grove. The person responsible for the discharge shall
be liable for all reasonable attorney fees and costs incurred in the collection
of cleanup and removal costs.
Chapter 286
INSURANCE
§ 278-4 PENNS GROVE CODE § 278-6
1:206
ARTICLE I
Fire Insurance Claims
[Adopted 6-19-1979 by Ord. No. 79-11 (Ch. 119 of the 1986 Code);
amended in its entirety 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
§ 286-1. Conditions for payment of claims; anticipated costs of
demolition.
§ 286-2. Requests for certificate of search; amendment or
modification.
A. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 17:36-8 et seq., no insurance company authorized
to issue fire insurance policies in the State of New Jersey shall pay to a
claimant any claim in excess of $2,500 for fire damages on any real
property located within the Borough of Penns Grove pursuant to any
fire insurance policy issued or renewed after the adoption of this article
and the filing of this article with the State Commissioner of Insurance
until such time as:
(1) All taxes and assessments and all other municipal liens or charges
levied and assessed and due and payable appearing on the official
certificate of search for municipal liens pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-12
shall have been paid either by the owner of such real property or by
the insurance company; and
(2) The insured person submits an official certificate, on a form
prescribed and certified by the Tax Collector of the Borough, that
demolition is not required or that the costs of demolition or
anticipated demolition have been paid, and the identity and contact
information for the insurer of the property; or
(3) The municipality submits to the insurance company a copy of a
resolution adopted pursuant to § 286-4 of this article.
B. If demolition has not yet occurred on the date of receipt of a request for
an official certificate of search pursuant to this section, the insurer shall
provide on that certificate an estimate of the anticipated costs of
demolition. The insured on notice shall pay the anticipated cost of
demolition to the municipality which shall hold the funds in an interestbearing
escrow account in a state or federally chartered bank, savings
banks or savings and loan association in this state.
A. Any request for an official certificate of search for municipal liens shall
specify that the search concerns fire-damaged property.
B. The official certificate of search may, from time to time, be altered by
the bonded official responsible for preparing such certificates in order
to cancel any error or omission or to add any municipal liens or related
charges due and payable subsequent to the preparation of the official
certificate.
§ 286-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 286-3
1:207
§ 286-3. Appeals.
If an appeal is taken on the amount of any lien or charge, other than
an appeal on the assessed valuation of real property pursuant to N.J.S.A.
54:3-21, the insurance company shall issue a draft payable to the court
of record, to be held by the court in an interest-bearing escrow account
in a state or federally chartered bank, savings bank or savings and loan
association in the state, in an amount totaling 75% of the full amount of
the lien or charge being contested, but not to exceed the proceeds payable
under its insurance policy, and the insurance company shall issue a draft
payable to the municipality for the remaining 25% of the lien or charge
being contested, with the full amount paid by the insurance company to the
court and the municipality not to exceed the proceeds payable under its
insurance policy, pending termination of all proceedings, at which time such
moneys and all interest accruing thereon, at a rate paid on interest-bearing
accounts in state or federally chartered banks, savings banks or savings and
loan associations in the state, shall be disbursed in accordance with the final
order or judgment of the court.
§ 286-4. Installment payments.
§ 286-5. Distribution of copies.
Copies of this article shall be provided to the Chief Financial Officer, Tax
Collector, and Borough Clerk for their information and attention.
§ 286-6. Filing with Commissioner of Insurance.
Upon the adoption of this article, a certified copy shall be filed by the
Clerk of the Borough with the State Commissioner of Insurance, pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 17:36-9.
§ 286-7. Incorporation of state law.
A. The Borough Council of the Borough of Penns Grove may by resolution
enter into an agreement with the owner of any fire-damaged property
situated in the Borough of Penns Grove to pay in full all delinquent
taxes, assessments or other municipal liens by installments pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 54:5-19, or for the redemption of a tax sale lien by installment
payments pursuant to Article 7 of Chapter 5 of Title 54 of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey, or for the payment in full of any anticipated
costs of demolition by installment, if the Mayor and Council are
satisfied that the claim for fire damages is to be used to restore or
improve the fire-damaged property.
B. In the event of such a resolution, a certified copy of said resolution shall
be sent to the insurance company authorizing the insurance company to
make full payment on the claim to the insured.
A. All other powers conveyed and reserved to the Borough of Penns Grove
by N.J.S.A. 17:36-8 through 17:36-13, as now or hereafter amended, not
§ 286-3 PENNS GROVE CODE § 286-7
1:208
specifically set forth in this article are hereby incorporated by reference
and enacted by the Borough of Penns Grove.
B. Any provisions of this article inconsistent with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
17:36-8 through 17:36-13, as now or hereafter amended, are hereby
modified or repealed to the extent of such inconsistencies, but all other
parts of this article shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 286-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 286-7
1:209
Chapter 298
LITTERING, DUMPING AND OUTDOOR STORAGE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass, weeds and debris — See Ch.
198.
Unfit and abandoned buildings — See Ch. 206.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 347.
Solid waste — See Ch. 382.
Zoning — See Ch. 450.
§ 298-1. Littering prohibited; definitions. [Amended 4-4-1995 by
Ord. No. 95-5]
§ 298-2. Use of litter receptacles.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, discard or otherwise
place litter of any nature upon any public or private property, other than
in a litter receptacle, mailbox, letter box, post office box, drop or letter
drop.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DROP or LETTER DROP — A mechanism which constitutes a receptacle
or slot into which a booklet, pamphlet, brochure, leaflet, journal,
gazette, newspaper, magazine, tabloid, treatise or other paper is
dropped in order to provide for transfer, delivery or deposit.
LITTER — Any used or unconsumed substance or waste material which
has been discarded, whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic, rubber,
paper or other natural or synthetic material, or any combination
thereof, including but not limited to any bottle, jar or can, or any top,
cap, or detachable tab of any bottle, jar or can, any unlighted cigarette,
cigar or match, or any flaming or glowing material, or any garbage,
trash, refuse, debris, rubbish, grass clippings or other lawn or garden
waste, newspaper, magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers
or other packaging or construction material, but does not include the
waste of the primary processes of mining or other extraction processes,
logging, sawmilling, farming or manufacturing. Also, any booklet,
pamphlet, brochure, leaflet, journal, gazette, newspaper, magazine,
tabloid, treatise or other paper product which has been gratuitously
discarded, thrown, deposited, dropped, delivered, transferred, given or
otherwise placed for any other purpose.
LITTER RECEPTACLE — A container suitable for the depositing of
litter.
MAILBOX — A container suitable for the depositing of mail, letters,
correspondence and messages.
§ 286-7 PENNS GROVE CODE § 298-2
1:210
§ 298-3. Materials from outside Borough. [Amended 10-18-1988 by
Ord. No. 88-14]
A. Litter receptacles and their servicing are required at public places
which exist in the municipality, including:
(1) Sidewalks used by pedestrians in active retail commercially zoned
areas, such that at a minimum there shall be no single linear
quarter mile without a receptacle;
(2) Buildings held out for use by the public, including schools,
government buildings and railroad and bus stations;
(3) Parks;
(4) Drive-in restaurants;
(5) All street vendor locations;
(6) Self-service refreshment areas;
(7) Construction sites;
(8) Gasoline service station islands;
(9) Shopping centers;
(10) Parking lots;
(11) Campgrounds and trailer parks;
(12) Marinas, boat moorage and fueling stations;
(13) Boat launching areas;
(14) Public and private piers operated for public use;
(15) Beaches and bathing areas; and
(16) At special events to which the public is invited, including sporting
events, parades, carnivals, circuses, and festivals.
B. The proprietors of these places or the sponsors of these events shall be
responsible for providing and servicing the receptacles such that
adequate containerization is available.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to transport any litter, household or
commercial solid waste, junk, vehicle or vehicle parts, rubber tires,
appliances or furniture to the Borough of Penns Grove from outside the
Borough of Penns Grove for the purpose of throwing, dropping,
discarding or otherwise placing the aforesaid materials upon any public
or private property, including a litter receptacle, with or without the
consent of the owner or occupant of said property. Any owner or
occupant of Borough property who consents to the throwing, dropping,
or discarding of the aforementioned materials, as well as the person
§ 298-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 298-3
1:211
§ 298-4. Storage of bulky household waste.
It shall be unlawful for any residential property owner to store or permit
storage of any bulky household waste, including household appliances,
furniture and mattresses, in areas zoned residential, except in a fully
enclosed structure. Said items may be placed outside immediately prior to
the scheduled pickup thereof.
§ 298-5. Storage of tires.
It shall be unlawful for any residential property owner to store or permit
the storage of tires in areas zoned residential, except in a fully enclosed
structure. Tires may be placed outside immediately prior to the scheduled
pickup thereof.
§ 298-6. Parking of vehicles on residential lawns.
It shall be unlawful for any residential property owner to park or permit the
parking of any vehicle on his or her residential lawn.
§ 298-7. Inoperable vehicles. [Amended 4-4-1995 by Ord. No. 95-6]
transporting the aforementioned materials into the Borough of Penns
Grove for the purpose of throwing, dropping or discarding them, shall
be subject to the penalties for the violation of this chapter.
B. The Borough of Penns Grove, through a resolution duly adopted by the
Mayor and Council, may grant an exemption to this section for the
purpose of entering into a cooperation agreement with another
municipality for the storage and disposal of said materials.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or permit the keeping on
streets, vacant lots and residential lawns, except in a fully enclosed
structure, any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer which:
(1) Is missing tires, wheels, engine or any essential parts;
(2) Displays extensive body damage or deterioration which renders the
vehicle inutile or otherwise inoperable or in violation of the Motor
Vehicle Code of the State of New Jersey;
(3) Does not display a current, valid state license or registration; or
(4) Is wrecked, disassembled or partially disassembled.
B. This section shall supersede any and all conflicting provisions found
elsewhere within this Code, including Chapter 212, Vehicles,
Abandoned,30 and any other provision of this Code which adopts or
incorporates, by reference or otherwise, any relevant provision of the
BOCA Code relating to the subject of inoperable or junk cars.
30.Editor's Note: Reference is to Ch. 212, Vehicles, Abandoned, of the 1986 Code which was
removed from the Code as superseded by this section.
§ 298-3 PENNS GROVE CODE § 298-7
1:212
§ 298-8. Vehicles to be covered.
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be driven, moved, stopped or parked
on any highway unless such a vehicle is constructed or loaded to prevent
any of its load from dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping
therefrom. Any person operating a vehicle from which any glass or objects
have fallen or escaped, which could cause an obstruction, damage a vehicle
or otherwise endanger travelers or public property, shall immediately cause
the public property to be cleaned of all glass or objects and shall pay the
costs therefor.
§ 298-9. Construction and demolition sites.
It shall be unlawful for any owner, agent or contractor in charge of a
construction or demolition site to permit the accumulation of litter before,
during or after completion of any construction or demolition project. It shall
be the duty of the owner, agent or contractor in charge of a construction
site to furnish containers adequate to accommodate flyable or nonflyable
debris or trash at areas convenient to construction areas and to maintain
and empty the receptacles in such a manner and with such a frequency as
to prevent spillage of refuse.
§ 298-10. Open or overflowing waste disposal bins.
It shall be unlawful for any residential or commercial property owner to
permit open or overflowing waste disposal bins on his or her property.
§ 298-11. Sidewalks and other areas to be kept clear.
It shall be the duty of the owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or person in
charge of any structure to keep and cause to be kept the sidewalk and
curb abutting the building or structure free from obstruction or nuisances
of every kind and to keep sidewalks, areaways, backyards, courts and alleys
free from litter and other offensive material. No person shall sweep into
or deposit in any gutter, street, catch basin or other public place any
accumulation of litter from any public or private sidewalk or driveway.
Every person who owns or occupies property shall keep the sidewalk in
front of his or her premises free of litter. All sweepings shall be collected
and properly containerized for disposal.
§ 298-12. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-5]
Otherwise, this section shall be read in pari materia with any
nonconflicting provision found in any other part of this Code.
A. A person who throws, drops, discards or otherwise places any litter of
any nature upon public or private property other than in a litter
receptacle commits a petty disorderly persons offense and,
notwithstanding the provisions of N.J.S.A. 2C:43-3 to the contrary, for
every such offense shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than
§ 298-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 298-12
1:213
Chapter 315
NOISE
§ 315-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL — The sound-pressure level in decibels as
measured on a sound-level meter using the A-weighting network. The level
so read is designated dBA.
MOTORCYCLE — Defined as in the Motor Vehicle Code of the State of New
Jersey.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Defined as in the Motor Vehicle Code of the State of
New Jersey.
MUFFLER or SOUND-DISSIPATIVE DEVICE — A device for abating the
sound of escaping gases of an internal combustion engine.
NOISE — Any sound which annoys or disturbs humans or which causes or
tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on humans.
$500. The Superior Court and Municipal Court shall have jurisdiction
to enforce this section. The state or the Borough may institute
proceedings under this section. If a money judgment is rendered
against a defendant, the payment made to the Court shall be remitted
to the Chief Financial Officer of the Borough, to be used by the Borough
to help finance litter control activities in addition to or supplementing
existing litter pickup and removal activities in the Borough.
B. If a person violates Subsection A of this section the Court, in addition to
any penalty imposed under that subsection, may direct the person to
perform community service, including litter pickup and removal from
any public property, or any private property with permission of the
owner, upon which the person deposited litter, for a term of not less
than 20 hours nor more than 40 hours.
C. A person who is convicted of an offense under Subsection A of this
section within six months after the date of a previous conviction
thereunder shall be sentenced to pay a fine not less than $250 nor more
than $1,000, may be sentenced to imprisonment for a definite term not
to exceed 60 days, and may be directed to perform community service,
including litter pickup and removal from any public property, or from
any private property if permission of the owner has been granted, for a
term of not less than 40 nor more than 80 hours.
D. Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no other
penalty is prescribed shall be subject to a penalty as provided in § 1-2 of
this Code.
§ 298-12 PENNS GROVE CODE § 315-1
1:214
NOISE DISTURBANCE — Any sound which is capable of being heard or
perceived by a person of normal aural range at a distance of 50 feet or
greater or which disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities or
endangers or injures personal or real property.[Amended 5-1-1990 by
Ord. No. 90-8]
PERSON — Any individual, association, partnership or corporation and
includes any officer, employee, department, agency or instrumentality of a
state or any political subdivision of a state or federal agency not associated
with national defense.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, highway,
sidewalk or alley or similar place which is owned or controlled by a
governmental entity.
§ 315-2. Prohibited acts. [Amended 5-1-1990 by Ord. No. 90-8;
9-2-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-12]
§ 315-3. Examples. [Added 9-2-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-12]
A. No person shall make, continue or cause to be made or continued any
loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which does or is likely
to annoy, disturb, injure or endanger the comfort, repose, health, peace
or safety of others.
B. No person shall allow a person on premises or within a structure under
his or her control, as an owner or lessee, to make, continue or cause to
be made or continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any
noise which does or is likely to annoy, disturb, injure or endanger the
comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others.
A. Without intending to limit the generality of § 315-2, the following acts
are hereby declared to be examples of loud, disturbing and unnecessary
noise in violation of this chapter:
(1) Radios; televisions; phonographs.
(a) The playing, use or operation of any radio receiving set,
television, musical instrument, phonograph or other machine
or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such a
manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of
neighboring inhabitants or with louder volume than is
necessary for convenient hearing for persons who are in the
room, vehicle or chamber in which the machine or device is
operated and who are voluntary listeners; or
(b) The operation of such a set, instrument, phonograph, machine
or device so that it is clearly audible across real property
boundaries or through partitions common to two parties within
a building or clearly audible at 50 feet from such device when
operated within a motor vehicle parked on a public right-ofway
or on a public space or within a boat.
§ 315-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-3
1:215
(2) Yelling; shouting. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on
the public streets which annoys or disturbs the quiet, comfort or
repose of persons in any office, dwelling, hotel or other type of
residence or of any persons in the vicinity.
(3) Animals; birds. The keeping of animals or birds which, by causing
frequent or long continued noise, disturbs the comfort or repose of
any person in the vicinity.
(4) Horns. The sounding of a horn or warning device on an automobile,
motorcycle, bus or other vehicle except when required by law or
when necessary to give timely warning of the approach of the
vehicle or as a warning of impending danger to persons driving
other vehicles or to persons on the street. No person shall sound a
horn or warning device on an automobile, motorcycle, bus or other
vehicle which emits an unreasonably loud or harsh sound or for an
unnecessary or unreasonable period of time.
(5) Exhaust. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of an
engine, stationary internal combustion engine or motor vehicle,
except through a muffler or other device which will effectively
prevent loud or explosive noises. In addition, the modification of an
exhaust system in a motor vehicle in a manner which will amplify or
increase the noise emitted by such vehicle above that by the
exhaust system originally installed on the vehicle.
(6) Defect in vehicle or load. The use of an automobile, motorcycle or
vehicle so out of repair or so loaded that it creates loud and
unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise.
(7) Construction or repair. The carrying on of any excavation,
demolition, construction, repair or alteration work other than
between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., or 1/2 hour after
sunset, whichever is earlier, on Monday through Friday and
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon on Saturday.
Property owners and tenants may carry on construction, repairs or
alteration work on property they own or lease on Saturday and
Sunday between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00. Commercial
activities relating to excavation, demolition, construction, repairs
or alteration work are prohibited on Sunday, Good Friday,
Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day,
Christmas Day and New Year's Day. In case of urgent necessity or
in the interest of public health or safety, the Construction Code
Official may grant a permit for excavation, demolition,
construction, repair or alteration for a period not to exceed three
days for work to be carried on over a twenty-four-hour basis.
(8) Schools; courts; churches; hospitals. The creation of excessive
noise on a street adjacent to a school, institution of learning,
church or court while in use or adjacent to a hospital which
unreasonably interferes with the working of the institution or
§ 315-3 PENNS GROVE CODE § 315-3
1:216
which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital, provided
that conspicuous signs are displayed in such a street indicating that
it is a school, church, hospital or court street. [Amended 7-5-2017
by Ord. No. 2017-5]
(9) Public use of sound-creating devices. The operation of any form of a
sound-creating device, vocal or instrumental, human or mechanical
or otherwise, on the sidewalks, streets and highways or other
public places of the Borough, for or without profit, for the purpose
of attracting the attention of the public to and the advertisement of
any business, sport, exhibition, entertainment, spectacle,
undertaking, happening, occasion and any other event, or the
operation in any building or on any premises or on any public street
of the Borough of any radio device or mechanical musical
instrument or device of any kind whereby the sound is cast directly
or indirectly upon any public street or place and where such device
is maintained and operated for advertising purposes or for the
purpose of attracting the attention of the passing public or which is
so placed and operated that the sounds coming therefrom can be
heard to the annoyance or inconvenience of persons upon any
street or public place or in neighboring premises, provided that the
prohibition herein contained shall not be applicable to any parade
for which a permit has been issued. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-5]
(10) Motor vehicles and motorcycles.
(a) Unreasonable noise disturbances made, continued or caused to
be made by the operation of a motor vehicle or motorcycle.
(b) Repairing, rebuilding, modifying or testing any motor vehicle
or motorcycle in such a manner as to cause a noise
disturbance.
(c) Operating or causing to be operated a public or private motor
vehicle or motorcycle on a public right-of-way at any time in
such a manner that the sound level emitted by the motor
vehicle or motorcycle exceeds the level set forth in Table 1:
§ 315-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-3
1:217
§ 315-4. Exceptions. [Added 9-2-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-12]
Nothing herein contained in §§ 315-2 and 315-3 shall be construed to apply
to:
Table 1
Motor Vehicle and Motorcycle Sound Limits
(measured at 15 feet or 15 meters)
Sound Level
(dBA)
Vehicle Class
Speed Limit 35
mph or Less
Speed Limit Over
35 mph
Any motorcycle 82 86
Any motor
vehicle
76 82
(d) The operation of any motor vehicle or motorcycle not equipped
with a muffler or sound-dissipative device in good working
order and in constant operation.
(11) Engine braking. The use or operation, at any time and on any road
within the Borough of Penns Grove, of any mechanical exhaust or
decompression device, also known as "engine braking." "Engine
braking," as used herein, shall mean the use or operation of any
mechanical exhaust device designed to aid in the braking,
decompression or deceleration of any motor vehicle which results
in loud or unusual noise from such vehicle and shall include engine
compression brakes. The provisions herein regarding engine
braking shall not apply where conventional vehicle brakes have
failed, resulting in an emergency making necessary the use of
engine braking, or to emergency equipment being used for
emergency purposes.
B. The above enumeration is intended to give typical illustrations of
prohibited noise and shall not be construed as exclusive.
A. The reasonable use of bells, chimes or sound amplifiers by churches
engaged in church activities, subject to the permission of the Mayor
and Council.
B. Activities of municipal departments in the performance of their duties,
drills or public demonstrations.
C. Activities in public parks, playgrounds or public buildings under
permission or authority of municipal officials.
D. The playing by a band or orchestra in a hall or building or in the open
air, where duly authorized.
§ 315-3 PENNS GROVE CODE § 315-4
1:218
§ 315-5. Enforcement; violations and penalties. [Amended
6-17-1986 by Ord. No. 86-5; 9-2-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-12]
E. School band practice.
F. School- and Borough-sponsored sporting events.
G. Borough-approved parades and/or similar celebrations or events.
H. Noise from domestic power tools and lawn mowers when operated with
a muffler between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
I. Noise from construction activity, provided that all motorized equipment
used in such activity is equipped with functioning mufflers, and subject
to the restrictions on days and hours of construction activity in
§ 315-3A(7). [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
J. Noise from snowblowers, snow throwers, and snowplows when
operated with a muffler for the purpose of snow removal.
K. Noise from stationary emergency signaling devices that conforms to the
provisions of N.J.A.C. 7:29.
L. Noise from an exterior burglar alarm of any building or motor vehicle,
provided that such burglar alarm shall terminate its operation within 30
minutes after it has been activated.
M. Noise from agricultural equipment.
N. The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the
existence of an emergency.
O. The emission of sound in situations within the jurisdiction of the Federal
Occupational Safety and Health Act.
A. Issuance of summons. Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be
cause for a summons to be issued by police. [Amended 7-5-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-5]
B. Abatement orders.
(1) In lieu of issuing a summons, a police officer may issue an order
requiring abatement of any source of sound alleged to be in
violation of this chapter within a reasonable time period according
to guidelines which the police officer may prescribe.
Noncompliance with an abatement order will result in a summons
being issued.
(2) An abatement order shall not be issued:
(a) If any person willfully or knowingly violates any provisions of
this chapter; or
§ 315-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-5
1:219
§ 315-6. Other remedies. [Added 9-2-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-12]
No provision of this chapter shall be construed to impair any common law
or statutory cause of action, or legal remedy therefrom, of any person for
injury or damage arising from any violation of this chapter or from other
law.
Chapter 318
NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass, weeds and debris — See Ch.
198.
Unfit and abandoned buildings — See Ch. 206.
Hazardous substances — See Ch. 278.
Littering, dumping and outdoor
storage — See Ch. 298.
Solid waste — See Ch. 382.
§ 318-1. Adoption of standards. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-5]
A code defining and prohibiting certain matters, things, conditions or acts
and each of them as a nuisance; prohibiting certain noises or sounds;
requiring the proper heating of apartments; prohibiting lease or rental
of certain buildings; prohibiting spitting in or upon public buildings,
conveyances or sidewalks; authorizing the inspection of premises by an
enforcing official; providing for the removal or abatement of certain
nuisances and recovery of expenses incurred by the Board of Health in
removing or abating such nuisances; and prescribing penalties for
violations is hereby established pursuant to Chapter 188 of the Laws of
(b) If the police officer has reason to believe that there will not be
compliance with the abatement order.
C. Penalties.
(1) Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be
subject to a penalty, for each offense, of not less than $100 nor
more than $2,000, except as provided in Subsection C(2).
(2) Any person who is convicted of violating this chapter within one
year of the date of a previous violation of this chapter and who was
fined for the previous violation shall be sentenced by the court to
an additional fine as a repeat offender. The additional fine imposed
by the court upon a person for a repeated offense shall not be less
than the minimum or exceed the maximum fine fixed for a violation
of this chapter but shall be calculated separately from the fine
imposed for the violation of this chapter.
§ 315-5 PENNS GROVE CODE § 318-1
1:220
1950, excluding Section II, Nuisances Defined and Prohibited, Subsection
2.1(a) and (b), both of which have been declared unconstitutional.31 A copy
of said code is annexed hereto and made a part hereof without the inclusion
of the text thereof herein.
§ 318-2. Title of standards.
Said code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey
(1953)."
§ 318-3. Copies to be on file.
Three copies of said Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey (1953)
have been placed on file in the office of the Secretary of this local Board of
Health upon the introduction of this chapter and will remain on file there
for the use and examination of the public.
§ 318-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or neglects to comply with any provision of this
chapter or code established herein or notice issued pursuant thereto shall,
upon conviction thereof, be liable to a penalty of not less than $5 nor more
than $500 for each violation.
Chapter 324
PARADES AND ASSEMBLIES
§ 324-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Parade and Assembly
Ordinance for the Borough of Penns Grove."
§ 324-2. Definitions. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
The following words, as used herein, shall have the definitions and
meanings set forth herein:
MOTORCADE — An organized procession containing 10 or more vehicles,
except funeral and wedding processions, upon any public street, sidewalk
or alley.
PARADE — Any march, procession, assembly or gathering consisting of 20
or more people and animals or vehicles, or combination thereof, except
funeral processions, upon any public street, sidewalk, park or alley, which
does not comply with normal and usual traffic regulations or controls.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
31.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 et seq.
§ 318-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 324-3
1:221
§ 324-3. Permit required. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a parade or motorcade in or
upon any public street, sidewalk, park, alley or other public place in the
Borough or knowingly participate in any such parade or motorcade unless
and until a permit to conduct such parade or motorcade has been obtained
from the Chief of Police or his designee or, as is hereinafter provided, from
the Borough Council.
§ 324-4. Exceptions. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
A permit under this chapter shall not be required for the following:
§ 324-5. Application for permit.
A. Funeral and wedding processions.
B. Students going to and from school classes or participating in
educational activities, provided that such conduct is under the
immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities.
C. A government agency acting within the scope of its functions.
A. A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application
with the Chief of Police or his designee on forms provided by such
officer.
B. Filing period. An application for a parade permit shall be filed with the
Chief of Police or his designee not less than 15 days before the date on
which it is proposed to conduct the parade.
C. Contents. The application for a parade permit shall set forth the
following information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to
conduct such parade.
(2) If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of or by an
organization, the name, address and telephone number of the
headquarters of the organization and of the authorized and
responsible heads of such organization.
(3) The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be
the parade chairperson and who will be responsible for its conduct.
(4) The date when the parade is to be conducted.
(5) The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination
point.
(6) The approximate number of persons, animals and vehicles
constituting such parade, the type of animals and a description of
the vehicles.
§ 324-3 PENNS GROVE CODE § 324-5
1:222
§ 324-6. Fee.
There shall be a charge of $5 for each permit issued by the Chief of Police
or his designee, which money shall be used by the Borough to cover the
expenses attached to the regulating and issuing of said permit.
§ 324-7. Standards for issuance.
The Chief of Police or his designee shall issue a permit as provided for
hereunder unless, from a consideration of the application and from such
other information as may otherwise be obtained, he/she finds that:
(7) The hours when such parade will start and terminate.
(8) The location by streets of any assembly area or areas for such
parade.
(9) The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any
such assembly area or areas.
(10) If the parade is designed to be held by and on behalf of or for any
person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall
file with the Chief of Police a communication in writing from the
person proposing to hold the parade, authorizing the applicant to
apply for the permit on his behalf.
(11) Any additional information which the Chief of Police or his designee
may find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to
whether a permit should be issued.
A. The conduct of the parade will substantially interrupt the safe and
orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route.
B. The conduct of the parade will require the diversion of so great a
number of police officers of the Borough to properly police the line of
movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police
protection to the Borough.
C. The conduct of such parade will require the diversion of so great a
number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to
portions of the Borough other than that to be occupied by the proposed
line of march and areas contiguous thereto.
D. The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points
of the parade will unduly interfere with proper fire and police
protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such
assembly areas.
E. The conduct of such parade will interfere with the movement of firefighting
equipment en route to a fire.
F. There is not sufficient or adequate sanitation or other required health
facilities available in or adjacent to any public assembly areas.
§ 324-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 324-7
1:223
§ 324-8. Masks or other devices unlawful.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to assemble or parade on the
sidewalks, streets, parks, alleys or other public places of the Borough while
such persons shall be attired with a mask or other device so that the identity
of such person or persons is hidden.
§ 324-9. Time limit for action on application.
The Chief of Police or his designee shall act upon the application for a
parade permit within five days after the filing thereof. If the Chief of
Police or his designee disapproves of the application, he/she shall mail the
applicant within five days after the date upon which the application was
filed a notice of his/her action, stating the reasons for his/her denial of the
permit.
§ 324-10. Appeals.
Any applicant aggrieved by the determination of the Chief of Police or his
designee may appeal in writing to the Borough Council within five days after
the date of the mailing of the notice of disapproval of the application by the
Chief of Police or his designee. The Borough Council shall act upon any such
appeal within three days after its receipt of the notice of such appeal.
§ 324-11. Alternate permits.
The Chief of Police or his designee, in denying an application for a permit,
shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of the parade on a date,
at a time or over a route different from that named by the applicant. An
applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within five days after
notice of the action of the Chief of Police or his designee, file a written
notice of acceptance with the Chief of Police or his designee. An alternate
parade permit shall conform to the requirements of, and shall have the
effect of, a parade permit under this chapter.
§ 324-12. Notice of issuance of permit.
Immediately upon the issuance of a parade permit, the Chief of Police or his
designee shall send a copy thereof to the following:
G. The parade is not scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point
of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route.
H. The parade is to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any product,
goods or event, and is designed to be held purely for private profit.
A. The Mayor.
B. The Borough Clerk/Borough Council.
C. The Fire Chief.
§ 324-7 PENNS GROVE CODE § 324-12
1:224
§ 324-13. Permit data.
Each parade permit shall state the following information:
§ 324-14. Duties of permittee.
§ 324-15. Public conduct during parade.
D. The Chief of Police.
E. The Borough Attorney.
F. The general manager or responsible head of each public transportation
utility, the regular routes of whose vehicles will be affected by the route
of the proposed parade.
A. Starting time.
B. Minimum speed.
C. Maximum speed.
D. Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the
parade.
E. The portions of the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by the
parade.
F. The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof.
G. Such other information as the Chief of Police shall find necessary for
the enforcement of this chapter.
A. Possession of permit. The parade chairperson or other person heading
or leading such activity shall carry the parade permit upon his/her
person during the conduct of the parade.
B. Compliance with applicable ordinances. The issuance of a permit shall
not void or waive compliance with any and all applicable ordinances of
the Borough of Penns Grove, including but not limited to those related
to Chapter 229, Curfew, Chapter 298, Littering, Dumping and Outdoor
Storage, Chapter 315, Noise, and Chapter 336, Public Peace and Safety.
[Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
C. Compliance with New Jersey Code of Criminal Justice and Motor
Vehicle Laws. The issuance of a permit shall not void or waive
compliance with the New Jersey Code of Criminal Justice (N.J.S.A.
2C:1-1 et seq.) and motor vehicle laws (N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 et seq.).
[Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
A. Interference. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct or impede
or interfere with any parade or parade assembly or with any person,
vehicle or animal participating or used in the parade.
§ 324-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 324-15
1:225
§ 324-16. Construction with National Labor Relations Act.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit any lawful activity
under the National Labor Relations Act concerning picketing.
§ 324-17. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons who violate any provision of this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000 or by
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days, or both, in the discretion
of the Municipal Judge. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 332
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 340.
§ 332-1. Restricted activities.
B. Driving through parades. No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the
vehicles or persons comprising a parade when such vehicles or persons
are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade.
C. Parking on parade route. The Chief of Police shall have the authority,
when reasonable necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of
vehicles along a highway or part thereof constituting a part of the route
of a parade. The Chief of Police shall post signs to such effect, and it
shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle
in violation thereof. No person shall be liable for parking on a street
unposted in violation of this chapter.
A. No person in a public park or recreational area shall:
(1) Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with or displace or
remove any buildings, bridges, tables, benches, fireplaces, railings,
paving or paving materials, waterlines or public utilities or parts or
appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or placards, whether
temporary or permanent, monuments, stakes, posts or other
structures or equipment, facilities or park property or
appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal.
(2) Fail to cooperate in maintaining rest rooms and washrooms in a
neat and sanitary condition. No person above the age of five years
shall use the rest rooms and washrooms designated for the
opposite sex.
§ 324-15 PENNS GROVE CODE § 332-1
1:226
(3) Dig or remove any soil, rock, sand, stones, trees, shrubs or plants
or other wood or materials, or make any excavation by tool
equipment, blasting or other means or agency.
(4) Construct or erect any building or structure of whatever kind,
whether permanent or temporary, or run or string any public
service utility into, upon or across such lands, except on special
written permit issued hereunder.
(5) Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant or
injure the park or pick flowers or seeds of any trees or plant, dig in
or otherwise disturb grass areas or in any other way injure the
natural beauty or usefulness of any area.
(6) Climb any tree or walk, stand or sit upon monuments, bases,
planters, fountains, railings, fences or upon any other property not
designated or customarily used for such purposes.
(7) Tie or hitch an animal to any tree or plant.
(8) Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the
waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream or other body of water in
or adjacent to any park or any tributary stream, storm sewer or
drain flowing into such water any substance, matter or thing, liquid
or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of said waters.
(9) Have brought in or shall dump in, deposit or leave any bottles,
broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste,
garbage or refuse or other trash. No such refuse or trash shall be
placed in any waters in or contiguous to any park, or left anywhere
on the grounds thereof, but it shall be placed in the proper
receptacles where the same are provided. Where receptacles are
not provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from
the park by the person responsible for its presence and properly
disposed of elsewhere.
(10) Drive any vehicle, including motorized vehicles, such as minibikes
and mopeds, on any area except the paved park roads or parking
areas, or such areas as may on occasion be specifically designated
as temporary areas.
(11) Park a vehicle in other than an established or designated parking
area, and such shall be in accordance with posted directions
thereof and with the instruction of any attendant who may be
present.
(12) Leave a vehicle standing or parked at night in established parking
areas or elsewhere in the park area.
(13) Leave a bicycle in a place other than a bicycle rack when such is
provided and there is space available.
(14) Ride a bicycle without reasonable regard to the safety of others.
§ 332-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 332-1
1:227
(15) Leave a bicycle lying on the ground or paving or set against trees,
or in any place or position where other persons may trip over or be
injured by it.
(16) Swim, bathe or wade in any waters or waterways in or adjacent to
any park.
(17) Bring into or operate any boat, raft or other watercraft, whether
motor-powered or not, upon any waters, except at places
designated for boating. Such activity shall be in accordance with
applicable regulations as are now or hereafter may be adopted.
(18) Carry or possess firearms of any description or air rifles, spring
guns, bows and arrows, slings or any other forms of weapons
potentially inimical to wildlife and dangerous to human safety, or
any instrument that can be loaded with and fire blank cartridges, or
any kind of trapping device. Shooting in park areas from beyond
park boundaries is forbidden.
(19) Picnic or lunch in places other than those designated for that
purpose.
(20) Use any portion of the picnic area or any of the buildings or
structures therein for the purpose of holding picnics to the
exclusion of other persons, nor shall any person use such areas and
facilities for an unreasonable time if the facilities are crowded.
(21) Take part in or abet the playing of any games involving thrown or
otherwise propelled dangerous objects, such as stones, arrows or
javelins, except in those areas set apart for such form of recreation.
(22) Allow a dog of which he is in charge to go upon any part of the park
property or recreational area unless held by a leash not longer than
six feet.
(23) Sell or offer for sale any goods, wares or merchandise whatsoever
or display or distribute any advertising device, circular or card in
any park or recreational area, except upon written permit from the
Department of Public Works and upon authorization from the
Mayor and Council specifically for each occasion.
B. While in a public park or recreational area, all persons shall conduct
themselves in a proper and orderly manner, and in particular no person
shall:
(1) Bring alcoholic beverages or drink the same at any time, nor shall
any person be under the influence of intoxicating liquor.
(2) Have in his possession or set or otherwise cause to explode or
discharge or burn any firecrackers, torpedo rockets or other
fireworks, firecrackers or explosives of inflammable material, or
discharge them or throw them into any such areas from lands or
highways adjacent thereto. This prohibition includes any
§ 332-1 PENNS GROVE CODE § 332-1
1:228
§ 332-2. Hours.
substance, compound, mixture or article that in conjunction with
any other substance or compound would be dangerous from any
of the foregoing standards. At the discretion of the Borough Clerk,
permits may be given for conducting properly supervised fireworks
in designated park areas.
(3) Appear at any place in other than proper clothing.
(4) Build or attempt to build a fire except in such areas and under such
regulations as may be designated. No person shall drop, throw or
otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning cigarettes or cigars,
tobacco paper or other inflammable material within any park or
recreational area or on any highways, roads or streets abutting or
contiguous thereto.
(5) Enter an area posted as "Closed to the Public," nor shall any person
use or abet in the use of any area in violation of posted notices.
(6) Gamble or participate in or abet any game of chance except in such
areas and under such regulations as may be designated by the
Borough Clerk.
(7) Sleep or protractively lounge on the seats or benches or other
areas or engage in loud, boisterous, threatening, abusive, insulting
or indecent language or engage in any disorderly conduct or
behavior tending to breach the public peace.
(8) Disturb or interfere unreasonably with any person or party
occupying any area or participating in any activity under the
authority of a permit.
(9) Paste, glue, tack, paint or otherwise post any sign, placard,
advertisement or inscription whatever, nor shall any person erect
or cause to be erected any sign whatever on any public lands or
highways or roads adjacent to a park.
(10) Smoke or use tobacco-related products and/or discard those
products within any park and/or recreation area owned, leased or
utilized by the Borough of Penns Grove or within 50 feet of any park
and/or recreation area owned, leased or utilized by the Borough of
Penns Grove. [Added 5-15-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-9]
C. Use of playground equipment located within any park or recreation
area located within the Borough shall be limited to use by children
between the ages of three and 10 years of age. Use by persons outside
said age perimeters is prohibited, as well as use of playground
equipment in the absence of appropriate adult supervision, including
but not limited to the actual physical presence of a parent, guardian or
other responsible person over the age of 18 years of age. [Added
10-6-1992 by Ord. No. 92-19]
§ 332-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 332-2
1:229
§ 332-3. Permits for special events.
Permits for special events in parks shall be obtained by application to the
Borough Clerk in accordance with the following procedure:
A. Except for unusual and unforeseen emergencies, parks shall be open to
the public every day of the year during the designated hours. The
opening and closing hours for each individual park shall be posted
therein for public information.
B. Any section or part of any park may be declared closed to the public at
any time and for any interval of time, either temporarily or at regular
and stated intervals (daily or otherwise), and either entirely or merely
for certain uses.
A. A person seeking issuance of a permit hereunder shall file an
application with the Borough Clerk stating:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The name and address of the person, persons, corporation or
association sponsoring the activity, if any.
(3) The day and hours for which the permit is desired.
(4) The park or portion thereof for which such permit is desired.
(5) Any other information which the Borough Clerk shall find
reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit
should be issued hereunder.
B. Standards for issuance of a use permit by the Borough Clerk shall
include the following findings:
(1) The proposed activity or use of the park will not unreasonably
interfere with or detract from the general public enjoyment of the
park.
(2) The proposed activity and use will not unreasonably interfere with
or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare, safety and
recreation.
(3) The proposed activity or uses that are reasonably anticipated will
not include violence, crime or disorderly conduct.
(4) The proposed activity will not entail extraordinary or burdensome
expense or police operation by the Borough of Penns Grove.
(5) The facilities desired have not been reserved for other use at the
date and hour requested in the application.
C. Appeal. Within five days after the receipt of an application, the Borough
Clerk shall apprise an applicant in writing of his reasons for refusing a
permit, and any aggrieved person shall have the right to appeal to the
§ 332-2 PENNS GROVE CODE § 332-3
1:230
§ 332-4. Barber Avenue park pavilion. [Added 8-6-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-11; amended 6-4-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-5]
Any individual or group who or which desires to have exclusive or
substantial use and control of the pavilion at the park for any organized
activity or event shall pay a nonrefundable fee to the Clerk of the Borough
of Penns Grove in the amount of $75. Said fee shall be paid no less than
five days in advance of the planned activity or event. In addition, said fee
shall be paid per day. A day shall be defined as one calendar day any time
between dawn and dusk.
§ 332-5. Enforcement.
Mayor by service of a written notice thereof on the Borough Clerk
and the Mayor within five days of said refusal. Said Clerk shall then
immediately forward the application and the reasons for its refusal to
the Mayor, who shall consider the application under the standards set
forth under Subsection B hereof and sustain or overrule the Clerk's
decision within 10 days from the receipt of the appeal by him. The
decision of the Mayor shall be final.
D. A permittee shall be bound by all park rules and regulations and all
applicable ordinances fully as though the same were inserted in said
permits.
E. The person or persons to whom the permit is issued shall be liable for
all loss, damage or injury sustained by any person whatever by reason
of the negligence of the person or persons who shall have been issued
the permit. The Borough Clerk shall have the right to require any
permittee to submit evidence of liability insurance covering injuries to
members of the general public arising out of such permitted activities
in such amounts as may be from time to time determined by the Clerk
prior to the commencement of any activity for which a permit is issued.
F. Revocation. The Borough Clerk shall have the authority to revoke a
permit upon finding of a violation of any rule or ordinance, or upon good
cause shown.
A. The Borough Clerk and police officers shall, in connection with their
duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the provisions of this chapter.
B. The Borough Clerk and any police officer shall have the authority to
eject from the park area any person or persons acting in violation of this
chapter.
C. The Borough Clerk and any police officer shall have the authority to
seize and confiscate any property, thing or device in the park, or used in
violation of this chapter.
D. This chapter shall also be enforced by the Police Department of the
Borough of Penns Grove.
§ 332-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 332-6
1:231
§ 332-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than $500 or to
imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both, in the discretion of the
Judge of the Municipal Court.
§ 332-7. Word usage.
The use of the word "park" herein is intended, where not specifically stated,
to include "recreational area."
Chapter 336
PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 173.
Animals — See Ch. 181.
Curfew — See Ch. 229.
Drug-free school zones — See Ch. 236.
Gambling and games of chance — See Ch.
259.
Graffiti — See Ch. 272.
Noise — See Ch. 315.
Parades and assemblies — See Ch. 324.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 332.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 340.
§ 336-1. Begging or gathering of alms prohibited.
No person shall go about from door to door or place himself or herself in the
streets or highways to beg or gather alms.
§ 336-2. Decency standards.
A. Regulated conduct. All persons over the age of 12 who are on the public
streets, roads, and properties of the Borough shall comply with the
following dress and decency standards at all times: the waistband of
shorts, pants, and/or skirts shall not be worn more than three inches
below the wearer's waist, interpreted to mean at a level below the crest
of ilium, so as to expose either skin or garment underneath.
B. Consequence of violation. Violation of Subsection A of this section shall
be addressed by a Borough law enforcement officer by advising the
offender of the herein requirements and requesting compliance by
either altering his or her dress or immediately and peaceably exiting
such public street, road or property.
C. Request not required. If the offender has been previously advised of the
requirements of the herein section by a law enforcement officer and has
been found to be intentionally or knowingly in violation at a later time
§ 332-6 PENNS GROVE CODE § 336-2
1:232
§ 336-3. Other improper conduct.
Other riotous conduct, indecent conduct, breach of the peace, vagrancy and
prostitution not hereinbefore mentioned are hereby prohibited within the
limits of said Borough.
§ 336-4. Disposition of fines.
All fines imposed and collected under and by virtue of this chapter shall be
paid into the treasury of said Borough.
or subsequent date, the provisions of Subsection B shall not apply as a
prerequisite to action being taken under Subsection D herein.
D. Consequences of failure to comply with request. If a request as outlined
in Subsection B of this section does not result in immediate, peaceful
compliance, or the offender has been previously advised of the
requirements of this section by a law enforcement officer such that he
or she is in knowing or intentional violation of the requirements herein,
a citation for violation of this section shall issue. In addition to the
issuance of a citation, the offender shall be escorted or removed from
the public street, road or property unless the law enforcement officer
has determined good cause to allow such offender to remain,
conditioned upon full compliance with Subsection A herein.
E. Violation shall not result in an arrest. An arrest may not be issued for
violation of Subsection A of this section.
F. Circumstances where arrest prohibition does not apply. The arrest
prohibition within Subsection E of this section shall not apply to any
conduct which is independently disorderly, in arrogation of the
direction or order of a law enforcement officer, or otherwise in violation
of the New Jersey Criminal Code or the ordinances of the Borough of
Penns Grove, so as to provide an independent basis for arrest.
G. Fines and penalties. Notwithstanding the fines and penalties set forth
elsewhere in this chapter, a citation issued for violation of this section
shall subject the offender to a penalty of not less than $25 nor more
than $100 for the first offense, which may be payable at $25 to the court
without appearance, and not more than $1,000 for each subsequent
offense, court appearance mandatory. In addition to the fine, the court
may order such person to participate in up to 40 hours of courtapproved
community service activities.
H. Defense. It is a defense under this section if it is determined that the
person was exercising rights protected by the federal or state
constitution. Any defense under this section must be asserted prior to
any hearing or trial in the matter.
§ 336-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 336-5
1:233
§ 336-5. Violations and penalties.
Anyone violating this chapter or part of this chapter shall be subject, upon
conviction, to a penalty as provided in § 1-2 of this Code.
Chapter 340
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
§ 336-5 PENNS GROVE CODE § 336-5
1:234
ARTICLE I
General Regulations
[Adopted 5-7-1991 by Ord. No. 91-332 (Ch. 171 of the 1986 Code)]
§ 340-1. Legislative intent.
This article is adopted to regulate peddling and soliciting of certain
materials, services and related activities within the Borough of Penns
Grove. The registration of persons engaged in the above-mentioned
activities is required so that the identity of persons going from door to door
or distributing materials within the Borough may be established and so that
general regulations may be more effectively enforced, for the protection
and maintenance of the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of
the Borough, and to prevent dishonest business practices and dishonest
solicitation of funds within the Borough.
§ 340-2. Definitions.
When used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
MERCHANDISE — All goods, wares, food, meat, fish, ice cream, fruits,
vegetables, magazines, periodicals, printed material, farm products,
services and orders or contracts for services, home improvements or
alterations and anything that may be sold or distributed by peddlers or
solicitors, as defined herein.
PEDDLER — Any person, whether a resident of the Borough or not, who
goes from house to house, from place to place or from street to street,
traveling by foot, automotive vehicle or any other type of conveyance, or
stays at any location for any period of time or who offers merchandise
for sale at any location for any period of time, carrying or transporting
merchandise to customers. The word "peddler" shall also include the words
"hawker" and "huckster."
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, organization,
club, association or any principal, agent or employee thereof.
SOLICITOR — Any person, whether a resident of the Borough or not, who
goes from house to house, from place to place or from street to street,
traveling by foot, automotive vehicle or any other type of conveyance,
soliciting, taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of merchandise or
services of any kind for future performance or delivery, whether or not such
individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the merchandise or
services and whether or not he is collecting advance payments on such sales
or orders, or a person who engages in any of the foregoing activities from a
stationary location on any street or other public place. The word "solicitor"
shall also include the word "canvasser."
32.Editor's Note: This ordinance repealed original Ch. 171, Peddling and Soliciting, Art. I,
General Provisions, adopted as Art. 5 of Ch. 13 of the 1968 Revised Ordinances, and Art.
II, Street Vending, adopted 10-18-1977 by Ord. No. 77-8, as amended.
§ 340-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-3
1:235
§ 340-3. Registration and license required.
It shall be unlawful for any peddler or solicitor to sell, offer for sale or
take sales orders for merchandise or services or to distribute merchandise
or printed material within the Borough without first registering with the
Borough by filing an application for registration and paying a registration
fee to the Borough Clerk and obtaining a license from the Borough Clerk.
§ 340-4. Application for license.
Applications for a peddler's/solicitor's license shall be made to the Clerk of
the Borough of Penns Grove. The Clerk shall have the discretion to either
issue a license immediately upon receipt of a completed application and
license fee or to withhold issuance of the license pending a background
investigation by the Police Department. Said application shall contain the
following information:
§ 340-5. License fees; licenses not valid during special events.
A. The name and address of the applicant.
B. A physical description of the applicant.
C. The name and address of the firm or employer represented by the
applicant, together with credentials establishing the relationship with
the firm or employer.
D. A brief statement of the nature of the business and a description of the
merchandise or service to be sold or a description of the type of
solicitation to be done.
E. If a vehicle is to be used, a description of such vehicle and its license
number.
F. The location where the merchandise to be sold or offered for sale is
manufactured or produced and the location where such merchandise is
located at the time such application is filed and the proposed method of
delivery.
G. A statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted of any
crime, disorderly persons offense or violation of a municipal ordinance,
other than traffic regulations, and the nature of the offense. [Amended
7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
A. The fees for a license shall be as follows: [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-5]
(1) One-day license: $5.
(2) Weekly license: $15.
(3) Monthly license: $25.
(4) Yearly license expiring December 31: $100.
§ 340-3 PENNS GROVE CODE § 340-5
1:236
§ 340-6. Review by Police Department.
A copy of each application completed by a person for a license shall be
forwarded to the Chief of Police or the designated officer in charge after
issuance of a license or, in the discretion of the Clerk, prior to the issuance
of a license. The Police Department shall have the discretion to investigate
the accuracy of the information contained in the application.
§ 340-7. License not transferable.
No license issued under the provisions of this article shall be used at any
time by any person other than the individual to whom it was issued.
§ 340-8. Food and beverage equipment.
The equipment used or employed by such peddler/solicitor of ice cream,
foods, beverages, confections or other related commodity shall be
maintained in a clean and sanitary manner and be subject to the inspection
of an authorized agent of the Borough Board of Health.
§ 340-9. Responsibilities of licensee.
The licensee shall exhibit his license to any police officer or other person
on request. The licensee shall be courteous to all persons and shall not
importune or annoy any of the inhabitants of the Borough and shall conduct
himself in a lawful manner.
§ 340-10. Denial or revocation of license.
In the event that the Police Department does an investigation of the
information contained on the application and discovers material
inaccuracies or believes that there are reasonable grounds for denying
the application or if the peddler or solicitor makes misrepresentations or
materially incorrect statements in the course of carrying on his business,
the Chief of Police shall give written notice setting forth specifically the
grounds of the complaint seeking to deny or revoke the license. Said notice
shall be mailed to the applicant or license holder at the address given on
the application at least five days prior to the date set for the hearing or
be delivered personally at least three days prior to the date set for the
hearing. The Chief of Police or his designee shall have the right to conduct
B. None of these licenses shall be valid on Penns Grove Day or any other
day on which a special event is recognized by resolution of the Mayor
and Council. Notice of recognized special events shall be given to
holders of valid licenses. Any peddler/solicitor who wishes to conduct
business within the Borough of Penns Grove on the actual day that
Penns Grove Day or another special event takes place shall apply
exclusively to the Penns Grove Recreation Committee for a one-day
license. The fee for said license is presently $25, which fee may change
from time to time at the request of the Recreation Committee and
subsequent approval by the Mayor and Council.
§ 340-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-10
1:237
the hearing. If the applicant or licensee is not satisfied with the decision of
the hearing officer, the applicant or licensee may appeal that decision to the
Police Committee within 10 days of the date of the hearing, setting forth a
written statement fully explaining the grounds for the appeal. Thereafter,
the Police Committee will notify the applicant or licensee of a hearing,
which will take place within 30 days of the date of the notice of appeal. The
decision of the Police Committee at that hearing shall be final.
§ 340-11. Hours of activity.
The hours during which activity by a licensee is permitted within the
Borough shall be between 9:00 a.m. and 6:30 p.m. or sunset, whichever
occurs earlier, unless the licensee has specifically been invited to a dwelling
by a resident.
§ 340-12. Exemptions.
The following persons are exempt from the payment of a fee upon
compliance with all other provisions of this article and submission of
applicable identification and documents to support their claim to
exemption:
§ 340-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-5]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall
be subject to a penalty as provided in § 1-2 of this Code.
A. Any charitable or religious organization or society which is recognized
as tax exempt under the United States Internal Revenue Code that shall
conduct sales of personal property where the proceeds thereof shall be
applied to the payment of the expenses thereof and to the charitable or
religious object for which the society exists.
B. Any person honorably discharged from the military services of the
United States possessing a peddler's license issued in conformity with
N.J.S.A. 45:24-9 and 45:24-10.
C. Any person who is an exempt fireman of a volunteer fire department, as
defined by N.J.S.A. 45:24-9 and 45:24-10, possessing a license in
conformity with said law.
D. Any person engaged in the delivery of goods, wares or merchandise or
other articles or things in the regular course of business to the premises
of persons who had previously ordered the same or were entitled to
receive the same by reason of a prior agreement.
E. Any school, political or civic organization, benevolent society, service
club or organization not for profit which is located in the Borough or
has a majority of its membership from the Borough.
§ 340-10 PENNS GROVE CODE § 340-13
1:238
ARTICLE II
Charitable Solicitation in Roadways
[Adopted 5-21-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-7]
§ 340-14. Permission to solicit contributions.
The Borough of Penns Grove shall permit charitable organizations as
defined in N.J.S.A. 45:17A-20 to solicit contributions in roadways situated
in the Borough of Penns Grove in accordance with the provisions contained
herein.
§ 340-15. Application for permit. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-5]
All charitable organizations as defined in N.J.S.A. 45:17A-20 which desire
to solicit contributions in roadways situated in the Borough of Penns Grove
shall file an application for a permit with the Borough of Penns Grove's Chief
of Police on a form supplied by said Chief of Police specifying the following
information:
§ 340-16. Review of application; grant or denial of permit.
[Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
Upon the filing of a complete application in accordance with the provisions
of this article, the Chief of Police shall present the same to the Mayor and
Council of the Borough of Penns Grove for their review and consideration,
A. Name of applicant's organization.
B. Address of applicant's organization.
C. Telephone number of applicant's organization.
D. Contact person of applicant's organization.
E. Specific location or locations of proposed charitable solicitation.
F. Dates and times of proposed charitable solicitation.
G. If said request pertains to a location or locations on any county highway,
or intersection of a county highway, said application shall include a
copy of an authorization from the Salem County Board of Chosen
Freeholders to permit said charitable solicitation.
H. If said request pertains to a location or locations on any state highway,
or intersection of a state highway, said application shall include a copy
of an authorization from the Commissioner of Transportation of the
State of New Jersey to permit said charitable solicitation.
I. Identify the manner in which the motorist solicitation will be conducted
and the procedures to be used to ensure the safety of the members of
the public who will be traveling the roadways situated in the Borough of
Penns Grove.
§ 340-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-16
1:239
after which the Mayor and Council shall grant or deny the applicant's
request. In the event the Mayor and Council grant the applicant's request,
the Chief of Police shall issue a permit to the applicant which shall be
subject to the representations contained in the applicant's application and
any conditions imposed by the Mayor and Council.
§ 340-17. Minors prohibited.
In no event shall any charitable organization requesting authorization from
the Borough of Penns Grove for said charitable solicitation use any
individual under the age of 18 years to perform any function or task
associated with said charitable solicitation in any roadway.
§ 340-18. Compliance with statute required.
Any charitable organization requesting authorization from the Borough of
Penns Grove for said charitable solicitation shall comply with all of the
terms and conditions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-60, as amended by P.L. 1997, c. 82,
approved April 30, 1997.
§ 340-19. Statutory authorization.
This article is adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-60, as amended by P.L.
1997, c. 82, approved April 30, 1997.
§ 340-16 PENNS GROVE CODE § 340-19
1:240
Chapter 347
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass, weeds and debris — See Ch.
198.
Unfit and abandoned buildings — See Ch. 206.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 223.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 247.
Graffiti — See Ch. 272.
Littering, dumping and outdoor
storage — See Ch. 298.
Rental property — See Ch. 359.
Solid waste — See Ch. 382.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 395.
§ 340-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-19
1:241

ARTICLE I
General Standards
[Adopted 7-1-1980 by Ord. No. 80-9 (Ch. 175, Art. I, of the 1986
Code)]
§ 347-1. Adoption of standards. [Amended 10-7-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-15; 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
The provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.1 et seq. and the International Existing
Building Code 2015 are hereby accepted, adopted, and established as
standards to be used as a guide in determining the fitness of a building for
human habitation, occupancy, or use. Copies are on file in the office of the
Borough Clerk and are available to persons desiring to use and examine the
same.
§ 347-2. Title of standards. [Amended 7-5-1988 by Ord. No. 88-11;
10-7-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-15; 6-3-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-7;
7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
Said code, established and adopted by this article, is described and
commonly known as the "International Existing Building Code 2015,"
published by the International Code Council, Inc.
§ 347-3. Copies on file. [Amended 7-5-1988 by Ord. No. 88-11;
6-3-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-7]
Three copies of the International Existing Building Code have been placed
on file in the office of the Borough Clerk, upon introduction of this article,
and will remain on file there until final action is taken on this article for the
use and examination of the public.
§ 347-4. Modifications to standards. [Added 8-4-1992 by Ord. No.
92-14; amended 6-3-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-7]
The International Existing Building Code adopted under § 347-1 and named
under § 347-2 is amended to add:
SECTION 112 RIGHT TO APPEAL
112.1 Petition. Any person affected by any notice which has been issued
in connection with the enforcement of any provision of this code, or of
any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, shall have the right and
be granted a review of the matter by the Appeals Officer, provided that
such person shall file, in the office of the Appeals Officer, a written petition
requesting such a review and containing a statement of the grounds
therefor within 20 days after the day the notice was served.
112.2 Appeals Officer. In order to permit a review of a notice of violation
prior to an appearance in the Municipal Court of the Borough of Penns
Grove, an Appeals Officer is hereby established, which officer shall be the
Construction Code Official or person acting in that capacity in the Borough
in the absence of a Construction Code Official.
§ 347-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 347-4
1:243
112.3 Review. The Appeals Officer shall hear all appeals made relative
to the enforcement of this code and shall reverse or affirm, wholly or
partly, or modify the decision appealed from and shall make such order or
determination as in his opinion ought to be made.
112.4 Appeals process. The Appeals Officer is encouraged to personally
review each property that is the subject of an appeal. If possible, the
Appeals Officer should meet jointly with the property owner and the
Housing Officer or Deputy Housing Officer who filed the notice of violation.
112.5 Written record. The Appeals Officer shall keep a written report
concerning his investigation and findings in regard to each appeal filed.
112.6 Municipal Court. In the event that the decision appealed from is
wholly or partially affirmed, the matter or matters shall be listed to be
heard in the Municipal Court of the Borough of Penns Grove.
§ 347-5. Enforcement. [Added 11-1-1982 by Ord. No. 82-10;
amended 7-5-1988 by Ord. No. 88-11; 6-3-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-7;
7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
The Housing Officer and Housing Inspector of the Borough of Penns Grove
shall have the right to make inspections, issue orders and otherwise enforce
the provisions of the International Existing Building Code; provided,
however, that all such activities of the Housing Officer and Housing
Inspector with regard to the enforcement of the International Existing
Building Code must be authorized by the Construction Code Official of
the Borough of Penns Grove, who, notwithstanding the provisions of this
section, shall remain primarily responsible for such enforcement.
§ 347-6. Authority of police officers. [Added 7-18-1989 by Ord. No.
89-15; amended 6-3-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-7; 7-5-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-5]
In addition to the overall enforcement of the International Existing Building
Code by the Construction Code Official, any police officer of the Borough of
Penns Grove authorized by the Chief of Police is hereby empowered to make
inspections, issue notices of violations, prepare and serve complaints and
otherwise enforce the sections of the International Existing Building Code
previously adopted which relate to exterior maintenance.
§ 347-4 PENNS GROVE CODE § 347-6
1:244
ARTICLE II
Habitable Floor Area
[Adopted 8-5-1980 by Ord. No. 80-10 (Ch. 175, Art. II, of the 1986
Code)]
§ 347-7. Minimum area required.
A. A one-bedroom single-family house located in the R-1 Zoning District
shall have a minimum habitable floor area of 1,000 square feet and an
additional 150 square feet for each additional bedroom.
B. A one-bedroom single-family house located in the R-2 Zoning District
shall have a minimum habitable floor area of 880 square feet and an
additional 150 square feet for each additional bedroom.
§ 347-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 347-7
1:245

ARTICLE III
Electrical Service
[Adopted 3-20-1984 by Ord. No. 84-7 (Ch. 175, Art. III, of the 1986
Code)]
§ 347-8. Minimum service.
Minimum electrical service of 100 amperes shall be provided. The owner
of every dwelling and multifamily dwelling unit shall provide this minimum
service, said installation being made in accordance with the law.
§ 347-9. Enforcement.
The provision stated herein shall be enforced at the time of occupancy
change and/or transfer of ownership and shall be a condition precedent to
the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
§ 347-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 347-9
1:247

ARTICLE IV
Enforcement of Standards
[Adopted 7-5-1988 as part of Ord. No. 88-11 (Ch. 175, Art. IV, of the
1986 Code)]
§ 347-10. Violations and penalties.
A. The penalty for a conviction of a violation of the International Existing
Building Code shall be a minimum fine of $100 and a maximum fine of
$1,000. [Amended 6-3-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-7; 7-5-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-5]
B. In addition to the foregoing fines, a conviction under the foregoing
chapter shall also be punishable by imprisonment for up to 30 days.
[Added 7-18-1989 by Ord. No. 89-15]
§ 347-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 347-10
1:249

ARTICLE V
Standards for Creditors
[Adopted 10-21-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-12 (Ch. 175, Art. V, of the
1986 Code)]
§ 347-11. Vacant and abandoned residential properties.
In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.12s, all vacant and abandoned
residential properties in which a summons and complaint in an action to
foreclose have been filed shall be subject to the following standards with
regard to the care, maintenance, security, and upkeep of the exterior of the
properties:
A. The premises shall be kept free of litter (including, without limiting the
generality of the foregoing, discarded, windblown, deposited, dropped
or strewn paper, wrappings, cardboard, bottles, cans, boxes and broken
glass) and of all nuisances and hazards to the safety of pedestrians and
other persons having access to the premises and free of unsanitary
conditions, and any of the foregoing shall be promptly removed and
abated. The word "hazards" shall include, but is not limited to, the
following:
(1) Refuse. Brush, weeds, broken glass, stumps, roots, obnoxious
growths, filth, garbage, trash, rubbish, refuse and debris of any
description.
(2) Natural growth. Dead and dying trees and other natural growth
which, by reason of rotting or deteriorating conditions or storm
damage, are or may be dangerous to persons in the vicinity thereof.
Trees shall be kept pruned and trimmed to prevent such conditions.
(3) Overhangings. Loose, overhanging and projecting objects and
accumulations of ice and snow which, by reason of location above
ground level, constitute dangers to persons in the vicinity thereof.
(4) Ground surface and unsanitary conditions. Holes, excavations,
breaks, projections, obstructions and excretion of pets or other
animals on paths, sidewalks, walks, driveways, parking lots and
parking areas and other parts of the exterior of the premises which
are accessible to and used by persons having access to such
premises.
(5) Recurring accumulation of stormwater. Adequate runoff drains
shall be provided and maintained to eliminate recurrent
accumulations of stormwater.
(6) Sources of infestation.
(7) Foundation walls. Foundation walls shall be kept structurally
sound, free from defects and damage and capable of bearing
imposed loads safely.
§ 347-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 347-11
1:251
§ 347-12. Responsibility of creditor.
Any and all creditors filing a summons and complaint in an action to
foreclose shall be responsible for the care, maintenance, security, and
upkeep of the exterior of the vacant and abandoned residential property
as set forth herein, and if located out of state shall be responsible for
(8) Chimneys and flue and vent attachments thereto. Chimneys and
flue and vent attachments thereto shall be maintained structurally
sound, safe, durable, smoke-tight and capable of withstanding the
action of flue gases.
(9) Exterior porches, landings, balconies, stairs and fire escapes.
Exterior porches, landings, balconies, stairs and fire escapes shall
be provided with banisters or railings properly designed and
maintained structurally sound, in good repair, well painted or
otherwise provided with a protective treatment to prevent
deterioration, and free from defects.
B. Exterior of the premises. The exterior of the premises shall be
maintained so that the appearance thereof shall reflect a level of
maintenance in keeping with the standards of the neighborhood or such
higher standards as may be adopted by the Borough of Penns Grove and
such that the appearance thereof shall not constitute a blighting effect
upon neighboring properties nor an element leading to a progressive
deterioration and downgrading of neighboring properties with an
accompanying diminution of property values, including the following:
(1) The exterior of every building shall be maintained in good repair,
and all exterior surfaces thereof shall kept painted or otherwise
provided with a protective treatment where necessary for purposes
of preservation and appearance.
(2) All exterior surfaces thereof shall be maintained free from broken
glass, loose shingles or siding, crumbling masonry, excessively
peeling paint or other condition reflective of deterioration or
inadequate maintenance to the end that the building itself may be
preserved, safety and fire hazards eliminated and adjoining
properties and the neighborhood protected from blighting
influences.
C. Landscaping. Where exposed to public view, the landscaping of the
premises shall be maintained in an orderly state with lawns and bushes
trimmed and free from becoming overgrown, littered and unsightly
where such would constitute a blighting effect, depreciating adjoining
and nearby property. Open areas shall be graded evenly to eliminate
holes, depressions, gullies, mounds, accumulations of debris or other
unsightly or unsafe conditions.
D. Security. The premises shall be enclosed and secured against
unauthorized entry.
§ 347-11 PENNS GROVE CODE § 347-12
1:252
appointing an in-state representative or agent to act for the foreclosing
creditor.
§ 347-13. Issuance of notice to creditor. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-5]
A public officer, appointed pursuant to P.L. 1942, c. 112 (N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.3
et seq.), or any other local official responsible for administration of any
property maintenance or public nuisance code may issue a notice to the
creditor filing the summons and complaint in an action to foreclose, if
the public officer or other authorized municipal official determines that
the creditor has violated this article by failing to provide for the care,
maintenance, security, and upkeep of the exterior of the property. Such
notice shall require the person or entity to correct the violation within 30
days of receipt of the notice, or within 10 days of receipt of the notice if
the violation presents an imminent threat to public health and safety. The
issuance of a notice pursuant to this section shall constitute proof that a
property is "vacant and abandoned" for the purposes of Subsection a of
Section 1 of P.L. 2012, c. 70 (N.J.S.A. 2A:50-73).
§ 347-14. In-state representative or agent.
Any and all out-of-state creditors subject to this article shall include the full
name and contact information of the in-state representative or agent in the
notice required to be provided pursuant to Paragraph (1) of Subsection a of
Section 17 of P.L. 2008, c. 127 (N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51).
§ 347-15. Violations and penalties.
A. Any out-of-state creditor subject to this article and found by the Penns
Grove Municipal Court to be in violation of the requirement to appoint
an in-state representative or agent pursuant to this article shall be
subject to a fine of $2,500 for each day of the violation. Any fines
imposed on a creditor for the failure to appoint an in-state
representative or agent shall commence on the day after the ten-day
period set forth in Paragraph (1) of Subsection a of Section 17 of P.L.
2008, c. 127 (N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51), for providing notice to the Municipal
Clerk that a summons and complaint in an action to foreclose on a
mortgage has been served.
B. Any creditor subject to this article found to be in violation of the
requirement to correct a care, maintenance, security, or upkeep
violation cited in a notice issued pursuant to this article shall be subject
to a fine of $1,500 for each day of the violation. Any fines imposed
pursuant to this section shall commence 31 days following receipt of
the notice, except if the violation presents an imminent risk to public
health and safety, in which case any fines shall commence 11 days
following receipt of the notice.
§ 347-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 347-16
1:253
§ 347-16. Allocation of fines.
No less than 20% of any money collected pursuant to this article shall be
utilized by the Borough of Penns Grove for municipal code enforcement
purposes.
§ 347-16 PENNS GROVE CODE § 347-16
1:254
Chapter 359
RENTAL PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Certificates of occupancy — See Ch. 213.
Noise — See Ch. 315.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 347.
§ 347-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 347-16
1:255

ARTICLE I
Registration and Licensing
[Adopted 11-3-1999 by Ord. No. 99-21 (Ch. 179A, Art. I, of the 1986
Code)]
§ 359-1. Definitions.
Unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning, the following
words or phrases when used in this article shall have the following meaning:
AGENT — The individual or individuals designated by the owner as the
person(s) authorized by the owner to perform any duty imposed upon the
owner by this article. The term does not necessarily mean a licensed real
estate broker or salesman of the State of New Jersey as those terms are
defined by N.J.S.A. 45:15-3; however, such term may include a licensed
real estate broker or salesman of the State of New Jersey if such person
designated by the owner as his agent is so licensed.
APARTMENT COMPLEX — Two or more buildings, each containing two or
more apartments, which are located within close proximity to each other
and are owned by the same owner.
APARTMENT or DWELLING — Any apartment, cottage, bungalow, any room
or rooms in a rooming/boarding house or other dwelling unit consisting of
one or more rooms occupying all or part of a floor or floors in a building,
whether designed with or without housekeeping facilities for dwelling
purposes and notwithstanding whereto the apartment be designed for
residence, for office, or the operation of any industry or business, or for any
other type of independent use.
LICENSE — The license issued by the Borough Clerk or designee attesting
that the rental unit has been properly registered in accordance with this
article.
LICENSEE — The person to whom the license is issued pursuant to this
article. The term "licensee" includes within its definition the term "agent"
where applicable.
OWNER — Any person or group of persons, firm, corporation, or officer
thereof, partnership, association, or trust which owns, operates, exercises
control over or is in charge of a rental facility.
PERSON — An individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association, trust
or other legal entity, or any combination thereof.
RENTAL FACILITY — Every building, group of buildings of a portion thereof
which is kept, used, maintained, advertised or held out to be a place where
living accommodations are supplied, whether furnished or unfurnished, for
pay or other consideration, to one or more individuals and is meant to
include apartments and apartment complexes.
RENTAL UNIT — A dwelling unit which is available for lease or rental
purposes and is meant to include apartments and apartment complexes.
§ 359-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 359-2
1:257
§ 359-2. Registration required.
All rental units shall hereafter be registered with the Borough Clerk or
designee of the Borough of Penns Grove or such other person designated
by the Borough Council on forms which shall be provided for that purpose
and which shall be obtained from the Borough Clerk or designee. Such
registration shall occur on an annual basis as provided herein. Upon
registration, a license will issue allowing the landlord to rent that property
if all conditions are met.
§ 359-3. Term of registration; initial registration.
Each rental unit shall be registered on an annual basis. If there is a change
of occupancy within that year, the registration form must be updated.
It is a violation of present Borough law to change tenants at any time
without obtaining a new certificate of occupancy pursuant to Chapter 213,
Certificates of Occupancy, of the Code of the Borough of Penns Grove.
The initial registration shall occur within 45 days following the adoption
of this article and will be in effect for one year. Any lease which has
been executed prior to the adoption of this article must nevertheless be
registered, inspected and licensed in accordance with this article, although
the tenant need not vacate pending this procedure. No rental unit shall
hereafter be rented unless the rental unit is registered and licensed in
accordance with this article.
§ 359-4. Registration forms.
Without in any way intending to infringe upon the requirements of N.J.S.A.
46:8-28, all rental units shall be registered and licensed as provided herein.
Every owner shall file with the Borough Clerk or designee of the Borough
of Penns Grove or such other person as designated by the Borough Council
a registration from for each unit contained within a building or structure,
which shall include the following information:
A. The name and address of the record owner or owners of the premises
and the record owner or owners of the rental business if not the same
persons. In the case of a partnership, the names and addresses of all
general partners shall be provided, together with the telephone
numbers for each of such individuals indicating where such individual
may be reached both during the day and evening hours. If the record
owner is a corporation, the names and addresses of the registered
agent and corporate officers of said corporation shall be provided,
together with the telephone numbers for each of such individuals
indicating where such individual may be reached both during the day
and evening hours.
B. If the address of any record owner is not located in Penns Grove or in
Salem County, the name and address of a person who resides in Salem
County and who is authorized to accept notices from a tenant and to
issue receipts therefor and to accept service of process on behalf of the
record owner.
§ 359-2 PENNS GROVE CODE § 359-4
1:258
§ 359-5. Indexing and filing forms.
The Borough Clerk or designee shall index and file the registration forms.
In doing so, the Borough Clerk or designee shall follow the mandates of
N.J.S.A. 46:8-28.1 as amended and supplemented so that the filing of the
registration form will simultaneously satisfy the registration requirements
of N.J.S.A. 46:8-28 to the extent that it applies to the property being
registered and will also satisfy the registration requirements of this article.
§ 359-6. Amended forms.
Every person required to file a registration form pursuant to this article
shall file an amended registration form within 20 days after any change in
the information required to be included thereon. No fee shall be required
for the filing of an amendment except where the ownership of the premises
is changed.
§ 359-7. Periodic inspections.
C. The name and address of the agent of the premises, if any.
D. The name and address, including the dwelling unit number, of the
superintendent, janitor, custodian or other individual employed by the
owner or agent to provide regular maintenance service, if any.
E. The name, address and telephone number of an individual
representative of the owner or agent who may be reached or contacted
at any time in the event of an emergency affecting the premises or any
unit of dwelling space therein, including such emergencies as the
failure of any essential service or system, and who has the authority to
make emergency decisions concerning the building and any repair
thereto or expenditure in connection therewith. [Amended 7-5-2017
by Ord. No. 2017-5]
F. The name and address of every holder of a recorded mortgage on the
premises.
G. If oil is used to heat the building and the landlord furnishes the heat in
the building, the name and address of the fuel oil dealer servicing the
building and the grade of fuel oil used.
H. As to each rental unit, a specification of the exact number of sleeping
rooms contained in the rental unit. In order to satisfy the requirement
of this provision, an owner shall submit a floor plan which shall become
part of the application and which shall be attached to the registration
form when filed by the Borough Clerk or designee.
I. Such other information as may be prescribed by the Borough.
A. Each rental unit shall be inspected at least once every twelve-month
period.
§ 359-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 359-7
1:259
§ 359-8. Access for inspections and repairs.
B. Such inspections shall be performed by such person, persons or agency
duly authorized and appointed by the Borough of Penns Grove, and
inspections made by persons or an agency other than the duly
authorized and appointed person, persons or agency of the Borough of
Penns Grove shall not be used as a valid substitute.
C. Such inspection shall be for the purpose of determining compliance
with Chapter 450, Zoning, and, to the extent applicable, to determine if
the property complies with the Uniform Construction Code and
International Property Maintenance Code 2015. [Amended 7-5-2017
by Ord. No. 2017-5]
D. Unsatisfactory inspection. In the event that the inspection(s) of a rental
unit does not result in a satisfactory inspection, such property shall not
thereafter be registered, nor shall a license issue, and the owner of the
property, or his agent, shall not lease or rent such property, nor shall
any tenant occupy the property until the necessary corrections have
been made so as to bring the property and rental unit into compliance
with the applicable code and the property is thereafter subsequently
inspected, registered and licensed. In the event that the property is
occupied when such conditions are discovered, all such corrections
shall be made within 60 days, and if not made within that time period,
the owner shall be deemed in violation of this article, and every day that
the violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct violation,
subject to the penalty provisions of § 359-18 of this article. The owner is
responsible for relocating the tenant if the property is uninhabitable
pending repairs.
A. The inspection officers are hereby authorized to make inspections to
determine the condition of rental facilities, rental units and rooming/
boarding houses in order that they may promote the purposes of this
article to safeguard the health, safety, and welfare of the occupants of
rental facilities, rental units and rooming/boarding houses and of the
general public. For the purposes of making such inspections, the
inspecting officers are hereby authorized to enter, examine and survey
rental facilities, rental units and rooming/boarding houses at all
reasonable times. The owner or occupant of every rental facility, rental
unit and rooming/boarding house shall give the inspecting officer free
access to the rental facility, rental unit and rooming/boarding house at
all reasonable times for the purpose of such inspections, examinations
and surveys.
B. Every occupant shall give the owner of the rental facility, rental unit
and rooming/boarding house access to any part of such rental facility,
rental unit and rooming/boarding house at all reasonable times for the
purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect
compliance with the provisions of this article or any lawful order issued
pursuant thereto.
§ 359-7 PENNS GROVE CODE § 359-8
1:260
§ 359-9. Meetings between Borough and landlords. [Amended
4-4-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-15]
The Borough reserves the right to set meetings with all licensed landlords
in the Borough with mandatory attendance. If the landlord cannot attend,
an authorized representative must appear on the landlord's behalf. If the
rental property is owned by a corporation, an officer of the corporation must
be present. All meetings will be held in the Borough, and at least 30 days'
notice of such a meeting will be provided.
§ 359-10. Issuance of license.
Upon the filing of a completed registration form, and payment of the
prescribed fee, and a satisfactory inspection, the owner shall be entitled to
the issuance of a license commencing on the date of issuance and expiring
on the same date of the next calendar year. A registration form shall be
required for each rental unit, and license shall issue to the owner for each
rental unit, even if more than one rental unit is contained in the property.
§ 359-11. Fees.
At the time of the filing of the registration form and prior to the issuance
of a license, the owner or agent of the owner must pay a fee in accordance
with the following:
§ 359-12. Providing registration form to occupants and tenants.
Every owner shall provide each occupant or tenant occupying a rental unit
with a copy of the registration form required by this article. This particular
provision shall not apply to any hotel, motel, or guesthouse registered with
the State of New Jersey pursuant to the Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Act as
C. Complaints. Within 10 days of receipt of a complaint alleging a reported
violation of this article, an inspecting officer shall conduct an inspection
as hereinbefore provided.
A. An annual registration fee of $15 per year, per unit.
B. A reinspection fee of $15 for each subsequent year, per unit.
C. If the owner of the property is a senior citizen who resides in a unit of
the property and rents out the remaining unit and would otherwise
qualify under the State of New Jersey property tax deduction under
N.J.S.A. 54:4-8.41, there shall be no fee.
D. In the case of a properly licensed rooming/boarding house, the fee of
$15 will apply to the entire structure and not to each room individually.
E. If any fee is not paid within 30 days of its due date, a late fee surcharge
of $50 per unit will be assessed. The due date shall be calculated as
follows: years registered plus 30 calendar days from date of initial
registration. [Amended 4-4-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-15]
§ 359-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 359-12
1:261
defined in N.J.S.A. 55:13A-3. This provision may be complied with by posting
a copy of the registration certificate in a conspicuous place within the rental
unit(s).
§ 359-13. Maximum number of occupants to be posted. [Amended
7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
The maximum number of occupants shall be posted in each rental unit.
It shall be unlawful for any person, including the owner, agent, tenant or
registered tenant, to allow a greater number of persons than the posted
maximum number of occupants to sleep in or occupy overnight the rental
unit for a period exceeding 29 days. Any person violating this provision shall
be subject to the penalty provisions of § 359-18 of this article.
§ 359-14. Taxes and municipal charges to be paid prior to
registration.
No rental unit may be registered and no license shall issue for any property
containing a rental unit unless all municipal taxes, water and sewer charges
and any other municipal assessments are paid on a current basis.
§ 359-15. Maintenance standards. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-5]
All dwelling units shall be maintained in accordance with the Uniform
Construction Code and the International Property Maintenance Code 2015.
§ 359-16. Occupant standards.
A. Occupants. Only those occupants whose names are on file with the
Borough Clerk as provided in the article may reside in the licensed
premises. It shall be unlawful for any other person to reside in said
premises, and this provision may be enforced against the landlord,
tenant, or other person residing in said premises.
B. Nuisance prohibited. No rental facility shall be conducted in a manner
which shall result in any unreasonable disturbance or disruption to the
surrounding properties and property owners or of the public in general
such that it shall constitute a nuisance as defined in the ordinances of
the Borough of Penns Grove.
C. Compliance with other laws. The maintenance of all rental facilities and
the conduct engaged in upon the premises by occupants and their
guests shall at all times be in full compliance with all applicable
ordinances and regulations of the Borough of Penns Grove and with all
applicable state and federal laws.
D. Penalties. Any landlord, tenant or other person violating the provisions
of this section shall be subject to the penalty provisions of § 359-18 of
this article.
§ 359-12 PENNS GROVE CODE § 359-17
1:262
§ 359-17. Revocation or suspension of license.
A. Grounds. In addition to any other penalty prescribed herein, an owner
may be subject to the revocation or suspension of the license issued
hereunder upon the happening of one or more of the following:
[Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
(1) Conviction of a violation of this article in the Municipal Court or
any other court of competent jurisdiction.
(2) Determination of a violation of this article at a hearing held
pursuant to Subsection B herein.
(3) Continuously renting the unit or units to a tenant or tenants who
are convicted of a violation of Chapter 315, Noise, of the Code of
the Borough of Penns Grove.
(4) Continuously permitting the rental unit to be occupied by more
than the maximum number of occupants as defined in this article.
(5) Maintaining the rental unit or units or the property of which the
rental unit is a part in a dangerous condition likely to result in
injury to person or property.
B. Procedure; written complaint; notice; hearing.
(1) A complaint seeking the revocation or suspension of a license may
be filed by any one or more of the following: Chief of Police,
Construction Code Official, Housing Inspector, Zoning Officer, the
membership of the Penns Grove Police Department, or any other
person or office authorized to file such complaint. Such complaint
shall be in writing and filed with the Borough Clerk or designee.
The complaint shall be specific and shall be sufficient to apprise the
licensee of the charges so as to permit the licensee to present a
defense. The individual(s) filing the complaint may do so on the
basis of information and belief and need not rely on personal
information. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
(2) Upon the filing of such written complaint, the Borough Clerk or
designee shall immediately inform the Borough Council and a date
for a hearing shall be scheduled which shall not be sooner than 10
nor more than 30 days thereafter. The Borough Clerk or designee
shall forward a copy of the complaint and a notice as to the date of
the hearing to the licensee and the agent, if any, at the address
indicated on the registration form. Service upon the agent shall be
sufficient.
(3) The hearing required by this section shall be held before the
Borough Council unless, in its discretion, the Borough Council
determines that the matter should be heard by a hearing officer;
such officer shall transmit his findings of fact and conclusions of
law to the Borough Council within 30 days of the conclusion of the
§ 359-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 359-17
1:263
§ 359-18. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-5]
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
in the Municipal Court of the Borough of Penns Grove or such other court
having jurisdiction, be subject to a penalty as provided in § 1-2 of this Code.
hearing. Borough Council shall then review the matter and may
accept, reject, or modify the recommendations of the hearing
officer based on the record before such hearing officer. In the event
that the matter is not referred to a hearing officer and is heard
by the Borough Council, then the Borough Council shall render a
decision within 30 days of the conclusion of the hearing. Following
the hearing, a decision shall be rendered dismissing the complaint,
revoking or suspending the license, or determining that the license
shall not be renewed or reissued for one or more subsequent
license years.
(4) A stenographic transcript shall be made of the hearing. All
witnesses shall be sworn prior to testifying. The strict rules of
evidence shall not apply and the evidential rules and burden of
proof shall be that which generally controls administrative
hearings.
(5) The Borough Solicitor or his designee shall appear and prosecute
on behalf of the complainant in all hearings conducted pursuant to
this section.
C. If the license is revoked or suspended, the landlord must remove the
tenants from the property within 30 days. It is the responsibility of the
landlord to relocate the tenant as a result of a violation of this article. If
the Borough decides to relocate the tenant for emergent reasons, the
landlord will have to reimburse the Borough for the expense.
D. Defenses. It shall be a defense to any proceeding for the revocation,
suspension or other disciplinary action involving a rental license by
demonstrating that the owner has taken appropriate action and has
made a good faith effort to abate the conditions or circumstances giving
rise to the revocation proceeding, including but not limited to the
institution of legal action against the tenant(s), occupant(s), or guests
for recovery of the premises, eviction of the tenant(s) or otherwise.
§ 359-17 PENNS GROVE CODE § 359-18
1:264
Chapter 371
SHOPPING CARTS
§ 371-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning
indicated:
PARKING AREA — A parking lot or other property provided by a retailer
for the use of a customer for parking an automobile or other vehicle. The
parking area of a retail mercantile establishment located in a multistore
complex or shopping center shall include the entire parking area used by
the complex or center.
PERSON — A person of either sex, corporation, partnership, association,
joint-stock company, limited liability company, societies and other entities
capable of being sued.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Includes streets, avenues, roads, alleys, lanes,
highways, boulevards, concourses, driveways, culverts, crosswalks,
sidewalks, parks, parking lots, parking areas and places generally used by
the general public.
SHOPPING CART — A push cart of the type or types which are commonly
provided by grocery stores, drugstores or other retail mercantile
establishments for the use of the public in transporting commodities in
stores and markets and their parking areas.
§ 371-2. Removal of shopping carts prohibited.
§ 371-3. Leaving shopping carts on public property prohibited.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove a shopping cart, as defined
herein, from the property of any store or other business establishment
as well as from the business establishment's parking area. Further, it
shall be unlawful for any person or other business establishment to
permit or allow any person to remove a shopping cart, as defined
herein, from the property of the store or other business establishment
or its parking area.
B. In the event of a conviction of a violation of this section, the Municipal
Court shall impose a penalty as provided in § 371-14.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, or such persons, agents or
employees, to leave or suffer or permit to be left any shopping cart,
either owned by such person or in such person's possession, custody or
control, upon any public property as defined above.
B. In the event of a conviction of a violation of this section, the Municipal
Court shall impose a penalty as provided in § 371-14.
§ 359-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 371-4
1:265
§ 371-4. Removal from public property by Borough.
The Borough shall remove or cause to be removed any shopping cart found
upon any public property and shall take the same to Borough property,
where it shall be held until redeemed, sold or otherwise disposed of as
hereinafter provided.
§ 371-5. Procedure for removal and redemption.
§ 371-6. Additional impoundment procedures; unidentified
shopping carts.
A. The Borough of Penns Grove shall not impound a shopping cart that has
a sign or notice identifying the owner of the shopping cart, or the
retailer who has written consent from the owner to use the shopping
cart, and listing a valid telephone number or address through which the
owner or retailer can be contacted, unless the following conditions are
met:
(1) The shopping cart is located outside of the premises or parking
area of the retail mercantile establishment and on public property
as defined above.
(2) The Borough will notify the owner or retailer of the location of the
shopping cart and will allow three business days from the date of
such notification for the owner, retailer or an authorized agent to
retrieve the shopping cart unless immediate removal is necessary
to prevent a danger to public safety.
(3) The Borough shall notify the owner or retailer by certified mail,
return receipt requested, and regular mail or personal delivery
upon impoundment of a shopping cart and shall include
information as to how the cart may be retrieved.
(4) The location that an impounded shopping cart is held is reasonably
convenient to the owner, retailer or authorized agent and is open
for business at least six hours of each business day.
B. Should the owner or retailer of the impounded shopping cart fail to
retrieve the shopping cart upon notification, upon conviction of
violation of this chapter, the Municipal Court shall impose a fine not
exceeding $50 for each occurrence for failure to retrieve shopping
carts. An occurrence includes all shopping carts impounded in
accordance with this section during a twenty-four-hour period.
C. The Borough shall allow the owner or retailer a minimum of five
business days following receipt of notice that a shopping cart has been
impounded to retrieve the shopping cart before a violation is issued and
before the cart is sold or otherwise disposed of.
A. The Borough may impound a shopping cart without compliance with
§ 371-5 under the following circumstances:
§ 371-4 PENNS GROVE CODE § 371-6
1:266
§ 371-7. Notice of public auction; redemption fee and costs; sale.
When any shopping cart remains in the possession of the Borough for a
period set forth in § 371-5 above after removal and with respect to which no
person has retrieved said cart from the Borough with proof establishing to
the Borough's satisfaction that the person retrieving the cart has sufficient
proof of ownership or right of possession, then the Borough shall give public
notice in its official newspaper that, at a specified place and time, not less
than five days after such notice is published, such shopping cart shall be
sold at public auction for not less than $25, plus the cost of advertising the
sale. If, after such notice of sale is given, any person desires to redeem any
cart prior to sale, such person shall pay to the Borough for redemption the
sum of $25 plus the cost of advertising the sale. A general description of the
cart shall be sufficient. The sale shall be conducted by the Borough Clerk
or such person as the governing body may designate. The redemption costs
shall not be exclusive of any penalty or fine issued as a result of a violation
of this chapter.
(1) The Borough may impound a shopping cart that has a sign or notice
identifying the owner of the shopping cart, or the retailer who has
written consent from the owner to use the cart, and lists a valid
telephone number or address through which the owner or retailer
can be contacted, without meeting the conditions required by
§ 371-5 of this chapter if the Borough follows the following
procedures or the following circumstances exist:
(a) The Borough notifies in writing the owner or retailer with 24
hours of impounding the shopping cart and includes
information on how the shopping cart may be retrieved.
(b) The Borough releases the shopping cart to the owner, retailer
or authorized agent without any charge or fine whatsoever, if
the owner, retailer, or authorized agent attempts to retrieve
the cart within five business days of notice.
(2) The Borough may impound a shopping cart that does not have a
sign or a notice identifying the owner of the shopping cart, or the
retailer who has written consent from the owner to use the
shopping cart, and does not list a valid telephone number or
address through which the owner or retailer can be contacted.
B. Under the circumstances set forth in this section, should the owner or
retailer be determined through other means rather than notice on the
cart and pursuant to the procedures set forth in this section, the owner
or retailer may be held in violation of this chapter, in which case the
Municipal Court may fine the owner or retailer a fine not exceeding of
$50 for each occurrence for failure to retrieve shopping carts. An
occurrence includes all shopping carts impounded in accordance with
this section during a twenty-four-hour period.
§ 371-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 371-8
1:267
§ 371-8. Disposition of unsold shopping carts.
If the shopping cart is not sold at public auction, the Borough may offer
it again for sale or may dismantle, destroy or otherwise dispose of such
shopping cart.
§ 371-9. Liability.
Any disposition of such shopping cart made pursuant to this chapter shall
be made without any liability of the Borough to the owner of such shopping
cart or person lawfully entitled thereto or having any interest therein. If
the shopping cart clearly identifies the owner and the owner is notified
pursuant to § 371-5 or 371-6 and the owner does not remove and redeem
in accordance with this chapter within the time period prescribed by this
chapter and the Borough is unable to dispose of the shopping cart by
auction, the Borough Clerk or other designated individual shall certify the
cost of disposal to the Borough of Penns Grove and authorize the forwarding
of a bill to the owner of the shopping cart for payment of the cost of disposal
plus $25 for handling within 30 days of the date of the bill. The amount of
these charges shall become a lien upon any land owned by the owner and
shall be added to and become part of the taxes to be assessed upon said
land, to bear interest at the same rate as taxes not paid. The cost shall be in
addition to any penalties imposed for any violation of this chapter.
§ 371-10. Disposition of proceeds.
Upon redemption or sale of the shopping cart, the proceeds shall be
deposited in the general funds of the Borough.
§ 371-11. Enforcement.
The Zoning Officer, Police Department or other official designated by the
Borough Council shall be authorized to enforce the provisions of this
chapter. Mandatory court appearances shall be required for all violations of
this chapter.
§ 371-12. Applicability.
This chapter shall not apply to any shopping cart or personal property which
may come into possession and custody of any department of the Borough
pursuant to any other ordinance, law or regulation.
§ 371-13. Nonexclusive remedy.
Use of the public auction or disposition remedy does not preclude use of
other provisions or penalties in this chapter or which are provided for by
law.
§ 371-8 PENNS GROVE CODE § 371-14
1:268
§ 371-14. Violations and penalties.
In the event of a conviction of a violation of § 371-3 or 371-4 of a person
other than the owner subject to §§ 371-7, 371-8 and 371-9 of this chapter,
the Municipal Court shall impose a penalty as provided in § 1-2 of this Code.
Chapter 375
SITE PLAN REVIEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use procedures and fees — See Ch. 85.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 223.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 400.
Zoning — See Ch. 450.
§ 371-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 371-14
1:269

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 375-1. Purpose; site plan approval required. [Amended 7-5-2017
by Ord. No. 2017-5]
In order to protect and preserve the road network of the Borough, ensure
the efficient and safe movement of traffic, promote the development of a
well-ordered community, further the objectives of comprehensive planning
and best serve and protect the public health, safety and general welfare,
no public, professional, commercial, industrial or other nonresidential or
nonagricultural or general purpose use and no multiple-family dwelling use,
except for developments consisting of two-family dwellings and except as
otherwise provided in this chapter, shall be permitted, nor shall any zoning
permit be issued or certificate of occupancy countersigned for such uses,
until site plan approval has been received. Notwithstanding the abovestated
requirements, the Borough of Penns Grove Planning Board may
waive site plan review requirements when the lot under consideration is
already substantially developed and the use proposed is substantially the
same as the use already existing. If an applicant desires to seek a waiver
of the site plan review requirements as set forth herein, the applicant shall
submit an application requesting such relief to the Planning Board and pay
such application fee as is otherwise required by ordinance.
§ 375-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MAJOR SITE PLAN — Any site plan not meeting the definition of a minor
site plan shall be deemed a major site plan.
MINOR SITE PLAN — A development plan of 10 or fewer lots or 10 acres,
whichever is less, which does not involve planned development, any new
street or extension of any off-tract improvement which is to be prorated
pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 291, § 30, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42, and contains the
information reasonably required in order to make an informed
determination as to whether the requirements established by ordinance for
approval of a minor site plan have been met.[Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-5]
SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots on which is shown
the existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including but not necessarily
limited to topography, vegetation, drainage, floodplains, marshes and
waterways; the location of all existing and proposed buildings, drives,
parking spaces, walkways, means of ingress and egress, drainage facilities,
utility services, landscaping, structures and signs, lighting and screening
devices; and any other information that may be reasonably required in order
to make an informed determination concerning the adequacy of the plan in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter, Chapter 450, Zoning, and
the Borough Master Plan.
§ 375-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-2
1:271

ARTICLE II
Submission Requirements; Development Review Procedures
§ 375-3. Preparation and contents of application.
In addition to the information required for a zoning permit, materials to be
submitted with each application for site plan review shall clearly show the
conditions on and adjacent to the site at the time of the application, the
features of the site which are being incorporated into the proposed use or
building and the appearance and function of the proposed use or building.
Site plans shall be signed and sealed by either a New Jersey licensed
professional engineer or registered architect. It shall be drawn in blackon-
white at a scale not less than one inch equals 50 feet. As a minimum,
the application shall provide the following information, including plans for
both before and after conditions. The following list will be provided to the
applicant as a checklist and all of the documents, materials, and signatures
must be provided, except those items waived by the Board either of its own
volition or after petition by the applicant. Such waivers shall be provided
before the application can be deemed complete.33
§ 375-4. Application procedures.
Any applicant for site plan review and approval within the jurisdiction of
the Planning Board shall obtain all necessary forms from the Land Use
Secretary. Said Secretary shall inform the applicant of the steps to be taken
in securing Planning Board action and the Board's regular meeting dates.
The applicant shall be given the checklist of requirements above.
§ 375-5. General review procedures.
A. All site plans, as defined by this chapter, are subject to the review and
approval requirements specified herein.
B. Any site plan seeking a variance as part of its plan is required to give
proper notice pursuant to Borough Code §§ 85-17 and 85-18. Any site
plan deemed to be a major site plan shall also make such notice.
C. The Planning Board shall determine on the advice of the Board
Engineer and the Land Use Secretary that the application is complete
and properly submitted and therefore subject to review or that the
application is incomplete, in which case the developer shall be advised
within 45 days of his initial submission as to the additional material
required. If the application is complete, it shall be so certified by the
Land Use Secretary as of the day that it met all requirements specified
in this chapter for the purposes of the commencement of the time
period for action.
D. An amended or revised application shall be submitted in the same
manner as the original application.
33.Editor's Note: The checklist is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 375-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-5
1:273
E. At the request of the developer, the Planning Board shall grant an
informal review of a concept plan for development for which the
developer intends to submit a formal application for review. No fees
shall be required for such an informal review. The developer shall not
be bound by any concept plan for which review is requested and the
Planning Board shall not be bound by any such review. The Board at its
discretion may appoint a committee to handle such reviews.
F. An applicant for site plan review may make a sketch submission for
classification purposes. If a sketch submission results in classification
as a major site plan, the application shall not be deemed complete until
all preliminary application requirements have been met.
Notwithstanding this procedure for sketch submission, nothing shall
prohibit an applicant from initially submitting an application to the
Planning Board for preliminary major site plan approval.
G. Whenever review or approval of the application by the County Planning
Board is required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.6, the Planning Board
shall condition any approval that it grants on the timely receipt of a
favorable report on the application by the County Planning Board or
approval by said Board by its failure to report therein within the
required time period.
H. In reviewing any site plan application, the Planning Board shall be
guided by any pertinent comprehensive plan recommendations, policies
and proposals, any specific standards relating to particular uses
contained in this chapter and the following general site design
standards:
(1) Every effort shall be made to either preserve the landscape in its
natural state or to improve existing site conditions in keeping with
adjacent areas.
(2) Wherever possible, excessive cut or fill should be avoided,
floodplains respected and, where necessary, incorporation in the
design of erosion control measures, including terracing, stilling
ponds, surface water retention basins, grassed slopes, grassed
swales, etc.
(3) In the orientation and siting of buildings, the unique characteristics
of the site shall be taken into account, with consideration given to
relating buildings and accessory uses to the topography of the site;
creating desirable focal points; preserving a natural view;
providing desirable space enclosures; and respecting the
established character of the surrounding neighborhood.
(4) The site plans shall provide for the development of the project as a
unified whole with design features that will tie principal, accessory
and other site structures together and relate site features
successfully and harmoniously to similar elements in surrounding
buildings or structures. In criticizing these aspects of the site plan,
the Board shall consider the massing of architectural elements, the
§ 375-5 PENNS GROVE CODE § 375-5
1:274
nature and positioning of windows, doors and other building
features, advertising structures and elements, building height,
paving materials, landscape materials and pedestrian and vehicle
accommodations and furnishings. In the case of auto parking areas,
truck loading areas, utility buildings and structures and similar
accessory areas and structures, special consideration shall be
given to the use of screen planting or other screening methods,
where said features or structures are incongruous with the existing
or contemplated character of adjacent areas. [Amended 7-5-2017
by Ord. No. 2017-5]
§ 375-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-5
1:275

ARTICLE III
Design Standards
[Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
§ 375-6. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide design standards for improvements
that are proposed or required as part of site plan, subdivision, variance, and
other applications for development made pursuant to this chapter. These
standards will apply to all matters that are not subject to the requirements
of the New Jersey Residential Site Improvement Standards.
§ 375-7. New Jersey Residential Site Improvement Standards.
Residential and nonresidential subdivision, site plan and variance
applications are subject to the New Jersey Residential Site Improvement
Standards (RSIS), codified at N.J.A.C. 5:21-1.1 et seq. Applicants who wish
to deviate from the RSIS must apply for exceptions or waivers pursuant
to RSIS requirements. If recommended by the Planning Board Engineer,
the Planning Board may apply the RSIS design specifications and other
requirements to commercial or industrial major subdivision, site plan,
variance, or other applications for development of nonresidential projects.
§ 375-8. Review criteria.
Subject to the requirements of the Residential Site Improvement Standards,
and applying generally accepted design standards and principles, the
following factors in § 375-9 et seq. of this article shall be considered in the
review and development of all subdivision, site plan, variance, and other
applications for development.
§ 375-9. Site design.
The design and layout of structures and improvements shall be reviewed
so as to provide aesthetically pleasing design, efficient arrangement, and
proper function. In the orientation and placement of structures and
improvements, the unique characteristics of the site shall be taken into
account, with consideration given to relating structures and improvements
to the natural terrain and other site features, creating desirable focal
points, preserving natural views, and respecting the established character
of the neighborhood and areas reserved for public use. The development
plan shall provide for a unified design with features that tie principal
and accessory structures together and relate site features successfully
and harmoniously to similar elements and surrounding buildings, using
generally accepted design standards and principles in conformance with the
requirements of this chapter and the Borough Master Plan.
§ 375-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-10
1:277
§ 375-10. Circulation.
Proposed pedestrian and vehicular traffic movement within and adjacent to
the site shall be reviewed, applying generally accepted design standards
and principles, with particular emphasis on the provision and layout of
properly designed parking areas, off-street loading and unloading areas,
and the movement of people, goods and vehicles within and near the site.
The Planning Board shall ensure that all parking spaces and driveways
are usable and safely and conveniently arranged. Access to the site from
adjacent roads shall be designed so as to interfere as little as possible with
traffic flow on these roads and to permit vehicles a rapid and safe entrance
and exit to and from the site. Streets and driveways in a subdivision or other
development must be of sufficient width and suitable grade and suitably
located to accommodate prospective traffic and to provide access for firefighting
and emergency equipment to buildings. New streets meeting all
requirements of this chapter and other applicable laws must be coordinated
with the Official Map, if any, and the circulation element of the Master
Plan, if any, and oriented so as to permit, consistent with the reasonable
utilization of land, the buildings constructed thereon to maximize solar
gain. Streets wider than 50 feet will not be required unless the street is
an extension of an existing street at the greater width, or already has
been shown on the Master Plan at the greater width, or already has been
shown in greater width on the Official Map. The site also must conform
to applicable state and county and municipal highway/road/street access
management codes. Upon recommendation of its Engineer, the Planning
Board may require a traffic study for any application for development.
§ 375-11. Parking and loading area design standards.
Any new or changed use, structure, or other development which is the
subject of an application pursuant to this chapter must meet the following
off-street parking and loading requirements:
A. Parking spaces must be a minimum of nine feet wide and 18 feet long.
B. Parking areas must be no less than 50 feet from driveway intersection
with public road or street.
C. No parking spaces are allowed in a driveway, unless it is wide enough to
prevent vehicles from backing into the travel lane.
D. Curbing and guttering is required to ensure adequate drainage,
delineate the borders of the parking area and separate parking spaces
from driveways and aisles.
E. Off-street parking for more than two vehicles must be designed so no
vehicles will back into the street.
F. Aisles within parking areas must meet the following minimum width
requirements:
(1) Parallel parking: 12 feet.
§ 375-10 PENNS GROVE CODE § 375-11
1:278
(2) Angle parking, 30° or less: 12 feet.
(3) Angle parking, 30° to 45°: 13 feet
(4) Angle parking, 45° to 60°: 18 feet
(5) Angle parking, 60° to 90°: 25 feet
G. Parking spaces, driveways, and aisles must be clearly marked. Areas
must be designated for fire-fighting and emergency equipment and
must be clearly marked as such.
H. One-way internal circulation system is required in all parking areas
having 20 or more parking spaces.
I. Parking areas may not be located within side or rear yard setback areas
or within 10 feet of any street.
J. At least 5% of the parking area must be landscaped along walkways,
center islands and at the end of bays, in addition to the general
landscaping requirement per site plan, subdivision or other
development approval.
K. Double-loaded parking bays having more than 20 parking spaces must
provide a suitably landscaped strip, at least 10 feet wide between
aisles. The strip should include a four-foot walkway, unless walkways
are provided elsewhere.
L. New parking must not reduce the number of existing off-street parking
spaces.
M. Parking areas must be paved according to generally accepted standards
and specifications.
N. Two or more uses or structures may share a parking area if the total
number of spaces provided equals or exceeds the combined total of all
of the spaces that are required for each use or structure. See also
Chapter 450, Zoning, § 450-62E.
O. Off-street parking must be on lot or contiguous to the lot and adjacent
to the principal uses. For nonresidential uses in commercial districts,
parking may be up to 300 feet away, measured from the nearest point of
the parking facility to the nearest point of the principal building. See
also Chapter 450, Zoning, § 450-62G.
P. New off-street loading must not affect existing off-street loading in a
way that would make it deficient for the uses served. Surface must be
asphaltic or portland cement concrete. Off-street loading spaces must
be designed so that no vehicles will back into public streets or internal
access roads or a parking area. Loading areas must be located or
screened so they cannot be seen from adjacent land uses or from the
public street and they must not encroach into any required yards.
§ 375-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-11
1:279
Q. Parking lots containing 50 or more spaces must provide a deceleration
lane for traffic turning right into the driveway from the street. The
deceleration lane must be at least 200 feet long and at least 13 feet
wide. A minimum forty-foot curb radius will be used from the
deceleration lane into the driveway. When a deceleration lane is used,
the driveway angle may be less than 75°.
R. Parking lots containing 200 or more parking spaces and adjacent to a
road with a peak hour traffic volume exceeding 1,000 vehicles per hour
must provide an acceleration lane to improve traffic merging and sight
conditions. The acceleration lane must be at least 200 feet long and 13
feet wide.
S. Areas of ingress and egress, loading and unloading areas, major
interior driveways, aisles and other areas likely to experience similar
heavy traffic shall be constructed with:
(1) Four inches of compacted dense graded aggregate in accordance
with Section 301, Soil Aggregate Base Course and Dense Graded
Aggregate Base Course, of the New Jersey Department of
Transportation Standard Specifications (NJDOTSS) for Road and
Bridge Construction (2001) and amendments thereto; and
(2) Not less than five inches of compacted base course of plant-mixed
bituminous stabilized base course, NJDOT Mix I-2, constructed in
layers not more than three inches compacted thickness, or an
equivalent, and prepared and constructed in accordance with
Section 304, Bituminous Stabilized Base Course, Mix I-2, of the
NJDOTSS for Road and Bridge Construction (2001) and
amendments thereto. A minimum two-inch-thick compacted
wearing surface of bituminous concrete surface course, NJDOT Mix
I-5 or equivalent, shall be constructed thereon in accordance with
Section 404, Bituminous Concrete Surface Course, Mix I-5, of the
NJDOTSS for Road and Bridge Construction (2001) and
amendments thereto.
T. Parking space areas and other areas likely to experience light traffic
shall be constructed with four inches of compacted dense graded
aggregate constructed in accordance with Section 301, Soil Aggregate
Base Course and Dense Graded Aggregate Base Course, of the
NJDOTSS for Road and Bridge Construction (2001) and amendments
thereto and paved with not less than three inches of compact base
course of plant-mixed bituminous stabilized base course, NJDOT Mix
I-2, or an equivalent, prepared and constructed in accordance with
Section 304, Bituminous Stabilized Base Course, of the NJDOTSS for
Road and Bridge Construction (2001) and amendments thereto, and at
least two inches NJDOT Mix I-5 surface of bituminous concrete surface
course or equivalent shall be constructed thereon in accordance with
Section 404, Bituminous Concrete Surface Course, of the NJDOTSS for
Road and Bridge Construction (2001) and amendments thereto.
§ 375-11 PENNS GROVE CODE § 375-12
1:280
§ 375-12. Drainage.
The drainage system should be adequate to convey the stormwater and
natural drainage water which originates not only within the developed lot's
boundaries but also that which originates from the total natural watershed
surrounding the property in question.
A. The drainage system shall be designed to control the amount and rate
of stormwater runoff. A general principle for development design shall
be to not increase the parcel's rate of stormwater runoff by the use of
structural and nonstructural measures.
B. Whenever possible, any development's drainage system shall be
designed for the recharge of groundwater and the retention of
stormwater on site.
C. Provisions shall be made to limit the amount of sedimentation and other
pollutants that may enter a natural watercourse as a result of the
development.
D. Where possible, a development's stormwater management design shall
preserve stream channels, floodplains, and wetlands in their natural
condition to act as buffers against flooding and pollution.
E. No stormwater runoff or natural drainage water shall be so diverted as
to overload existing drainage systems, create flooding, or require the
construction of additional drainage facilities in other private or public
lands without proper and approved provisions being made for
remedying these off-site or off-tract conditions.
F. For all developments, land subject to periodic or occasional flooding
(floodplain areas) shall not be plotted for residential occupancy nor for
any other purpose which may endanger life or property or aggravate
the flood hazard. Such land within a plat shall be considered for open
land use.
G. All streets shall be provided with catch basins and pipes where
necessary for proper surface drainage. Dry wells are specifically
prohibited as alternatives to catch basins, or as a method of recharge.
H. The materials used for drainage facilities and appurtenances shall be in
conformance with N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.4, as the same may be revised from
time to time, particularly with low points in the streets and no overland
relief. Otherwise, such materials shall be in conformance with the
Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction of the New
Jersey Department of Transportation, and all addenda. The technique
for calculations and design parameters shall be by the rational method
for drainage sheds less than four acres and the Natural Resources
Conservation Service method for drainage sheds above four acres.
I. For storm sewer design, a ten-year to twenty-five-year storm frequency
consistent with localized circumstances should be considered as a
§ 375-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-12
1:281
minimum, unless special circumstances are involved such as
inadequate downstream stormwater facilities, lack of positive overland
relief, or evidence of local flooding. In such special circumstances,
engineers shall design facilities to accommodate, as a minimum, the
following storm frequencies:
(1) Ten-year storm drain systems where excess flow can continue
downgrade in the street or parking lot and not exceed the gutter
capacity. Also, ten-year storms shall be used at low points in storm
drain systems with overland relief.
(2) Twenty-five-year storm where flow in a storm drain is totally
carried by pipe when conditions above do not apply.
(3) Twenty-five-year storm for culvert design where the culvert will be
located in streams shown as a blue line on the New Jersey State
Atlas or the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey maps.
Culverts with an upstream drainage area of 50 acres or more shall
be designed to accommodate a one-hundred-year frequency storm
in accordance with flood hazard area control regulations, N.J.A.C.
7:13.
(4) Twenty-five-year storms for open channels where the upstream
drainage area is less than 50 acres. When the upstream drainage
area is 50 acres or more, design engineers shall design open
channels to accommodate the one-hundred-year storm in
accordance with flood hazard area control regulations, N.J.A.C.
7:13.
J. Storm drain inlets installed as part of new development and
redevelopment projects (public or private) that disturb one acre or
more are subject to the requirements of this subsection. In addition,
retrofitting of existing storm drain inlets to this standard is required
where such inlets are in direct contact with repaving, repairing,
reconstruction or alterations of facilities owned or operated by the
Borough. For exemptions to this standard see Subsection J(3),
Exemptions, below.
(1) Grates in pavement or other ground surfaces.
(a) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates
whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground
surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a storm
drain or surface water body under that grate:
[1] The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT)
bicycle-safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the
NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways
Planning and Design Guidelines (April 1996).
[2] A different grate, if each individual clear space in that
grate has an area of no more than seven square inches or
§ 375-12 PENNS GROVE CODE § 375-12
1:282
is no greater than 0.5 inch across the smallest dimension.
(In regard to whether the different grate must also be
bicycle safe, the Residential Site Improvement Standards
include requirements for bicycle-safe grates.)
(b) Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates in
grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening portion) of
combination inlets, grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch
grates, trench grates, and grates of spacer bars in slotted
drains. Examples of ground surfaces include surfaces of roads
(including bridges), driveways, parking areas, bikeways,
plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open channels, and
stormwater basin floors.
(2) Curb opening inlets (including curb opening inlets in combination
inlets).
(a) Whenever design engineers use a curb opening inlet, the curb
opening shall be divided (except as provided below) by bars or
other means into individual clear spaces. Each such clear
space shall have an area of no more than seven square inches
or be no greater than two inches across the smallest
dimension.
(b) At sag points, the curb opening may consist of one or more
larger clear spaces if the review agency determines that such a
curb opening is required for adequate hydraulic performance.
(3) Exemptions.
(a) Hydraulic performance exemptions.
[1] New development and redevelopment projects. Where the
review agency determines that this standard would cause
inadequate hydraulic performance that could not
practicably be overcome by using additional or larger
storm drain inlets that meet these standards.
[2] Retrofitting of existing storm drain inlets. Where the
review agency determines that this standard would cause
inadequate hydraulic performance.
(b) Alternate device exemptions.
[1] Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in N.J.A.C. 7:8 are conveyed through any device
(e.g., end of pipe netting facility, manufactured treatment
device, or a catch basin hood) that is designed, at a
minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable
materials that could not pass through one of the following:
§ 375-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-12
1:283
[a] A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches
wide (this option does not apply for outfall netting
facilities); or
[b] A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch.
[2] Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the bars, to
the elevation of the water quality design storm as specified
in N.J.A.C. 7:8.
(c) Note. The preceding exemptions do not authorize any
infringement of requirements in the Residential Site
Improvement Standards for bicycle-safe grates in new
residential development [N.J.A.C. 5:21-4.18(b)2 and
5:21-7.4(a)].
K. Single Type "B" inlets shall not be designed to catch more than 5 1/2
cubic feet per second, regardless of head, but shall not be spaced
greater than 400 feet center to center. Discharge and collection
systems shall not be designed for inlet head under any circumstances.
L. Drainage structures that are located on state or county highway rightsof-
way shall be approved by the state or county highway engineer's
office, and a letter from that office indicating such approval shall be
directed to the Borough Planning Board and shall be received prior to
the final plat approval. Drainage structures proposed on a brook or
stream with drainage area of 1/2 square mile (320 acres) or greater
shall be approved by the New Jersey Water Supply Authority, and a
letter from the office shall be directed to the Planning Board Chair.
M. All proposed developments abutting a brook or stream whose drainage
area, up to and including the subdivision or other development, is
greater than 50 acres shall be required to secure a flood hazard permit
from the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection prior to
the authorization of final approval. Furthermore, a copy of the permit
shall be forwarded to the Planning Board and shall be attached to the
final engineering plans of the same.
N. Road drainage. The use of swales for road drainage purposes may be
permitted at the discretion of the Borough Planning Board for all
development projects, provided that road drainage for subdivision
projects must be reviewed according to the following provisions: In the
case of subdivisions of fewer than 20 lots, the minimum lot sizes must
be greater than one acre, and the swale grade must not exceed 6% or
be less than 1/2 of 1%. In the case of subdivisions with more than 20
lots, swales may only be permitted along roads in which reverse
frontage has been provided. Where these conditions are not met or
where drainage conditions warrant, curbing and guttering shall be
required along all existing and proposed streets. In minor subdivisions,
curbing and guttering may be required where drainage or traffic
§ 375-12 PENNS GROVE CODE § 375-12
1:284
conditions warrant or when the subdivision is in proximity to existing
curbed and guttered areas.
O. Land drainage. All surface drainage shall be piped unless the developer
demonstrates that the use of swales is a more appropriate form of
conveyance to the satisfaction of the Borough Planning Board. The use
of swales is discouraged where the adjacent lot sizes on the same tract
are 25,000 square feet or less.
P. Swales, where permitted, shall be designed according to the following
standards:
(1) Swales shall have a parabolic or trapezoidal shape.
(2) Side slopes of a swale along a road shall not be steeper than 4:1
adjacent to the road and 2:1 on the slope away from the road. Side
slopes of swales not along a road shall not exceed 3:1.
(3) Trees, brush, and stumps as well as other objectionable material
are to be cleared and disposed of so as not to interfere with
construction or proper functioning of the waterway.
(4) Separate areas filled are to be compacted as needed to prevent
unequal settlement that will cause damage in the completed
waterway.
(5) Waterways and outlets shall be protected against erosion by
vegetative means as soon after construction as practical before
diversions or other channels are outletted into them. Seeding,
fertilizing, mulching, and sodding shall be in accordance with the
applicable standards as determined by the State Soil Conservation
Committee.
Q. Storm sewer pipe shall be installed in accordance with proper
engineering practices and shall be designed according to the following
standards:
(1) The pipe shall be concrete or ductile iron pipe as required by the
Planning Board Engineer. Other pipe materials, in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:21-7, are subject to approval by the Municipal Engineer.
(2) All drainage pipes shall have a minimum diameter of 15 inches
unless otherwise approved by the Municipal Engineer. The pipe
shall be laid in straight alignment, between manholes. All
transitions in slope, change of direction, or pipe size shall be
confined to manholes, catch basins, or other accessible structures.
(3) The size of the pipe, slope, and invert elevations shall be submitted
on a final drainage plan.
(4) In those areas where the groundwater elevation is such that
roadway subbase instability could occur from the same, the
Planning Board Engineer shall reserve the right to require
§ 375-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-12
1:285
§ 375-13. Lighting.
Adequate lighting shall be provided to ensure safe movement of persons
and vehicles and for security purposes. Lighting standards shall be a type
approved by the approving authority. Directional lights shall be arranged so
as to minimize glare and reflection on adjacent properties. Streetlighting
shall be provided in accordance with the recommendations of the Planning
Board Engineer and as required by the Borough Planning Board. Adequate
lighting shall be provided at all intersections and along all roads classified
as Borough collectors. The developer shall pay to the Borough the costs
of operation of said streetlights (as determined by the standard rates of
the utility) until the street upon which said streetlights are installed is
accepted by the Borough Council as a public street. All subdivision, site
plan, variance, and other applications for development must include plans
for proposed exterior lighting, including location, type, pole height, and
luminaire mounting height (all must be depicted in plan detail), radius of
light and intensity in footcandles, and designed in accordance with the
following and other generally accepted standards:
underdrains in addition to storm sewer conduit for the purpose of
adequately underdraining the surrounding soil and stabilizing the
affected subbase.
(5) Slotted drainpipe shall not be permitted, unless approved by the
Municipal Engineer.
R. Any area occupied or to be occupied by a municipal watercourse,
surface or subsurface drainageway, channel or stream must be
established by easement to the Borough. The width of the drainage
easement shall be determined by the Borough Engineer based upon the
width needed to accommodate future stormwater runoff and to allow
sufficient area for maintenance or construction activities. A minimum
width of all drainage easements shall be 40 feet or 20 feet from the
edge of the watercourse.
S. For minimum stormwater management requirements and controls for
major development in the Borough of Penns Grove please see Chapter
387, Stormwater Management.
A. The style, light standard, and height of the light must be consistent with
the architectural style of the principal building. Light height cannot
exceed 35 feet. Lights must be shielded to restrict maximum
illumination apex to 150° and to prevent glare to adjacent land uses.
B. There must be lighting along streets, parking areas, at all intersections,
and at all building entrances/exits. Sidewalks must have low or
mushroom-type lighting. Freestanding lights must be designed so as
not to cause a roadside safety hazard.
C. No spotlight fixtures attached to a building will be permitted except for
security purposes in the rear of buildings.
§ 375-12 PENNS GROVE CODE § 375-13
1:286
§ 375-14. Buffer yards.
Buffer yards are required in all COS and H-C/I Districts along the district
boundaries between themselves and residential districts. No commercial
and industrial uses shall hereafter be established, nor shall existing uses be
expanded, unless they meet the following buffer yard regulations:
D. Upon the recommendation of the Planning Board Engineer, the
Planning Board will determine the appropriate intensity and type of
lighting. To provide applicants with a guideline to prepare the plans for
initial Planning Board submission and notes for consideration, the
following lighting intensity values are proposed:
Use Average Footcandles
High activity:
Parking lots/walkways in business and
similar areas
2
Commercial loading areas 10
Playgrounds (general) 5
Medium activity:
Streetlighting at intersections 1.2
Streetlighting at mid-block and similar
locations
0.6
Low activity:
Lighting along rural roads and similar
locations
0.8
E. In areas of high activity the Planning Board may require a reduction in
lighting after certain hours.
F. Streetlights in residential areas must be installed at either end of all
curves with a radius less than 350 feet. Site plan lighting information
must be provided on a designated lighting plan which is to be prepared
in conjunction with a landscape plan to determine the correct location
of canopy trees. All existing lights within 100 feet of the site in question,
including location of all poles and luminaires, must be shown on the
lighting plan.
A. The buffer yard shall be measured from the district boundary line or
from the near street line where a street serves as the district boundary
line.
B. Buffer yards shall be not less than 15 feet in width in the COS District
and not less than 30 feet in the H-C/I District.
C. The buffer yard may be coterminous with required front, side or rear
yards, and in case of conflict, the larger yard requirements shall apply.
§ 375-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-14
1:287
§ 375-15. Landscaping; trees.
Every effort shall be made to preserve the landscape in its natural state
or to improve existing site conditions in keeping with adjacent areas.
D. In all buffer yards, the exterior fifteen-foot width shall be planted with
grass seed, sod or ground cover and shall be maintained and kept clean
of all debris, rubbish, weeds and tall grass in conformance with
Borough ordinance.
E. No structure, manufacturing or processing activity or storage of
materials shall be permitted in the buffer yard; however, parking of
passenger automobiles shall be permitted in the portion of the buffer
yard exclusive of the exterior fifteen-foot width.
F. All buffer yards shall include a dense screen planting of trees, shrubs or
other plant materials, or both, the full length of the lot line to serve as a
barrier to visibility, airborne particles, glare and noise. Such screen
planting shall be in accordance with the following requirements:
(1) Plant materials used in the screen planting shall be at least four
feet in height when planted and be of such species as will produce,
within two years, a complete visual screen of at least eight feet in
height.
(2) The screen planting shall be maintained permanently, and any
plant material which does not live shall be replaced within one year.
(3) The screen planting shall be so placed that at maturity it will not be
closer than three feet to any street or property line.
(4) A clear sight triangle shall be maintained at all street intersections
and at all points where private accessways intersect public streets.
(5) The screen planting shall be broken only at points of vehicular or
pedestrian access.
G. No screen planting shall be required along streets which form district
boundary lines, provided that:
(1) No outdoor processing or manufacturing activity and no outdoor
storage of materials shall be so located to be visible from the
adjacent residential districts.
(2) Only the front of any proposed building shall be visible from the
adjacent residential districts.
H. Prior to the issuance of any zoning permit, complete plans showing the
arrangement of all buffer yards and the placement, species and size of
all plant materials and the placement, size, materials and type of all
fences to be placed in such buffer yard shall be reviewed by the Zoning
Officer to ascertain that the plans are in conformance with the terms of
this chapter.
§ 375-14 PENNS GROVE CODE § 375-15
1:288
Landscaping shall be provided as part of the overall project design and
integrated into building arrangements, topography, parking and buffering
requirements. Landscaping shall include trees, bushes, shrubs, ground
cover, perennials, annuals and plants and shall be designed according
to generally accepted standards. A landscaping plan must be submitted
with each development application. The landscaping plan must identify
and locate existing and proposed trees, shrubs, bushes, plants and ground
cover. It also must indicate proposed alterations to the terrain. Additionally,
the following principles should be followed:
A. Landscaping must accent and complement buildings and promote
interior climate control.
B. The impact over time of proposed landscaping shall be considered so
that shrubs or trees do not grow to block sight distances, especially at
driveway entrances and in parking areas.
C. Factors to consider include species, texture, color, and shape as well as
resistance to disease, litter, and maintenance requirements.
D. The preservation of existing trees and vegetation is encouraged. Trees
greater than 15 inches in diameter shall be incorporated into the
landscaping plan. The grade around existing trees may not be varied
more than six inches unless properly designed trees wells are
constructed.
E. The clearing of woodland shall be strictly controlled. The stripping of
trees from a lot and the filling, or the alteration of the water table in
wooded areas, shall be prohibited except if an extensive replacement
tree planting program has been approved by the Borough Planning
Board. All development projects shall be designed to have minimal
impact on existing woodland. The siting of structures shall be such as to
preserve the maximum number of trees over 15 inches in diameter and
all trees over 24 inches in diameter.
F. Shade trees. In all development projects including major subdivisions,
shade trees shall be provided along the frontage. Two trees properly
planted, staked, and fertilized shall be provided for every 100 feet of
road frontage except if an equivalent number of trees is preserved
within 50 feet of the right-of-way. All shade trees shall meet the
following requirements:
(1) Trees shall be a deciduous variety (oak, hard maple) native to the
area and shall be approved by the Planning Board.
(2) Trees shall be nursery grown and shall have a mini-caliper of 1 1/2
inches measured three feet above the ground.
(3) Trees shall be planted where required by the Planning Board in a
planting strip 10 feet from the edge of the shoulder when the road
has been designed according to the approved cross sections.
§ 375-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-15
1:289
§ 375-16. Signs.
§ 375-17. Utilities; solid waste disposal.
Sanitary waste disposal, water supply and solid waste disposal shall be
reviewed to confirm conformity with public safety regulations. Stormwater
drainage and detention facilities, stormwater management plans, and all
applicable laws and regulations shall be reviewed and considered,
particularly with respect to land designated as subject to flooding, to avoid
danger to life or property. Particular emphasis shall be given to the
adequacy of all existing utility systems and the need for any on-site or offsite
improvements. Adequate fire protection systems must be included in
all plans. Solid waste disposal must be adequate to minimize infestation by
vermin and rodents and must conform to all applicable Borough recycling
ordinances and other applicable laws and regulations, including but not
limited to § 382-7E of the Borough Code.
(4) To prevent problems with underground utilities and impacts to the
sidewalks, shade trees must be placed five feet to 10 feet behind
sidewalk. Street trees shall be planted 40 feet to 60 feet apart,
parallel to the curb and directly outside any utility easements
which border the project's right-of-way. A ten-foot-wide shade tree
easement shall be created if required by the Board. Trees shall not
be placed in the grass strip between the curb and sidewalk.
(5) Trees shall be balled and burlapped, nursery grown, free from
insects and disease and true to species and variety.
A. To facilitate the safe and efficient movement of traffic into and out of a
land development, the Borough Planning Board may, as a condition of
the land development approval, require the installation of specified
directional, regulatory or advisory signs or pavement markings at
designated locations on the land development on the Borough right-ofway.
Such signs shall be of a size, color and design as specified in the
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways,
as amended and supplemented by the New Jersey Department of
Transportation.
B. No advertising sign, device or marking may be designed to be erected
on or overhang a Borough right-of-way. Advertising signs which revolve,
move, flash, or give the illusion of movement shall be prohibited within
25 feet of the existing or proposed future curbline.
A. Plans must include depictions of all public services being connected to
an approved public utility system. Development applicants must submit
written approval from each serving utility to confirm compliance with
this section.
B. Applicants shall arrange with the serving utility for the underground
installation of the utilities, distribution supply lines, and service
connection. Service connections shall be made underground for all
§ 375-15 PENNS GROVE CODE § 375-17
1:290
§ 375-18. Environmental considerations.
Environmental elements relating to soil erosion, preservation of trees, and
protection of watercourses, topography, soil, and wildlife shall be reviewed
and the design of the plan shall minimize any adverse impact on these
elements. Whenever possible, the natural features of a site are to be
preserved, floodplains respected, and excessive cut or fill avoided. In
reviewing a development application, the Planning Board shall take into
consideration the effect of the development upon all aspects of the
environment as outlined in the environmental impact statement
requirements, as well as the sufficiency of the applicant's proposal in the
environmental impact statement for dealing with any immediate or
projected adverse effects. The reviewing authority may require, as a
condition of approval or the application, that steps be taken to minimize
all adverse environmental impacts during and after construction, and no
final approval shall be issued until all such requirements shall have been
complied with or compliance is guaranteed by a performance guarantee.
§ 375-19. Natural features.
The important natural features of a site shall be preserved in the design of
all development projects in accordance with generally accepted standards.
Natural features that shall be protected include the natural terrain,
wetlands, wooded area, vistas, natural drainageways, and lakes. A
developer shall only be permitted to significantly alter or encroach on
the existing natural features if the Planning Board is convinced that the
alteration is the minimum necessary to allow the use of the land for the
intended purpose and that there are no alternatives to the development
project design which would eliminate or mitigate any adverse impact on
natural features.
§ 375-20. Topsoil protection.
No topsoil shall be removed from the site or used as spoil. Topsoil moved
during the course of construction shall be redistributed within the
development project so as to provide at least four inches of cover to all
areas of the development project and shall be stabilized by seeding or
planting.
§ 375-21. Lot configuration.
developments. Whenever the widening or extension of a street requires
the replacement or relocation of utilities, such replacement or
relocation shall be underground. Common trenches shall be utilized
where appropriate according to generally accepted standards.
C. Utility easements along rear or side property lines may be required.
Such easements shall be at least 20 feet wide and, to the extent
possible, be centered on or adjacent to rear or side lot lines.
§ 375-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-21
1:291
§ 375-22. Monuments.
Monuments shall be installed in compliance with the requirements of the
Map Filing Law (N.J.S.A. 46:26B-1 et seq.). All lot corners shall be marked
with a durable metal alloy pin.
§ 375-23. Improvements to be within municipal boundaries.
No cul-de-sac or loop street, or any part thereof, or any building or site
improvements for any site plan or subdivision project may extend from
Penns Grove into another municipality, or from another municipality into
Penns Grove. All streets and portions thereof, including cul-de-sac streets,
loop streets, and portions of all other types of streets within Penns Grove,
must provide access only to lots that meet all applicable lot area, dimension
and configuration requirements.
§ 375-24. Private storm drain inlet retrofitting.
See Chapter 390, Stormwater Pollution Control, Article VII, Private Storm
Drain Inlet Retrofitting.
§ 375-25. Dumpster enclosures.
Dumpsters must be surrounded by a masonry wall or vinyl fence which
shall be at least six feet high and which structure shall have a self-closing
gate for access (side or rear access door or doors optional). The enclosure
shall be situated on a paved surface, and if it is constructed with chain-link
fencing it shall have vinyl slatting to obscure the interior from passersby. In
A. Lot dimensions and area shall not be less than the requirements of
Chapter 450, Zoning, of the Borough Code unless approved by variance.
B. Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight
streets and radial to curved streets.
C. Where additional right-of-way has been required to bring existing
rights-of-way up to standard, lots shall begin at the proposed right-orway
line and all setbacks shall be measured from that line.
D. For proper development of the land within the Borough, lots shall have
an average length no greater than 250% of the average width, except
where the width exceeds three times the zoning requirements.
E. Where there is a question as to the suitability of a lot or lots for their
intended use due any failure to meet the above lot configuration
standards, or due to factors such as poor drainage conditions or where
percolation tests or test borings show the ground conditions to be
inadequate for proper on-lot sewage treatment, the Planning Board
may, after adequate investigation, withhold approval of such lots. If
approval is withheld, the Planning Board shall specify the reasons for
such denial in its memorializing resolution.
§ 375-21 PENNS GROVE CODE § 375-25
1:292
addition, steel bollards shall be placed in the interior of the enclosure, the
exact location of which shall be determined by the Planning Board Engineer.
§ 375-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-25
1:293
Chapter 382
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass, weeds and debris — See Ch.
198.
Unfit and abandoned buildings — See Ch. 206.
Hazardous substances — See Ch. 278.
Littering, dumping and outdoor
storage — See Ch. 298.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 347.
Stormwater pollution control — See Ch. 390.
§ 382-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Borough of Penns Grove Waste
Separation, Recycling and Waste Disposal Ordinance."
§ 382-2. Statement of purpose.
§ 382-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
ASBESTOS-CONTAINING WASTE — All materials manufactured from
asbestos, including but not limited to asbestos insulation, asbestos shingles,
A. The Borough of Penns Grove finds that it is in the public interest to
require the separation of designated waste materials from trash,
garbage and other waste products which are collected by the Borough
and are disposed of in a solid waste landfill facility. Obvious
environmental and cost benefits will be derived from practicing waste
minimization, and its importance as part of a comprehensive solid
waste management plan cannot be overestimated. Hence, the Borough
encourages all residents, along with commercial and institutional solid
waste generators, to reduce waste at the source, to reuse materials
when practical and to recycle waste when possible.
B. The Borough also recognizes its obligation to establish a mandatory
recycling program under the provisions of P.L. 1987, c. 102, as
amended.34 In order to fulfill its obligations under state statute, to
conserve recyclable materials for sale and reuse to the public benefit
and to reduce the amount of solid waste to be disposed of in a sanitary
landfill and thus to reduce the cost of disposal fees incurred by the
Borough and its residents, the within chapter is hereby adopted and
amended to comply with the provisions of the County Solid Waste
Management Plan.
34.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.11 et seq.
§ 375-25 PENNS GROVE CODE § 382-3
1:294
asbestos millboard, asbestos gloves or any solid waste which contains
friable asbestos material.
BUILDING RUBBLE — Used masonry building materials, including block,
cement, concrete, brick and stone.
BULK WASTE — Large items of solid waste which, because of their size
or weight, require handling other than normally used for municipal wastes.
"Bulk waste" includes but is not limited to such items as tree trunks,
mattresses, demolition and construction materials, appliances and
furniture.
COLLECTION — The act of picking up solid waste at its point of generation
or storage and placing it in a vehicle.
COLLECTION HAULER — A person, firm or corporation engaged in the
collection of solid waste and/or transportation of such waste between solid
waste facilities.
COMMERCIAL SECTOR — Wholesale or retail businesses, professional and
nonprofessional services and service establishments, such as restaurants,
cafeterias, stores, markets, banks, theaters, hotels, motels, taverns and
warehouses. The term shall also include administrative and nonindustrial
functions at industrial sites. The term "commercial sector" shall be liberally
construed in order to include all generators who are not defined as
residential or institutional.
COMMERCIAL SECTOR RECYCLABLES — Recyclables originating in the
commercial sector.
COMMINGLED — A combining of nonputrescible source-separated
recyclable materials for the purpose of recycling.
COMPOST — Thoroughly decomposed humidified organic matter produced
through composting and suitable for application to soil.
COMPOSTING — The process of accelerated organic matter decomposition
based on microbial self-heating; a process typically used for leaves at statepermitted
vegetative waste or leaf composting facilities.
CONSTRUCTION/DEMOLITION DEBRIS — Wood, wood scraps, asphalt
shingles, plaster, drywall, wire, pipe, nonasbestos insulation and similar
waste resulting from the construction or demolition of buildings.
"Construction/demolition debris" shall not include building rubble, as such
term is defined herein.
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those materials designated
within the Salem County Solid Waste Management Plan to be source
separated for the purpose of recycling by residential, commercial,
institutional and industrial sectors. These materials cannot be deposited in
the landfill and include:
A. Residential.
§ 382-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 382-3
1:295
Glass containers (05): All glass containers used for packaging food
or beverages.
(1)
Aluminum cans (06): Food and beverage containers made entirely
of aluminum.
(2)
Newspaper (03): All paper marketed as newsprint or newspaper
and containing at least 70% newsprint or newspaper (American
Paper Institute Grade Nos. 6, 7 and 8 news).
(3)
Mixed office (02): All computer paper and all high-grade white
paper (including letterhead, typing paper, copier paper, onionskin,
tissue, and notepad).
(4)
Corrugated (01): Containers and similar paper items, usually used
to transport supplies, equipment, parts, or other merchandise.
(5)
Other paper/magazines/junk mail (04): All magazine stock, white
and colored paper and envelopes.
(6)
Plastic (08): Containers such as polyethylene terephthalate (PETE
No. 1) soda bottles and high-density polyethylene (HDPE No. 2)
milk, water or detergent bottles.
(7)
Yard trimmings (19): Leaves (19), grass clippings (18), stumps (20),
brush (17), and other lawn and garden trimmings from homes,
institutions, and commercial or industrial sources.
(8)
Steel cans (07): Rigid containers made exclusively or primarily of
steel, tin-plated steel, and composite steel and aluminum cans used
to store food, beverages, paint, and a variety of other household
and consumer products.
(9)
Tires (15): Rubber-based scrap automotive, truck, and specialty
tires (e.g., forklift tires).
(10)
White goods and light iron (11): All large appliances such as
washers, dryers, refrigerators, etc., as well as products made from
sheet iron, such as shelving, file cabinets, metal desks, recycled or
reconditioned steel drums, stainless steel and other nonstructural
ferrous scrap.
(11)
Food scraps (23): Food plate waste and food processing wastes.
Food processing wastes include food processing vegetative waste
(material generated in trimming and reject sorting operations from
the processing of fruits and vegetables in canneries or similar
industries, e.g., tomato skins, pepper cores, bean snips, cranberry
hulls, etc.), food processing residuals and animal processing
wastes. If the material is transported and processed as animal feed,
it may be identified as such.
(12)
Textiles (29): Cloth material such as cotton, linen, wool, nylon,
polyester, etc., derived from clothing, cloth diapers, linens, etc.
(13)
§ 382-3 PENNS GROVE CODE § 382-3
1:296
FERROUS WASTE — All waste products constructed or manufactured of or
containing iron.
Commercial.
Glass containers (05): All glass containers used for packaging food
or beverages.
(1)
Aluminum cans (06): Food and beverage containers made entirely
of aluminum.
(2)
Newspaper (03): All paper marketed as newsprint or newspaper
and containing at least 70% newsprint or newspaper (American
Paper Institute Grade Nos. 6, 7 and 8 news).
(3)
Mixed office (02): All computer paper and all high-grade white
paper (including letter head, typing paper, copier paper, onionskin,
tissue, and notepad).
(4)
Corrugated (01): Containers and similar paper items, usually used
to transport supplies, equipment, parts, or other merchandise.
(5)
Other paper/magazines/junk mail (04): All magazine stock, white
and colored paper and envelopes.
(6)
Plastic (08): Containers such as polyethylene terephthalate (PETE
No. 1) soda bottles and high-density polyethylene (HDPE No. 2)
milk, water or detergent bottles.
(7)
Steel cans (07): Rigid containers made exclusively or primarily of
steel, tin-plated steel, and composite steel and aluminum cans used
to store food, beverages, paint, and a variety of other household
and consumer products.
(8)
Tires (15): Rubber-based scrap automotive, truck, and specialty
tires (e.g., forklift tires).
(9)
White goods and light iron (11): All large appliances such as
washers, dryers, refrigerators, etc., as well as products made from
sheet iron, such as shelving, file cabinets, metal desks, recycled or
reconditioned steel drums, stainless steel and other nonstructural
ferrous scrap.
(10)
Food scraps (23): Food plate waste and food processing wastes.
Food processing wastes include food processing vegetative waste
(material generated in trimming and reject sorting operations from
the processing of fruits and vegetables in canneries or similar
industries, e.g., tomato skins, pepper cores, bean snips, cranberry
hulls, etc.), food processing residuals and animal processing
wastes. If the material is transported and processed as animal feed,
it may be identified as such.
(11)
Textiles (29): Cloth material such as cotton, linen, wool, nylon,
polyester, etc., derived from clothing, cloth diapers, linens, etc.
(12)
B.
§ 382-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 382-3
1:297
FRIABLE ASBESTOS MATERIAL — Any material that contains more than
1% asbestos by weight, which material can be crumbled, pulverized or
reduced to powder, when dry, by hand pressure.
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetable waste incident
to and resulting from the use, preparation, cooking and consumption of
food.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Any solid waste or combination of solid wastes,
including toxic, corrosive, irritating, sensitizing, radioactive, biologically
infectious, explosive or flammable solid waste, which poses a present or
potential threat to human health, living organisms or the environment,
provided that the solid waste is defined as hazardous pursuant to N.J.A.C.
7:26G.[Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
HDPE — Plastic products manufactured from high-density polyethylene,
including but not limited to containers for milk, juice, water, many laundry
detergents and fabric softeners, which containers display the plastic
container code number two, shown clearly within the recycling symbol
triangle.
HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTE — Residentially generated hazardous
waste, including but not limited to paints and pesticides.
INFECTIOUS WASTE — Pathological or medical solid waste that is defined
as infectious by the Department.
INSTITUTIONAL SECTOR — Schools, hospitals, churches, nursing homes,
care centers, libraries, governmental operations, research institutions and
public buildings.
INSTITUTIONAL SECTOR RECYCLABLES — Recyclable materials
originating in the institutional sector.
MUNICIPAL RECYCLING COORDINATOR — The person or persons
appointed by the municipal governing body and who shall be authorized to
enforce the provisions of this chapter, and any rules and regulations that
may be promulgated hereunder. This appointee shall also be responsible to
assure that all materials recycled in the municipality are properly reported
and recorded.
MUNICIPAL RECYCLING DEPOT — A facility at which commercial,
residential and institutional generators may deposit designated recyclable
materials in a market-ready state and which recyclable materials do not
require further separation or processing prior to marketing.
MUNICIPAL RECYCLING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Person or persons
appointed by the Borough of Penns Grove who shall be authorized to
enforce this chapter as directed by the Municipal Recycling
Coordinator.[Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE (MSW) STREAM — All solid waste generated
at residential, commercial and institutional establishments within the
boundaries of the Borough of Penns Grove.[Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-5]
§ 382-3 PENNS GROVE CODE § 382-3
1:298
NONFERROUS WASTE — Waste metal products which do not include iron.
NONRECYCLABLE PAPER — Paper products currently unsuitable for
recycling, including the following: carbon paper, post-it notes, tissue
products, paper plates/cups, paper towels, foil-lined paper, synthetic paper,
paper beverage containers, chemically treated NCR, glue-bound books or
laminated pads, plastic-coated paper (identified by slippery and somewhat
shiny texture and nonrip quality), gummed labels and stickers, window
envelopes, waxed papers, gum wrappers, thermal copy paper, mimeo
stencils, photographs and film and blueprints.
OTHER RECYCLABLES —
PETE — Plastic products manufactured from polyethylene terephthalate,
including but not limited to containers for soft drinks, which products will
generally display the plastic container code number one, shown clearly
within the recycling symbol triangle.
PLASTIC CONTAINER CODES SYSTEM — An identification system used by
manufacturers to identify seven different types of plastic materials through
a code number (a single digit one through seven) displayed within a
recycling symbol triangle on the bottom of each container. The respective
plastic container codes are as follows:
Code Material
1 PETE Polyethylene terephthalate
2 HDPE High-density polyethylene
3 V Vinyl/polyvinyl chloride
4 LDPE Low-density polyethylene
5 PP Polypropylene
6 PS Polystyrene
7 Other All other resins and layered multimaterial
POTW (PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS) — Any device or system
used in the treatment, including recycling and reclamation, of municipal
sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature which is owned by the state,
a municipality or a public authority. This definition includes sewers, pipes
or other conveyances only if they convey wastewater to a POTW providing
treatment.
PUTRESCIBLE WASTE — Any waste likely to enter into a state of
putrefaction, the typically anaerobic splitting of a protein by bacteria and
fungi with the formation of foul smelling, incompletely oxidized products.
RCRA — Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (hazardous waste
regulations).
Vegetative waste (other than leaves), such as brush, tree branches,
bushes and tree stumps.
A.
B. Building rubble (separated from construction/demolition debris).
§ 382-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 382-3
1:299
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — Those materials that would otherwise become
solid waste and which may be collected, separated, or processed and
returned to the economic mainstream in the form of raw materials or
products.
RECYCLING CENTER — A facility, approved by the Department, designed
and operated solely for receiving, storing, processing and transferring
source-separated nonputrescible or source-separated commingled
nonputrescible metal, glass, paper, plastic containers, corrugated and other
cardboard or other recyclable materials.
RESIDENTIAL SECTOR — Households and private residences, including
mobile homes, multifamily structures and apartment complexes.
RESIDENTIAL SECTOR RECYCLABLES — Recyclable materials originating
in the residential sector.
SCAVENGING — The unauthorized removal of solid waste material,
including designated recyclables.
SCUA — The Salem County Utilities Authority.
SOLID WASTE — All trash, garbage and other waste products. "Solid waste"
does not include any item designated as a recyclable material.
SOLID WASTE FACILITY — Any system, site, equipment or building which
is utilized for the storage, collection, processing, transfer, transportation,
separation, recycling, recovering or disposal of solid waste, but not
including a recycling center.
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT — The purposeful, systematic control of
the generation, storage, collection, processing, transfer, transportation,
separation, recycling, recovery and disposal of solid wastes.
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Recyclable materials
that are separated at the point of generation by the generator thereof from
solid waste for the purpose of recycling.
SOURCE SEPARATION — The process by which recyclable materials are
separated at the point of generation by the generator thereof from solid
waste for the purposes of recycling.
SWAC — The Salem County Solid Waste Advisory Committee.
TRASH — Nonputrescible residential, commercial or institutional solid
wastes from which all designated recyclables and other recyclables have
been source-separated.
WASTE OIL — A petroleum-based or synthetic oil which, through use,
storage or handling, has become unsuitable for its original purpose due to
the presence of impurities or loss of original properties, such as crankcase
oil.
§ 382-3 PENNS GROVE CODE § 382-4
1:300
§ 382-4. Designation of recyclable materials. [Amended 7-5-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-5]
The Borough determines that the materials designated within the Salem
County Solid Waste Management Plan as defined in § 382-3 shall be source
separated as the designated recyclable materials within the Borough. The
Borough may, from time to time, designate additional items as recyclable
materials. Such determination shall be made by resolution.
§ 382-5. Mandatory source separation and recycling requirements.
A. Mandatory source separation. It shall be mandatory for all persons who
are owners, lessees, tenants or occupants of residential and
nonresidential premises, including but not limited to retail and
commercial locations and government, school, and other institutional
locations within the Borough, to separate designated recyclable
materials from all solid waste. Designated recyclable material shall be
placed separately at the curb in a manner and on such days and times
as may be established by the Borough. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-5]
B. When municipal curbside collection is not provided for designated
recyclable materials, as is the case for those recyclables generated by
commercial and institution entities, it shall be the obligation of the
generator to arrange for the private collection and delivery of
designated recyclable materials to a recycling facility or to deliver
designated recyclable materials to a municipal recycling depot
designated by the Borough.
C. Residential dwelling requirements. The owner of each property shall be
responsible for compliance with this chapter. For multifamily dwelling
units, including but not limited to condominium complexes and
seasonal hotels/motels and guest houses, the management or owner is
responsible for setting up and maintaining the recycling system,
including collection of source-separated recyclable materials.
Violations and penalty notices will be directed to the owner or
management, in those instances where the violator is not easily
identifiable. The owner or management shall issue notification and
collection rules regarding recycling requirements to all new tenants
when they arrive and with a reminder a minimum of every six months
during their occupancy. The owner or occupant of any residential
property located within the Borough who shall place for disposal,
removal or collection the items defined in this chapter shall do so in
strict conformity with the following regulations:
(1) It is the responsibility of the property owner to provide adequate
size and number of containers for the separate placement of
recyclables for curbside collection as follows:
(a) Paper products may be commingled in one container or may be
placed in brown paper bags; however, plastic bags shall not be
§ 382-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 382-5
1:301
used for curbside collection of paper products; glass food and
beverage containers, metal food and beverage containers, and
plastic bottles and jugs may be commingled in one container.
(b) All containers and brown paper bags containing sourceseparated
recyclable materials shall be placed prior to
collection between the curb and sidewalk or, in the absence of
curb and sidewalk, as near to the street as possible as not to
constitute a danger, where such receptacles shall be readily
accessible to the collector without providing obstruction to
pedestrians.
(c) The owner or occupant of the premises shall keep all
receptacles clean and in safe handling condition.
(2) All receptacles or dumpsters shall be maintained in a clean and
safe manner.
(3) Vegetative waste, such as limbs, branches, small trees and bushes,
shall be cut in lengths not to exceed four feet and placed neatly at
the curbline. Any exceptions to this length requirement must be
approved by the Superintendent of the Borough Public Works
Department or the superintendent of the public works department
of any municipality which the Borough of Penns Grove has a shared
services agreement with for public works. [Amended 7-5-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-5]
(4) Leaves shall be mulched or composted on site by the property
owner or placed in plastic lawn or leaf bags at the curbside. (See
§ 382-6 for additional requirements for leaf generators.)
(5) Grass clippings shall be mulched or composted on site by the
property owner or placed in plastic lawn or leaf bags at the
curbside. (See § 382-6 for additional requirements for grass
clippings.)
(6) White goods, ferrous waste and nonferrous waste shall be placed at
curbside at a time and date agreed upon, in advance, by the owner
or occupant of the property and the Superintendent of the Borough
Public Works Department or the superintendent of the public works
department of any municipality which the Borough of Penns Grove
has a shared services agreement with for public works. [Amended
7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
(7) All other items not heretofore defined in this section or
subsequently designated as recyclable materials by the Borough
shall be considered as trash and debris, and said items shall be
placed in metal or heavy-duty plastic containers, which containers
are to be secured by a lid. No container shall exceed thirty-twogallon
capacity, and no container, when filled, shall exceed a weight
of 50 pounds.
§ 382-5 PENNS GROVE CODE § 382-6
1:302
§ 382-6. Leaves and grass clippings.35
§ 382-7. Recycling requirements for commercial, institutional and
industrial facilities; multifamily housing.
A. No person, firm or corporation shall place leaves or grass clippings for
disposal as solid waste at the Salem County Solid Waste Facility.
B. No person, firm or corporation shall permit leaves and/or grass
clippings to become mixed with nonorganic materials, paper, plastic,
metal, wood or other materials.
C. No person, firm or corporation shall permit leaves or grass clippings to
be mixed with garbage, solid waste or designated recyclable materials.
D. No person, firm, hauler or corporation shall collect solid waste in which
leaves or grass clippings have been mixed.
E. The Borough shall cause notification to be given to residential leaf
generators within the Borough of the requirements of this section, the
duties and responsibilities of each such generator, the persons
designated as enforcement officers under this chapter, and the fines
and penalties imposed for violation of this chapter.
A. All commercial, institutional or industrial facilities shall be required to
comply with the provisions of this chapter. [Amended 7-5-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-5]
B. The arrangement for collection of all categories of designated
mandatory recyclables hereunder shall be the responsibility of the
commercial, institutional or industrial property owner or its designee,
except for those specific designated recyclable materials that are
collected by the municipality from that property. All commercial,
institutional or industrial properties at which litter is generated by
employees or the public shall provide litter and recycling receptacles.
These properties shall provide for separate recycling collection services
for the contents of the recycling receptacles.
C. Every business, institution or industrial facility shall report on a
quarterly basis to the Municipal Recycling Coordinator, on such forms
as may be prescribed, regarding recycling activities at its premises,
including the amount and type of recycled material not placed curbside
for municipal collection. If material is removed from the premises by a
hauler, recycler or paper shredder, the quantity and final disposition of
the material is to be reported on the form.
D. All food service establishments, as defined in the Health Code, shall, in
addition to compliance with all other recycling requirements, be
required to recycle grease and/or cooking oil created in the processing
35.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 390, Art. II, Containerized Yard Waste, and Art. III, Yard Waste
Collection Program.
§ 382-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 382-7
1:303
§ 382-8. Charitable organizations.
For the purposes of this chapter, charitable organizations shall be
considered as institutional uses and shall be subject to § 382-7 of this
chapter.
§ 382-9. Authority of Borough.
The Borough is hereby authorized to promulgate, from time to time,
additional rules and regulations relating to source separation, preparation,
placement and collection of recyclable materials pursuant to the provisions
of this program and chapter; provided, however, that such rules and
regulations shall not be inconsistent with terms and provisions of this
chapter and shall be approved by the governing body. Such rules and
regulations shall be duly promulgated subsequent to publication so that the
public has had notice hereof.
§ 382-10. Designation of containers.
If any recyclable product is placed at curbside in a manner wherein said
product is not easily visible to the collector, the container shall be marked
of food or food products and maintain such records as may be
prescribed for the inspection by a code enforcement officer.
E. Any application to the Planning Board of the Borough for subdivision or
site plan approval for the construction of multifamily dwellings of three
or more units, single-family developments of three or more units or any
commercial, institutional or industrial development of 1,000 square feet
or more must include a recycling plan.
(1) This plan shall contain, at a minimum, the following:
(a) A detailed analysis of the expected composition and amounts of
solid waste and recyclables generated at the proposed
development; and
(b) Locations documented on the application's site plan that
provide for convenient recycling opportunities for all owners,
tenants and occupants. The recycling area shall be of sufficient
size, convenient location and contain other attributes (signage,
lighting, fencing, etc.) as may be determined by the Municipal
Recycling Coordinator.
(2) Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the Borough,
the owner of any new multifamily housing or commercial,
institutional or industrial development must supply a copy of a duly
executed contract with a hauling company for the purposes of
collecting and recycling source-separated designated recyclable
materials for those locations or properties where the municipally
does not otherwise provide the service.
§ 382-7 PENNS GROVE CODE § 382-10
1:304
in a clear and visible fashion by the occupant or owner of the property so as
to indicate the contents of said receptacle.
§ 382-11. Waste mixed with recyclable materials; unauthorized
pickup and scavenging; ownership of materials.
§ 382-12. Responsibility of haulers and collectors.
It shall be unlawful for solid waste collectors to collect solid waste that
is mixed with or contains visible signs of designated recyclable materials.
It is also unlawful for solid waste collectors to remove for disposal those
bags or containers of solid waste which visibly display a warning notice
sticker or some other device indicating that the load of solid waste contains
designated recyclable materials.
§ 382-13. Collection of solid waste and recyclable materials.
[Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
The collection, removal and disposal of solid waste and recyclable material
from residential properties in the Borough shall be supervised by the
Superintendent of the Borough Public Works Department or the
superintendent of the public works department of any municipality which
the Borough of Penns Grove has a shared services agreement with for public
works in accordance with this chapter. The following shall not be accepted
for collection:
A. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or occupant to properly
segregate the uncollected waste for proper disposal and/or recycling.
Allowing such unseparated solid waste and recyclables to accumulate
at the curbside beyond 7:00 p.m. on the day of collection will be
considered a violation of this chapter and the local sanitary code.
B. Once placed in the location identified by this chapter, or any rules or
regulations promulgated pursuant to this chapter, no person, other than
any personnel authorized by the municipality or the owner or occupant
responsible for placement of the designated recyclable materials for
collection, shall tamper with, collect, remove, or otherwise handle
designated recyclable materials. Upon placement of such designated
recyclable material, it shall become property of the municipality or its
authorized agent. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person
not duly authorized to collect or pick up or cause to be collected or
picked up any recyclable materials that are the property of the
municipality as provided for above.
A. Any and all waste material generated outside of the Borough.
B. Any waste material not accepted by the Salem County Solid Waste
Facility. Prohibited wastes include but are not limited to the following:
(1) Any and all waste material generated outside of Salem County.
(2) Discarded automobiles, trucks, trailers and large vehicle parts.
§ 382-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 382-13
1:305
(3) N.J.A.C. Type No. 12, sewage sludge.
(4) N.J.A.C. Type No. 17, dry hazardous waste.
(5) N.J.A.C. Type No. 26, hazardous waste oil spill cleanup waste.
(6) N.J.A.C. Type No. 28, infectious waste.
(7) N.J.A.C. Type No. 70, waste oil and sludge.
(8) N.J.A.C. Type No. 72, bulk liquids and semiliquids.
(9) N.J.A.C. Type No. 73, septic tank cleanout wastes.
(10)N.J.A.C. Type No. 74, liquid sewage sludge.
(11)N.J.A.C. Type No. 76, liquid hazardous waste.
(12)N.J.A.C. Type No. 77, liquid chemical waste.
(13) Empty pesticide containers not triple-rinsed or determined not to
be empty and nonhazardous.
C. Any waste material not accepted by the Salem County Solid Waste
Facility without special arrangements, special packaging, special
handling or special fees. Such wastes include but are not limited to the
following:
(1) N.J.A.C. Type No. 27, dry nonhazardous industrial waste (asbestos
shingles).
(2) N.J.A.C. Type No. 27A, industrial waste, asbestos (insulation,
sheetrock or loose).
(3) Animal and food processing waste.
D. Spent lead-acid batteries and household batteries.
E. Household hazardous wastes (residentially generated hazardous
wastes, usually in the form of discarded commercial chemical
products).
F. Waste oils identified by the following generic New Jersey hazardous
waste numbers: X721, X722, X723, X724, X725, X726 and X727,
regardless of whether such oils were generated from residential,
commercial or institutional entities.
G. Brush and trees or parts of trees in excess of the limitations stated in
§ 382-5C(3).
H. Waste resulting from the demolition or renovation of buildings. For all
activities that require municipal approval such as construction,
demolition or public event permits, a designated recyclable materials
plan shall be filed along with all other required permit conditions. The
plan shall include provisions for the recovery of all designated
§ 382-13 PENNS GROVE CODE § 382-13
1:306
§ 382-14. Method of placement for collection.
§ 382-15. Refusal to accept solid waste.
In addition to any of the remedies provided herein for violation of this
chapter, the Borough shall have the right to refuse to collect any solid waste
or recyclable materials in the event that the property owner or occupant
has not complied with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 382-16. Recycling Coordinator.
The Municipal Recycling Coordinator shall be responsible for coordinating
and overseeing recycling efforts within the Borough and the filing of all
reports and notices as required by law. Such reports include but are not
limited to:
recyclable materials generated during construction, renovation and
demolition activities, as well as public events. The Municipal Recycling
Coordinator shall review the information submitted pursuant to this
subsection and determine, prior to the issuance of municipal approval
or permit, whether the plan submitted by the owner of the entity
carrying out the covered activity will comply or fail to comply with the
recycling requirements set forth herein. The determination regarding
compliance will be provided to the Superintendent of the Borough
Public Works Department or the superintendent of the public works
department of any municipality which the Borough of Penns Grove has
a shared services agreement with for public works and the owner of
the entity carrying out the covered project in writing. When such plan
is deemed not compliant, the Municipal Recycling Coordinator shall
include specific conditions to be implemented by the permit holder
to achieve compliance. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any
permit holder to fail to comply with the recycling requirements set forth
herein.
I. Tires.
A. All containers for solid waste and designated recyclable materials shall
be supplied by the occupant or owner of the premises. Said containers
shall meet the specifications set forth in § 382-5 hereof. Said containers
shall be readily accessible to the collector. The occupant or owner shall
keep all containers clean and in a condition for safe handling.
B. Containers and items to be disposed of shall be placed at the curbline
no earlier than 6:00 p.m. of the day immediately preceding the day of
collection. After collection, all empty containers are to be removed by
the owner or occupant of the property not later than 8:00 p.m. of the
day of collection.
C. The Borough shall have the power to establish the time, method and
routes of service for pickup of solid waste.
§ 382-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 382-16
1:307
§ 382-17. Fees for bulk waste.
There is hereby created a fee for the collection, transportation and disposal
of bulk waste in the Borough. The fee for bulk waste shall be as hereinafter
set forth:
Item Fee
Large truck or tractor tire $20
Piano/organ $20
Truck caps/bedliners $20
Refrigerator $10
Freezer $10
Air conditioner $10
Dehumidifier $10
Other appliance using Freon $10
Sofa bed $10
Small truck tire $10
Mattress, queen and king $10
Tub $10
TV 32 inches and above $10
Riding mower $10
Sofa bed with recliner/sectional $10
Boiler $10
Washer $5
Dryer $5
Stove $5
Hot-water heater $5
Dishwasher $5
Gas grill $5
Sofa $5
Stuffed chair $5
A. Weight for designated recyclable materials, to be provided to the
County Recycling Coordinator within 20 days after the last day of June
and within 20 days of the last day of December.
B. Composting data related to the disposal of leaves, to be provided to the
Salem County Deputy Director for Recycling by August 1 of each year.
C. A report, to be filed with the Salem County Utilities Authority, certifying
compliance with the Recycling Ordinance, said report to be filed not
later than December 1 of each year.
§ 382-16 PENNS GROVE CODE § 382-17
1:308
Item Fee
Recliner $5
TV up to 30 inches $5
Bureau $5
Dresser $5
Desk $5
Table $5
Mattress, twin and full $5
Box spring all sizes $5
Head boards (wood or metal) $5
Dining tables $5
Chairs, lounges (outdoor
furniture)
$5
Microwaves $5
Computers (monitors and towers) $5
Bathroom vanity $5
Toilet $5
Push mower $5
Entertainment center $5
Chair $2
Car tire without rim $2
Coffee/end table $2
Helium tank (party balloons) $2
Vehicle batteries $2
§ 382-18. Application for collection of bulk waste.
The Carneys Point Township Clerk shall develop an application form which
shall be utilized in connection with the collection of bulk waste. The
application form shall include the name, address and telephone number of
the applicant, the item of bulk waste to be collected and the fee paid for said
collection. Application forms shall be available at the office of the Carneys
Point Township Clerk and the Chief Municipal Finance Officer. Each person,
firm or corporation desiring the collection of bulk waste shall complete an
application form and file the same with the Carneys Point Township Clerk
or the Chief Municipal Finance Officer.
§ 382-19. Labels for bulk waste items.
A. Issuance of label. Upon the filing of a completed application form as
required pursuant to § 382-18 hereof and payment of the fee as
required pursuant to § 382-17 hereof, the Township Clerk shall issue a
§ 382-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 382-19
1:309
§ 382-20. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate the provisions
of this chapter shall be subject to a fine not less than $50 and not more
than $1,000 or imprisonment in the Salem County Correctional Facility for
a term not to exceed 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment, in the
discretion of the Municipal Judge. The continuation of any violation for each
successive day shall constitute a separate offense, and the person, persons,
or entity allowing or permitting the continuation of the violation may be
punished as provided above for each separate offense. Any violation may be
afforded warnings at the discretion of the enforcement designees before the
issuance of any fines.
§ 382-21. Enforcement. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
The municipal recycling enforcement officers are hereby individually
empowered to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The enforcers of this
chapter may conduct an inspection at the site of the generator, which
consists of sorting through containers and opening of solid waste bags
to detect, by sound or sight, the presence of any designated recyclable
materials. However, any official or employee of Carneys Point Township or
the Borough of Penns Grove shall be authorized to sign a complaint in the
Municipal Court of the Borough of Penns Grove for violation of any of the
terms of this chapter. Additionally, the Salem County Health Department
(SCHD) shall be empowered to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
The municipality shall retain primary enforcement responsibility with the
SCHD also serving in an enforcement role, which includes inspection of
commercial establishments and multifamily residential dwellings.
Chapter 387
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 223.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 252.
Site plan review — See Ch. 375.
Stormwater pollution control — See Ch. 390.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 400.
Zoning — See Ch. 450.
§ 387-1. General provisions.
label to the applicant. Said label shall be affixed to the item of bulk
waste to be collected. No item of bulk waste shall be collected unless
an appropriate label has been affixed thereto.
B. Inappropriate use of labels. Any person who attempts to duplicate or
counterfeit a label, or reuse a cancelled label, shall be in violation of
this chapter and shall be subject to prosecution in the Municipal Court.
§ 382-19 PENNS GROVE CODE § 387-1
1:310
A. Policy statement. Flood control, groundwater recharge, and pollutant
reduction through nonstructural stormwater management strategies
per this chapter, and all low-impact stormwater management
strategies, shall be explored before relying on structural BMPs.
Structural BMPs should be integrated with nonstructural stormwater
management strategies and proper maintenance plans. Nonstructural
strategies include both environmentally sensitive site design and
source controls that prevent pollutants from being placed on the site or
from being exposed to stormwater. Source control plans should be
developed based upon physical site conditions and the origin, nature,
and the anticipated quantity or amount of potential pollutants. Multiple
stormwater management BMPs may be necessary to achieve the
established performance standards for water quality, quantity, and
groundwater recharge.
B. Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum
stormwater management requirements and controls for major
development, as defined in § 387-2.
C. Applicability. This chapter shall be applicable to all site plans,
subdivisions, variance, conditional use, and general development plans
for the following major developments that require preliminary or final
site plan or subdivision review:
(1) Nonresidential major developments; and
(2) Aspects of residential major developments that are not preempted
by the Residential Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21 et
seq.
D. Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements.
Compliance with the requirements of this chapter is to be considered an
integral part of development approvals under the review process for
applicable major developments and does not relieve the applicant of the
responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for activities
regulated by any other applicable code, rule, act, or ordinance. In their
interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be
held to be the minimum stormwater management requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. This
chapter is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other
ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law, except
that, where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different
from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other
provision of law, the more restrictive provisions or higher standards
shall control.
E. Residential development subject to Residential Site Improvement
Standards. All residential development shall remain subject to
applicable requirements of the Residential Site Improvement Standards
at N.J.A.C. 5:21 et seq.
§ 387-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 387-2
1:311
§ 387-2. Definitions.
Whenever the following terms, or pronouns in place of them, are used,
the intent and meaning, unless a different intent or meaning is clearly
indicated, shall be interpreted as set forth in the following unless
specifically defined below:
BMP — The New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual.
CAFRA PLANNING MAP — The geographic depiction of the boundaries for
coastal planning areas, CAFRA centers, CAFRA cores and CAFRA nodes
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:7-13.[Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
COMPACTION — An increase in soil bulk density.
CONSERVATION EASEMENT — An interest in land less than fee simple
absolute, stated in the form of a right, restriction, easement, covenant,
or condition, in any deed, will or other instrument, other than a lease,
executed by or on behalf of the person vested with a greater interest
therein, appropriate to retaining land or water areas predominantly in their
natural, scenic, open or wooded condition, or for conservation of suitable
habitat for plants or animals.
CONSERVATION RESTRICTION — An interest in land less than fee simple
absolute, stated in the form of a right, restriction, easement, covenant, or
condition, in any deed, will or other instrument, other than a lease, executed
by or on behalf of the owner of the land, appropriate to retaining land
or water areas predominantly in their natural, scenic or open or wooded
condition, or for conservation of soil or wildlife, or for outdoor recreation or
park use, or as suitable habitat for fish or wildlife, to forbid or limit any or
all:
Construction or placing of buildings, roads, signs, billboards or other
advertising, or other structures on or above the ground.
A.
Dumping or placing of soil or other substance or material as landfill, or
dumping or placing of trash, waste or unsightly or offensive materials.
B.
C. Removal or destruction of trees, shrubs or other vegetation.
Excavation, dredging or removal of loam, peat, gravel, soil, rock or
other mineral substance.
D.
Surface use except for purposes permitting the land or water area to
remain predominantly in its natural condition.
E.
Activities detrimental to drainage, flood control, water conservation,
erosion control or soil conservation, or fish and wildlife habitat
preservation.
F.
Other acts or uses detrimental to the retention of land or water areas
according to the purposes of any conservation or environmental laws or
regulations.
G.
§ 387-2 PENNS GROVE CODE § 387-2
1:312
CORE — A pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic uses serving
the surrounding municipality, generally including housing and access to
public transportation.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — Unless otherwise specified, the Salem
County Planning Board, or such other agency as may be designated by the
Salem County Board of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater
management plans and implementing ordinances, and the Salem County
Soil Conservation District.
DESIGNATED CENTER — A state development and redevelopment plan
center as designated by the State Planning Commission, such as urban,
regional, town, village, or hamlet.
DESIGN ENGINEER — A person professionally qualified and duly licensed
in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may include, but not
necessarily be limited to, development of project requirements, creation
and development of project design and preparation of drawings and
specifications.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels;
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or structure; any mining
excavation or landfill; any forestry or logging activities; and any use or
change in the use of any building or other structure, or land or extension
of use of land, by any person, for which permission is required under
the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. In the case of
development of agricultural lands, "development" means any activity that
requires a state permit; any activity reviewed by the County Agricultural
Board (CAB) and/or the State Agricultural Development Council (SADC),
and municipal review of any activity not exempted by the Right to Farm Act,
N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq.
DRAINAGE AREA — A geographic area within which stormwater,
sediments, or dissolved materials drain to a particular receiving water body
or to a particular point along a receiving water body.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CONSTRAINED AREAS — Areas where the physical
alteration of the land is in some way restricted, either through regulation,
easement, deed restriction or ownership, such as but not limited to
wetlands, floodplains, threatened and endangered species sites or
designated habitats, and parks and preserves. Habitats of endangered or
threatened species are identified using the NJDEP's Landscape Project as
approved by the NJDEP's Endangered and Nongame Species Program.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREA — An area or feature which is of
significant environmental value, including but not limited to stream
corridors, natural heritage priority sites, habitats of endangered or
threatened species, large areas of contiguous open space or upland forest,
steep slopes, and wellhead protection and groundwater recharge areas.
Habitats of endangered or threatened species are identified using the
NJDEP's Landscape Project as approved by the NJDEP's Endangered and
Nongame Species Program.
§ 387-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 387-2
1:313
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer of
material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
INFILTRATION — The process by which water seeps into the soil from
precipitation.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Any development (as defined herein) that
provides for ultimately disturbing one or more acres of land or increasing
impervious surface by 1/4 acre or more. Projects undertaken by any
government agency which meet the definition of "major development" but
which do not require approval under the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq., are also considered major development.
MUNICIPALITY — Any city, borough, town, township or village.
NJDEP — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
NODE — An area designated by the State Planning Commission
concentrating facilities and activities which are not organized in a compact
form.
NUTRIENT — A chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or
phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the development of
organisms.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, the Borough of Penns Grove, or political subdivision of this
state subject to municipal jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land Use
Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge, munitions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes, radioactive
substance (except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as
amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2011 et seq.), thermal waste, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal, agricultural, and
construction waste or runoff, or other residue discharged directly or
indirectly to the land, groundwaters or surface waters of the state, or
to a domestic treatment works. "Pollutant" includes both hazardous and
nonhazardous pollutants.
RECHARGE — The amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates into
the ground and is not evapotranspired.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is
being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water or
gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE — The lot or lots upon which a development is to occur or has
occurred.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin.
STATE DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN METROPOLITAN
PLANNING AREA (PA1) — An area delineated on the State Plan Policy Map
§ 387-2 PENNS GROVE CODE § 387-2
1:314
and adopted by the State Planning Commission that is intended to be the
focus for much of the state's future redevelopment and revitalization efforts.
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — The geographic application of the State
Development and Redevelopment Plan's goals and statewide policies and
the official map of these goals and policies.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, or is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or drainage facilities,
or conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — An excavation or embankment
and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A stormwater
management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a detention basin or
infiltration basin), retain water in a permanent pool (a retention basin), or
be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most constructed stormwater
wetlands).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Any structural or
nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program, or other
method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated
pollutants, or to induce or control the infiltration or groundwater recharge
of stormwater, or to eliminate illicit or illegal nonstormwater discharges
into stormwater conveyances.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE — Chapter 387 of the Code of
the Borough of Penns Grove.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — The water flow on the surface of the ground or
in storm sewers that results from precipitation.
TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — A flood hazard area which may be
influenced by stormwater runoff from inland areas but which is primarily
caused by the Atlantic Ocean.
TIME OF CONCENTRATION — The time required for runoff to travel from
the hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to the point of interest
within a watershed.
URBAN COORDINATING COUNCIL EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD
— A neighborhood given priority access to state resources through the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority.
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONE — A zone designated by the New Jersey
Enterprise Zone Authority pursuant to the New Jersey Urban Enterprise
Zones Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60 et seq.
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA — Previously developed portions of
areas:
Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) as the Metropolitan
Planning Area (PA1), designated centers, cores or nodes;
A.
B. Designated as CAFRA centers, cores or nodes;
§ 387-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 387-2
1:315
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries and all springs,
streams, wetlands, and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether
natural or artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or
subject to its jurisdiction.
WETLANDS or WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence
of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
commonly known as "hydrophytic vegetation."
§ 387-3. Design and performance standards for stormwater
management measures.
§ 387-4. Stormwater management requirements for major
development.
C. Designated as urban enterprises zones; and
Designated as Urban Coordinating Council empowerment
neighborhoods.
D.
A. Stormwater management measures for major development shall be
developed to meet the erosion control, groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality standards in
this chapter. To the maximum extent practicable, these standards shall
be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater management
strategies into the design. If these strategies alone are not sufficient to
meet these standards, structural stormwater management measures
necessary to meet these standards shall be incorporated into the
design.
B. The standards in this chapter are intended to minimize the impact of
stormwater runoff on water quality and water quantity in receiving
water bodies and maintain groundwater recharge. The standards do not
apply to the extent that alternative design and performance standards
are applicable under a regional stormwater management plan or water
quality management plan adopted in accordance with NJDEP rules.
C. Stormwater management measures shall be designed in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:21-7 unless otherwise required herein.
A. Each major development must include a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures in accordance with § 387-10 below
and Appendix D of the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual, as amended.
B. Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse impacts of
concentrated flow on environmentally constrained areas,
environmentally critical areas, or any habitat for threatened and
endangered species as documented in the NJDEP's Landscape Project
or Natural Heritage Database established under N.J.S.A. 13:1B-15.147
§ 387-2 PENNS GROVE CODE § 387-4
1:316
through 13:1B-15.150, particularly Helonias bullata (swamp pink) and/
or Clemmys muhlenbergi (bog turtle).
C. The following municipal, county, state, and federal linear development
projects, and linear development projects that have been approved by
the Board of Public Utilities, are exempt from the groundwater
recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
requirements of Subsections F and G:
(1) The construction of an underground utility line, provided that the
disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion;
(2) The construction of an aboveground utility line, provided that the
existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent
practicable; and
(3) The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk
or trail with a maximum width of 14 feet, provided that the access
is made of permeable material.
D. The Planning Board may grant a waiver from strict compliance with the
groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater
runoff quality requirements of Subsections F and G below for the
enlargement of an existing public roadway or railroad, or the
construction or enlargement of a public pedestrian access, provided
that all of the following conditions are met: [Amended 7-5-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-5]
(1) The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the
project that cannot be accomplished by any other means;
(2) The applicant demonstrates through an alternative analysis that,
through the use of nonstructural and structural stormwater
management strategies and measures, the option selected
complies with the requirements of Subsections F and G to the
maximum extent practicable;
(3) The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the requirements
of Subsections F and G, existing structures currently in use, such
as homes and buildings, would need to be condemned; and
(4) The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other
rights to areas, including the potential to obtain through
condemnation lands not falling under Subsection D(3) above,
within the upstream drainage area of the receiving stream that
would provide additional opportunities to mitigate the
requirements of Subsections F and G that were not achievable on
site.
E. Nonstructural stormwater management strategies.
(1) To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in Subsections F
and G shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater
§ 387-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 387-4
1:317
management strategies set forth in this subsection into the design.
The applicant shall identify the nonstructural measures
incorporated into the design of the project. If the applicant
contends that it is not feasible for engineering, environmental,
or safety reasons to incorporate any nonstructural stormwater
management measures identified in Subsection E(2) below into
the design of a particular project, the applicant shall identify the
strategy considered and provide a basis for the contention.
(2) Nonstructural stormwater management strategies incorporated
into site design shall:
(a) Protect environmentally constrained areas, environmentally
critical areas, and other areas that provide water quality
benefits or which are particularly susceptible to erosion and
sediment loss.
(b) Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect the
flow of runoff over impervious surfaces.
(c) Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation.
(d) Minimize the decrease in the time of concentration from preconstruction
to post-construction.
(e) Minimize land disturbance, including clearing and grading.
(f) Minimize soil compaction.
(g) Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages
retention and planting of native vegetation and minimizes the
use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides.
(h) Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas.
(i) Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the use or
exposure of pollutants at the site, in order to prevent or
minimize the release of those pollutants into stormwater
runoff. Such source controls include, but are not limited to:
[1] Site design features that help to prevent accumulation of
trash and debris in drainage systems, including features
that satisfy Subsection E(3) below;
[2] Site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash
and debris from drainage systems;
[3] Site design features that help to prevent and/or contain
spills or other harmful accumulations of pollutants at
industrial or commercial developments; and
§ 387-4 PENNS GROVE CODE § 387-4
1:318
[4] When establishing vegetation after land disturbance,
applying fertilizer in accordance with the requirements
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and implementing rules.
(3) Site design features identified under Subsection E(2)(i)[2] above
shall comply with the following standard to control passage of solid
and floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For purposes of
this subsection, "solid and floatable materials" means sediment,
debris, trash, and other floating, suspended, or settleable solids.
For exemptions to this standard see Subsection E(3)(c) below.
(a) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates
whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground
surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a storm
drain or surface water body under that grate:
[1] The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT)
bicycle-safe grate, as described in the NJDOT Bicycle
Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning and Design
Guidelines, as amended; or
[2] A different grate, if each individual clear space in that
grate has an area of no more than seven square inches, or
is no greater than 0.5 inch across the smallest dimension.
Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates
in grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening
portion) of combination inlets, grates on storm sewer
manholes, ditch grates, trench grates, and grates of spacer
bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground surfaces
include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields,
open channels, and stormwater basin floors.
(b) Whenever design engineers use a curb opening inlet, the clear
space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if
the curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an
area of no more than seven square inches or be no greater than
two inches across the smallest dimension.
(c) This standard does not apply:
[1] Where the Planning Board determines that this standard
would cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could
not practicably be overcome by using additional or larger
storm drain inlets that meet these standards;
[2] Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in Subsection G(1) are conveyed through any
device (e.g., end of pipe netting facility, manufactured
treatment device, or a catch basin hood) that is designed,
§ 387-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 387-4
1:319
at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable
materials that could not pass through one of the following:
[a] A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches
wide (this option does not apply for outfall netting
facilities); or
[b] A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch;
[3] Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the bars, to
the elevation of the water quality design storm as specified
in Subsection G(1); or
[4] Where the NJDEP determines, pursuant to the New Jersey
Register of Historic Places rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that
action to meet this standard is an undertaking that
constitutes an encroachment or will damage or destroy the
New Jersey Register listed historic property.
(4) Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater management
measure to meet the performance standards in Subsections F and
G below shall be dedicated to a government agency other than the
Borough of Penns Grove, subjected to a conservation restriction
filed with the Salem County Clerk's office, or subject to an
approved equivalent restriction that ensures that measure or an
equivalent stormwater management measure approved by the
Planning Board is maintained in perpetuity.
(5) Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management strategies is
available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in § 387-7 or found on the Department's website
at www.njstormwater.org.
F. Erosion control, groundwater recharge and runoff quantity standards.
(1) This subsection contains minimum design and performance
standards to control erosion, encourage and control infiltration and
groundwater recharge, and control stormwater runoff quantity
impacts of major development.
(a) The minimum design and performance standards for erosion
control are those established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and
implementing rules.
(b) The minimum design and performance standards for
groundwater recharge are as follows:
[1] The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and
factors for stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge
calculations at § 387-5, either:
§ 387-4 PENNS GROVE CODE § 387-4
1:320
[a] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the site and its stormwater management
measures maintain 100% of the average annual preconstruction
groundwater recharge volume for the
site; or
[b] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the increase of stormwater runoff volume
from pre-construction to post-construction for the
two-year storm is infiltrated.
[2] This groundwater recharge requirement does not apply to
projects with any urban redevelopment areas or to
projects that are subject to Subsection F(1)(b)[3] below.
[3] The following types of stormwater shall not be recharged:
[a] Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading. High
pollutant loading areas are areas in industrial and
commercial developments where solvents and/or
petroleum products are loaded/unloaded, stored, or
applied; areas where pesticides are loaded/unloaded
or stored; areas where hazardous materials are
expected to be present in greater than "reportable
quantities" as defined by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR
302.4, or any subsequent amendments thereto; areas
where recharge would be inconsistent with a NJDEP
approved remedial action work plan or landfill closure
plan; and areas with high risks for spills of toxic
materials, such as gas stations and vehicle
maintenance facilities; and
[b] Industrial stormwater exposed to source material.
"Source material" means any material(s) or machinery
located at an industrial facility that is directly or
indirectly related to process, manufacturing or other
industrial activities, which could be a source of
pollutants in any industrial stormwater discharge to
groundwater. Source materials include, but are not
limited to, raw materials; intermediate products; final
products; waste materials; by-products; industrial
machinery and fuels; and lubricants, solvents, and
detergents that are related to process, manufacturing,
or other industrial activities that are exposed to
stormwater.
[4] The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on
the groundwater table and design the site so as to avoid
adverse hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse hydraulic
impacts include, but are not limited to, exacerbating a
§ 387-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 387-4
1:321
naturally or seasonally high water table so as to cause
surficial ponding, flooding of basements, or interference
with the proper operation of subsurface sewage disposal
systems and other subsurface structures in the vicinity or
downgradient of the groundwater recharge area.
(c) In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the
design engineer shall, using the methods and procedures for
stormwater runoff calculations at § 387-5, complete one of the
following to the Board's satisfaction:
[1] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that for stormwater leaving the site, post-construction
runoff hydrographs for the two-, ten- and one-hundredyear
storm events do not exceed, at any point in time, the
pre-construction runoff hydrographs for the same storm
events.
[2] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that there is no increase, as compared to the preconstruction
condition, in the peak runoff rates of
stormwater leaving the site for the two-, ten- and onehundred-
year storm events and that the increased volume
or change in timing of stormwater runoff will not increase
flood damage at or downstream of the site. This analysis
shall include the analysis of impacts of existing land uses
and projected land uses assuming full development under
existing zoning and land use ordinances in the drainage
area.
[3] Design stormwater management measures so that the
post-construction peak runoff rates for the two-, ten-, and
one-hundred-year storm events are 50%, 75% and 80%,
respectively, of the pre-construction peak runoff rates. The
percentages apply only to the post-construction
stormwater runoff that is attributable to the portion of the
site on which the proposed development or project is to be
constructed. The percentages shall not be applied to postconstruction
stormwater runoff into tidal flood hazard
areas if the increased volume of stormwater runoff will not
increase flood damages below the point of discharge.
[4] In tidal flood hazard areas, stormwater runoff quantity
analysis in accordance with Subsection F(1)(c)[1], [2] and
[3] above shall only be applied if the increased volume of
stormwater runoff could increase flood damages below the
point of discharge.
(2) A minimum of two soil borings shall be required for each basin. For
each basin with surface area of 1/2 acre or more, borings will be
§ 387-4 PENNS GROVE CODE § 387-4
1:322
required at a rate of one soil boring per each 1/2 acre in addition
to the initial two borings per facility.
(3) Any application for a new agricultural development that meets the
definition of "major development" for purposes of this chapter shall
be submitted to the appropriate Soil Conservation District for
review and approval in accordance with the requirements of this
section, any applicable Soil Conservation District guidelines for
stormwater runoff quantity and erosion control, and the Rutgers
Farmland Management Best Management Practices. For the
purposes of this section, "agricultural development" means land
uses normally associated with the production of food, fiber and
livestock for sale. Such uses do not include the development of land
for the processing or sale of food and the manufacturing of
agriculturally related products.
G. Stormwater runoff quality standards.
(1) Stormwater management measures shall be designed to reduce the
post-construction load of total suspended solids (TSS) in
stormwater runoff by 80% of the anticipated load from the
developed site, expressed as an annual average. Stormwater
management measures shall only be required for water quality
control if an additional 1/4 acre of impervious surface is being
proposed on a development site. The requirement to reduce TSS
does not apply to any stormwater runoff in a discharge regulated
under a numeric effluent limitation for TSS imposed under the New
Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules,
N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or in a discharge specifically exempt under a
NJPDES permit from this requirement. The water quality design
storm is 1.25 inches of rainfall in two hours. Water quality
calculations shall take into account the distribution of rain from the
water quality design storm, as reflected in Table 1 of the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual Chapter 5,
as amended. The calculation of the volume of runoff may take into
account the implementation of nonstructural and structural
stormwater management measures.
(2) For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 4-1 in Chapter 4
of the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual,
as amended, presents the presumed removal rates for certain
BMPs designed in accordance with the New Jersey Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual. The BMP Manual and other
sources of technical guidance are listed in § 384-7 or found on the
Department's website at www.njstormwater.org. Total suspended
solids reduction shall be calculated based on the removal rates for
the BMPs in the aforementioned Table 4-1 as amended. Alternative
removal rates and methods of calculating removal rates may be
used if the design engineer provides documentation demonstrating
the capability of these alternative rates and methods to the review
agency. The applicant must provide a copy of any approved
§ 387-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 387-4
1:323
alternative rate or method of calculating the removal rate to the
NJDEP at the following address prior to signature of plans or any
clearing, grading, demolition, installation of improvements or other
construction-related activities at the site: Division of Watershed
Management, New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, P.O. Box 418, Trenton, New Jersey 08625-0418.
(3) If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the required
80% TSS reduction for a site, the applicant shall utilize the
following formula to calculate TSS reduction:
R = A + B - (A x B)/100
Where:
R = Total TSS percent load removal from application of
both BMPs.
A = The TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first
BMP.
B = The TSS percent removal rate applicable to the
second BMP.
(4) If there is more than one on-site drainage area, the 80% TSS
removal rate shall apply to each drainage area, unless the runoff
from the subareas converges on site, in which case the removal
rate can be demonstrated through a calculation using a weighted
average.
(5) Stormwater management measures shall also be designed
according to standards set forth in Subsections B and C above to
reduce, to the maximum extent feasible, the post-construction
nutrient load of the anticipated load from the developed site in
stormwater runoff generated from the water quality design storm.
In achieving reduction of nutrients to the maximum extent feasible,
the design of the site shall include nonstructural strategies and
structural measures that optimize nutrient removal while still
achieving the performance standards in Subsections F and G
above.
(6) Additional information and examples are contained in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, as
amended.
(7) In accordance with the definition of FW1 at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4,
stormwater management measures shall be designed to prevent
any increase in stormwater runoff to waters classified as FW1.
(8) Special water resource protection areas shall be established by the
applicant along all waters designated Category One at N.J.A.C.
7:9B, and perennial or intermittent streams that drain into or
upstream of the Category One waters as shown on the USGS
quadrangle maps or in the county soil surveys, within the
§ 387-4 PENNS GROVE CODE § 387-4
1:324
associated HUC14 drainage area. These areas shall be established
for the protection of water quality, aesthetic value, exceptional
ecological significance, exceptional recreational significance,
exceptional water supply significance, and exceptional fisheries
significance of those established Category One waters. These areas
shall be designated and protected as follows:
(a) The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water
resource protection area in accordance with one of the
following:
[1] A three-hundred-foot special water resource protection
area shall be provided by means of conservation
easements and conservation restrictions in favor of the
Borough on each side of the waterway, measured
perpendicular to the waterway from the top of the bank
outwards or from the center line of the waterway where
the bank is not defined, to preserve existing vegetation
and/or to promote the natural succession of new
vegetation.
[2] Encroachment within the designated special water
resource protection area under Subsection G(8)(a)[1]
above shall only be allowed where previous development
or disturbance has occurred (for example, active
agricultural use, parking area or maintained lawn area).
The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection
area will be maintained to the maximum extent
practicable. In no case shall the remaining special water
resource protection area be reduced to less than 150 feet
as measured perpendicular to the top of bank of the
waterway or center line of the waterway where the bank is
undefined. All encroachments proposed under this
subsection shall be subject to review and approval by the
NJDEP.
(b) All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow through
the special water resource protection area and shall comply
with the standard for off-site stability in the Standards for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey, established under
the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et
seq.
(c) If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through the
special water resource protection area cannot comply with the
standard for off-site stability in the Standards for Soil Erosion
and Sediment Control in New Jersey, established under the Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.,
then the stabilization measures in accordance with the
§ 387-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 387-4
1:325
§ 387-5. Calculation of stormwater runoff and groundwater
recharge.
requirements of the above standards may be placed within the
special water resource protection area, provided that:
[1] Stabilization measures shall not be placed within 150 feet
of the Category One waterway;
[2] Stormwater associated with discharges allowed by this
section shall achieve a 95% TSS post-construction removal
rate;
[3] Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no impact on
the receiving waterway;
[4] The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection
area will be maintained to the maximum extent
practicable;
[5] A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with the
appropriate NJDEP staff and Soil Conservation District
staff to identify necessary stabilization measures; and
[6] All encroachments proposed under this section shall be
subject to review and approval by the NJDEP.
(d) A stream corridor protection plan may be developed by a
regional stormwater management planning council as an
element of a regional stormwater management plan or by the
Borough through an adopted municipal stormwater
management plan. If a stream corridor protection plan for a
waterway subject to Subsection G(8) has been approved by the
NJDEP, then the provisions of the plan shall be the applicable
special water resource protection area requirements for that
waterway. A stream corridor protection plan for a waterway
subject to Subsection G(8) shall maintain or enhance the
current functional value and overall condition of the special
water resource protection area as defined in Subsection
G(8)(a)[1] above. In no case shall a stream corridor protection
plan allow the reduction of the special water resource
protection area to less than 150 feet as measured
perpendicular to the waterway subject to this subsection.
(e) Subsection G(8) does not apply to the construction of one
individual single-family dwelling that is not part of a larger
development on a lot receiving preliminary or final subdivision
approval on or before February 2, 2004, provided that the
construction begins on or before February 2, 2009.
§ 387-4 PENNS GROVE CODE § 387-5
1:326
A. Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the following:
(1) The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the
following methods:
(a) The United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) Natural
Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) methodology,
including the NRCS runoff equation and dimensionless unit
hydrograph, as described in the NRCS National Engineering
Handbook Section 4, Hydrology, and Technical Release 55, as
amended, Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds; or
(b) The rational method for peak flow and the modified rational
method for hydrograph computations.
(2) For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and groundwater
recharge, there is a presumption that the pre-construction
condition of a site or portion thereof is a wooded land use with good
hydrologic condition. The term "runoff coefficient" applies to both
the NRCS methodology at Subsection A(1)(a) and the rational and
modified rational methods at Subsection A(1)(b). A runoff
coefficient or a groundwater recharge land cover for an existing
condition may be used on all or a portion of the site if the design
engineer verifies that the hydrologic condition has existed on the
site or portion of the site for at least five years without interruption
prior to the time of application. If more than one land cover has
existed on the site during the five years immediately prior to the
time of application, the land cover with the lowest runoff potential
shall be used for the computations. In addition, there is the
presumption that the site is in good hydrologic condition (if the
land use type is pasture, lawn, or park), with good cover (if the land
use type is woods), or with good hydrologic condition and
conservation treatment (if the land use type is cultivation).
(3) In computing pre-construction stormwater runoff, the design
engineer shall account for all significant land features and
structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows, or
culverts, that may reduce pre-construction stormwater runoff rates
and volumes.
(4) In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the design
engineer shall consider the relative stormwater runoff rates and/or
volumes of pervious and impervious surfaces separately to
accurately compute the rates and volume of stormwater runoff
from the site. To calculate runoff from unconnected impervious
cover, urban impervious area modifications as described in the
NRCS Technical Release 55, Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds, and other methods may be employed.
(5) If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater management
measure is below the flood hazard design flood elevation as defined
at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the design engineer shall take into account the
§ 387-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 387-5
1:327
§ 387-6. Standards for structural stormwater management
measures.
effects of tailwater in the design of structural stormwater
management measures.
B. Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with the
following: the New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32, A Method
for Evaluating Groundwater Recharge Areas in New Jersey,
incorporated herein by reference, as amended and supplemented, and
information regarding the methodology is available from the New
Jersey Best Management Practices Manual or the New Jersey
Geological Survey, 29 Arctic Parkway, P.O. Box 427, Trenton, New
Jersey 08625-0427.
A. Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as
follows:
(1) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
meet the standards of § 387-4, Stormwater management
requirements for major development, and § 387-5, Calculation of
stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge, while taking into
account the existing site conditions, including for example
environmentally critical areas; wetlands; flood-prone areas; slopes;
depth to seasonal high-water table; soil type, permeability and
texture; and drainage area and drainage patterns.
(2) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and repairs, and
ensure proper functioning to meet the standards of § 387-4,
Stormwater management requirements for major development,
and § 387-5, Calculation of stormwater runoff and groundwater
recharge. Trash racks shall be installed at the intake to the outlet
structure as appropriate and shall have parallel bars with one-inch
spacing between the bars to the elevation of the water quality
design storm. For elevations higher than the water quality design
storm, the parallel bars at the outlet structure shall be spaced no
greater than 1/3 the width of the diameter of the orifice or 1/3 the
width of the weir, with a minimum spacing between bars of one
inch and a maximum spacing between bars of six inches. In
addition, the design of trash racks must comply with the
requirements of § 387-8B.
(3) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed,
constructed, and installed to be strong, durable, and corrosionresistant.
Measures that are consistent with the relevant portions
of the Residential Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3,
5:21-7.4, and 5:21-7.5, as amended, shall be deemed to meet this
requirement.
§ 387-5 PENNS GROVE CODE § 387-6
1:328
§ 387-7. Sources for technical guidance.
(4) At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management basin,
the orifice size shall be a minimum of 2 1/2 inches in diameter.
(5) Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the
minimum safety standards for stormwater management basins in
§ 387-8 below.
B. Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Other
stormwater management measures may be utilized provided the design
engineer demonstrates that the proposed measure and its design will
accomplish the required water quantity, groundwater recharge and
water quality design and performance standards established by § 387-4
of this chapter.
C. Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the requirements
of § 387-4 of this chapter, provided the pollutant removal rates are
verified by the New Jersey Corporation for Advanced Technology and
certified by the NJDEP.
D. A stormwater basin that serves more than one residential lot must be
located on a separate lot that is not used for residential purposes.
A. Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be
found in the documents listed at Subsection A(1) and (2) below, which
are available from Maps and Publications, New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, 428 East State Street, P.O. Box 420, Trenton,
New Jersey 08625.
(1) Guidelines for stormwater management measures are contained in
the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual,
as amended. Information is provided on stormwater management
measures such as bioretention systems, constructed stormwater
wetlands, dry wells, extended detention basins, infiltration
structures, manufactured treatment devices, pervious paving, sand
filters, vegetative filter strips, and wet ponds.
(2) The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual, as
amended.
B. Additional technical guidance for stormwater management measures
can be obtained from the following:
(1) The Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey
promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee and
incorporated into N.J.A.C. 2:90;
(2) The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service; and
(3) The Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)3.
§ 387-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 387-8
1:329
§ 387-8. Safety standards for stormwater management basins.
A. This section sets forth minimum requirements to protect public safety
through the proper design and operation of stormwater management
basins.
B. Requirements for trash racks, overflow grates and escape provisions.
(1) A trash rack is a device designed to catch trash and debris and
prevent the clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet from the stormwater
management basin to ensure proper functioning of the basin
outlets in accordance with the following:
(a) The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater than
six-inch spacing between the bars.
(b) The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely affect
the hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or structure.
(c) The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is not to
exceed 2.5 feet per second under the full range of stage and
discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the basis of the net
area of opening through the rack.
(d) The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be rigid,
durable, and corrosion-resistant and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per
square foot.
(2) An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the
overflow structure. If an outlet structure has an overflow grate,
such grate shall meet the following requirements:
(a) The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but
removable for emergencies and maintenance.
(b) The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two inches
across the smallest dimension.
(c) The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion-resistant and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per
square foot.
(3) For purposes of this Subsection B(3), "escape provisions" means
the permanent installation of ladders, steps, rungs, or other
features that provide easily accessible means of egress from
stormwater management basins. Stormwater management basins
shall include escape provisions as follows:
(a) If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure,
escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the structure.
§ 387-8 PENNS GROVE CODE § 387-8
1:330
§ 387-9. Requirements for major development stormwater plan.
The Planning Board may exempt a freestanding outlet
structure from this requirement pursuant to Subsection C
below.
(b) Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
stormwater management basins having a permanent pool of
water deeper than 2 1/2 feet. Such safety ledges shall be
comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four to six feet in
width. One step shall be located approximately 2 1/2 feet below
the permanent water surface, and the second step shall be
located one to 1 1/2 feet above the permanent water surface.
See the New Jersey Residential Site Improvement Standards
(RSIS), N.J.A.C. 5:21-1.1 et seq., for an illustration of safety
ledges in a stormwater management basin.
(c) In new stormwater management basins, the maximum interior
slope for an earthen dam, embankment, or berm shall not be
steeper than four horizontal to one vertical. A forty-two-inchhigh
wooden double split-rail fence or six-foot-high galvanized
chain-link fence, for purposes of delineation, must surround
any basin where there is a possibility of standing water of 30
inches or more.
C. Waiver or exemption from safety standards. A waiver or exemption from
the safety standards for stormwater management basins may be
granted only upon a written finding by the Planning Board that the
waiver or exemption will not constitute a threat to public safety.
D. Safety ledges in a new stormwater management basin shall comply with
the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual
Appendix D and this section, as amended.
A. Submission of major development stormwater plan.
(1) Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a development
subject to this chapter, the applicant shall submit all of the
information and materials required in the checklist for the site
development stormwater plan referred to in Subsection C below as
part of the submission of the applicant's application for subdivision,
site plan, or other development approval.
(2) The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the
standards set forth in this chapter.
(3) The applicant shall submit a minimum of four copies of the
materials listed in the checklist for site development stormwater
plans in accordance with Subsection C of this section.
B. The applicant's site development stormwater plan shall be reviewed as
a part of the subdivision, site plan or other development application
§ 387-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 387-9
1:331
§ 387-10. Maintenance and repair.
review process by the Planning Board or Borough official from whom
approval is sought. The Planning Board or Borough official shall consult
the engineer retained by the Planning and/or Borough to determine if
all of the checklist requirements have been satisfied and to determine
if the project meets the standards set forth in this chapter.
C. Checklist.
(1) Submission requirements. All applications for major development
must include completed Borough of Penns Grove ordinance
checklist and all information required therein.36
(2) Waiver from submission requirements. The Planning Board may, in
consultation with the Planning Board Engineer, waive submission
of any of the checklist submission requirements when appropriate
under the circumstances of a particular application if is determined
that granting such a waiver will not materially affect the
application review process.
A. Applicability. Projects subject to review as in § 387-1C of this chapter
shall comply with the requirements of Subsections B and C below.
B. General maintenance.
(1) The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the
structural and nonstructural stormwater management measures
incorporated into the design of a major development.
(2) The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventative
maintenance tasks and schedules; cost estimates, including
estimated cost of sediment, debris, or trash removal; and the name,
address, and telephone number of the person or persons
responsible for preventative and corrective maintenance (including
replacement). If the maintenance plan identifies an individual other
than the developer (for example, the present and future owners of
the property, a public agency or a homeowners' or lot owners'
association) as having the responsibility for maintenance, the plan
shall include documentation confirming such person's assumption
of or agreement to assume this responsibility and/or of the
developer's obligation to dedicate a stormwater management
facility to such person.
(3) Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or transferred
to the owner or tenant of an individual property in a residential
development or project, unless such owner or tenant owns or
leases the entire residential development or project.
36.Editor's Note: The checklist is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 387-9 PENNS GROVE CODE § 387-10
1:332
(4) If the person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above is not a public agency, the maintenance plan
and any future revisions based on Subsection B(7) below shall be
incorporated into easements and covenants to be recorded upon
the deed of record for each property on which the maintenance
described in the maintenance plan must be undertaken. The
Planning Board and/or the Borough may require that any such
easements and restrictions contain terms and conditions that will
carry out the purposes of this chapter on an ongoing basis at no
cost to the Borough. The Planning Board and/or the Borough may
require the responsible person to post and periodically renew
bonds or other guarantees to ensure that the purposes of this
chapter will be carried out at no cost to the Borough in the event of
any failure by the responsible person.
(5) Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to
maintain the function of the stormwater management measure,
including repairs or replacement to the structure; removal of
sediment, debris, or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow and
ice removal; fence repair or replacement; restoration of vegetation;
and repair or replacement of nonvegetated linings.
(6) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above shall maintain a detailed log providing a
quantitative and qualitative record of all preventative and
corrective maintenance for the structural stormwater management
measures incorporated into the design of the development,
including a record of all inspections and observations made during
the same, and copies of all maintenance-related work orders.
(7) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above shall evaluate the effectiveness of the
maintenance plan at least once per year and adjust the plan and the
deed as needed.
(8) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above shall retain and make available, upon
request by any public entity with administrative, health,
environmental, or safety authority over the site, the maintenance
plan and the documentation required by Subsection B(6) and (7)
above.
(9) The requirements of Subsection B(3) and (4) do not apply to
stormwater management facilities that are dedicated to and
accepted by the municipality or another governmental agency.
(10) In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a
danger to public safety or public health, or if it is in need of
maintenance or repair, the Borough may so notify the responsible
person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the responsible
person shall have 14 days to effect maintenance and repair of the
§ 387-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 387-10
1:333
§ 387-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person who erects, constructs, alters, repairs, converts, maintains or
uses any building, structure or land in violation of this chapter shall be
subject to a fine of $500 per day.
§ 387-12. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon the filing thereof with the Salem County
Planning Board and after final passage and publication in the manner
prescribed by law.
Chapter 390
STORMWATER POLLUTION CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Solid waste — See Ch. 382.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 387.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 400.
facility in a manner that is approved by the Borough Engineer or
his designee. The Borough, in its discretion, may extend the time
allowed for effecting maintenance and repair for good cause. If the
responsible person fails or refuses to perform such maintenance
and repair, the Borough or county may immediately proceed to do
so and thereafter bill the cost thereof to the responsible person, in
which event the responsible person must pay the full amount of the
bill and all related administrative costs within 14 days following the
issuance of such notification.
C. Nothing in this section shall preclude the municipality in which the
major development is located from requiring the posting of a
performance or maintenance guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.
§ 387-10 PENNS GROVE CODE § 387-12
1:334
ARTICLE I
Illicit Connection
[Adopted 2-7-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-3]
§ 390-1. Purpose. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
The purpose of this article is to prohibit illicit connections to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Borough of Penns Grove,
so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties
for failure to comply.
§ 390-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use
in the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When
not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number,
and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The
word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. The definitions
below are the same as or based on corresponding definitions in the New
Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C.
7:14A-1.2.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Waste and wastewater from humans or household
operations.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any physical or non-physical connection that
discharges domestic sewage, non-contact cooling water, process
wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater) to the
municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Borough of Penns
Grove, unless that discharge is authorized under a NJPDES permit other
than the Tier A Municipal Stormwater General Permit (NJPDES Permit
Number NJ0141852). Non-physical connections may include, but are not
limited to, leaks, flows, or overflows into the municipal separate storm
sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Non-domestic waste, including, but not limited to,
those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b), or (c) of the Federal
Clean Water Act [33 U.S.C. § 1317(a), (b), or (c)].
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough of Penns Grove or other
public body and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.[Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
NJPDES PERMIT — A permit issued by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
§ 390-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-2
1:335
NON-CONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used to reduce temperature for
the purpose cooling. Such waters do not come into direct contact with any
raw material, intermediate product (other than heat) or finished product.
Non-contact cooling water may however contain algaecides, or biocides to
control fouling of equipment such as heat exchangers, and/or corrosion
inhibitors.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Any water which, during manufacturing or
processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production
or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct,
or waste product. Process wastewater includes, but is not limited
to, leachate and cooling water other than non-contact cooling water.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 390-3. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged through an illicit
connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the
Borough of Penns Grove any domestic sewage, non-contact cooling water,
process wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater).
§ 390-4. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department and/or other
municipal officials of the Borough of Penns Grove.
§ 390-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.
§ 390-2 PENNS GROVE CODE § 390-5
1:336
ARTICLE II
Containerized Yard Waste
[Adopted 2-7-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-4]
§ 390-6. Purpose. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
The purpose of this article is to establish requirements for the proper
handling of yard waste in the Borough of Penns Grove, so as to protect
public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for failure to
comply.
§ 390-7. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
CONTAINERIZED — The placement of yard waste in a trash can, bucket,
bag, or other vessel, such as to prevent the yard waste from spilling or
blowing out into the street and coming into contact with stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive,
or other way, which is an existing state, county, or municipal roadway,
and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or
unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking areas, and other areas within the street lines.
YARD WASTE — Leaves and grass clippings.
§ 390-8. Prohibited conduct.
The owner or occupant of any property, or any employee or contractor
of such owner or occupant engaged to provide lawn care or landscaping
services, shall not sweep, rake, blow or otherwise place yard waste, unless
the yard waste is containerized, in the street. If yard waste that is not
containerized is placed in the street, the party responsible for placement of
yard waste must remove the yard waste from the street or said party shall
be deemed in violation of this article.
§ 390-9. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Police Department and
the local Board of Health of the Borough of Penns Grove.
§ 390-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-10
1:337
§ 390-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.
§ 390-10 PENNS GROVE CODE § 390-10
1:338
ARTICLE III
Yard Waste Collection Program
[Adopted 2-7-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-5]
§ 390-11. Purpose. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
The purpose of this article is to establish a yard waste collection and
disposal program in the Borough of Penns Grove, to protect public health,
safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for failure to comply.
§ 390-12. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
CONTAINERIZED — The placement of yard waste in a trash can, bucket,
bag, or other vessel, such as to prevent the yard waste from spilling or
blowing out into the street and coming into contact with stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive,
or other way, which is an existing state, county, or municipal roadway,
and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or
unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking areas, and other areas within the street lines.
YARD WASTE — Leaves and grass clippings.
§ 390-13. Prohibited conduct. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-5]
Sweeping, raking, blowing or otherwise placing yard waste that is not
containerized at the curb or along the street is only allowed during the
seven days prior to a scheduled and announced collection, and yard waste
shall not be placed closer than 10 feet to any storm drain inlet. Placement of
such yard waste at the curb or along the street at any other times or in any
other manner is a violation of this article. If such placement of yard waste
occurs, the party responsible for placement of yard waste must remove the
yard waste from the street or said party shall be deemed in violation of this
article.
§ 390-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-14
1:339
§ 390-14. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Police Department and
the local Board of Health of the Borough of Penns Grove.
§ 390-15. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.
§ 390-14 PENNS GROVE CODE § 390-15
1:340
ARTICLE IV
Pet Waste
[Adopted 2-7-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-6]
§ 390-16. Purpose. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
The purpose of this article is to establish requirements for the proper
disposal of pet solid waste in the Borough of Penns Grove, so as to protect
public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for failure to
comply.
§ 390-17. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
IMMEDIATE — That the pet solid waste is removed at once, without delay.
OWNER/KEEPER — Any person who shall possess, maintain, house or
harbor any pet or otherwise have custody of any pet, whether or not the
owner of such pet.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PET — A domesticated animal (other than a disability assistance animal)
kept for amusement or companionship.
PET SOLID WASTE — Waste matter expelled from the bowels of the pet;
excrement.
PROPER DISPOSAL — Placement in a designated waste receptacle, or other
suitable container, and discarded in a refuse container which is regularly
emptied by the municipality or some other refuse collector, or disposal into
a system designed to convey domestic sewage for proper treatment and
disposal.
§ 390-18. Requirement for disposal.
All pet owners and keepers are required to immediately and properly
dispose of their pet's solid waste deposited on any property, public or
private, not owned or possessed by that person.
§ 390-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-19
1:341
§ 390-19. Exemptions.
Any owner or keeper who requires the use of a disability assistance animal
shall be exempt from the provisions of this article while such animal is being
used for that purpose.
§ 390-20. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Police Department and
the local Board of Health of the Borough of Penns Grove.
§ 390-21. Violations and penalty.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.
§ 390-19 PENNS GROVE CODE § 390-21
1:342
ARTICLE V
Improper Disposal of Waste
[Adopted 2-7-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-7]
§ 390-22. Purpose. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the spilling, dumping, or disposal
of materials other than stormwater to the municipal separate storm sewer
system (MS4) operated by the Borough of Penns Grove, so as to protect
public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for failure to
comply.
§ 390-23. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough of Penns Grove or other
public body and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.[Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 390-24. Prohibited conduct.
The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other than stormwater to the
municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Borough of Penns
Grove is prohibited. The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other
than stormwater in such a manner as to cause the discharge of pollutants
to the municipal separate storm sewer system is also prohibited.
§ 390-25. Exceptions to prohibition. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-5]
Section 390-24 shall not apply to the following:
A. Waterline flushing and discharges from potable water sources.
§ 390-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-25
1:343
§ 390-26. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department and/or other
municipal officials of the Borough of Penns Grove.
§ 390-27. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who continues to be in violation of the provisions of this
article after being duly notified shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.
B. Uncontaminated groundwater (e.g., infiltration, crawl space or
basement sump pumps, foundation or footing drains, and rising
groundwaters).
C. Air-conditioning condensate (excluding contact and non-contact cooling
water).
D. Irrigation water (including landscape and lawn watering runoff).
E. Flows from springs, riparian habitats and wetlands, water reservoir
discharges and diverted stream flows.
F. Residential car washing water and residential swimming pool
discharges.
G. Sidewalk, driveway and street wash water.
H. Flows from fire-fighting activities.
I. Flows from rinsing of the following equipment with clean water: beach
maintenance equipment immediately following its use for its intended
purposes and equipment used in the application of salt and de-icing
materials immediately following salt and de-icing material applications.
Prior to rinsing with clean water, all residual salt and de-icing materials
must be removed from equipment and vehicles to the maximum extent
practicable using dry cleaning methods (e.g., shoveling and sweeping).
Recovered materials are to be returned to storage for reuse or properly
discarded. Rinsing of equipment, as noted in the above situation, is
limited to exterior, undercarriage, and exposed parts and does not
apply to engines or other enclosed machinery.
§ 390-25 PENNS GROVE CODE § 390-27
1:344
ARTICLE VI
Refuse Containers and Dumpsters
[Adopted 10-4-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-13]
§ 390-28. Purpose. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
The purpose of this article is to require dumpsters and other refuse
containers that are outdoors or exposed to stormwater to be covered at all
times and prohibit the spilling, dumping, leaking or otherwise discharging
of liquids, semiliquids or solids from the containers to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Borough of Penns Grove
and/or the waters of the state so as to protect public health, safety and
welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 390-29. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough of Penns Grove or other
public body and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.[Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
REFUSE CONTAINER — Any waste container that a person controls,
whether owned, leased, or operated, including dumpsters, trash cans,
garbage pails, and plastic trash bags.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries and all springs,
streams and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural or
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
§ 390-30. Prohibited conduct.
§ 390-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-30
1:345
§ 390-31. Exceptions to prohibition. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-5]
Section 390-30 shall not apply to the following:
§ 390-32. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Penns Grove Police Department and/or
the Code Enforcement Officer of the Borough of Penns Grove.
§ 390-33. Violations and penalties. [Added 7-5-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-5]
Any person(s) who continues to be in violation of the provisions of this
article after being duly notified shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.
A. Any person who controls, whether owned, leased or operated, a refuse
container or dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster is
covered at all times and shall prevent refuse from spilling out or
overflowing.
B. Any person who owns, leases or otherwise uses a refuse container or
dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster does not leak or
otherwise discharge liquids, semiliquids or solids to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Borough of Penns
Grove.
A. Permitted temporary demolition containers.
B. Litter receptacles (other than dumpsters or other bulk containers).
C. Individual homeowner trash and recycling containers.
D. Refuse containers at facilities authorized to discharge stormwater
under a valid NJPDES permit.
E. Large bulky items (e.g., furniture, bound carpet and padding, and white
goods placed curbside for pickup).
§ 390-30 PENNS GROVE CODE § 390-33
1:346
ARTICLE VII
Private Storm Drain Inlet Retrofitting
[Adopted 10-4-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-14]
§ 390-34. Purpose. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
The purpose of this article is to require the retrofitting of existing storm
drain inlets which are in direct contact with repaving, repairing,
reconstruction, or resurfacing or alterations of facilities on private property,
to prevent the discharge of solids and floatables (such as plastic bottles,
cans, food wrappers and other litter) to the municipal separate storm sewer
systems(s) operated by the Borough of Penns Grove, so as to protect public
health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to
comply.
§ 390-35. Definitions. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough of Penns Grove or other
public body and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORM DRAIN INLET — An opening in a storm drain used to collect
stormwater runoff and includes, but is not limited to, a grate inlet, curb
opening inlet, slotted inlet, and combination inlet.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries and all springs,
streams and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural or
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
§ 390-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-36
1:347
§ 390-36. Prohibited conduct.
No person in control of private property (except a residential lot with one
single-family house) shall authorize the repaving, repairing (excluding the
repair of individual potholes), resurfacing (including top coating or chip
sealing with asphalt emulsion or a thin base of hot bitumen), reconstructing
or altering any surface that is in direct contact with an existing storm drain
inlet on that property unless the storm drain inlet either:
§ 390-37. Design standard.
Storm drain inlets identified in § 390-36 above shall comply with the
following standard to control passage of solid and floatable materials
through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this section, "solid and floatable
materials" means sediment, debris, trash, and other floating, suspended, or
settleable solids. For exemptions to this standard, see Subsection C below.
A. Already meets the design standard below to control passage of solid
and floatable materials; or
B. Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in § 390-37 below prior
to the completion of the project.
A. Grates.
(1) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever
they use a grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect
stormwater from that surface into a storm drain or surface water
body under that grate:
(a) The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT)
bicycle-safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the
NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning
and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
(b) A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate
has an area of no more than seven square inches, or is no
greater than 0.5 inch across the smallest dimension.
(2) Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates in grate
inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening portion) of combination
inlets, grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates,
and grates of spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground
surfaces include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open
channels, and stormwater basin floors.
B. Whenever design engineers use a curb opening inlet, the clear space in
that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if the curb opening
has two or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no more than seven
square inches, or be no greater than two inches across the smallest
dimension.
§ 390-36 PENNS GROVE CODE § 390-37
1:348
§ 390-38. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Penns Grove Police Department and/or
the Code Enforcement Officer of the Borough of Penns Grove.
§ 390-39. Violations and penalties. [Added 7-5-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-5]
Any person(s) who continues to be in violation of the provisions of this
article after being duly notified shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.
C. This standard does not apply:
(1) Where the Municipal Engineer agrees that this standard would
cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could not practicably
be overcome by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that
meet these standards;
(2) Where flows are conveyed through any device (e.g., end of pipe
netting facility, manufactured treatment device, or a catch basin
hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all
solid and floatable materials that could not pass through one of the
following:
(a) A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches wide
(this option does not apply for outfall netting facilities); or
(b) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch;
(3) Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars; or
(4) Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places
Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet this standard is an
undertaking that constitutes an encroachment or will damage or
destroy the New Jersey Register listed historic property.
§ 390-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-39
1:349
Chapter 395
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public Works Department — See Ch. 124.
Bicycles and play vehicles — See Ch. 192.
Brush, grass, weeds and debris — See Ch.
198.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 203.
Littering, dumping and outdoor
storage — See Ch. 298.
Parades and assemblies — See Ch. 324.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 347.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 432.
§ 390-39 PENNS GROVE CODE § 390-39
1:350
ARTICLE I
Maintenance of Sidewalks, Curbs and Gutters
[Adopted as Art. 1 of Ch. 22 of the 1968 Revised Ordinances (Ch.
189, Art. I, of the 1986 Code)]
§ 395-1. Responsibility of property owner.
All existing sidewalks, curbs or gutters that have been constructed on
streets in the Borough shall be maintained by the property owner in a
smooth and safe condition.
§ 395-2. Notice of poor or unsafe condition. [Amended 7-5-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-5]
If the Streets, Buildings and Grounds Committee or Borough Engineer shall
determine that sidewalks, curbs or gutters abutting any property are in
a poor or unsafe condition, the property owner shall be notified by the
Borough Engineer.
§ 395-3. Contents of notice.
The notice referred to in § 395-2 shall contain a description of the property,
a description of the repairs to be made and a statement that, unless the
owner or owners complete the same within 30 days after service thereof,
the municipality will undertake to make the repairs at the expense of the
owners.
§ 395-4. Failure to make repairs; costs to become lien.
After the property owner fails to make the repairs specified in the notice
set forth in § 395-2 within the thirty-day period, the repairs shall be made
by the municipality and the cost thereof assessed against the property as a
municipal lien.
§ 395-5. Liability of property owner.
Nothing in the foregoing sections shall remove the liability of the property
owner to maintain sidewalks, curbs or gutters in a safe condition.
§ 395-6. Supervision of work.
All work done under the foregoing provisions shall be under the supervision
of the Borough Engineer.
§ 395-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 395-6
1:351

ARTICLE II
New Construction and Reconstruction
[Adopted as Art. 2 of Ch. 22 of the 1968 Revised Ordinances (Ch.
189, Art. II, of the 1986 Code)]
§ 395-7. Concrete specifications. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-5]
All materials used in the construction of concrete of any kind shall meet
the requirements of the specifications governing materials of the State
Department of Transportation and be approved by the Borough Engineer.
§ 395-8. Concrete mix.
§ 395-9. Concrete curing.
The concrete shall be placed in the forms to make a monolithic slab, that is,
the same mixture throughout. The forms may be stripped in 24 hours and
then the concrete shall be kept moist for at least three days, with five days
advised.
§ 395-10. Combination curb and gutters.
The dimensions of combination curb and gutters shall be six inches at the
top of the curb with the face of the curb on a 1 1/2 inch batter, six inches
deep to the gutter and 14 inches deep in the back. The gutter shall be eight
inches thick and extend 24 inches from the back of the curb. Corners at
curb intersections are to be rounded with a curve of not less than 12 feet
radius for sidewalks which are nine and 10 feet in width, and for sidewalks
eight feet in width, a curve of not less than 10 feet radius, and for sidewalks
six feet in width, a curve of not less than eight feet radius shall be used.
A. The concrete shall be made with a one-to-two-to-three mix that is one
part of portland cement; two parts fine aggregate, washed concrete
sand; and three parts coarse aggregate, three-fourths-inch traprock or
washed gravel. The concrete, when machine mixed, shall be mixed one
to 1 1/2 minutes. Only sufficient water shall be used to make a thick
pasty mixture after the finish of the mixing, with a slump not less than
that required by the state highway specifications for concrete paving.
The concrete, when placed, shall be thoroughly spaded and tamped into
forms in layers of not more than four or five inches.
B. Concrete for curbs, gutters and sidewalks shall have a compressive
strength of 3,000 pounds per square inch after a twenty-eight-day
curing period.
C. Should there be any question as to the concrete mix or strength, the
Borough Engineer shall make test cores from the concrete as placed in
the forms, and if, after test is made, the concrete fails to meet the
strength test, the owner shall have such concrete work removed as
hereinafter specified.
§ 395-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 395-11
1:353
§ 395-11. Separate curbs.
Should a separate curb be installed, the dimensions for a separate concrete
curb shall be six inches wide at the top and 12 inches at the bottom, and the
depth of the curb shall be 24 inches.
§ 395-12. Forms.
The forms for the concrete shall be of clean lumber, not less than two inches
thick, or standard metal forms, except on curves where flexible strips may
be used. They shall be set true to grade and line and oiled on the surface
which comes in contact with the concrete.
§ 395-13. Expansion joints. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
Expansion joints shall be constructed every 20 feet and placed across
the curb and gutter the full width of the concrete. The joint shall be of
bituminized felt or sheets of solid bitumen, such as is used in standard
pavement expansion joints, and shall meet the requirements of the State
Department of Transportation and be approved by the Borough Engineer,
and it shall be not less than 1/2 inch in thickness. Where sidewalks abut
curbs or copings, they shall be separated by an expansion joint of not less
than one-half-inch thickness and of the same depth as the abutting sidewalk
of the same specifications as called for above.
§ 395-14. Sidewalks.
All sidewalks shall be at least four inches thick and shall contain the
same mix as is required for curb and gutters, except driveways hereinafter
provided for. Sidewalks shall be installed not less than six feet in width,
where possible, starting from back of the curb.
§ 395-15. Driveways.
All driveways shall be at least six inches thick and shall be constructed of
the same ingredients and proportions as that required for curbs and gutters
and sidewalks. The curb on driveways shall rise two inches above the gutter
at the gutter line.
§ 395-16. Permits and certificates.
All persons shall make written application to the Borough Clerk of Penns
Grove before constructing any concrete work, curb, gutter, sidewalk and/
or coping in the streets or roads of the Borough, stating location and
approximate length, and the Borough Clerk shall issue a permit therefor,
said permit to be kept on the job during construction. No concrete work,
curb, gutter, sidewalk and/or coping shall be constructed in the streets or
roads of the Borough until lines and grades have been provided by the
Borough Engineer, and such work shall not be started until the person
or persons installing said concrete work shall be given a certificate from
the Borough Engineer showing that said lines and grades have been given
§ 395-11 PENNS GROVE CODE § 395-16
1:354
him and permit granted by the Borough Clerk. Any person installing said
concrete work shall provide a certificate that he has constructed the
concrete work in strict conformity with the above specifications and shall
follow the lines and grades provided by the Borough Engineer.
§ 395-17. Rebate for installation of curbs and gutters. [Amended
6-2-1981 by Ord. No. 81-5; 11-1-1983 by Ord. No. 83-9]
Upon the installation of curbs and gutters, in accordance with the
specifications and procedures as provided for by ordinance of the Borough,
the Borough shall participate in the costs thereof to an amount not to
exceed $3 per linear foot for the installation of combination curbs and
gutters. Said Borough participation shall be limited to those instances in
which a curb and gutter is installed where a curb and gutter did not exist
previously or where the Borough directs that a curb and gutter be installed.
§ 395-18. Rebate for installation of sidewalks. [Amended 6-2-1981
by Ord. No. 81-5; 11-1-1983 by Ord. No. 83-9]
Upon the installation of sidewalks, in accordance with the specifications and
procedures as provided for by ordinance of the Borough, the Borough shall
participate in the costs thereof to an amount not to exceed $1.50 per square
foot, limited to a maximum of six feet in width. Said Borough participation
shall be limited to those instances in which a sidewalk is installed where
a sidewalk did not exist previously or where the Borough directs that a
sidewalk be installed.
§ 395-19. Persons entitled to rebate.
The participation provided for herein shall be paid to the owner making
such installation of combination curbs and gutters and sidewalks or to his
contractor, upon proof that said owner has received credit therefor, in an
amount not to exceed the amounts above stated.
§ 395-20. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-17-1986 by Ord. No.
86-5]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to
a penalty of not more than 90 days in the county jail or a fine not exceeding
$1,000 or both and shall remove any or all of the concrete work installed
not in accordance with the above specifications within 10 days as herein set
forth, and each day after such 10 days that the owner fails to remove the
same shall be considered as a separate offense.
§ 395-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 395-20
1:355

ARTICLE III
Snow Removal From Sidewalks
[Adopted as Art. 3 of Ch. 22 of the 1968 Revised Ordinances (Ch.
189, Art. III, of the 1986 Code)]
§ 395-21. Responsibility of owner; time limit.
The owner or owners, occupant or occupants of premises and lands abutting
or bordering upon any street, avenue or highway in the Borough are hereby
required to remove all ice or snow from the sidewalks of such street, avenue
or highway within 12 hours of daylight after the same shall be formed or
fallen thereon.
§ 395-22. Failure to remove. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-5]
If the owner or owners, occupant or occupants of the premises and lands
abutting or bordering upon said sidewalks shall neglect, fail or refuse to
comply with the provisions of § 395-21 of this article, then and in that case
the ice and snow may be removed by the Streets, Buildings and Grounds
Committee under the direction of the Mayor and Council, and the costs
thereof shall be certified by the Chairman of the Streets, Buildings and
Grounds Committee to the Assessor of Taxes of said Borough and shall
thereupon become and be a lien upon said premises and lands and shall be
added to and collected with and in the same manner as the taxes next to be
assessed and levied upon such premises and lands.
§ 395-23. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-5]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall
be punishable by one or more of the following: imprisonment in the county
jail for a term not exceeding 90 days, a fine not exceeding $2,000, or a
period of community service not exceeding 90 days. Each day that the
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 395-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 395-23
1:357

ARTICLE IV
Obstructions
[Adopted as Art. 4 of Ch. 22 of the 1968 Revised Ordinances (Ch.
189, Art. IV, of the 1986 Code)]
§ 395-24. Permission required.
No person shall encumber or obstruct any street or public place with
any article or thing whatsoever without first having obtained permission
therefor from the Mayor and Council.
§ 395-25. Temporary display of wares and goods.
No person shall use any portion of the sidewalk for display of wares and
goods without the permission of the Council. The Council, in its discretion,
may issue a permit to a property owner to use a portion of the sidewalk for
the temporary display of wares and goods.
§ 395-26. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-17-1986 by Ord. No.
86-5; 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall
be punishable by one or more of the following: imprisonment in the county
jail for a term not exceeding 90 days, a fine not exceeding $2,000, or a
period of community service not exceeding 90 days. Each day that the
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 395-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 395-26
1:359

ARTICLE V
Street Openings
[Adopted as Art. 3 of Ch. 23 of the 1968 Revised Ordinances;
amended in its entirety 6-4-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-6 (Ch. 189, Art.
V, of the 1986 Code)]
§ 395-27. Prerequisites to opening streets.
No person, firm, partnership or corporation shall open or dig a trench in
any public road, street, highway or sidewalk of this Borough without having
first:
§ 395-28. Permit required to open right-of-way areas.
No person, firm or corporation shall direct or cause any employee, agent or
contractor of such person, firm, partnership or corporation to open or dig
a trench in any public road, street, sidewalk or right-of-way until a written
permit for such opening or trench has been issued by the Borough.
A. Made a written application therefor to the Borough of Penns Grove in
the County of Salem on forms to be provided by the Borough and
supplied a map or sketch of the project to the Borough.
B. Paid the proper fee and escrow to said Borough for such opening or
trench, in the amount specified by § 395-31.
C. Provided the Borough cash, a letter of credit or surety company bond,
in the amount specified by § 395-30, to guarantee that the opening or
trench made by the permittee will be properly closed. Upon completion
of the work in a satisfactory manner, the performance bond or cash will
be released in return for a maintenance bond or cash to guarantee that
the road, street or highway over the opening or trench will remain in
good condition for at least one year after the permanent closing by the
permittee. The minimum amount of each maintenance bond shall be
25% of the amount of the performance bond but shall not be less than
$50. A utility company may, in lieu of giving a separate performance
bond and separate maintenance bond on each project, keep in
continuing effect and posted with the Borough Clerk a combination
performance and maintenance bond or letter of credit for $10,000 by
the permittee and a surety company licensed to do business in New
Jersey, which bond shall guarantee both performance and maintenance
by the utility company in regard to street openings as required by this
article and shall be approved as to form by the Borough Solicitor.
D. Received from the Borough a written permit for the specific opening or
trench.
§ 395-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 395-29
1:361
§ 395-29. Permittee's responsibilities; construction standards.
Each permittee shall accomplish each of the following items with respect
to each opening or trench for which the permittee is responsible. The
permittee shall:
A. Have the trench or opening dug within 60 days after the permit
aforesaid is granted.
B. Have the material which is taken from the opening or trench placed so
as not to interfere with public use of the roadway and/or sidewalk
areas.
C. Have proper and ample guards, barricades, signs and lights maintained
on the site to sufficiently warn users of the road, street or highway of
the dangers attendant to the project, from the time the excavation is
begun until the time the opening or trench is completely restored and
completely reopened to public travel. The contractor is required to
perform work and traffic control in accordance with New Jersey
Department of Transportation (NJDOT) standards and the Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways, United
States Department of Transportation.
D. Assume full liability for any and all injuries caused by the negligence of
the permittee or the employees or agents of the permittee in
constructing such opening or trench, as well as in its maintenance or
closing.
E. Keep said opening or trench open a minimum period of time to
accomplish the purpose of the permittee and close such opening or
trench with semipermanent materials immediately thereafter. Said
period shall not exceed 30 days.
F. Comply with the following standards hereby adopted in this Borough
for such openings and trenches in public roads, streets and highways:
(1) Protection for traveling public. The permittee shall keep such
opening or trench properly guarded and, at night, have lights
placed thereat and, in doing the work, interfere as little as possible
with the travel along the road and open no greater part of the road
at any time than shall be allowed by the Borough Engineer.
(2) Protection from suits. The permittee shall also save harmless said
Borough of Penns Grove, its officers and servants from and against
any loss, injury or damage resulting from any negligence or fault of
the permittee, his agents or servants in connection with the
performance of the work covered by the permit.
(3) Time limit. The opening or trench shall be backfilled and
semipermanently patched immediately, and the pavement shall be
permanently restored within 60 days. In case the work has not been
completed before the day of expiration, as shown on the permit,
§ 395-29 PENNS GROVE CODE § 395-29
1:362
and the permittee has not requested an extension of time, the
Borough Council may take steps to restore the trench and replace
a permanent pavement over the opening for which the permit
has been issued, and if any extension of time beyond said date is
needed for the completion of the work, a new application must be
filed, if required by the Borough Engineer.
(4) Maintenance. The restoration of the opening or trench shall be
maintained by the permittee for one year after completion.
(5) Excavation.
(a) The permittee shall give a forty-eight-hour notice to the
Borough Clerk and Engineer or their duly authorized assistant
prior to making an opening, except in case of emergency.
(b) No excavation work may commence until all existing utilities
underground are marked out in accordance with the
Underground Facilities Protection Act, better known as the
"One-Call Law," established in October 1994.37 No opening
shall be commenced on a Saturday, Sunday or holiday, except
in case of emergency.
(c) On a bituminous-surface-treated road, the edges of the
opening shall be saw cut straight through the bituminous
surface before the trench is excavated.
(d) The work shall be so conducted as not to interfere with the
water, sewer or other utility mains or any connections with
buildings until permission of the proper authorities shall have
been obtained. No excavation which will damage trees shall be
made without the approval of the Borough Engineer.
(6) Backfilling. The permittee shall completely backfill the excavation
and replace as great a portion as possible of the material
excavated, compacting it by using mechanical tamping equipment,
and supply additional material when there is a deficiency.
Whenever the Borough Engineer or his duly authorized
representative shall deem the material unsatisfactory for backfill,
the permittee shall backfill the trench with select backfill material,
Zone 3, compacted, and shall remove all excess material from the
premises. The material shall be placed in layers not exceeding six
inches in thickness, moistened where and as directed, and each
layer mechanically tamped until thoroughly compacted.
(7) Restoration of surface paving and surface paving foundation. After
the backfilling of the opening or trench has been completed, as
above specified, the restoration of the pavement shall be governed
by the following applicable rules:
37.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 48:2-73 et seq.
§ 395-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 395-29
1:363
§ 395-30. Bond; guarantee.
(a) In the case of any opening or trench in the earth shoulder, the
permittee shall restore the top four inches of the trench or
opening with topsoil with sufficient organic material capable of
supporting the growth of grass and shall fertilize, seed and
mulch the surface.
(b) In the case of a gravel pavement, the permittee shall fill the top
12 inches of the excavated trench or opening with compacted,
state-approved I-5 road gravel.
(c) In the case of a penetration macadam road which consists of
broken stone of various sizes, the permittee may salvage the
broken stone and replace it in the top of the trench similar to
the original pavement and cover it with two inches of hot mix
asphalt (HMA).
(d) In the case of a gravel-based bituminous concrete road, the
permittee shall restore the surface with six inches of
compacted, state-approved I-5 road gravel covered with two
inches of hot mix asphalt base, Mix 19M64, and two inches of
HMA, Mix 9.5M64, top pavement or surface and base similar to
existing road, whichever is greater.
(e) In the case of a bituminous-treated gravel road, the permittee
shall restore the surface with 12 inches of compacted, stateapproved
I-5 gravel covered with two inches of HMA, Mix
9.5M64.
(f) In the case of a concrete surface, the permittee shall construct
a concrete foundation and shall restore the reinforcement and
the concrete pavement as directed by the Borough Engineer.
(g) In the case of any special condition, the permittee shall restore
the trench or opening as directed by the Borough Engineer.
(h) In any case, if the Borough is required to restore the pavement,
the final charges, based on the schedule of costs, shall be billed
to the permittee on the completion of the work by the Borough.
A. Each applicant for a permit for such opening or trench shall post cash,
letter of credit or surety company bond with the Borough to cover the
estimated costs of closing the particular opening or trench for which
the application is being made, according to the Borough Engineer.
B. Each such letter of credit, surety bond or cash shall be executed by the
permittee as principal therein. The surety company shall be the surety
therein, which surety company shall be one licensed to do business in
the State of New Jersey.
§ 395-29 PENNS GROVE CODE § 395-30
1:364
§ 395-31. Permits fees and escrow.
§ 395-32. Escrow account for public utility.
C. Upon completion of the project by the permittee and the restoration of
the public road, street, highway or sidewalk, in accordance with this
article, the permittee shall receive back his performance guarantee
upon proper written application therefor and upon approval thereof by
the Borough Engineer and upon posting of the maintenance bond, letter
of credit or cash described in § 395-27C.
A. Each applicant for a permit shall pay a fee of $100 for such permit and
$250 for the permit review by the Borough Engineer. Said permit fee
shall be nonrefundable and shall be utilized to defer the administrative
costs of the Borough.
B. In addition to the fee set forth herein, each applicant shall post an
inspection escrow with the Borough Chief Financial Officer. Said
escrow shall be in an amount determined as follows: the sum of $500
plus $2 per square/linear foot of surface opened in concrete or
bituminous surface or $500 plus $1 per square foot of surface opened in
earthen surfaces. Said escrow account shall be utilized to pay all
professional services which shall be required in order to administer this
article as it affects the proposed street/sidewalk opening, including
engineering, legal and other expenses connected with the application.
Sums not utilized shall be returned to the applicant once permanent
paving has been in place for one year and is deemed in satisfactory
condition by the Borough Engineer and release of the maintenance
bond required pursuant to § 395-27C. If the applicant shall post such
escrow but not proceed with the street opening as anticipated, the
escrow shall be returned, less any charges made against said escrow,
upon the abandonment or expiration of the permit.
C. If the Borough Engineer determines that the escrow fund, as posted by
the applicant, is insufficient to pay for engineering, legal and other
expenses, then the applicant shall be required, upon written notice, to
provide such funds as the Borough Engineer shall determine to be
necessary to pay said costs. Upon notification, in writing, the applicant
shall post said amounts within five business days. Failure to post the
requested escrow shall result in the revocation of the permit.
D. The fee and escrow required under the provisions of this section shall
accompany the application made when it is initially filed with the
Borough or its representative.
A. "Public utility," as used in this article, shall mean any public or quasipublic
agency or entity under the jurisdiction of the Board of Public
Utilities. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
B. In order to satisfy the escrow requirements which are otherwise stated
in § 395-31B, a public utility may post an escrow with the Borough Chief
§ 395-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 395-32
1:365
§ 395-33. Duties of Borough Engineer.
Unless otherwise directed by the Borough Council, the Borough Engineer
shall be the agent and representative of this Borough to:
Financial Officer in the amount of $1,000 for repair or installation
of services. Said escrow account shall be utilized to pay for all
professional services which shall be required to administer this article
as it affects the proposed street opening.
C. Said escrow shall be administered by the Borough Chief Financial
Officer as follows: Whenever engineering, legal or other services are
rendered in connection with an application made by the public utility,
said expenses shall be paid from the escrow posted by the public utility.
Notice of such payment shall then be provided, in writing, to the public
utility. Said notice shall advise the public utility as to the service
rendered, the date the service was rendered and the location of the
street opening. The public utility shall then reimburse the escrow in an
amount equal to the expenses paid from the escrow. Said
reimbursement shall be made within 30 days of the date that notice is
provided to the public utility.
D. In the event that a public utility does not post an escrow of $1,000 in
accordance with this section, the public utility shall be required to
abide by the provisions of § 395-31B, C and D. If the public utility fails
to make reimbursement in accordance with Subsection C of this section
in a timely fashion, notice of such failure shall be provided to the public
utility, and, thereafter, the public utility shall be required to abide by the
provisions of § 395-31B, C and D.
E. In the event that there shall be a dispute between the Borough and the
public utility as to the validity of any charge or expense paid from the
escrow established under this section, notice of such must be provided
by the public utility to the Borough Chief Financial Officer within 30
days of the date that the public utility receives notice of the charge or
expense which is disputed. Any dispute shall be resolved by the
Borough Council in its sole discretion.
F. In the case of utility main replacements or extensions, the applicant
shall post an escrow with the Borough Treasurer in the amount of 3% of
the approved cost of construction. Said escrow account shall be utilized
to pay for all professional services which shall be required in order to
administer this article of the Borough of Penns Grove Code as it affects
the proposed street/sidewalk opening, including engineering, legal and
other expenses connected with the application. The applicant shall pay
the permit fee and application by two separate checks to the Borough.
A. Review and approve road opening applications.
B. Inspect the sites of the proposed openings or trenches.
§ 395-32 PENNS GROVE CODE § 395-33
1:366
§ 395-34. Responsibility for damages.
Nothing in this article shall be construed by any permittee or other person
to absolve any permittee or his employees, agents or contractors of any
responsibility for any damage done to any person or property in opening or
digging a trench in any public road, street or highway.
§ 395-35. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-5]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall
be punishable by one or more of the following: imprisonment in the county
jail for a term not exceeding 90 days, a fine not exceeding $2,000, or a
period of community service not exceeding 90 days. The continuation of
such violation for each successive day shall constitute a separate offense,
and the person or persons or entities allowing or permitting the
continuation of the violation may be punished for each separate offense.
C. Inspect openings or trenches, warning guards, barricades, signs and
lights maintained or to be maintained at the respective sites by the
permittee.
D. Inspect the closing of openings or trenches and the restoration of public
roads, streets and highways.
E. Notify the permittee and the Borough Council of any failure, refusal or
neglect on the part of the permittee or his employees or representatives
to comply herewith.
F. Inspect the trench opening at the end of the maintenance period, report
any discrepancies, coordinate with the permittee to address
discrepancies and make recommendation to release the bond/
guarantee upon proper completion of the work.
G. Administer the provisions of this article for and on behalf and in the
name of this Borough, under the direction of and for the Borough
Council.
§ 395-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 395-35
1:367

ARTICLE VI
Sports Equipment in Streets
[Adopted 6-4-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-3]
§ 395-36. Basketball nets and apparatus.
The existence of basketball nets and/or apparatus extending into the street
from the curb will now be prohibited.
§ 395-37. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-5]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall
be punishable by one or more of the following: imprisonment in the county
jail for a term not exceeding 90 days, a fine not exceeding $2,000, or a
period of community service not exceeding 90 days. A violation of this
article will result in a fine of no more than $150 for the first offense.
§ 395-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 395-37
1:369
Chapter 400
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use procedures and fees — See Ch. 85.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 203.
Certificates of occupancy — See Ch. 213.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 223.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 252.
Site plan review — See Ch. 375.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 387.
Stormwater pollution control — See Ch. 390.
Zoning — See Ch. 450.
§ 400-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish rules, regulations, standards and
procedures for approval of subdivisions of land to promote and ensure:
A. Conformity with the Map Filing Law (N.J.S.A. 46:26B-1 et seq.).
B. Consistency of the layout or arrangement of the subdivision with the
requirements of Chapter 450, Zoning, of the Borough Code.
C. Streets in the subdivision of sufficient width and suitable grade and
suitably located to accommodate prospective traffic and to provide
access for fire-fighting and emergency equipment to buildings and
coordinated so as to compose a convenient system consistent with the
Official Map, if any, and the circulation element of the Master Plan, if
any, and so oriented as to permit, consistent with the reasonable
utilization of land, the buildings constructed thereon to maximize solar
gain, provided that no street of a width greater than 50 feet within the
right-of-way lines shall be required unless said street constitutes an
extension of an existing street of the greater width, or already has been
shown on the Master Plan at the greater width, or already has been
shown in greater width on the Official Map, subject to the New Jersey
Residential Site Improvement Standards.
D. Adequate water supply, drainage, shade trees, sewerage facilities and
other utilities necessary for essential services to residents and
occupants.
E. Suitable size, shape and location for any area reserved for public use
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-44.
F. Reservation pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-43 of any open space to be set
aside for use and benefit of the residents of planned development
resulting from the application of standards of density or intensity of
land use contained in this chapter and Chapter 450, Zoning, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65c.
§ 395-37 PENNS GROVE CODE § 400-1
1:370
G. Regulation of land designated as subject to flooding, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65e, to avoid danger to life or property.
H. Protection and conservation of soil from erosion by wind or water or
from excavation or grading.
I. Conformity with standards promulgated by the Commissioner of
Transportation pursuant to the Air Safety and Hazardous Zoning Act of
1983 (N.J.S.A. 6:1-80 et seq.) for any airport hazard areas delineated
under that Act.
J. Conformity with a municipal recycling ordinance required pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.16.
K. Conformity with the State Highway Access Management Code adopted
by the Commissioner of Transportation under Section 3 of the State
Highway Access Management Act (N.J.S.A. 27:7-91 et seq.) with respect
to any state highways within the municipality.
L. Conformity with any access management code adopted by the county
under N.J.S.A. 27:16-1 with respect to any county roads within the
municipality.
M. Conformity with any municipal access management code adopted
under N.J.S.A. 40:67-1 with respect to municipal streets.
N. Protection of potable water supply reservoirs from pollution or other
degradation of water quality resulting from the development or other
uses of surrounding land areas, which provisions shall be in accordance
with any siting, performance, or other standards or guidelines adopted
therefor by the Department of Environmental Protection.
O. Conformity with the public safety regulations concerning stormwater
detention facilities adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-95.1 and
reflected in stormwater management plans and stormwater
management ordinances adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-93 et seq.
P. Conformity with the model ordinance promulgated by the Department
of Environmental Protection and Department of Community Affairs
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13a regarding the inclusion of facilities
for the collection or storage of source-separated recyclable materials in
any new multifamily housing development.
Q. Standards, subject to the New Jersey Residential Site Improvement
Standards, as applicable, for grading, improvement and construction of
streets or drives and for any required walkways, curbs, gutters,
streetlights, shade trees, fire hydrants and water, and drainage and
sewerage facilities and other improvements as shall be found necessary,
and provisions ensuring that such facilities shall be completed either
prior to or subsequent to final approval of the subdivision by allowing
the posting of performance and maintenance guarantees by the
developer.
§ 400-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-1
1:371
§ 400-2. Applicability of Map Filing Law.
Except as otherwise provided herein, any division, subdivision,
resubdivision, or reconfiguration of any lot, tract or parcel of land, whether
or not for sale or development, must be made in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter and all other applicable requirements of the
Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.) and Chapter 450,
Zoning, of this Code. All major and minor subdivision plans must conform
to all applicable requirements of the Map Filing Law (N.J.S.A. 46:26B-1
et seq.), including requirements relating to monuments. Applicants must
confirm to the satisfaction of the Planning Board Engineer, prior to the
signature of any final subdivision plat or minor subdivision deeds by any
R. Standards to ensure that subdivisions shall conform to the applicable
provisions of this chapter.
S. Performance in substantial accordance with the final development plan,
provided that the Planning Board may permit a deviation from the final
plan, if caused by change of conditions beyond the control of the
developer since the date of final approval, and the deviation would not
substantially alter the character of the development or substantially
impair the intent and purpose of the Master Plan and Chapter 450,
Zoning, of the Borough Code.
T. Off-tract water, sewer, drainage and street improvements which are
necessitated by a subdivision, subject to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-42.
U. In the case of a development which proposes construction over a period
of years, the protection of the interests of the public and of the
residents, occupants and owners of the proposed development in the
total completion of the development.
V. The submission of proof that no taxes or assessments for local
improvements are due or delinquent on the property for which any
subdivision, site plan, or planned development application is made.
W. Provisions for minor subdivision approval pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-47.
X. Standards encouraging and promoting flexibility, economy and
environmental soundness in layout and design in accordance with
which the Planning Board may approve the varying, within a
conventional subdivision, of lot areas and dimensions and yards and
setbacks otherwise required by municipal development regulations in
such a way that the average lot areas and dimensions, yards and
setbacks within the subdivision conform to the conventional norms of
the municipal development regulations, provided that such standards
shall be appropriate to the type of development permitted.
Y. Promoting any other purposes or objectives of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.,
the Penns Grove Borough Master Plan, and this chapter.
§ 400-1 PENNS GROVE CODE § 400-2
1:372
Borough official, that all approved existing monuments remain in place and
that all required new or reset monuments have been set or reset consistent
with the approved plan.
§ 400-3. Exemptions.
The following shall not be considered subdivisions within the meaning of
this chapter, if no new streets are created:
§ 400-4. Waiver of specific subdivision submission and design
requirements.
The Planning Board, when acting upon applications for preliminary or
minor subdivision approval, shall have the power to grant such exceptions
from applicable submission requirements and design standards as may
be reasonable and within the general purpose and intent of this chapter,
Chapter 450, Zoning, of this Code and the Municipal Land Use Law, if
the literal enforcement of one or more provisions of this chapter is
impracticable or will exact undue hardship because of peculiar conditions
pertaining to the land in question, and if the proposed resulting lots and the
existing and proposed structures and improvements upon them will comply
with all applicable zoning requirements.
§ 400-5. Lot requirements.
A. Divisions of land found by the Planning Board to be for agricultural
purposes where all resulting parcels are five acres or larger in size;
B. Division of property by testamentary or intestate provisions;
C. Divisions of property upon court order, including but not limited to
judgments of foreclosure;
D. Consolidation of existing lots by deed or other recorded instrument;
and
E. Conveyance of one or more adjoining lots, tracts or parcels of land
owned by the same person(s) and all of which are found and certified by
the administrative officer to conform to the requirements of the
municipal development regulations and are shown and designated as
separate lots, tracts, or parcels on the Tax Map or atlas of the Borough.
A. Unsuitable lots. All lots shall be suitable for the purpose for which they
are intended to be used.
(1) In order to prevent the use of lots which are not suitable because of
adverse topography, flood conditions, proximity to municipal
boundaries, or similar circumstances, the Planning Board may
require such revisions in the layout of the subdivision as will
accomplish one of the following:
§ 400-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-5
1:373
§ 400-6. Minor subdivisions.
(a) The area of any unsuitable lot is included in other lots by
increasing the size of the remaining lots and eliminating the
unsuitable lot;
(b) The unsuitable lot is included in an area to be deeded to the
Borough and held in its natural state for conservation and/or
recreation purposes;
(c) The unsuitable lot is deed restricted against unsuitable uses
and limited only to suitable uses subject to zoning
requirements; or
(d) Some other suitable arrangement is made, such as common
ownership made permanent by deed covenants running with
the land.
(2) No building or structure in a municipality other than the Borough
of Penns Grove will have street access only in Penns Grove, and no
building or structure in the Borough of Penns Grove will have street
access only in another municipality.
B. Block and lot numbers. Block and lot numbers shall be assigned for
each lot by the Tax Assessor.
C. Driveways. Existing and proposed driveway locations must be depicted
on all subdivision plans. Driveways must be located at safe distances
from all roadway intersections when applying generally accepted
engineering or other design or safety standards. Driveways must also
conform to all applicable zoning regulations.
D. Sidewalks, curbs, gutters and other improvements. Sidewalks, curbs,
gutters and other improvements are required for all subdivisions, minor
and major, as set forth in this chapter or in the Residential Site
Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21-1.1 et seq.), as applicable, unless
waived or exempted by the Planning Board or the New Jersey
Department of Community Affairs. In the case of minor subdivisions,
applicants must depict all required improvements on the minor
subdivision plans to the Planning Board Engineer's satisfaction and
then deliver a copy of the approved plan to the Borough Engineer prior
to signature of the minor subdivision deeds by the Planning Board Chair
and Municipal Land Use Secretary. All required improvements at each
lot must thereafter be completely installed by such lot's respective
owner, and inspected and approved by the Borough, prior to issuance of
any certificate of occupancy for such lot.
E. Grading and drainage. Grading and drainage plans for all lots resulting
from minor and major subdivisions must be reviewed and approved.
A. Classification. A minor subdivision is a subdivision of land that does not
involve the creation of more than two lots, in addition to one retained or
§ 400-5 PENNS GROVE CODE § 400-6
1:374
remainder parcel, provided that such subdivision does not involve a
planned development, any new street or the extension of any off-tract
improvement, the cost of which is to be prorated pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-42.
(1) In counting lots to determine whether or not a proposed
subdivision is a minor subdivision, the following lots shall be
counted:
(a) All lots to be created by or resulting from the proposed
subdivision, including all retained or remainder parcels.
(b) All lots created by prior subdivisions out of the original parcel
of contiguous land under common ownership as it existed on
September 1, 1987.
(2) No lots shall be counted twice, and in the case of resubdivisions, lot
line adjustments or lot mergers any lot eliminated shall be
deducted and any lot replaced shall not be recounted.
B. Application requirements. Applications for minor subdivision approval
shall include applicable fees and escrow deposits.
C. Review. If the Planning Board determines that the application for
development is complete and conforms to the above definition of "minor
subdivision" and if the applicant's proposal complies with all applicable
zoning requirements and other requirements for approval, the Board
may hear and decide the application without public notice. Minor
subdivision approval shall be deemed to be final approval of the
subdivision by the Board, provided that the Board shall condition any
minor subdivision approval that it grants upon timely receipt of a
favorable report on the application by the Salem County Planning Board
as may be applicable pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3, or approval by the
Salem County Planning Board by its failure to report thereon within the
required time period. The Board may also condition minor subdivision
approval upon ensuring the provision of certain improvements pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-38, 40:55D-39, 40:55D-40 and 40:55D-53, as well as
provision of review and inspection escrows relating thereto, and
applicable approvals from other regulatory agencies.
D. Time for decision. Minor subdivision approval shall be granted or
denied within 45 days after completeness is certified or deemed by law,
or within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant.
E. Amendment. Applicants may amend a minor subdivision approval prior
to expiration of the approval or filing of the minor subdivision deed or
plat. Applications for amendment must include all required materials,
information and fees. Any application for amendment of an approval in
which publicly noticed site plan approval or variances were also
granted, or which involves any new site plan approval requiring public
notice or any new variance request, must be heard on public notice
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-11 and 40:55D-12. When approving an
§ 400-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-6
1:375
§ 400-7. Major subdivisions.
amendment to a previous approval in which variances or site plan
approval was granted, the Planning Board may modify the nature and
extent and any terms or conditions of such variances or site plan
approval. The engineer's estimate on which any posted performance
or maintenance guarantees have been calculated, and the guarantees
themselves, as well as any easements or restrictions that were required
as part of the earlier approval, should be reviewed to determine
whether any changes are necessary.
F. Expiration. Minor subdivision shall expire 190 days from the date on
which the Planning Board adopts the resolution of approval unless,
within such period, a plat in conformity with such approval and the
provisions of the Map Filing Law (N.J.S.A. 46:26B-1 et seq.), or a deed
clearly describing the approved minor subdivision, is filed by the
developer with the County Recording Officer, the Municipal Engineer
and the Municipal Tax Assessor. Any such plat or deed accepted for
such filing shall have been signed by the Chair of the Planning Board
and the Municipal Land Use Secretary.
(1) In reviewing the application for development for a proposed minor
subdivision the Planning Board may be permitted by ordinance to
accept a plat not in conformity with the Map Filing Law, provided
that if the developer chooses to file the minor subdivision as
provided herein by plat rather than deed, such plat shall conform to
the provisions of said law.
(2) The zoning requirements and general terms and conditions,
whether conditional or otherwise, upon which minor subdivision
approval was granted shall not be changed for a period of two years
after the date on which the resolution of minor subdivision
approval is adopted, provided that the approved minor subdivision
shall have been duly recorded as provided above.
(3) The recording deadline and/or approval expiration period can be
extended by the Planning Board as provided in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-47
or, if there have been no changes in the applicable zoning or the
facts and circumstances of the application, simply reaffirmed for a
new period of 190 days. Any extension or reaffirmation request for
an approval that also included any variance or publicly noticed site
plan approval granted must be heard on public notice pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-11 and 40:55D-12. Applications to extend or
reaffirm a minor subdivision approval must include all required
materials, information and fees. The engineer's estimate on which
any posted performance or maintenance guarantees have been
calculated, and the guarantees themselves, as well as any
easements or restrictions that were required as part of the earlier
approval, should be reviewed to determine whether any changes
are necessary.
§ 400-6 PENNS GROVE CODE § 400-7
1:376
A. Classification. All subdivision applications not classified as minor
pursuant to § 400-6 above shall automatically be classified as major
subdivision applications. All major subdivision applications should be
formally reviewed in two stages, preliminary and final.
B. Preliminary major subdivision application.
(1) Fees and escrow deposits. Applications for preliminary major
subdivision approval shall include all required fees and escrow
deposits.
(2) Review. The Planning Board shall review the preliminary major
subdivision application at a public hearing on public notice as
required by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-11 through 40:55D-12.2 for the
purposes of making an informed decision as to whether the
requirements necessary for preliminary approval have been met.
The plat and any other engineering documents to be submitted
shall be required in tentative form for discussion purpose for
preliminary approval. If the Planning Board requires any
substantial amendment in the layout of improvements proposed by
the developer that have been the subject of a hearing, an amended
application shall be submitted and proceeded upon, as in the case
of the original application for development. The Planning Board
shall, if the proposed subdivision complies with this chapter and
the Municipal Land Use Law, grant preliminary approval to the
subdivision.
(3) Time for decision. For a subdivision of 10 or fewer lots, the
Planning Board must grant or deny preliminary approval within 45
days following the date the application is certified or deemed
complete or within such further time as may be consented to by the
developer. For a subdivision of more than 10 lots, the Planning
Board must grant or deny preliminary approval within 95 days
following the date the application is certified or deemed complete
or within such further time as may be consented to by the
developer. Otherwise, the Planning Board shall be deemed to have
granted preliminary approval to the subdivision.
(4) Denial. In the event the Board denies the preliminary major
subdivision application, such denial must be memorialized in a
written resolution containing a statement of reasons for the denial,
a copy of which shall be given to the applicant.
(5) Other agency approvals. Review or approval by the Planning Board
does not preclude the necessity for submission, review and
approval by other reviewing authorities. These authorities may
include but are not be limited to the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection and the Salem County Planning Board.
(6) Amendment. Applicants may amend a preliminary major
subdivision approval prior to expiration of the approval or the grant
of final major subdivision approval. Applications for amendment
§ 400-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-7
1:377
must include all required materials, information and fees. All
applications for amended preliminary major subdivision approval
must be heard on public notice pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-11 and
40:55D-12. When approving an amendment to a previous approval
in which variances or site plan approval was granted, the Planning
Board may modify the nature and extent and any terms or
conditions of such variances or site plan approval. The engineer's
estimate on which any posted performance or maintenance
guarantees have been calculated, and the guarantees themselves,
as well as any easements or restrictions that were required as part
of the earlier approval, should be reviewed to determine whether
any changes are necessary.
(7) Expiration. Preliminary major subdivision approval shall expire
three years following the date the initial resolution of preliminary
subdivision plan approval is adopted. Except as provided in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-49d, preliminary major subdivision approval confers upon
the applicant the following rights during the aforesaid three-year
period:
(a) The general terms and conditions on which preliminary
approval was granted shall not be changed, including but not
limited to use requirements; layout and design standards for
streets, curbs and sidewalks; lot size; yard dimensions; and offtract
improvements, except that nothing herein shall be
construed to prevent the Borough from modifying by ordinance
such general terms and conditions of preliminary approval as
relate to public health and safety;
(b) The applicant may submit for final approval on or before, but
not after, the expiration date of preliminary approval the whole
or a section or sections of the preliminary subdivision plat, as
the case may be, provided that such section or sections were
depicted on and approved with the preliminary subdivision
plat; and
(c) The applicant may apply for extension(s) of preliminary major
subdivision approval as provided in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-49. All
extension requests must be heard on public notice pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-11 and 40:55D-12. Applications to extend or
reaffirm a preliminary major subdivision approval must include
all required materials, information and fees. The engineer's
estimate on which any posted performance or maintenance
guarantees have been calculated, and the guarantees
themselves, as well as any easements or restrictions that were
required as part of the earlier approval, should be reviewed to
determine whether any changes are necessary.
C. Final major subdivision application. Applications for final major
subdivision approval must be filed prior to the expiration of preliminary
approval (that is, within three years, plus any extensions, following the
§ 400-7 PENNS GROVE CODE § 400-7
1:378
date the initial resolution of preliminary major subdivision approval is
adopted). Applications for final major subdivision approval filed after
the expiration of preliminary approval will not be accepted or reviewed.
(1) Fees and escrow deposits. Applications for final major subdivision
approval must include all required fees and escrow deposits.
(2) Review. The Planning Board shall review the final major subdivision
application at a public hearing on public notice pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-11 through 40:55D-12.2 and shall grant final approval if the
detailed drawings, specifications and estimates of the application
for final approval conform to the standards established by this
chapter, the conditions of preliminary major subdivision approval,
and the standards prescribed by the Map Filing Law (N.J.S.A.
46:26B-1 et seq.). The following matters should be addressed as
part of any grant of final major subdivision approval:
(a) All road, sight triangle, drainage or other easements or
restrictions which must be granted or imposed on behalf of the
Borough or any other person or entity.
(b) The installation and maintenance of proposed improvements
that must be secured by performance and maintenance
guarantees pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53 and approval of the
engineer's cost estimate.
(c) The amount and terms of payment for off-tract improvements
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42.
(d) The completion deadline or schedule of deadlines to be
imposed for installation of improvements that are to be
secured by performance and maintenance guarantees.
(3) Time for decision. Final approval shall be granted or denied within
45 days after the date completeness is certified, or within such
further time as may be consented to by the applicant.
(4) Denial. In the event the Board denies the final major subdivision
application, such denial must be memorialized in a written
resolution containing a statement of reasons for the denial, a copy
of which shall be given to the applicant.
(5) Other agency approvals. Whenever review or approval of the
application by the Salem County Planning Board is required by
N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3, the Planning Board shall condition any approval
that it grants upon timely receipt of a favorable report on the
application by the County Planning Board or approval by the
County Planning Board by its failure to report thereon within the
required time period. Review or approval by the Planning Board
does not preclude the necessity for submission, review and
approval by other reviewing authorities, including but not limited
to the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
§ 400-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-7
1:379
(6) Amendment. Applicants may amend a final major subdivision
approval prior to expiration of the approval or filing of the final
plat. Applications for amendment must include all required
materials, information and fees. All applications for amended final
major subdivision approval must be heard on public notice
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-11 and 40:55D-12. When approving an
amendment to a previous approval in which variances or site plan
approval was granted, the Planning Board may modify the nature
and extent and any terms or conditions of such variances or site
plan approval. The engineer's estimate on which any posted
performance or maintenance guarantees have been calculated, and
the guarantees themselves, as well as any easements or
restrictions that were required as part of the earlier approval,
should be reviewed to determine whether any changes are
necessary.
(7) Expiration. Final major subdivision approval shall expire two years
following the date the initial resolution of final major subdivision
approval is adopted, or upon such other deadline as may be
imposed by the Board pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-52b, provided
that the approval shall expire within 95 days following the signing
of the final plat if the plat is not thereafter filed in the Salem County
Clerk's office within that period as required by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-54.
Additionally, the zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary
approval first granted and all other rights conferred upon the
developer pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-49, whether conditionally or
otherwise, shall not be changed during the aforesaid two-year
period.
(a) If the developer has followed the standards prescribed for final
approval and has duly recorded the plat as required by N.J.S.A.
40:55D-54, the Planning Board may extend the approval period
for extensions of one year but not to exceed three extensions,
or as may otherwise be provided in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-52 or
40:55D-54. All extension requests must be heard on public
notice pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-11 and 40:55D-12.
Applications to extend a final major subdivision approval must
include all required materials, information and fees. The
engineer's estimate on which any posted performance or
maintenance guarantees have been calculated, and the
guarantees themselves, as well as any easements or
restrictions that were required as part of the earlier approval,
should be reviewed to determine whether any changes are
necessary.
(b) Notwithstanding any other provisions of the Municipal Land
Use Law or this chapter, the granting of final approval
terminates the time period of preliminary approval pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-49 for the section granted final approval.
§ 400-7 PENNS GROVE CODE § 400-7
1:380
§ 400-8. Requirements following approval.
(c) No final plat will be signed for any major subdivision as to
which final approval has expired. No zoning permit or building
permit will be issued for any major subdivision project prior to
the filing of the final plat in the Salem County Clerk's office, or
for any major subdivision as to which final approval has
expired.
A. The final plat will not be signed by the Planning Board Engineer or
Chair or Municipal Land Use Secretary until all conditions of approval
are satisfied, including required approvals from other agencies and
posting of approved performance guarantees, maintenance guarantees,
and inspection escrows, with proof satisfactory having been provided to
the Borough Solicitor of the Borough's right to go upon the property to
exercise the Borough's rights under the guarantees. The applicant must
provide eight Mylars and eight paper copies of the approved plan to the
Planning Board Engineer for signature.
B. No zoning or building permit can be issued until the final plat is signed
and recorded in the Salem County Clerk's office.
C. No clearing, grading or land disturbance, or the installation of site
improvements, advertising or other signage for a major subdivision can
commence or occur without a zoning permit.
D. No construction, installation or placement of buildings or structures of
any kind whatsoever, including but not limited to sales offices, trailers,
platforms or displays, can commence or occur without a zoning permit
and building permit.
E. Notwithstanding the posting of any performance or maintenance
guarantee or any other provision of this chapter, no building permit,
certificate of occupancy, or other required permit for construction or
occupancy of any building on any lot within the subdivision or section
thereof shall be issued until the following on-tract and off-tract
improvements for the subdivision or section thereof have been
completed and approved by the Borough Engineer:
(1) Curbs, roadway subbase, and roadway bituminous stabilized base
course on the full width of the road fronting the lot on which the
permit is to be issued and along the entire frontage of that lot and
continuing from that lot to the existing improved public road
system outside the subdivision. In addition, in order to provide
adequate access for police, fire and rescue vehicles during
emergencies for the lot on which the permit is to be issued, curbs,
roadway subbase, and roadway bituminous stabilized base course
must be completed on a road or combination of roads or portions
thereof within the subdivision to the extent necessary to provide a
second route of access from the existing improved public road
§ 400-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-8
1:381
§ 400-9. Design standards for major subdivisions; street layout.
Chapter 404
SWIMMING POOLS
§ 404-1. Definitions and word usage.
system outside the subdivision to a point within 100 feet of the lot
for which the permit is to be issued.
(2) Storm drainage facilities as necessary in the opinion of the Borough
Engineer to serve the lot on which the permit is to be issued,
including but not limited to pipes, inlets, manholes, headwalls,
swales, channels, detention basins, retention basins, and conduit
outlet protection.
(3) Streetlights or evidence of payment to the electric utility company
for installation by it of all streetlights within the subdivision or
section (complete with poles and fixtures) in accordance with the
approved subdivision plans.
F. Applicants may apply for field changes or minor amendments to final
major subdivision approval. Applicants may also make application for
amended preliminary and final major subdivision approval, subject to
the public notice requirements of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-11 and 40:55D-12.
A. Residential Site Improvement Standards (RSIS). Residential major
subdivisions must conform to the requirements of the Residential Site
Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21-1.1 et seq.). All major
subdivisions that are not subject to RSIS requirements must conform to
design standards as set forth in Chapter 375, Site Plan Review, Article
III, Design Standards.
B. Layout and arrangement of streets. No cul-de-sac or loop street, or any
part thereof, may extend from Penns Grove into another municipality, or
from another municipality into Penns Grove. All streets and portions
thereof, including cul-de-sac streets, loop streets, and portions of all
other types of streets within Penns Grove, must provide access only to
lots that meet all applicable lot area, dimension and configuration
requirements.
A. Definitions. The following words, when used in this chapter, shall have
the following meanings:
BUILDING — Includes any structure or fabricated apparatus.
PERSON — Includes a corporation, association, organization, firm or
partnership as well as an individual.
STRUCTURE — Includes any building or fabricated apparatus.
§ 400-8 PENNS GROVE CODE § 404-1
1:382
§ 404-2. Permit required.
§ 404-3. Material and color specifications.
The Borough shall not pass on the durability of the swimming pool, but such
swimming pool shall be made of materials which are waterproof and easily
cleaned. The bottom and sides of such swimming pool shall be either white
or of a light color, except that no aluminum or toxic paint shall be used as a
finish. No sand or earth bottom shall be used.
§ 404-4. Water supply.
Any swimming pool constructed or installed in the Borough of Penns Grove
shall have its water supply furnished by connection through the residential
or commercial meter connection with the Borough of Penns Grove water
supply system, at present the Penns Grove Water Supply Company, or from
its successors or assigns or from a private potable domestic water supply.
The water shall be introduced into the pool for filling purposes by means of
a discharge pipe or hose or orifice which shall be separated from the highest
overflow level of the pool by an air space of at least four inches.
SWIMMING POOL — A public or private swimming pool or tank,
artificially constructed, installed or maintained upon any premises by
any person for his own or his family's use or for the use of his guests
or invitees and shall also mean and include a wading pool or tank, any
side wall of which is more than 24 inches in height or the capacity of
which exceeds 2,600 gallons.
B. Word usage. Whenever in this chapter any word importing a singular
number or masculine gender is used in describing or referring to any
person, party, matter or thing, the same shall include and apply to
several persons or parties, as well as to one person or party, to female
as well as male and to several matters or things as well as one matter or
thing.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to commence the construction or
installation of a swimming pool or to make any alteration, addition or
improvement to a swimming pool in the Borough without first having
obtained a zoning permit from the Zoning Officer, a building permit
from the Construction Code Official and a plumbing permit from the
Plumbing Subcode Official. [Amended 6-17-1986 by Ord. No. 86-5;
7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
B. Application for permits shall be accompanied by two sets of plans and
specifications of such proposed swimming pool, alteration, addition or
improvement, which application shall state the premises and the exact
location thereon where said swimming pool is proposed to be installed,
changed, altered, added to or improved, including plans and
specifications for auxiliary structures and appurtenances related
thereto.
§ 404-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 404-5
1:383
§ 404-5. Drains.
§ 404-6. Circulation and sanitation equipment.
There shall be maintained adequate equipment to properly recirculate the
water in such pool and for filtering, chlorinating and disinfecting the same
in accordance with the approved bacteriological standards, as may be
promulgated by regulations issued by the Borough's Board of Health.
§ 404-7. Location.
None of the area used for swimming pool purposes shall be nearer than four
feet to any property line or nearer than 30 feet to the curbline of any street
in the Borough. A swimming pool area shall encompass the swimming pool,
sidewalks, walks around the pool, utility buildings (either of permanent or
temporary construction) and all utilities and structures (exclusive of the
main residence) that are or may be used in connection with said pool for the
accommodation of the swimmers or otherwise, including the fence referred
to in § 404-9 hereof.
§ 404-8. Lighting.
No artificial lighting shall be maintained or operated in connection with
any swimming pool, presently constructed or installed or hereinafter to be
constructed or installed, in such manner as to be a nuisance or annoyance
to the neighboring properties or the occupants thereof.
§ 404-9. Fencing. [Amended 6-17-1986 by Ord. No. 86-5]
The area of every swimming pool to which this chapter applies shall be
completely enclosed by a fence preferably of cyclone-type construction or
any other type of durable construction approved by the Construction Code
Official, not less than four feet high at all points above the ground level of
the pool area, having at least one gate, which gate or gates shall be kept
A. Every swimming pool constructed or installed shall be equipped with a
discharge drain or drains at the deepest point and of sufficient size to
permit the pool to be completely drained or emptied. Such drain shall
not be over two inches in diameter at its final outlet and shall be of an
approved material and shall extend from said pool to the sanitary sewer
lines of the Penns Grove Sewerage Authority system either directly or
through the residential or commercial sewerage connection with the
Penns Grove Sewerage Authority system or to a sprinkler system for
watering lawns and gardens. The cost and expense of making all
connections and maintaining such drains shall be born by the person
connecting, installing or maintaining the swimming pool.
B. No swimming pool shall be drained into the Penns Grove Sewerage
Authority lines without first obtaining permission in writing from the
Penns Grove Sewerage Authority.
§ 404-5 PENNS GROVE CODE § 404-9
1:384
securely locked at all times when such pool is unattended by the owner or a
responsible adult who is in charge thereof by authority of the owner.
§ 404-10. Maintenance; inspection.
Every swimming pool presently constructed or installed or hereinafter
constructed or installed shall be maintained at all times in such manner
as to never constitute a hazard, nuisance or menace to health or safety.
Any nuisance, hazard or menace to health or safety which may exist or
develop in or in connection with any such swimming pool shall be forthwith
abated and/or removed by the person in possession, owning or having
jurisdiction over such pool, upon receipt of notice from the Borough's Board
of Health or police. All swimming pools, including the drainage, circulatory
and purification system, and all structures and fabricated apparatus used in
connection therewith, shall be made available at all times by the person in
possession, owning or having jurisdiction over such pool for inspection by
the duly authorized representative of the Board of Health.
§ 404-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-17-1986 by Ord. No.
86-5]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof by the Municipal Court, be subject to the payment of a
fine not exceeding $1,000 or to imprisonment for a period not exceeding
90 days, or both. Each day that the violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
Chapter 410
TAXATION
§ 404-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 404-11
1:385

ARTICLE I
Property Improvement Exemption
[Adopted 5-18-1976 by Ord. No. 76-4; amended in its entirety
1-18-1994 by Ord. No. 93-30 (Ch. 201, Art. I, of the 1986 Code)]
§ 410-1. Limitation on increase in value.
In determining the value of real property for the purposes of taxation,
the first $25,000 in Assessor's full and true value of home improvements
for each dwelling unit, multiple-dwelling unit or commercial and industrial
structure, primarily and directly affected by an improvement in any single
or multiple dwelling and commercial or industrial property more than 20
years old, shall not increase the value of such property for a period of
five years, notwithstanding that the value of the property to which such
improvements are made is increased thereby; provided, however, that
during said period, the assessment on such property shall in no case, except
that of damage through action of the elements sufficient to warrant a
reduction, be less than the assessment thereon existing immediately prior
to such improvements.
§ 410-2. Applicability.
This article includes all properties located within the Borough of Penns
Grove.
§ 410-3. Statutory provisions.
The laws of the State of New Jersey covering said exemption are
incorporated herein by reference thereto.38
38.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et seq.
§ 410-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-3
1:387

ARTICLE II
Agreements for Tax Abatement
[Adopted 12-6-1977 by Ord. No. 77-1; amended in its entirety
1-18-1994 by Ord. No. 93-30 (Ch. 201, Art. II, of the 1986 Code)]
§ 410-4. Authorization to enter into agreements with developers.
The Mayor and Council may enter into agreements with developers for
tax abatement on commercial, industrial or residential improvements or
projects, pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1991, c. 441,39 providing for the
exemption from real property taxation of improvements or projects for a
period of five years.
§ 410-5. Agreement procedures.
The following procedures shall govern agreements for tax abatement
entered into by the Mayor and Council and developers:
A. Improvements.
(1) All improvements, as defined in P.L. 1991, c. 441,40 shall be exempt
from local real property taxes, if approved by the Tax Assessor,
after proper application has been made. Application shall be upon
the form approved by the Director of the Division of Local
Government Services, Department of Community Affairs.
(2) Applicants shall be encouraged to apply for tax exemption on
improvements prior to the commencement of construction of the
improvement, provided that the applicant must file a proper
application with the Tax Assessor within 30 days of the completion
of the improvement in order to be eligible for tax exemption
thereon.
(3) Every properly completed application for exemption of one or more
improvements which is filed within 30 days of the completion of the
improvement shall be approved and allowed by the Assessor.
B. Projects.
(1) Applicants for tax abatement on projects shall provide the Mayor
and Council with an application setting forth:
(a) A general description of the project for which abatement is
sought.
(b) A legal description of all real estate necessary for the project.
39.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et seq.
40.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40A:21-3.
§ 410-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-5
1:389
(c) Plans, drawings and other documents, as may be required by
the Mayor and Council, to demonstrate the structure and
design of the project.
(d) A description of the number, classes and types of employees to
be employed at the project site within two years of completion
of the project.
(e) A statement of the reasons for seeking tax abatements on the
project and a description of the benefits to be realized by the
applicant if tax abatement is granted.
(f) Estimates of the cost of completing such project.
(g) A statement showing:
[1] The real property taxes currently being assessed at the
project site;
[2] Estimated tax payments that would be made annually by
the applicant on the project during the period of tax
abatement; and
[3] Estimated tax payments that would be made by the
applicant on the project during the first full year following
the termination of the tax abatement agreement.
(h) A description of any lease agreements between the applicant
and proposed users of the project and a history and description
of the user's business.
(i) If the project is a multiple dwelling, a description of the
number and types of dwelling units to be provided, a
description of the common elements or general common
elements and a statement of the proposed included rentals or
sales prices of the dwelling units according to type and of the
rental lease or resale restrictions to apply to the dwellings
units reflecting low- or moderate-income housing.
(j) Such other pertinent information as the Mayor and Council
may require.
(2) Upon approval of an ordinance authorizing an agreement for tax
abatement for a particular project, the Mayor and Council shall
enter into a written agreement with the applicant for the
abatement of local real property taxes. The agreement shall
provide for the applicant to pay to the Borough of Penns Grove in
lieu of full property tax payments an amount annually to be
computed by using either, but not a combination, of the formulas
set out in N.J.S.A. 40A:21-10. Such agreements may also provide for
tax phase-in pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:21-10c. All tax abatement
agreements hereunder shall be in effect for a period of not more
§ 410-5 PENNS GROVE CODE § 410-5
1:390
than five years starting with the date of completion of the project.
[Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
§ 410-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-5
1:391

ARTICLE III
Assessment of Certain Fees
[Adopted 8-1-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-11 (Ch. 201, Art. III, of the
1986 Code)]
§ 410-6. Fee for duplicate tax bill.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 54:4-64, the Tax Collector of the
Borough of Penns Grove shall charge and collect the following for the
preparation of duplicate tax bills:
§ 410-7. Fee for certificate of redemption.
The Tax Collector of the Borough of Penns Grove shall charge and collect
the sum of $25 in connection with the preparation and issuance of a
certificate of redemption.
§ 410-8. Fee for duplicate tax sale certificate.
The Tax Collector of the Borough of Penns Grove shall charge and collect
the sum of $25 in connection with the preparation and issuance of a
duplicate tax sale certificate.
A. Five dollars for the first duplicate copy.
B. Twenty-five dollars for each additional duplicate copy requested during
the same tax year.
§ 410-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-8
1:393
Chapter 413
TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES
§ 410-8 PENNS GROVE CODE § 410-8
1:394
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 413-1. Rules and regulations established.
There are hereby established in the Borough of Penns Grove rules and
regulations regarding taxicabs and limousines.
§ 413-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LIMOUSINE — Any automobile or motor car used in the business of
carrying passengers for hire to provide prearranged passenger
transportation on a dedicated, nonscheduled, charter basis that is not
conducted on a regular route and with a seating capacity of no more than
14 passengers, not including the driver, and which charges a premium fare
or price agreed upon in advance.
OPERATE — Having a place of business, office, dispatcher location or
storage yard for limousines or taxicabs within the Borough of Penns Grove
or accepting passengers from points within the Borough.
PRINCIPAL PLACE OF BUSINESS — The location of the main place of
business of the taxicab or limousine service where the service is conducted,
where taxicabs or limousines are dispatched, and where drivers report for
duty. A zoning permit is required for the establishment of a principal place
of business with the Borough of Penns Grove.
TAXICAB — Any vehicle propelled by mechanical motor power, engaged
in the business of transportation of passengers for hire or pay within the
Borough, either operated from stands in the public street or public place,
or on telephone calls to a central office, or in any manner within the
previous 24 hours. In order to qualify as a taxicab, a vehicle must have
a minimum wheel base of 100 inches and not exceed 15 years in age.
Specifically excluded from this definition are vehicles bearing livery and
limousine plates which are transporting, pursuant to a prearranged written
contractual agreement, persons to points within the Borough for weddings,
funerals and other similar occasions, and at no time will a vehicle bearing
livery or limousine license plates be substituted for a taxicab.
§ 413-3. Administration.
The licensing of taxicabs and limousines shall be by the Borough, and such
licenses when granted by the Borough Council shall be countersigned by
the Municipal Clerk. All fees shall be paid to the Municipal Clerk.
A. Taxicabs. The regulating and inspection of taxicabs, the application for
a license to operate taxicabs, the licensing of drivers as provided for in
this chapter and the enforcing of the provisions of this chapter shall be
by procedures set forth by the Municipal Clerk. The approval of a
license application shall be made upon approval of the Municipal Clerk.
§ 413-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 413-3
1:395
§ 413-4. License required.
No person, partnership or corporation shall operate a taxicab or limousine
service within the Borough without first having obtained a license for that
purpose.
B. Limousines. The application for a municipal license to operate a
limousine service from within the Borough of Penns Grove shall be
made to the Municipal Clerk, who shall also verify compliance with
requirements as set forth by state law. The approval of a verified license
application shall be made upon approval of the Municipal Clerk.
§ 413-3 PENNS GROVE CODE § 413-4
1:396
ARTICLE II
Taxicab Business License
§ 413-5. Application for license.
A. Applications for taxicab business licenses shall be made by the owner
upon forms to be furnished by the Municipal Clerk. The application
shall contain the full name and address of the owner/applicant, the year,
type and model of vehicle for which the license is desired and the
number of persons the manufacturer's specifications permit the year,
make and model of the vehicle to legally and safely carry. Such
application shall be accompanied by the required fee. No license shall
be issued for a vehicle that cannot accommodate a minimum of three
passengers.
B. An applicant shall be disqualified from obtaining a taxicab business
license if any individual with an ownership interest in the business for
which a license is being sought shall have a record of conviction of any
of the following crimes or offenses:
(1) In New Jersey or elsewhere, any crime as follows: aggravated
assault, arson, burglary, escape, extortion, homicide, kidnapping,
robbery, aggravated sexual assault, sexual assault, or endangering
the welfare of a child pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:24-4, whether or not
armed with or having in his possession any weapon enumerated in
Subsection r of N.J.S.A. 2C:39-1, a crime pursuant to the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 2C:39-3, 2C:39-4 or 2C:39-9 or a disorderly persons or
petty disorderly persons offense for the unlawful use, possession or
sale of a controlled dangerous substance as defined in N.J.S.A.
2C:35-2.
(2) In any other state, territory, commonwealth or other jurisdiction of
the United States, or any country in the world, as a result of a
conviction in a court of competent jurisdiction, a crime which in
that other jurisdiction or country is comparable to one of the crimes
enumerated in Subsection B(1) of this section.
(3) In New Jersey or elsewhere, the conviction of an alcohol- or drugrelated
traffic offense enumerated in N.J.S.A. 39:4-1 et seq. which
has occurred in the last 10 years prior to the application being
submitted.
C. There shall be a maximum of two taxicab business licenses available for
issuance. Taxicab business licenses shall be sold by public auction
conducted or supervised by the Borough Clerk in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 48:16-2.1 et seq. The Borough Council shall set by resolution a
minimum bid and conditions of sale with the reservation of the right to
reject all bids when the highest bid is not accepted. All eligible
applicants interested in obtaining a taxicab business license may attend
and bid on the license(s) available at the auction. The cost of the auction
§ 413-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 413-5
1:397
§ 413-6. Fees.
§ 413-7. Issuance of license.
§ 413-8. Information to be posted in or on taxicab; advertising.
shall be borne by the recipient of the taxicab business license issued by
such auction.
D. Every taxicab owner shall operate his business from an established
place of business, located in a proper zone, and the established
business shall be advertised in the telephone book, listing the address
and telephone number of the business. Additionally, every taxicab
owner shall have obtained the proper business license from the
Municipal Clerk's office.
A. The annual license renewal fee for each taxicab shall be $50, which
shall be payable on or before January 1. The licensing period shall
extend from January 1 until December 31. The fee imposed herein shall
be to defray the cost of administering, regulating and enforcing this
chapter and to defray the cost of the inspections required pursuant to
the terms of this chapter.
B. An annual license fee that remains unpaid after March 1 of the licensing
year shall cause the license to revert back to the Borough upon notice
to the license holder.
A. Upon approval and granting of a license for the operation of a taxicab
within the Borough, the Municipal Clerk shall provide the license
holder with a card containing the name of the applicant, the Borough
number in one-and-one-half-inch letters, the number of persons the
vehicle is authorized to transport and notice that in case of any
complaint, complaint forms are available at the Penns Grove Police
Department and in the office of the Municipal Clerk. Only after the
vehicle has been inspected will a decal be issued.
B. Every taxicab owner shall operate each licensed taxicab on a regular
basis for at least eight hours per day for a minimum of five days weekly,
and there shall be no inoperative licenses allowed. In the event a
taxicab license is not used for a period of nine consecutive months, the
license shall revert back to the Borough of Penns Grove, after notice to
the license holder, with an opportunity to be heard before the Borough
Council.
A. Each taxicab licensed pursuant to this chapter shall display the
Borough license number on the exterior of the vehicle. The number
shall be three inches in height and located in the center of the rear
quarter panels on the driver and passenger sides and the rear center
line of the trunk of the vehicle.
§ 413-5 PENNS GROVE CODE § 413-8
1:398
§ 413-9. Inspection of vehicle; prohibited vehicle types.
B. Each taxicab shall display on each rear door of the taxicab the name
"Penns Grove Borough" in letters three inches in height.
C. The Borough decal shall be placed in the center of the front windshield
behind the rear-view mirror of the vehicle.
D. A Penns Grove taxi rate card listing the rates as contained in § 413-16
herein shall be displayed in a prominent fashion in the vehicle so as to
be able to be read by any passenger therein.
E. There shall also be a notice prominently displayed in the passenger
compartment of the vehicle informing the passengers of their right to
occupy the taxicab alone at no additional charge. The notice shall be no
less than eight inches by 10 inches in area and contain lettering no less
than 1/2 inch in size. In addition, should the Borough issue a form of
notice, the form shall be the only one used in any taxicab.
F. Every taxicab shall have a permanent illuminated taxi sign and be
plainly marked as a taxicab, and such illuminated taxi sign shall be in
operation when the taxicab is commercially employed. Additionally,
every taxi company shall have its own color which will be registered
with the Municipal Clerk. All taxis owned by a company shall be painted
accordingly.
G. Each taxicab operated within the Borough of Penns Grove shall have a
sign painted on each front door. The sign shall contain the owner's
name and the word "Taxicab" or "Taxi" in letters which are not less than
four inches nor more than eight inches in height.
H. In addition to a sign containing the name and telephone number of the
taxicab company, each vehicle shall be allowed to carry an
advertisement fastened to the rear of the vehicle which shall comply
with all relative motor vehicle regulations of the State of New Jersey,
and it shall not be higher than the lowest part of the rear window of the
vehicle so as not to interfere with the rear-view vision of the driver.
A. No owner of a vehicle shall be issued a taxicab license until that vehicle
has been thoroughly and carefully inspected, especially with regard to
the brakes and front end, and examined by a person designated by the
Borough Council and found to be in a thoroughly safe condition for the
transportation of passengers. Side curtains, shades and/or dark, smoke
glass shall not be permitted on any such vehicles.
B. No vehicle known as a "two-door body" or "two-door hatchback" shall
be issued a taxicab license.
C. The Borough Police Department and Municipal Clerk shall maintain
constant vigilance over all taxicabs to see that they are kept clean and
in a condition of safety for the transportation of passengers and, to this
end, shall have the right at any and all times to inspect any and all
§ 413-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 413-9
1:399
§ 413-10. Transfer of license.
§ 413-11. Insurance.
licensed vehicles and shall maintain a record of all inspections. A copy
of the inspection records shall be kept on file in the Municipal Clerk's
office in compliance with Subsection A above. The records shall also
include all violations of this chapter and all violations of the motor
vehicle laws by the license holder.
D. Every taxicab owner shall cause to have his or her taxicab or taxicabs
inspected annually in September prior to renewal of the license or upon
initial application at a location designated by the Borough of Penns
Grove.
E. The owner or owners of any taxicab shall inspect or cause to be
inspected each taxicab at least once a day, but prior to each and every
shift, for any visible defects, cleanliness and to see that all required
information is posted in each taxicab. The inspection form will be filed
with the taxicab owner for a period of one day.
F. Every taxicab owner shall repair all body damage to each vehicle within
30 days from the date the damage is discovered.
A. Transfer of vehicles under business license.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any owner of a licensed taxicab to sell,
lease, rent, assign, or transfer a taxicab license without the
permission of the Municipal Clerk, nor shall any owner of a taxicab
hire out or rent a taxicab to a taxicab driver or any other person for
use within the Borough for a stipulated sum over a definite period
of time.
(2) No taxicab license shall be transferred to another vehicle without
the approval of the Municipal Clerk. A transfer fee of $50 shall be
due upon obtaining the approval of the Municipal Clerk.
(3) In the event the holder of a taxicab license desires to transfer such
license to another vehicle owned, registered and insured in his/her
name, the insurance card, containing the year and model of the
vehicle, shall be presented to the Municipal Clerk forthwith. A copy
of the New Jersey Division of Motor Vehicles transfer certificate
shall be submitted to the Municipal Clerk, upon receipt of the same
from the Division of Motor Vehicles.
B. Transfer of taxicab business license. No owner of a taxicab business
license shall sell, lease, rent, assign or transfer a taxicab business
license without the approval of the Borough Council.
A. In order to ensure the safety of the public, it shall be unlawful for the
owner or the lessee of any taxicab to operate or cause to permit such
taxicab to be operated, nor shall any license be issued hereunder, until
§ 413-9 PENNS GROVE CODE § 413-11
1:400
§ 413-12. Register of information.
The Municipal Clerk shall keep a register of the name of each person
owning or operating a vehicle or vehicles licensed under this chapter,
together with the license number and the make and description of such
vehicle with the date and complete record of inspection of the vehicle.
§ 413-13. Owner's duty to maintain safe vehicle; suspension of
license; summons and complaint.
and unless the applicant shall have complied with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 48:16-1 et seq. and the acts amendatory thereof or
supplemental thereof; provided, however, that the holder of the license
must have in effect a valid insurance policy of a company duly licensed
to transact business under the insurance laws of the State of New
Jersey conditioned for the payment of a sum not less than $100,000
to satisfy all claims for damages, by reason of bodily injury to, or the
death of, any one person resulting from an accident, by reason of the
ownership, operation, maintenance, or use of such taxicab upon any
public street, and the sum of $50,000 to satisfy any claim for damages
to property.
B. Upon the failure of the license holder to file the insurance certificate
with the Municipal Clerk or upon notice served to the Municipal Clerk
that the insurance coverage of the license holder has been revoked or
suspended, the Municipal Clerk shall refuse to issue the license or shall
notify the Chief of Police who shall, after notification to the license
holder, forthwith remove the license. If, after 30 days, proof of
insurance is not submitted to the Municipal Clerk, the taxicab license
shall immediately revert back to the Borough.
C. The owner of each taxicab license is to have insurance as required
herein which shall name the Borough of Penns Grove as a coinsured.
A. Owner's duty to maintain a safe vehicle. The owner of a taxicab license
shall be responsible for maintaining all licensed vehicles in a clean and
safe condition for the transportation of passengers for hire.
B. Suspension of taxicab license. The owner of any licensed taxicab found
to be unsafe for the transportation of passengers after inspection in
accordance with § 413-9 shall be notified that the taxicab license is
suspended until the vehicle is made safe for operation. A copy of the
inspection report listing the unsafe items shall be given to the operator
with the notice that the taxicab license is suspended until the vehicle is
made safe; the notice and report shall be signed by the inspecting
officer. An additional copy of the notice and report shall be mailed to the
owner's last known address.
C. Summons and complaint. Any owner or operator who knowingly allows
his vehicle to transport passengers for hire after the license has been
suspended shall receive a complaint and summons returnable in the
§ 413-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 413-13
1:401
§ 413-14. Cruising.
No driver of any taxicab shall seek employment by repeatedly and
persistently driving his taxicab to and from in a short space or otherwise
interfering with the proper and orderly access to or egress from any theater,
hall, hotel, public resort, or other place of public gathering, and no driver
shall solicit passengers for a taxicab.
§ 413-15. Lost property.
Every driver of a taxicab who discovers any property lost or left in the
taxicab must report in writing to the Police Department, with brief
particulars and description of the property, within 24 hours after his finding
thereof, unless sooner claimed or delivered to the owner. Any unclaimed
property in a taxicab must be turned over to the Police Department within
24 hours of its discovery by the driver or owner of the taxicab and held until
claimed or released by the Police Department in accordance with Police
Department regulations.
Borough of Penns Grove Municipal Court served upon the owner by
mailing a copy to his last known address or by serving a copy upon the
operator of the vehicle.
§ 413-13 PENNS GROVE CODE § 413-15
1:402
ARTICLE III
Taxicab Rates
§ 413-16. Rates enumerated.
A. The rates set forth shall be for single passengers, and there shall be a
charge of $0.50 for each additional passenger regardless of age.
B. The rate that may be charged passengers of taxicabs licensed under
this chapter shall not exceed the following from the hour of 6:00 a.m. to
the hour of 10:00 p.m.: There will be a maximum charge of up to $5 for
the dropoff fee plus a maximum charge of up to $1.50 per mile,
calculated at $0.15 for each 1/10 mile; provided, however, that the
minimum fare permitted will be up to $6.50 regardless of the distance
traveled.
C. The rate that may be charged passengers of taxicabs licensed under
this chapter shall not exceed the following from the hour of 10:00 p.m.
to the hour of 6:00 a.m.: There will be a maximum charge of up to $6 for
the dropoff fee plus a maximum charge of up to $3 per mile, calculated
at $0.30 for each 1/10 mile; provided, however, that the minimum fare
permitted will be up to $9 regardless of the distance traveled.
D. The rate that may be charged passengers 62 years of age or older of
taxicabs licensed under this chapter shall not exceed the following from
the hour of 9:00 a.m. to the hour of 3:00 p.m.: There will be a maximum
charge of up to $2 for the dropoff fee plus a maximum charge of up to
$1 per mile, calculated at $0.10 for each 1/10 mile; provided, however,
that the minimum fare permitted will be up to $3 regardless of the
distance traveled.
E. Additional charges by a licensee under this chapter shall be limited to
the following categories and shall not exceed the following. The rates
must be posted in accordance with § 413-8D of this chapter:
(1) Groceries: no charge for the first two bags and $0.25 for each
additional bag.
(2) Laundry; luggage: a charge of $2 when an item or items is
transported in the luggage compartment of a taxicab on behalf of a
passenger or passengers.
(3) Additional stop: a charge of $1 for each, after initial pickup, on any
specific call.
(4) Animal: a charge of $3 for each to be transported on behalf of a
passenger or passengers, which can be waived at a company's
discretion.
(5) Waiting time: There will be no charge for the first five minutes and
$1.50 for each subsequent period of five minutes or any part
thereof.
§ 413-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 413-16
1:403
§ 413-17. Requests for rate changes.
Taxicab license holders may request rate changes by submitting proposed
new rates in writing to the Municipal Clerk prior to August 1 each year.
(6) Additional items: Taxicab owners have a right to make reasonable
charges for items not covered by this chapter.
§ 413-16 PENNS GROVE CODE § 413-17
1:404
ARTICLE IV
Taxicab Stands
§ 413-18. Establishment of stands by Council; use by taxicabs.
The Borough Council may designate certain taxicab stands as provided
by law and the number of taxicabs permitted therein. The taxicabs shall
operate on a first-in-first-out basis at such taxicab stands. No taxicab shall
remain in a taxi stand for more than 30 consecutive minutes.
§ 413-19. Establishment of additional stands.
The Borough Council may establish other stands by resolution when in its
judgment that course shall be necessary. The continuance of such stand
shall thereupon be subject to the approval or disapproval of the Borough
Council, by resolution.
§ 413-20. Off-street parking.
Any owner of a taxicab license who shall change his place of business after
the effective date of this chapter shall provide off-street parking for all of
his taxicabs.
§ 413-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 413-20
1:405

ARTICLE V
Taxicab Operator's Permit
§ 413-21. Application for permit.
A. Each applicant for a taxicab operator's permit under the terms of this
chapter shall conform to the following regulations. The applicant shall:
(1) Be at least 18 years of age and possess a valid State of New Jersey
driver's license and be a bona fide resident of the State of New
Jersey for at least one year.
(2) Present the certificate of a duly licensed and qualified physician
certifying that he/she has been examined within the past 30 days
and that he/she is of sound physical condition for the safe operation
of a taxicab.
(3) Be a citizen or a legal resident alien of the United States.
(4) Have not been convicted of a crime and have not violated any
provision of this chapter. A person shall be disqualified from
operating a taxicab if a criminal history record background check
reveals a conviction of any of the following crimes:
(a) In New Jersey or anywhere else: aggravated assault, arson,
burglary, escape, extortion, homicide, kidnapping, robbery,
aggravated sexual assault, sexual assault or endangering the
welfare of a child pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:24-4, whether or not
armed with or having in his possession any weapon
enumerated in Subsection r of N.J.S.A. 2C:39-1, a crime
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 2C:39-3, 2C:39-4, or
2C:39-9, or a disorderly persons or petty disorderly persons
offense for the unlawful use, possession or sale of a controlled
dangerous substance as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:35-2.
(b) In any other state, territory, commonwealth, or other
jurisdiction of the United States, or any country in the world,
as a result of a conviction in a court of competent jurisdiction, a
crime which in that other jurisdiction or country is comparable
to one of the crimes enumerated in Subsection A(4)(a) of this
section.
(5) Not use narcotics or alcoholic beverages while working. To that
end, the Borough Council shall require the applicant to submit to
drug screening at the applicant's expense at a facility approved by
the Borough prior to the initial issuance of a taxicab operator's
permit. The Borough reserves the right to require a permittee to
submit to drug and alcohol screening at the applicant's expense
upon renewal of a taxicab operator's permit pursuant to the
appropriate federal or state laws.
§ 413-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 413-21
1:407
§ 413-22. Fee.
The taxicab operator's permit fee for each driver of a taxicab shall be
$25 per year. The permit period shall extend from January 1 to December
31. The fee imposed herein shall be to defray the cost of administering,
regulating and enforcing this chapter and to defray the cost of the
inspections required pursuant to the terms of this chapter.
§ 413-23. Issuance of taxicab operator's permit; display.
(6) Produce affidavits of his/her good character from at least two
reputable citizens who have known him/her personally for at least
two years.
(7) Fill out, upon a form provided by the Municipal Clerk, his/her full
name, residence, places of residence for the preceding five years,
place of birth, previous employment, whether he/she has ever been
convicted of a crime, including traffic violations or a violation of
this chapter, and whether his/her driver's license has ever been
revoked and for what cause, which statement shall be signed and
sworn to by the applicant and filed with the Municipal Clerk.
B. He/she shall also furnish four copies of passport-size photographs, front
view. The driver shall not be required to display his/her residence or
other personal information to the public other than that information
required by § 413-23.
C. The applicant shall also indicate in the application form any conviction
for violations of any of the provisions of the motor vehicle laws of the
State of New Jersey, as well as any convictions for motor vehicle
violations from any state or territory of the United States of America,
for a period of five years antedating the date of the application.
D. The applicant, every two years, shall be fingerprinted and cleared, at
his own expense, and the print shall be placed on file with the Penns
Grove Police Department.
E. The applicant shall indicate on the application form any criminal
conviction.
A. Issuance of taxicab operator's permit. Upon satisfactory fulfillment of
the foregoing requirements, the Municipal Clerk shall issue to the
applicant a taxicab operator's permit which shall contain the
photograph and permit number of the operator.
B. Display of taxicab operator's permit. The information referred to in
Subsection A herein shall be mounted in a protective holder or bracket
sufficient to prevent the permit from being defaced and shall be clearly
visible on the dashboard so as to have the information thereon visible to
any passenger(s) in the rear seat.
§ 413-21 PENNS GROVE CODE § 413-24
1:408
§ 413-24. Revocation of taxicab operator's permit.
If at any time within the permit year a taxicab driver has been convicted of
a crime or traffic violation, he shall immediately notify the Municipal Clerk
of the conviction, the jurisdiction of the conviction, the offense for which he
was convicted, and the circumstances thereof. It shall be in the discretion
of the Borough Council to revoke his operator's permit.
§ 413-25. Appearance of taxicab operator.
Every licensed taxicab operator, while operating a licensed vehicle for the
transportation of passengers for hire in the Borough, shall be properly
attired in a clean shirt shall be clean-shaven or possess a neatly trimmed
beard or moustache. It shall be unlawful for the operator to wear an
undershirt as an outer garment while so employed.
§ 413-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 413-25
1:409

ARTICLE VI
Enforcement
§ 413-26. Violations and penalties; summons and complaint; waiver
of hearing.
The owner of any taxicab business license in the Borough of Penns Grove
shall be responsible to ensure that any and all drivers under his employ
properly comply with all requirements set forth in this chapter. The license
owner's failure to verify his employees' proper compliance with all
requirements set forth in this chapter shall subject the license owner to all
of the fines and penalties to which operators of taxicabs are subject and to
be charged separately and in conformance with the penalties enumerated
under this section.
§ 413-27. Suspension or revocation of taxicab business license or
taxicab operator's permit.
A. The owner of a taxicab business license or the taxicab operator who is
found guilty after a hearing in Penns Grove Borough Municipal Court of
a violation of any section of Chapter 413 of the Code of the Borough of
Penns Grove shall be subject to any and all fines and penalties set forth
in § 1-2 of the Code of the Borough of Penns Grove.
B. Summons and complaint. A summons and complaint citing a violation of
this chapter returnable in Penns Grove Borough Municipal Court shall
be served personally or by mail to the last known address of the person
charged with a violation of this chapter.
C. Waiver of Municipal Court hearing. Any person, partnership or
corporation charged with a violation of any section of this chapter may
waive the court hearing thereon by pleading guilty to the violation and
making payment to the Court Administrator of the maximum fine for the
violation; provided, however, that a court appearance shall be required
for any person, partnership or corporation charged with a violation of
§ 413-23, Issuance of taxicab operator's permit; display.
D. Separate liability. Owners and operators of taxicabs shall be separately
charged with allegations of violations of any portion of this chapter. No
conviction of an operator of a taxicab shall result in an automatic
conviction of the owner of the taxicab for a violation of any portion of
this chapter. Similarly, no conviction of an owner of a taxicab shall
result in an automatic conviction of the operator of the taxicab for a
violation of any portion of this chapter.
A. Taxicab business licenses or taxicab operator's permits issued under
the provisions of this chapter may be suspended or revoked by the
Borough Council if the owner of a license or the holder of a permit has:
(1) Violated any of the provisions of this chapter;
(2) Discontinued operation for more than 30 days; or
§ 413-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 413-27
1:411
(3) Violated any ordinances of the Borough of Penns Grove, or the laws
of the United States or the State of New Jersey, the violation of
which reflects unfavorably on the fitness of the owner of the license
or the holder of the permit to offer public transportation.
B. Prior to suspension or revocation, the owner of a taxicab business
license or the holder of a taxicab operator's permit shall be given
written notice of the proposed action to be taken and the charges
against him or her and, thereupon, the license owner or the holder of a
permit shall be given a hearing.
§ 413-27 PENNS GROVE CODE § 413-27
1:412
ARTICLE VII
Limousine Regulations
§ 413-28. License term and fees.
The initial license and annual renewal fee for each limousine service shall
be $50 plus $25 for each limousine which is covered under the required
insurance policy. The license fee shall be payable on or before January 1.
The licensing period shall extend from January 1 until December 31.
§ 413-29. Insurance requirements; power of attorney.
§ 413-30. Equipment requirements.
§ 413-31. Compliance with state law.
Owners of limousine services and all applicants for employment as drivers
or operators of limousines shall comply with state law regarding
A. The owner of the limousine shall comply with the requirements of
N.J.S.A. 48:16-14 and file with the Municipal Clerk an insurance policy
of a company duly licensed to transact business under the insurance
laws of this state in the sum of at least $1,500,000 against loss by
reason of the liability imposed by law upon every limousine owner for
damages on account of bodily injury or death suffered by any person as
the result of an accident occurring by reason of the ownership,
maintenance or use of the limousine upon any public street.
B. The owner of the limousine shall comply with the execution and delivery
of the power of attorney requirement set forth in N.J.S.A. 48:16-16. The
power of attorney must be executed and delivered to the Division of
Motor Vehicles wherein the owner shall appoint the Director of the
Division of Motor Vehicles his true and lawful attorney for the purpose
of acknowledgement of service of process.
A. No limousine shall be operated unless it is equipped, in accordance
with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 48:16-22.1, with the following:
(1) A two-way communications system or mobile telephone which shall
provide for communication to a person outside the vehicle for a
distance of not less than 100 miles.
(2) A first-aid kit and operable fire extinguisher, which shall be
accessible inside the vehicle.
(3) If the height of the vehicle floor is 10 inches or more above ground
level, the vehicle shall be equipped with sideboards attached to the
permanent body construction of the vehicle.
B. The owner of the limousine service shall maintain records of the
examination of the condition of each limousine in his service which
report shall be subject to inspection by the Division of Motor Vehicles.
§ 413-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 413-31
1:413
background and criminal investigation requirements as well as testing for
controlled dangerous substances.
§ 413-32. Violations and penalties.
The operator who is found guilty after a hearing in Penns Grove Municipal
Court of a violation of any of the following shall be subject to the following
fines:
A. Operation of a limousine service without a valid license:
(1) First offense: $1,000.
(2) Second offense: $1,000 and suspension of business license for 30
days.
(3) Third offense: $1,000 and suspension of business license for 180
days.
§ 413-31 PENNS GROVE CODE § 413-32
1:414
Chapter 420
TRAILERS AND TRAILER CAMPS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 450.
§ 420-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CAMPSITE or TRAILER CAMP — Any lot or plot of ground used for the
temporary or permanent storage, parking or location of one or more trailers
or camp cars for a period of more than six hours and which places are used
as a business operated for profit or for personal use.
TRAILER, MOBILE HOME or CAMP CAR — Any unit designed and used for
living or sleeping purposes which is equipped with wheels or similar devices
used for the purpose of transporting said unit from place to place, whether
by motive power or other means, and without permanent foundation other
than wheels, jacks or skirtings.
§ 420-2. Prohibited acts.
§ 420-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-17-1986 by Ord. No.
86-5]
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate any terms or
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to
A. Within the limits of the Borough of Penns Grove, no person, firm or
corporation shall conduct or carry on the business of the operation of a
trailer camp or campsite or work in, occupy or directly or indirectly, in
any manner whatsoever, utilize any place or premises in which is
conducted or carried on a trailer camp or campsite, nor shall any
person, firm or corporation park, keep house or maintain any trailer
within the limits of this Borough, on a campsite or in a trailer camp,
except for the purpose of repair or storage, for a period of more than six
hours, including premises owned by the owner of the trailer, mobile
home or camp car.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation owning or
operating a camp car, mobile home or trailer, located on the premises of
the owner of the trailer or on leased ground, to remove or cause to have
removed the wheels or any similar devices from said trailer, mobile
home or camp car or to otherwise permanently fix it to the ground in a
manner that would prevent the ready removal of said trailer, mobile
home or camp car.
§ 413-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 420-3
1:415
imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding 90 days or a fine
not exceeding $1,000, or both, in the discretion of the Municipal Judge
before whom such conviction is had. Each day that a violation of any of
the terms or provisions of this chapter shall continue after notice shall
constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 432
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles and play vehicles — See Ch. 192.
Parades and assemblies — See Ch. 324.
Taxicabs and limousines — See Ch. 413.
Motorized recreational vehicles — See Ch.
436.
§ 420-3 PENNS GROVE CODE § 420-3
1:416
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 432-1. Definitions.
Whenever any words and phrases are used in this chapter, the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases
used herein.
§ 432-2. Repealer.
All former traffic ordinances of the Borough of Penns Grove are hereby
repealed, except that this repeal shall not affect or prevent the prosecution
or punishment of any person for any act done or committed in violation of
any ordinance hereby repealed prior to the taking effect of this chapter.
§ 432-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-15-1991 by Ord. No.
91-1; 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statute, every
person convicted or pleading guilty to a violation of a provision of this
chapter or any supplement thereto shall pay a minimum penalty of $21,
with the maximum penalty being $50, or be imprisoned for a term not
exceeding 15 days, or both. The penalty under this chapter shall be $21,
payable through the Violations Bureau of the Borough of Penns Grove,
unless indicated otherwise. In the event that a penalty in excess of $21 is
sought, the complaining party shall indicate on the summons that a court
appearance is required.
§ 432-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 432-3
1:417

ARTICLE II
Parking
§ 432-4. Regulations not exclusive.
The provisions of this article imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person of the duty to observe other and more restrictive
provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles as set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138 or any other New Jersey statute or
as hereinafter provided.
§ 432-5. Parking prohibited at all times.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule A (§ 432-32), attached to and made a part of
this chapter.
§ 432-6. Parking prohibited during certain hours.
§ 432-7. Stopping or standing prohibited.
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle during the times specified in
Schedule C (§ 432-34), of any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of
the streets or parts of streets described in said Schedule C, attached to and
made a part of this chapter.
§ 432-8. Parking time limited.
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit shown in
Schedule D (§ 432-35) at any time between the hours listed in said Schedule
D, of any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of the streets or parts
of streets described in said Schedule D, attached to and made a part of this
chapter.
§ 432-9. Parking for persons with disabilities. [Amended 6-4-2003
by Ord. No. 2002-23; 6-3-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-7; 11-4-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-15; 2-16-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-2; 2-16-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-3; 6-15-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-8; 2-21-2012 by Ord. No.
A. No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified in Schedule
B (§ 432-33), of any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of the
streets or parts of streets described in Schedule B, attached to and
made a part of this chapter.
B. Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this section
shall be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper
regulation of traffic, and any peace officer may provide for the removal
of such vehicle. The owner shall pay the reasonable costs of the removal
and storage which may result from such removal before regaining
possession of the vehicle.
§ 432-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 432-9
1:419
2012-3; 9-2-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-9; 7-7-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-8;
7-5-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-17; 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
Parking shall be prohibited at all times for all motor vehicles, except those
motor vehicles operated by persons who have been issued special vehicle
identification cards by the New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 39:4-205 and 39:4-197.5, on streets or other public areas of
the Borough of Penns Grove appropriately designated as restricted parking
areas for a person with a disability. Any person convicted of parking a motor
vehicle in such a parking area so designated who has not been issued such
a special vehicle identification card shall be subject to the penalty provided
in N.J.S.A. 39:4-197(3)c.
A. Two parking spaces for persons with disabilities will be set forth in front
of the residence at 9 Pearl Street, Penns Grove, New Jersey 08069.
B. Restricted parking areas.
(1) Pursuant to the authority granted to this municipality by N.J.S.A.
39:4-197.6, a restricted parking area shall be located as close as
practicable to the front of the following residences, to be used by
the person with a disability residing therein, if a windshield placard
or wheelchair symbol license plates have been issued for a vehicle
owned by the person with a disability residing within the residence,
or by another occupant of the residence who is a member of the
immediate family of the person with a disability, by the Motor
Vehicle Commission:
61 East Griffith Street, Block 31, Lot 15
21 Elvin Avenue, Block 26, Lot 20
12 Franklin Street, Block 58, Lot 16
305 Gillette Avenue, Block 88, Lot 6.04
311 Gillette Avenue, Block 88, Lot 6.01
83 North Broad Street, Block 27, Lot 3.0141
77 Penn Street, Block 52, Lot 20.01
100 Penn Street, Block 3, Lot 2
171 South Broad Street, Block 110, Lot 9.01
115 Tyrone Avenue, Block 70, Lot 4
120 West Harmony Street, Block 58, Lot 7
(2) No person, other than those persons authorized in this Subsection
B, shall be permitted to park in these restricted spaces.
(3) The restricted parking spaces established herein shall be properly
marked and posted in accordance with applicable law.
41.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2009-15 which added this entry also provided as follows:
"Due to the fact that Broad Street is a County Road, this Ordinance shall not be effective
unless consented to by the County of Salem in accordance with N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.2."
§ 432-9 PENNS GROVE CODE § 432-10
1:420
§ 432-10. Night parking of certain vehicles.
No person shall park a motor home, boat trailer, travel trailer or tractortrailer
truck on any of the Borough streets between the hours of 9:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m.
§ 432-11. Tractor-trailer trucks. [Added 6-3-1996 by Ord. No. 96-9]
The parking of tractor-trailer trucks is prohibited at all times, applying to all
streets and properties existing within the Borough of Penns Grove, except
when the vehicle is owned by a Borough resident, and the vehicle is being
kept on said resident's property without the motor running or when the
vehicle is being utilized in the picking up and delivery of materials within
the Borough limits. This second exception will apply when utilized in the
picking up and delivery of materials. This exception will apply for no more
than one hour during any pickup or delivery period and at no time will apply
to the parking of these vehicles on Borough streets.
§ 432-12. Fire stations. [Added 6-16-1998 by Ord. No. 98-6]
A. No operator of a vehicle shall stand or park a vehicle within 20 feet of
the driveway entrance to any fire station or on the side of a street
opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of said entrance.
B. The prohibited area shall be designated by yellow markings and signs
that will be erected notifying the public of said parking restriction.
§ 432-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 432-12
1:421

ARTICLE III
Truck Exclusions
§ 432-13. Trucks over four tons excluded.
Trucks over four tons' gross weight are hereby excluded from the streets or
parts of streets described in Schedule E (§ 432-36), except for the pickup
and delivery of materials on such streets, said Schedule E being attached to
and made a part of this chapter.
§ 432-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 432-13
1:423

ARTICLE IV
One-Way Streets
§ 432-14. One-way streets designated.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule F (§ 432-37), attached
to and made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as one-way streets
in the direction indicated.
§ 432-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 432-14
1:425

ARTICLE V
Through Streets; Stop and Yield Intersections
§ 432-15. Through streets designated.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the streets or parts of
streets described in Schedule G (§ 432-38), attached to and made a part
of this chapter, are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall
be installed on the near right side of each street intersecting the through
street, except where yield signs are provided for in the designations.
§ 432-16. Stop intersections designated.
§ 432-17. Yield intersections designated.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
in Schedule I (§ 432-40), attached to and made a part of this chapter, are
hereby designated as yield intersections. Yield signs shall be installed as
provided therein.
A. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections
described in Schedule H (§ 432-39), attached to and made a part of this
chapter, are hereby designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall
be installed as provided therein.
B. Additions and deletions. The Mayor and Council may, by resolution duly
adopted and in compliance with N.J.S.A. 39:4-8 and 39:4-140, designate
additional intersections in the Borough as stop intersections or delete
as stop intersections any of those hereby or hereafter established.
§ 432-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 432-17
1:427

ARTICLE VI
Special Zones and Areas
§ 432-18. Taxi stands designated.
The locations described in Schedule K (§ 432-41), attached to and made a
part of this chapter, are hereby designated as taxi stands.
§ 432-19. Bus stops designated.
The locations described in Schedule L (§ 432-42), attached to and made a
part of this chapter, are hereby designated as bus stops.
§ 432-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 432-19
1:429

ARTICLE VII
Turn Prohibitions and Lane Reservations
§ 432-20. U-turns.
No person shall make a U-turn on any of the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule M (§ 432-43), attached to and made a part of this
chapter.
§ 432-21. Turns at intersections.
No person shall make a turn of the kind designated (left, right, all) at any
of the locations described in Schedule N (§ 432-44), attached to and made a
part of this chapter.
§ 432-22. Lane use reservations.
The lane locations described in Schedule O (§ 432-45), attached to and
made a part of this chapter, are designated as lane use reservations, and
traffic shall move only as indicated.
§ 432-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 432-22
1:431

ARTICLE VIII
Emergency No Parking
§ 432-23. Designation of snow emergency no-parking areas.
§ 432-24. Posting of signs.
§ 432-25. Removal of vehicles.
Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this article shall
be deemed a nuisance and menace to the safe and proper regulation of
traffic, and any peace officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle.
The owner shall pay the reasonable costs of the removal and storage which
may result from such removal before regaining possession of the vehicle.
§ 432-26. Effectiveness of article.
The effectiveness of this article is contingent on signs being erected as
required by law.
A. Whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it covers
the street or highway, no vehicle shall be parked on either side of any of
the streets or parts thereof described in Schedule P (§ 432-46),
attached to and made a part of this chapter.
B. The above parking prohibitions shall remain in effect after the snow has
ceased until the streets have been plowed sufficiently and to the extent
that parking will not interfere with the normal flow of traffic.
A. Upon the declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking upon
streets or parts of streets where temporary emergency no-parking signs
are displayed. The Chief of Police or, in his absence, the ranking police
officer is authorized to declare an emergency and to direct the posting
of said emergency no-parking signs when weather conditions,
accidents, fires or public celebrations dictate or require the avoidance
of hazards or other conditions which interfere with the free flow of
traffic.
B. Notification that the emergency no-parking signs are being or will be
posted shall be given to the operator or owner of any vehicle which has
been parked prior to the posting of the signs.
§ 432-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 432-26
1:433

ARTICLE IX
Speed Limits
§ 432-27. Limits established.
The speed limit for both directions of traffic along the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule Q (§ 432-47), attached to and made a part of
this chapter, is hereby established at the rate of speed indicated.
§ 432-28. Posting of signs.
Regulating and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above-designated speed limits as authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ 432-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 432-28
1:435

ARTICLE X
Traffic Control Signals
§ 432-29. Traffic signals established.
Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated at the intersections of
the streets described in Schedule R (§ 432-48), attached to and made a part
of this chapter.
§ 432-30. Installation of signals.
The traffic signal installation shall be in accordance with the provisions of
an Act Concerning Motor Vehicles and Traffic Regulations, Subtitle 1 of
Title 39 of the Revised Statutes, and shall conform to the design and shall be
maintained in operation as authorized by the Department of Transportation
of the State of New Jersey.
§ 432-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 432-30
1:437

ARTICLE XI
No-Passing Zones
§ 432-31. No-passing zones.
All streets within the Borough are no-passing zones.
§ 432-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 432-31
1:439

ARTICLE XII
Schedules
§ 432-32. Schedule A: No Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 432-5, no person shall park a vehicle
at any time upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Bay Street [Added 4-7-1992
by Ord. No. 92-7]
Both Entire length
Cumberland Avenue East Entire length
Delaware Avenue West Entire length
Deming Avenue East Entire length
East Griffith Street South Entire length
East Harmony Street West Entire length
East Pitman Street North Entire length
Garnett Street Both Entire length
John Street West Entire length
Mary Street Both Entire length
Naylor Avenue West From West Main Street to
Railroad Avenue
North Broad Street East Entire length
Park Avenue Both Between Virginia Avenue and
South Smith Street
South New Street Both Entire length
South Smith Avenue East Entire length
Tyrone Avenue East Entire length
West Griffith Street South Entire length
West Harmony Street North From Franklin Street to
Delaware Avenue
West Harmony Street South From North Broad Street to
Franklin Street
Westminster Avenue East All of the street, except the
portion between Mitchell
Avenue and Walnut Street
West Pitman Street South Entire length
Willis Street North Entire length
§ 432-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 432-33
1:441
§ 432-33. Schedule B: No Parking Certain Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 432-6, no person shall park a vehicle
between the hours listed upon any of the following described streets or
parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Barber Avenue Both 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Thursdays
From Harmony
Street to Union
Street
Barber Avenue Both 6:00 a.m. to 8:30
a.m./Thursdays
From Main Street
to Harmony Street
Beach Avenue North 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Mondays
From Broad Street
to Delaware Drive
Beach Avenue South 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Mondays
From Delaware
Drive to Spruce
Street
Beach Avenue South 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Thursdays
From Naylor
Avenue to Broad
Street
Church Street North 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
p.m./Thursdays
From Broad Street
to Delaware Drive
Church Street South 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Mondays
From Delaware
Drive to Broad
Street
Cove Road Both 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Mondays
From Delaware
Drive to State
Street
Cumberland
Avenue
East 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Mondays
From Diver Avenue
to Main Street
Cumberland
Avenue
West 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Thursdays
From Main Street
to Diver Avenue
Delaware Avenue East 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Mondays
From Cove Road to
Church Street
Delaware Avenue East 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Fridays
From Main Street
to West Line Street
Delaware Avenue West 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Mondays
From Beach
Avenue to Cove
Road
Delaware Avenue West 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Tuesdays
From Line Street
to Main Street
Deming Avenue East 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Mondays
From Willis Avenue
to Walnut Street
§ 432-33 PENNS GROVE CODE § 432-33
1:442
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Denny Avenue Both 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Fridays
From Penn State to
Franklin Street
Diver Avenue North 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Mondays
From Gillette
Avenue to Virginia
Avenue
Diver Avenue North 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Mondays
From Smith
Avenue to
Cumberland
Avenue
Diver Avenue South 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Thursdays
From Virginia
Avenue to Gillette
Avenue
Diver Avenue South 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Mondays
From Westminster
Avenue to Smith
Avenue
Dixie Drive Both 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Thursdays
From Miller
Avenue to Regional
Drive
East Griffith
Street
South 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Tuesdays
From Broad Street
to Virginia Avenue
East Harmony
Street
South 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Tuesdays
From Virginia
Avenue to Broad
Street
East Line Street North 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Fridays
From Barber
Avenue to Broad
Street
East Line Street South 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Tuesdays
From Broad Street
to Barber Avenue
East Main Street North 6:00 a.m. to 8:30
a.m./Tuesdays
From Norman
Avenue to Gillison
Avenue
East Main Street North 6:00 a.m. to 8:30
a.m./Fridays
From Virginia
Avenue to Broad
Street
East Main Street South 6:00 a.m. to 8:30
a.m./Tuesdays
From Broad Street
to Norman Avenue
East Union Street North 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Tuesdays
From Barber
Avenue to Broad
Street
East Union Street South 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Fridays
From Broad Street
to Barber Avenue
§ 432-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 432-33
1:443
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Elvin Avenue Both 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Tuesdays
From Broad Street
to dead end
Featherer Avenue Both 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m./
Tuesdays
From Marsden
Avenue to Howard
Avenue
Franklin Street East 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Fridays
From Main Street
to Pitman Street
Franklin Street West 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Tuesdays
From Pitman
Street to Main
Street
Gillette Avenue Both 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Thursdays
From Norman
Avenue to Iona
Avenue
Gillison Avenue Both 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Tuesdays
From Main Street
to Marsden Avenue
Griffith Street North 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Fridays
From Virginia
Avenue to Broad
Street
Guest Street West 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Fridays
From Line Street
to Poplar Street
Harmony Street South 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Fridays
From Delaware
Avenue to Virginia
Avenue
Harold Street Both 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Thursdays
From Miller
Avenue to Norman
Avenue
Howard Avenue Both 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Tuesdays
From Featherer
Avenue to Virginia
Avenue
Iona Avenue Both 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Thursdays
From Miller
Avenue to Virginia
Avenue
Lanning Avenue East 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Fridays
From Pitman
Street to Line
Street
Lanning Avenue West 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Tuesdays
From Line Street
to Pitman Street
Line Street Both 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Fridays
From Delaware
Avenue to Morris
Avenue
§ 432-33 PENNS GROVE CODE § 432-33
1:444
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Line Street North 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Fridays
From Lanning
Avenue to Guest
Street
Line Street South 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Fridays
From Guest Street
to Wright Street
Main Street North 6:00 a.m. to 8:30
a.m./Tuesdays
From Gillison
Avenue to Virginia
Avenue
Maple Avenue North 6:00 a.m. to 7:30
a.m./Thursdays
From its
intersection to
Smith Avenue
Maple Avenue North 6:00 a.m. to 7:30
a.m./Tuesdays
From its
intersection to
State Street
Maple Avenue North 9:00 p.m. to 7:30 a.m./All From Route No.
130 to the east
side of the railroad
crossing
Maple Avenue South 6:00 a.m. to 7:30
a.m./Tuesdays
From Broad Street
to the intersection
Maple Avenue South 6:00 a.m. to 7:30
a.m./Thursdays
From Broad Street
to the intersection
Maple Avenue South 9:00 p.m. to 7:30 a.m./All From G Street to
Plant Street
Maple Avenue South 6:00 a.m. to 7:30
a.m./Fridays
From State Street
to Broad Street
Marsden Avenue Both 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Tuesdays
From Gillison
Avenue to Virginia
Avenue
Maryland Avenue North 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Thursdays
From Miller
Avenue to
Trumbull Street
Maryland Avenue South 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Mondays
From Trumbull
Street to Norman
Avenue
Mary Street and
John Street
Both 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Thursdays
From Broad Street
to Main Street
Miller Avenue Both 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Thursdays
From Harold
Street to Dixie
Drive
§ 432-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 432-33
1:445
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Mill Street East 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Thursdays
From Church
Street to Railroad
Avenue
Mill Street West 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Mondays
From Railroad
Avenue to Beach
Avenue
Mitchell Avenue North 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Thursdays
From Westminster
Avenue to Broad
Street
Mitchell Avenue South 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Mondays
From Broad Street
to Westminster
Avenue
Morris Avenue Both 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Fridays
From Line Street
to Pitman Street
Naylor Avenue East 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Mondays
From Beach
Avenue to Main
Street
Naylor Avenue West 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Thursdays
From Main Street
to Beach Avenue
North Broad
Street
East 6:00 a.m. to 8:30
a.m./Tuesdays
From Main Street
to Line Street
North Broad
Street
West 6:00 a.m. to 8:30
a.m./Fridays
From Line Street
to Main Street
North New Street Both 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Fridays
From Denny
Avenue to Pitman
Street
North Norman
Avenue
Both 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Thursdays
From Main Street
to Borough
boundary
North Smith
Avenue
Both 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Thursdays
From Main Street
to Harmony Street
North Torton
Avenue
Both 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Thursdays
From Main Street
to Borough
boundary
Oak Street Both 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Mondays
From Railroad
Avenue to Main
Street
Park Avenue Both 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Thursdays
From Gillette
Avenue to Virginia
Avenue
§ 432-33 PENNS GROVE CODE § 432-33
1:446
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Park Avenue Both 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Mondays
From Smith
Avenue to Virginia
Avenue
Pearl Street Both 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Tuesdays
From Broad Street
to dead end
Penn Street East 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Tuesdays
From Main Street
to Line Street
Penn Street West 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Fridays
From Line Street
to Main Street
Pitman Street North 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Tuesdays
From Virginia
Avenue to
Delaware Avenue
Pitman Street South 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Fridays
From Delaware
Avenue to Virginia
Avenue
Plant Road Both 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./All
From Maple
Avenue to
Summerill Avenue
Poplar Street North 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m.
Tuesdays
From Delaware
Avenue to Wright
Street
Railroad Avenue North 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Mondays
From Broad Street
to the river
Railroad Avenue South 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Mondays
From the river to
Mill Street
Railroad Avenue South 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Thursdays
From Mill Street to
Broad Street
Regional Drive Both 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Thursdays
From Dixie Drive
to Virginia Avenue
Sack Avenue North 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Thursdays
From Broad Street
to Naylor Avenue
Sack Avenue South 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Mondays
From Naylor
Avenue to Broad
Street
Smith Avenue East 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Mondays
From Maple
Avenue to Willis
Drive
Smith Avenue West 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Mondays
From Main Street
to Maple Street
South Broad
Street
Both 6:00 a.m. to 8:30
a.m./Tuesdays
From Maple
Avenue to the river
§ 432-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 432-33
1:447
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
South Broad
Street
East 6:00 a.m. to 8:30
a.m./Fridays
From Maple
Avenue to Main
Street
South Broad
Street
West 6:00 a.m. to 8:30
a.m./Tuesdays
From Main Street
to Maple Avenue
South Broad
Street
West 6:00 a.m. to 8:30
a.m./Thursdays
From Main Street
to Maple Avenue
South Norman
Avenue
East 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Thursdays
From Gillette
Avenue to Main
Street
South Norman
Avenue
West 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Mondays
From Main Street
to Gillette Avenue
South Smith
Avenue
East 6:00 a.m. to 7:30
a.m./Thursdays
From Maple
Avenue to Park
Avenue
South Smith
Avenue
East 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Thursdays
From Park Avenue
to Main Street
South Torton
Street
Both 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Mondays
From Maryland
Avenue to Main
Street
Spring Street Both 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Mondays
From Garnett
Street to dead end
Spruce Street Both 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Mondays
From Beach
Avenue to Church
Street
Spruce Street Both 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Mondays
From Cove Road to
Church Street
State Street East 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Tuesdays
From Maple
Avenue to Main
Street
State Street West 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Fridays
From Main Street
to Maple Avenue
Summerill
Avenue
Both 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Mondays
From Plant Road to
dead end
Trumbell Street Both 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Mondays
From Virginia
Avenue to Main
Street
Turner Avenue Both 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Fridays
From dead end to
Pitman Street
Tyrone Avenue Both 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./All
From Willis Avenue
to Walnut Street
§ 432-33 PENNS GROVE CODE § 432-33
1:448
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Walnut Street South 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Mondays
From Broad Street
to Virginia Avenue
Walnut Street South 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Thursdays
From Virginia
Avenue to Broad
Street
West Griffith
Street
Both 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Tuesdays
From Broad Street
to dead end
West Harmony
Street
South 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Tuesdays
From Broad Street
to Delaware
Avenue
West Line Street North 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Fridays
From Wright
Street to Lanning
Avenue
West Main Street North 6:00 a.m. to 8:30
a.m./Fridays
From Broad Street
to Delaware
Avenue
West Main Street South 6:00 a.m. to 8:30
a.m./Tuesdays
From Delaware
Avenue to Broad
Street
Westminster
Avenue
East 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Thursdays
From Diver Avenue
to Mitchell Avenue
Westminster
Avenue
West 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Mondays
From Mitchell
Avenue to Diver
Avenue
West Union
Street
Both 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Tuesdays
From Broad Street
to dead end
Willis Street North 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Thursdays
From Broad Street
to Virginia Avenue
Willis Street North 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Mondays
From Virginia
Avenue to Broad
Street
Wright Street East 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Tuesdays
From Poplar Street
to West Line Street
Wright Street West 8:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m./Fridays
From Line Street
to Poplar Street
§ 432-34. Schedule C: No Stopping or Standing.
In accordance with the provisions of § 432-7, no person shall stop or stand a
vehicle between the times specified upon of the following described streets
or parts of streets:
§ 432-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 432-34
1:449
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
(Reserved)
§ 432-35. Schedule D: Time Limit Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 432-8, no person shall park a vehicle
for longer than the time limit shown upon any of the following streets or
parts of streets:
Name of Street Side
Time Limit; Hours/
Days Location
East Main Street Both 2 hours; 9:00 a.m. to
9:00 p.m./All, except
Sundays
From Broad Street
to Virginia Avenue
South Broad
Street
Both 2 hours; 9:00 a.m. to
9:00 p.m./All, except
Sundays
From Main Street
to Walnut Street
West Main
Street
Both 2 hours; 9:00 a.m. to
9:00 p.m./All, except
Sundays
From railroad
crossing to Broad
Street
§ 432-36. Schedule E: Trucks Over Four Tons Excluded. [Amended
5-21-1991 by Ord. No. 91-5; 9-17-1991 by Ord. No. 91-10]
In accordance with the provisions of § 432-13, trucks over four tons' gross
weight are hereby excluded from the following described streets or parts of
streets, except for the pickup and delivery of materials on such streets:
Name of Street
All municipal streets within the Borough of Penns Grove, including:
Delaware Avenue
East Main Street
Maple Avenue
North Broad Street
South Broad Street
State Street
West Main Street
§ 432-37. Schedule F: One-Way Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 432-14, the following described
streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as one-way streets in the
direction indicated:
§ 432-34 PENNS GROVE CODE § 432-37
1:450
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Limits
Beach Avenue West From South Broad Street to Naylor
Avenue
Franklin Street South From West Pitman Street to West
Main Street
John Street North From Mary Street to East Main
Street
Mitchell Avenue East From South Broad Street to
Westminster Avenue
Penn Street North From West Main Street to West
Pitman Street
Westminster
Avenue
South From Mitchell Avenue to Walnut
Street
§ 432-38. Schedule G: Through Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 432-15, the following described
streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as through streets. Stop
signs shall be installed on the near right side of each street intersecting the
through street, except where yield signs are provided for in the designation.
Name of Street Limits
(Reserved)
§ 432-39. Schedule H: Stop Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 432-16, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as stop intersections, and stop signs
shall be installed as follows:
Intersection Stop Sign on
Barber Avenue and East Harmony
Street
East Harmony Street (4-way stop)
Barber Avenue and East Pitman
Street
East Pitman Street
Barber Avenue and Justice Street Justice Street
Beach Avenue and Naylor Avenue Naylor Avenue
Cumberland Avenue and Lincoln
Avenue
Lincoln Avenue
Delaware Avenue and Poplar Street Poplar Street
Delaware Avenue and Risner Avenue Risner Avenue
Delaware Avenue and West
Harmony Street
West Harmony Street
§ 432-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 432-39
1:451
Intersection Stop Sign on
Delaware Avenue and West Line
Street
West Line Street
Delaware Avenue and West Pitman
Street
West Pitman Street
Delaware Avenue and Woods Avenue Woods Avenue
Delaware Drive and Church Street Church Street
Delaware Drive and Cove Road Cove Road
Denny Avenue and New Street New Street
Diver Avenue and Gillette Avenue Gillette Avenue
East Griffith Street and Barber
Avenue
Barber Avenue
East Harmony Street and Barber
Avenue
Barber Avenue (4-way stop)
East Harmony Street and North
Smith Street
North Smith Street
East Main Street and Barber Avenue Barber Avenue
East Main Street and Cumberland
Avenue
Cumberland Avenue
East Main Street and Gillison
Avenue
Gillison Avenue
East Main Street and John Street John Street
East Main Street and Norman
Avenue
Norman Avenue
East Main Street and Smith Avenue Smith Avenue
East Main Street and Torton Street Torton Street
East Main Street and Trumbull
Street
Trumbull Street
East Maple Avenue and Garnett
Street
Garnett Street
East Maple Avenue and G Street G Street
East Maple Avenue and Hayes
Street
Hayes Street
East Maple Avenue and Plant Street Plant Street
East Maple Avenue and South Smith
Avenue
South Smith Avenue
East Union Street and Barber
Avenue
Barber Avenue
Elvin Avenue and Barber Avenue Barber Avenue
Franklin Street and Denny Avenue Denny Avenue
§ 432-39 PENNS GROVE CODE § 432-39
1:452
Intersection Stop Sign on
Iona Avenue and Gillette Avenue Gillette Avenue
Iona Avenue and Huffman Avenue Huffman Avenue
Lanning Avenue and Poplar Street Poplar Street
Marsden Avenue and Featherer
Avenue
Featherer Avenue
Maryland Avenue and Norman
Avenue
Norman Avenue
Maryland Avenue and Torton Street Torton Street
Mill Street and Beach Avenue Beach Avenue
Naylor Avenue and Railroad Avenue Railroad Avenue (4-way stop)
Norman Avenue and Harold Street Harold Street
North Broad Street and Elvin
Avenue
Elvin Avenue
North Broad Street and Griffith
Street
Griffith Street
North Broad Street and Harmony
Street
Harmony Street
North Broad Street and Line Street Line Street
North Broad Street and Pearl Street Pearl Street
North Broad Street and Pitman
Street
Pitman Street
North Broad Street and Union
Street
Union Street
Park Avenue and Gillette Avenue Gillette Avenue
Park Avenue and Huffman Avenue Huffman Avenue
Penn Street and Denny Avenue Denny Avenue
Poplar Street and Morris Avenue Morris Avenue
Poplar Street and Penn Street Penn Street
Poplar Street and Turner Avenue Turner Avenue
Poplar Street and Wright Street Wright Street
Railroad Avenue and Mill Street Mill Street
Railroad Avenue and Naylor Avenue Naylor Avenue (4-way stop)
Regional Drive and Dixie Drive Dixie Drive
South Broad Street and Beach
Avenue
Beach Avenue
South Broad Street and Church
Street
Church Street
South Broad Street and Mary Street Mary Street
§ 432-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 432-39
1:453
Intersection Stop Sign on
South Broad Street and Railroad
Avenue
Railroad Avenue
South Broad Street and Sack Avenue Sack Avenue
South Broad Street and Walnut
Street
Walnut Street
South Broad Street and Willis Street Willis Street
South Smith Avenue and Diver
Avenue
Diver Avenue
South Smith Avenue and Lincoln
Street
Lincoln Street
South Smith Avenue and Park
Avenue
Park Avenue
Spruce Street and Church Street Church Street
Spruce Street and Cove Road Cove Road
State Street and Beach Avenue Beach Avenue
State Street and Church Street Church Street
State Street and Cove Road Cove Road
State Street and Railroad Avenue Railroad Avenue
State Street and Sack Avenue Sack Avenue
Trumbull Street and Maryland
Avenue
Maryland Avenue
Virginia Avenue and East Griffith
Street
East Griffith Street
Virginia Avenue and East Harmony
Street
East Harmony Street
Virginia Avenue and East Pitman
Street
East Pitman Street
Virginia Avenue and Howard Avenue Howard Avenue
Virginia Avenue and Iona Avenue Iona Avenue
Virginia Avenue and Marsden
Avenue
Marsden Avenue
Virginia Avenue and Park Avenue Park Avenue
Virginia Avenue and Regional Drive Regional Drive
Virginia Avenue and Trumbull Street Trumbull Street
Virginia Avenue and Walnut Street Walnut Street
Virginia Avenue and Willis Street Willis Street
Walnut Street and Cumberland
Avenue
Cumberland Avenue
§ 432-39 PENNS GROVE CODE § 432-39
1:454
Intersection Stop Sign on
Walnut Street and South Smith
Avenue
South Smith Avenue
Walnut Street and Tyrone Avenue Tyrone Avenue
Walnut Street and Westminster
Avenue
Westminster Avenue
West Harmony Street and Franklin
Street
Franklin Street
West Harmony Street and Penn
Street
Penn Street
West Main Street and Delaware
Avenue
Delaware Avenue
West Main Street and Franklin
Street
Franklin Street
West Main Street and Naylor Avenue Naylor Avenue
West Main Street and State Street State Street
West Maple Avenue and South
Broad Street
South Broad Street (sign on both
sides of intersection)
Westminster Avenue and Diver
Avenue
Diver Avenue
West Pitman Street and Lanning
Avenue
Lanning Avenue
West Pitman Street and Morris
Avenue
Morris Avenue
West Pitman Street and New Street New Street
West Pitman Street and Penn Street Penn Street
West Pitman Street and Turner
Avenue
Turner Avenue
Willis Street and Cumberland
Avenue
Cumberland Avenue
Willis Street and South Smith
Avenue
South Smith Avenue
Willis Street and Tyrone Avenue Tyrone Avenue
Willis Street and Westminster
Avenue
Westminster Avenue
§ 432-40. Schedule I: Yield Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 432-17, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as yield intersections, and yield signs
shall be installed as follows:
§ 432-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 432-40
1:455
Intersection Yield Sign on
(Reserved)
§ 432-41. Schedule K: Taxi Stands.
In accordance with the provisions of § 432-18, the following described
locations are hereby designated as taxi stands:
Name of Street Side Location
West Main Street North In front of the taxi business
between both signs, taxi parking
only
§ 432-42. Schedule L: Bus Stops.
In accordance with the provisions of § 432-19, the following described
locations are hereby designated as bus stops:
Name of Street Side Location
East Main Street North Bus stop shelter
South Broad Street West Bus stop shelter
§ 432-43. Schedule M: U-Turn Prohibitions.
In accordance with the provisions of § 432-20, no person shall make a Uturn
at any of the following locations:
Name of Street Location
All streets within the Borough
§ 432-44. Schedule N: Prohibited Turns at Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 432-21, no person shall make a turn
of the kind designated below at any of the following locations:
Intersection Location Prohibited Turn
(Reserved)
§ 432-45. Schedule O: Lane Use Reservations.
In accordance with the provisions of § 432-22, all vehicles shall move as
described below:
Intersection Location Lane Reserved Purpose
(Reserved)
§ 432-40 PENNS GROVE CODE § 432-46
1:456
§ 432-46. Schedule P: Snow Emergency No-Parking Areas.
In accordance with the provision of § 432-23, no person shall park a vehicle
upon either side of any of the streets or parts of streets thereof listed below
whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it covers the
street or highway:
Name of Street Location
Barber Avenue Entire length
Church Street Entire length
Cove Road Entire length
Delaware Avenue Entire length
Delaware Drive Entire length
East Harmony Street Entire length
East Main Street Entire length
East Maple Avenue Entire length
East Pitman Street Entire length
Marsden Avenue Entire length
Maryland Avenue Entire length
North Broad Street Entire length
North Smith Street Entire length
Poplar Street Entire length
Railroad Avenue Entire length
South Broad Street Entire length
South Smith Avenue Entire length
State Street Entire length
Walnut Street Entire length
West Harmony Street Entire length
West Main Street Entire length
West Maple Avenue Entire length
West Pitman Street Entire length
Willis Street Entire length
§ 432-47. Schedule Q: Speed Limits.
In accordance with the provisions of § 432-27, the speed limits are as
follows:
§ 432-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 432-47
1:457
Street
Speed Limit
(mph)
All streets other than North Broad Street 25
North Broad Street 30
§ 432-48. Schedule R: Traffic Signals Established.
In accordance with the provisions of § 432-29, traffic signals shall be located
as follows:
A. At the intersection of Broad Street and Main Street.
§ 432-47 PENNS GROVE CODE § 432-48
1:458
ARTICLE XIII
Enforcement
§ 432-49. Authorization of Mayor.
The Mayor of the Borough of Penns Grove is hereby authorized to provide,
by regulation, for the closing of any street or portion thereof to motor
vehicle traffic on any day or days or during specified hours on any day or
days whenever he finds that such closing is necessary for the preservation
of the public safety, health or welfare.
§ 432-50. Posting of signs.
Any regulation promulgated hereunder shall provide for the posting of
proper warning signs of such closing of any street or portion thereof during
the time the same is closed in pursuance thereof.
§ 432-51. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of this article or of any regulation promulgated thereunder
shall be punished as provided in § 432-3.
§ 432-52. When effective. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
Any regulation adopted under this chapter shall not become effective unless
or until it has been submitted to and approved by the Commissioner of
Transportation, if approval by the Commissioner is required under N.J.S.A.
39:4-8.
§ 432-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 432-52
1:459
Chapter 436
VEHICLES, MOTORIZED RECREATIONAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles and play vehicles — See Ch. 192. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 432.
§ 436-1. Findings and purpose.
The Borough of Penns Grove finds that the operation of motorized
recreational vehicles has previously been conducted in a manner so as
to disturb the peace, quiet and tranquility of others and/or in a careless,
reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger or be likely to endanger the
safety of others or the property of others. This chapter proposes to regulate
their use.
§ 436-2. Word usage; definitions.
§ 436-3. Operation and use restrictions. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-5]
A. Whenever any words and phrases are used in this chapter, the meaning
respectively ascribed to them in N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 shall be deemed to
apply to such words and phrases used herein.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE — A motor-operated vehicle, designed to
travel over any terrain, of a type possessing between three and six
rubber tires, but shall not include golf carts.
MOTORCYCLE — Includes motorcycles, motor bikes, bicycles with a
motor attached and all motor-operated vehicles of the bicycle or
tricycle type.
PUBLIC HIGHWAY — The entire width between the boundary lines of
every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use
of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
PUBLIC LANDS — Any and all real property which is owned or
controlled by a governmental entity, including conservation areas,
utility easements and drainage easements.
SNOWMOBILE — Any motor-operated vehicle, designed primarily to
travel over ice or snow, of a type which uses sled-type runners, skis, an
endless belt tread, cleats or any combination of these or other similar
means of contact with the surface upon which it is operated, but does
not include any farm tractor, highway or other construction equipment,
or any military vehicle.
§ 432-52 PENNS GROVE CODE § 436-3
1:460
A. No person shall operate any recreational motorized vehicles, including
but not limited to snowmobiles; two-wheel vehicles known as "dirt
bikes," "minibikes," or "trail bikes"; motor scooters; three- or fourwheel
motor vehicles known as "all-terrain vehicles" (ATVs); and fourwheel
motor vehicles known as "go-carts" under the following
circumstances:
(1) On the private property of another without the express written
permission of the owner or occupant of the property, within 100
feet of an adjoining property owner(s) and within 100 feet of a
public street or right-of-way.
(2) On any public grounds or property, including playgrounds and
recreational areas or lands owned by the Borough, excluding
streets, the use of which is expressly provided for by the New
Jersey statutes.
(3) In a manner so as to create loud, unnecessary or unusual noise so
as to annoy other persons or to disturb or interfere with the peace
and quiet of the Borough. Further, no person shall operate a
recreational motor vehicle before the hour of 9:00 a.m. and after
the hour of 7:00 p.m. prevailing time or sunset, whichever shall
occur first. Further, no person shall cause dust to be created which
disturbs the peace and repose of neighbors, causes property
damage to neighboring homes and creates traffic hazards to
passing motorists.
(4) In a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger or be
likely to endanger the safety or property of any person, including
the operator of the vehicle.
B. No person operating a motor-propelled vehicle shall carry any
passenger or passengers therein or thereon unless said vehicle is
specifically equipped for the purpose of carrying one or more
passengers, and no person operating a motor-propelled vehicle shall
carry more passengers therein or thereon than such vehicle is
specifically equipped to carry.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or to permit to be
operated, or to ride as a passenger, any motorcycle or all-terrain vehicle
without wearing a protective helmet approved by the Director of the
Division of Motor Vehicles in the Department of Transportation of the
State of New Jersey. Any such helmet shall be of a type acceptable for
use in conjunction with motorcycles as provided in N.J.S.A. 39:3-76.7
through 39:3-76.10.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or permit to be operated a
motorcycle or all-terrain vehicle:
(1) That is not equipped with working headlights, taillights, brakes and
proper mufflers as supplied by the motor manufacturer for the
particular model without modifications.
§ 436-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 436-3
1:461
§ 436-4. Age requirement.
§ 436-5. Compliance with state statutes.
Any motor vehicle as defined under § 436-2 operated within the Borough
shall comply with all relevant provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:3C-1 et seq.,
including but not limited to the registration provisions contained in N.J.S.A.
39:3C-3 and the unlawful act regulations contained in N.J.S.A. 39:3C-19.
§ 436-6. Impoundment.
(2) At any time and in any manner intended or reasonably to be
expected to harass, drive or pursue any wildlife.
(3) Without lighted headlights and lighted taillights.
(4) Upon a railroad or right-of-way of an operating railroad, except
railroad personnel in performance of their duties.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this
chapter or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant to this chapter.
A. A person under the age of 14 years shall not operate or be permitted to
operate any snowmobile, motorcycle or all-terrain vehicle on public
lands or waters or across a public highway, not otherwise prohibited.
B. A person less than 16 years of age shall not operate on public lands or
waters or across a public highway of this state, not otherwise
prohibited, an all-terrain vehicle or motorcycle with an engine capacity
greater than 90 cubic centimeters.
C. A person less than 18 years of age shall not operate an all-terrain
vehicle or motorcycle registered in this state on public lands or waters
or across a public highway of this state, not otherwise prohibited,
unless the person has completed an all-terrain vehicle safety education
and training course established or certified by the Commissioner of
Environmental Protection pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:3C-15. At all times
during the operation of the all-terrain vehicle the person shall have in
his possession a certificate indicating successful completion of the
course. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
A. Any police officer enforcing this chapter may impound any motor-driven
vehicle operated on public or private property if the vehicle cannot be
legally driven upon the public roadways of this state.
B. In cases involving persons under the age of 17 years old, the vehicle
may be returned to the operator's parent or legal guardian upon
payment of all costs and fees associated with the impoundment, which
may include, but not be limited to, storage fees. In the case of an
unregistered vehicle, the vehicle shall be released from impoundment
upon proof that the vehicle has been properly registered and insured
under the New Jersey statutes and upon payment of all fees and costs
§ 436-3 PENNS GROVE CODE § 436-6
1:462
§ 436-7. Exclusions.
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent acceptable agricultural management
practices.
§ 436-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-5]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by one or more of the following: by a fine of
no less than $100 and no more than $2,000 or by imprisonment for a term
not to exceed 90 days or by a period of community service not to exceed 90
days. Any person who is convicted of violating any provision of this chapter
within one year of the date of a previous violation of this same chapter and
who was fined for the previous violation shall be sentenced by a court to an
additional fine as a repeat offender. The additional fine imposed by the court
upon a person for a repeated offense shall not be less than the minimum or
exceed the maximum fine fixed for a violation of this chapter but shall be
calculated separately from the fine imposed for the violation of this chapter.
Chapter 450
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use procedures and fees — See Ch. 85.
Certificates of occupancy — See Ch. 213.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 223.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 252.
Site plan review — See Ch. 375.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 387.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 400.
incurred in the impoundment, including but not limited to storage fees.
In the case of the vehicle being unable to be registered and insured in
this state and if the person(s) is under the age of 18 years old, then the
vehicle may be returned to his/her parent guardian.
C. In the event that the impounded vehicle is unable to be driven legally
upon the roadways of this state (i.e., all-terrain vehicles, dirt bikes and
such), the vehicle must be removed from impound by either towing or
carting.
§ 436-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 436-8
1:463

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 450-1. Interpretation.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be
held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public
health, safety, comfort, convenience, order and general welfare. Where the
provisions of this chapter impose greater restrictions than those of any
statute, other ordinance or regulation, the provisions of this chapter shall
control. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance or regulation
impose greater restrictions than this chapter, the provisions of such statute,
ordinance or regulation shall control.
§ 450-2. Word usage.
§ 450-3. Definitions.
Unless a contrary intention clearly appears, the following words and
phrases shall have, for the purpose of this chapter, meanings given in the
following clauses:
ACCESSORY —
A. For the purpose of this chapter, words and terms used herein shall be
interpreted as follows:
(1) Words used in the present tense include the future.
(2) The singular includes the plural.
(3) The word "person" includes a corporation, partnership and
association as well as the individual.
(4) The word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel."
(5) The term "shall" is mandatory.
(6) The word "used" or "occupied," as applied to any land or building,
shall be construed to include the words "intended," "arranged" or
"designed to be occupied."
(7) The word "Board" and the words "Planning Board" always mean the
Borough of Penns Grove Planning Board.
(8) The word "Council" or the words "Borough Council" always mean
the Borough of Penns Grove Mayor and Council. [Amended
7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
B. Any word or term not defined herein shall be used with a meaning of
standard usage.
A. ACCESSORY BUILDING — See definition of "building."
§ 450-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-3
1:465
ALTERATION — As applied to a building or structure, a change or
rearrangement in the structural parts or an enlargement, whether by
extending on a side or by increasing in height, or the moving from one
location or position to another.
AREA —
AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE EXCHANGE OFFICE — A building or part of
a building used for the transmission and exchange of telephone or
radiotelephone messages, provided that, in residential districts, such use
shall not include the transaction of business with the public, storage of
materials, trucks or repair facilities or housing of repair crews.
BASEMENT — A story partly underground, but having 1/2 or more of its
height (measured from floor to ceiling) above the average level of the
adjoining ground. A basement shall be counted as a story for the purpose
of height measurement or determining square footage only if the vertical
distance between the ceiling and the average level of the adjoining ground
is more than four feet or if used for business or dwelling purposes.
BUILDING — A structure having a roof which is used for the shelter or
enclosure of persons, animals or property. The word "building" shall include
any part thereof.
B. ACCESSORY USE — See definition of "use."
LOT AREA — The area contained within the property lines of the
individual parcels of land shown on a subdivision plan, excluding any
area within an existing street right-of-way, and including the area of any
easement.
A.
BUILDING AREA — The total of areas taken on a horizontal plane at the
main grade level of the principal building and all accessory buildings,
exclusive of uncovered porches, terraces and steps.
B.
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the areas of the several floors of a building
or structure, including areas used for human occupancy and
basements, attics and penthouses, as measured from the exterior faces
of the walls. It does not include cellars, unenclosed porches, attics not
used for human occupancy or any floor space in an accessory building
or in the main building intended and designed for the parking of motor
vehicles in order to meet the parking requirements of this chapter or
any such floor space intended and designed for accessory heating and
ventilating equipment. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
C.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY — A subordinate building located on the same
lot as a principal building and clearly incidental and subordinate to
the principal building. Any portion of a principal building devoted or
intended to be devoted to an accessory use is not an accessory building.
A.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building in which is conducted, or is
intended to be conducted, the principal use of the lot on which it is
located.
B.
§ 450-3 PENNS GROVE CODE § 450-3
1:466
BUILDING COVERAGE — That percentage of the plot or lot area covered
by the building area.
BUILDING HEIGHT — A vertical distance measured from the mean
elevation of the proposed finished grade at the street side of the building to
the highest point of the roof for flat roofs, to the decklines of mansard roofs
and to the mean height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel
roofs.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — The rear line of the minimum front yard, as
herein designed for each district, measured from the street line.
CELLAR — A story partly underground and having more than 1/2 of its
height (measured from floor to ceiling) below the average level of the
adjoining ground. A cellar shall not be considered in determining the
permissible number of stories or square footage, nor shall it be used for
dwelling purposes.
DORMITORY — A building occupied by and maintained exclusively for
faculty, students or other such persons affiliated with a school, church,
recreational or educational facility or other recognized institution and when
regulated by such institution.
DWELLING — A building containing one or more dwelling units.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms located within a
residential building and forming a single habitable unit with facilities
which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and
eating by one family.
A.
SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING — A dwelling having only one
dwelling unit from ground to roof, independent outside access and open
space on all sides.
B.
SINGLE-FAMILY SEMIDETACHED DWELLING — A dwelling having
only one dwelling unit from ground to roof, independent outside access
and not more than two walls in common with adjoining dwellings.
C.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — A dwelling having three or more dwelling
units which are completely separated by party walls but share outside
access.
GARDEN APARTMENTS — Multifamily buildings where individual
dwelling units share a common outside access. They also share a
common yard area, which is the sum of the required lot areas of all
dwelling units within the building. Garden apartments shall contain
three or more dwellings in a single structure and have a maximum
height of three stories.
(1)
MID-RISE APARTMENTS — Multifamily buildings where individual
dwelling units share a common outside access and elevators serve
each floor. Such buildings are not less than four nor more than
eight stories high. Each unit shares with other units a common yard
(2)
D.
§ 450-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-3
1:467
ELECTRIC SUBSTATION — An assemblage of equipment for purposes other
than generation or utilization through which electric energy in bulk is
passed for the purposes of switching or modifying its characteristics to meet
the need of the general public.
FAMILY — One or more persons occupying a dwelling unit as a single
nonprofit housekeeping unit, who are living together as a bona fide, stable
and committed living unit, being a traditional family unit or the functional
equivalent thereof, exhibiting the generic character of a traditional
family.[Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
LOT — A parcel of land used or set aside and available for use as the site
of one or more buildings and buildings accessory thereto or for any other
purpose, in one ownership and not divided by a street nor including any
land within the right-of-way of a public or private street upon which said lot
abuts, even if the ownership of such way is in the owner of the lot. A lot for
the purpose of this chapter may or may not coincide with a lot of record.
area, which is the sum of the required lot areas of all dwelling units
within the buildings.
TWO-FAMILY DUPLEX DWELLING — A dwelling having no more than
two dwelling units from ground to roof, independent outside access and
open space on all sides.
E.
PATIO HOUSE — A single-family detached or semidetached unit, with
one dwelling unit from ground to roof, having individual outside access.
The lot shall be fully enclosed by a wall of four to six feet in height. All
living spaces, i.e., living rooms, dens and bedrooms, shall open into a
major open area or patio.
F.
MULTIPLEX — An attached dwelling which may be single-family
attached or multifamily. In general, all units have independent outside
access, but this is not necessary. Units may be arranged in a variety
of configurations: side by side, back to back or vertically. The essential
feature is the small number of units attached. No more than five units
shall be attached in any group, and groups shall average four units per
structure.
G.
ATRIUM HOUSE — A single-family attached one-story dwelling unit
with individual outside access. The lot shall be fully enclosed by a wall
at least seven feet high. A private yard, herein called an "atrium," shall
be included on each lot. All living spaces, i.e., living rooms, dens and
bedrooms, shall open into the atrium.
H.
TOWNHOUSE — A single-family attached domicile with one dwelling
unit from ground to roof having individual outside access. Rows of
attached townhouses shall average eight dwelling units.
I.
CORNER LOT — A lot which has an interior angle of less than 135° at
the intersection of two street lines. A lot abutting upon a curved street
or streets shall be considered a corner lot if the tangent to the curve
at the points beginning within the lot or at the points of intersection of
A.
§ 450-3 PENNS GROVE CODE § 450-3
1:468
LOT LINES —
MARINA — A commercial configuration providing any or all in combination
of in water boat slips; transient dockage; marine store and services,
including fuel and holding tank pump out; upland (or dry) boat storage; and
boat and/or engine repairs.[Added 10-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-20]
MOBILE HOME — A dwelling unit manufactured in one or more sections
designed for long-term occupancy, containing sleeping accommodations, a
flush toilet, a tub or shower bath and kitchen facilities, with plumbing and
the side lot lines with the street lines intersects at an angle of less than
135°.
THROUGH LOT — An interior lot having frontage on two parallel or
approximately parallel streets.
B.
DEPTH OF LOT — The mean distance from the street line of the lot to
its opposite rear line measured in the general direction of the side lines
of the lot.
C.
LOT WIDTH — The distance measured between the side lot lines, at the
required building setback line. In a case where there is only one side
lot line, lot width shall be measured between such side lot line and the
opposite rear lot line or street line.
D.
LOT LINE — Any boundary line of a lot including a public right-of-way
line.
A.
LOT LINE, REAR — Any lot line which is parallel to or within 45° of
being parallel to a right-of-way, except for a lot line that is itself a legal
right-of-way line and except that, in the case of a corner lot, the owner
shall have the option of choosing which of the two lot lines that are not
legal right-of-way lines is to be considered a rear lot line. In the case of
a lot having no right-of-way frontage or a lot of an odd shape, only the
one lot line furthest from any legal right-of-way shall be considered a
rear lot line.
B.
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line which is not a legal right-of-way line or
a rear lot line.
C.
STREET LINE — See definition of "street line."
Sample Lot Configurations
(Letters correspond to above definitions)
D.
§ 450-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-3
1:469
electric connections provided for an attachment to outside systems, and
designed to be transported after fabrication on its own wheels or on a
flatbed or other trailer, arriving at the site where it is to be occupied as
a dwelling complete, including major appliances and furniture, and ready
for occupancy, except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly
operations. For purposes of this chapter, travel trailers are not considered
as mobile homes.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE, LOT OR USE — See § 450-65.
NURSING HOME — See § 450-14.
PRINCIPAL —
RIGHT-OF-WAY — Land set aside for use as a street, alley or other means of
travel.
ROOMER, BOARDER or LODGER — A person occupying any room or group
of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be used for
living and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating purposes, and paying
compensation for lodging or board and lodging by prearrangement for a
week or more at a time to an owner or operator. Any person occupying such
room or rooms and paying such compensation without prearrangement or
for less than a week at a time shall be classified for purposes of this chapter
not as a roomer, boarder or lodger but as a guest of a commercial lodging
establishment (motel, hotel, tourist home).
SEWER —
SIGN — See §§ 450-50 through 450-59.
A. PRINCIPAL BUILDING — See definition of "building."
B. PRINCIPAL USE — See definition of "use."
EXISTING RIGHT-OF-WAY — The legal right-of-way as established by
the state or other appropriate governing authority and currently in
existence. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
A.
FUTURE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The right-of-way deemed necessary by the
Borough of Penns Grove Master Plan as appropriate to provide
adequate width for future street improvements.
B.
PUBLIC SEWER — Any municipal or publicly owned sewer system in
which sewage is collected from buildings and piped to an approved
sewage disposal plant or central septic tank disposal system. It may
also be referred to as "off-lot" or "off-site" sewer. This shall include
capped sewers when installed to Borough specifications. [Amended
7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
A.
PRIVATE SEWER — An on-lot septic tank disposal system generally
providing for disposal of effluent for only one building or a group of
buildings on a single lot.
B.
§ 450-3 PENNS GROVE CODE § 450-3
1:470
STORY — That part of a building located between a floor and the floor or
roof next above.
STREET — A public or private way used or intended to be used for passage
or travel by automotive vehicles. If private, such way must be used or
intended to be used as the principal means of access to abutting lot or
lots or to more than two dwelling units on a lot on which a private way is
exclusively used.
STREET LINE — The dividing line between the street and the lot. The street
line shall be the same as the legal right-of-way, provided that where a future
right-of-way width for a road or street has been established, then that width
shall determine the location of the street line.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials assembled, constructed or
erected at a fixed location, including a building, the use of which requires
location on the ground or attachment to something having location on the
ground.
TRAVEL TRAILER — A vehicular portable structure built on a chassis
designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation, vacation and other
short-term uses, having a body width not exceeding eight feet and a body
length not exceeding 32 feet.
USE — Any activity, occupation, business or operation carried on or
intended to be carried on in a building or other structure or on a tract of
land.
WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM — A wind generator and all
associated equipment, including any base, blade, foundation, rotor, tower,
transformer, vane, wire, inverter, batteries or other component necessary
to fully utilize the wind generator.[Added 4-19-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-6;
amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
YARD — An open space, unobstructed from the ground up, on the same lot
with a structure, extending along a lot line or street line and inward to the
structure. The size of a required yard shall be measured as the shortest
distance between the structure and a lot line or street line.
The first story of a building is the lowest story having 75% or more of
its wall area above grade level.
A.
A half story is a story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall plates
of which on at least two opposite exterior walls are not more than two
feet above the floor of such story. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-5]
B.
USE, ACCESSORY — A use located on the same lot with a principal use
and clearly incidental or subordinate to and customary in connection
with the principal use.
A.
B. USE, PRINCIPAL — The main use on a lot.
YARD, FRONT — A yard between a structure and a street line and
extending the entire length of the street line. In the case of a corner lot,
A.
§ 450-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-3
1:471
the yards extending along all streets are front yards. In the case of a lot
other than a corner lot that fronts on more than one street, the yards
extending along all streets are front yards.
YARD, REAR — A yard between a structure and a rear lot line and
extending the entire length of the rear lot line.
B.
YARD, SIDE — A yard between a structure and a side lot line, extending
from the front yard to the rear yard. In the case of a lot having no street
frontage or a lot of odd shape, any yard that is not a front yard or a rear
yard shall be considered a side yard.
C.
§ 450-3 PENNS GROVE CODE § 450-3
1:472
ARTICLE II
Districts; Zoning Map; Interpretation of Boundaries
§ 450-4. Establishment of districts.
§ 450-5. Types of districts.
The districts are established and designated as follows:
R-1 District — Residential 1
R-2 District — Residential 2
R-3 District — Residential 3-Multifamily
COS District — Commercial, Office, Service
H-C/I District — Highway-Commercial/Industrial
M-1 — Marina District 1 [Added 10-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-20]
M-2 — Marina District 2 [Added 10-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-20]
§ 450-6. Zoning Map.
Districts are bounded and defined as shown on the map titled "Zoning Map
of the Borough of Penns Grove," which accompanies and which, with all
explanatory matters thereon, is hereby made a part of this chapter.42
§ 450-7. Interpretation of district boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of a district as
indicated on the Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
A. The Borough of Penns Grove is hereby divided into districts of different
types, each type being of such number, shape, kind and area and of such
common unity of purpose and adaptability of use that are deemed most
suitable to carry out the objectives of this chapter.
B. Every parcel of land and every building or other structure in the
Borough, except as otherwise provided by law or by ordinance, shall be
subject to the regulations, restrictions and requirements specified for
the district in which it is located.
A. Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately coinciding
with the center lines of streets, highways, railroad lines or streams,
such center lines shall be construed to be such boundaries.
B. Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately
coincide with lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be said
boundaries.
42.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is included as an attachment to this chapter. Ordinance
No. 99-20, adopted 10-19-1999, amended the Zoning Map to list the tax blocks and lots
included in the M-1 and M-2 Marina Zones. This list is on file in the Borough office.
§ 450-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-7
1:473
§ 450-8. Purpose and intent of districts.
C. Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately
parallel to center lines of streets or highways, such district boundaries
shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such distance
therefrom as indicated on the Zoning Map.
D. Where district boundaries divide a lot, the locations of such boundaries
are deemed to be lines which connect two identification points.
A. R-1 Residential 1 District. The purpose and intent of this district is to
retain the character of existing single-family residential areas, to
maintain the existing low residential density and to encourage the
preservation of permanent open space by providing appropriate
standards, to exclude activities incompatible with development and to
create conditions conducive to carrying out the broad purposes of this
chapter.
B. R-2 Residential 2 District. The purpose and intent of this district is to
retain the character and to maintain the existing medium residential
density areas where single-family homes are permitted, as well as
variations on single-family attached homes, and to encourage
serviceable and efficient land development while providing for the
preservation of permanent open space and to create conditions
conducive to carrying out the broad purposes of this chapter.
C. R-3 Residential 3 District. The purpose and intent of this district is to
provide appropriate areas for multifamily development in order to
broaden the Borough's housing base and, therefore, serve a greater
variety of housing needs, to provide reasonable standards to prevent
overcrowding of land, to regulate the density of population, to avoid
undue congestion in the streets, to allow for the harmonious
development of apartments and other uses which are compatible with
higher density residential development and to create conditions
conducive to carrying out the broad purposes of this chapter.
D. COS Commercial, Office, Service District. The purpose and intent of
this district is to provide areas for modern office, retail, specialty,
personal service, business uses and civic offices and uses in areas
where said uses already exist and to promote the development of this
district as a Borough core, encouraging coordinated efforts to meet
circulation and parking needs, to provide for the public convenience
and to fulfill the other broad purposes of this chapter.
E. H-C/I Highway-Commercial/Industrial District. The purpose and intent
of this district is to provide reasonable standards for the orderly
development of highway-oriented businesses, commercial uses and
industrial uses; to provide for the development of those businesses
which, due to the nature of their activities, must most appropriately be
located with adequate street frontages along major roads; to avoid
§ 450-7 PENNS GROVE CODE § 450-8
1:474
undue congestion on the streets; and to otherwise create conditions
conducive to carrying out the broad purposes of this chapter.
F. M-1 Marina District. The purpose and intent of this district is to provide
standards for mixed-use commercial development in the area of the
Borough directly adjacent and proximate to the Delaware River and to
provide standards to encourage the preservation and redevelopment of
the unique characteristics of the existing Borough area as an extension
of the current core business district. [Added 10-19-1999 by Ord. No.
99-20]
G. M-2 Marina District. The purpose and intent of this district is to provide
standards for limited conversion of residential uses to commercial uses
that are compatible with existing neighborhoods and uses that
accommodate the outgrowth of business uses from the M-1 Marina
District. [Added 10-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-20]
§ 450-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-8
1:475

ARTICLE III
Use Regulations
§ 450-9. Compliance required.
Except as provided by law or in this chapter, in each district no building,
structure or land shall be used or occupied except for the purposes
permitted in § 450-14 of this article and for the zoning districts so indicated.
§ 450-10. Uses by right; conditional uses; uses not permitted; uses
subject to Planning Board approval.
§ 450-11. Additional regulations.
Uses permitted by right or as conditional uses shall be subject, in addition
to use regulations, to such regulations of yard, lot size, lot width, building
area, provisions for off-street parking and loading and to such other
provisions as are specified in other articles hereof. In particular, the laws
of the State of New Jersey and the regulations of the Salem County
Department of Health regarding water supply and waste disposal shall be
adhered to.
§ 450-12. Existing conditional uses and special exceptions.
Any use existing on the effective date of this chapter which is classified as
requiring a conditional use or a special exception in the district in which
the land occupied by the use is located and which was lawful at the time
the use was established shall be deemed to have been granted a conditional
use subject to maintaining the character and extent of operations and
structures existing on that date. Any application for change in use or
structure shall be subject to the procedures specified in Articles VIII and X.
A. A use listed in § 450-14 is permitted by right in any district under which
it is denoted by the letter "P,"43 subject to all applicable requirements of
this chapter and subject to the issuance of a zoning permit in
accordance with Article X.
B. A use listed in § 450-14 is permitted as a conditional use in any district
under which it is denoted by the letter "C," provided that the Borough
Planning Board, pursuant to express standards and criteria set forth in
§ 450-14 and other applicable sections of this chapter, authorizes the
issuance of a zoning permit in accordance with Article X.
C. A use listed in § 450-14 is not permitted in any district under which it is
denoted by the letter "N."
D. All other uses listed in § 450-14 with no designation are subject to
Planning Board approval in all districts.
43.Editor's Note: See the Table of Use Regulations included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 450-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-13
1:477
§ 450-13. Temporary accessory uses.
§ 450-14. Specific use regulations.44
A. No garage or other accessory building, partial structure or other
temporary structure shall be erected or moved onto a lot and used for
any dwelling purposes, unless authorized by the issuance of a
temporary zoning permit. Such permit shall clearly set forth that the
structure proposed is intended for temporary dwelling purposes and
that the authorized structure is to be vacated upon the expiration of a
specific time limit not to exceed two years. On receipt of the zoning
permit, the applicant shall certify that he has knowledge of the terms of
the permit and the penalty that can be invoked for violation.
B. Nonconforming temporary buildings or uses incidental to a building
development and reasonably required for such development may be
granted temporary zoning permits according to the above procedures
and regulations.
A. Residential uses. Residential uses shall be as follows:
(1) Use 1: single-family detached dwelling.
(2) Use 2: single-family attached dwelling, provided that in R-3
Districts, such dwellings must be part of a cluster development as
provided in Use 4.
(3) Use 3: Conversion.
(a) Conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling (Use
1) to a single-family semidetached dwelling (§ 450-3, definition
of "dwelling," Subsection C), a single-family attached dwelling
(Use 2), a two-family duplex dwelling (§ 450-3, definition of
"dwelling," Subsection E) or a multifamily dwelling, low-rise
(Use 5); or
(b) Conversion of an existing two-family duplex dwelling (§ 450-3,
definition of "dwelling," Subsection E) or single-family
semidetached dwelling (§ 450-3, definition of "dwelling,"
Subsection C) to a multifamily dwelling, low-rise (Use 5).
(c) Conversions under Subsection A(3)(a) and (b) above shall be
subject to the following provisions:
[1] The lot area per dwelling unit shall not be reduced thereby
to less than the lot area required for single-family attached
dwellings, except within a zoning district designated
Residential 1 or Residential 2 where the minimum lot area
shall be 10,000 square feet per dwelling unit.
44.Editor's Note: See the Table of Use Regulations included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 450-13 PENNS GROVE CODE § 450-14
1:478
[2] The yard, building area and other applicable requirements
for the district shall not be reduced.
[3] No structural alteration shall be made to the exterior of
the building, except as may be necessary for purposes of
safety.
(4) Use 4: cluster development. See the performance standard
regulations (Article IX).
(5) Use 5: multifamily dwelling, garden apartments. Multifamily
dwelling, garden apartments, having not more than three stories,
subject to the following provisions: [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-5]
(a) Building standards. Maximum building size shall be restricted
to no more than 16 family units in any one continuous
structure, and there shall not be more than eight family units
in any unbroken apartment structure line. A setback of more
than 10 feet shall be considered as an acceptable break in the
apartment structure line. No more than three floors or levels
may be used for dwelling units or living quarters in any
building.
(b) Landscaping. Where side or rear lot lines of a multifamily
dwelling development abut a residential district, an evergreen
planting shall be provided along said side or rear lot lines.
Maintenance of plant material shall be a continuing obligation
of the owner of the property.
(c) Off-street parking design standards. In addition to the offstreet
parking provisions of Article VII, the following additional
provisions shall be required:
[1] All parking spaces and access drives shall be at least 20
feet from any multifamily dwelling on the lot.
[2] No one area for off-street parking of motor vehicles shall
exceed 30 cars in capacity. Separate parking areas on a lot
shall be physically separated from one another by an eightfoot
planting strip.
[3] All off-street parking shall be developed within the
confines of the lot.
(6) Use 6: multifamily dwelling, mid-rise, a building containing more
than three stories but no more than eight stories, a building
containing 12 or more dwelling units not having party walls
forming a complete separation between individual dwellings but
having a single common entrance and hallway system and provided
with an elevator. Such multiple dwellings shall be subject to the
following provisions:
§ 450-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-14
1:479
(a) Lot area per dwelling unit. Each lot used for such a multiple
dwelling shall provide a lot area for each dwelling unit.
[1] Seven hundred fifty square feet for each efficiency
dwelling unit.
[2] One thousand square feet for each one-bedroom unit.
[3] One thousand three hundred square feet for each twobedroom
unit.
[4] One thousand six hundred square feet for each threebedroom
unit.
(b) Gross floor area. The floor area ratio is the gross floor area
divided by the lot area. No mid-rise multiple-family dwelling
shall have a floor area ratio (FAR) exceeding 0.6, except that
the FAR may be increased up to a maximum of 1.5 according to
the formula listed below, as the building coverage is reduced
below the maximum of 30% established in § 450-17.
[Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
Building Coverage FAR
24% to 30% 0.6
23% 0.7
22% 0.8
21% 0.9
20% 1.0
19% 1.1
18% 1.2
17% 1.3
16% 1.4
15% 1.5
(c) Open space. A portion of the lot equal to the gross floor area
shall be usable open space. Usable open space is defined as
space on a lot which is unoccupied by buildings, unobstructed
to the sky, not devoted to driveways or off-street parking or
loading and devoted to landscaping, drying yards, recreation
space and other like uses, and, additionally, up to half the
required usable open space may be made up of space on
exterior balconies and roofs available for the purposes listed
above.
(d) Access. Access to a mid-rise multiple-family dwelling shall be
taken only from an arterial highway or a collector street.
[Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
(e) Off-street parking design requirements.
§ 450-14 PENNS GROVE CODE § 450-14
1:480
[1] All off-street parking lots and their access drives shall be
at least 20 feet from any principal building on a lot.
[2] No one area for off-street parking of motor vehicles shall
exceed 30 automobiles in capacity. Separate parking areas
on a lot shall be physically separated from one another by
eight-foot planting strips.
(7) Use 7: rooming house, a building or part of a building occupied or
intended to be occupied by two or more roomers, boarders or
lodgers, provided that the minimum lot area per sleeping room
shall be 1,000 square feet notwithstanding other provisions of this
chapter.
(8) Use 8: dwelling in combination with an existing or permitted office
or commercial use, provided that the lot and parking requirements
are met for both uses.
(9) Use 8A: community residences, as defined by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.1
and 40:55D-66.2, shall be permitted uses in all residential districts
and the requirements therefor shall be the same as for singlefamily
units located within such district. [Added 10-4-1988 by
Ord. No. 88-15; amended 3-18-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-1]
B. Institutional, recreational and educational uses. Institutional,
recreational and educational uses shall be as follows:
(1) Use 9: religious use, including churches, synagogues, religious
foundations or societies, plus associated convents, parish houses
and other housing for religious personnel, subject to the following
provisions:
(a) Minimum lot size shall not be less than 0.5 acre.
(b) Maximum height restrictions shall not apply to church or
synagogue buildings.
(c) There shall be direct access to an arterial or collector highway
or primary access street. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-5]
(2) Use 10: school, including religious and nonsectarian,
denominational, private or public school not conducted as a private
gainful business, subject to the following provisions:
(a) Minimum lot size shall be not less than two acres.
(b) There shall be direct access to an arterial or collector highway
or primary access street. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-5]
§ 450-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-14
1:481
(3) Use 11: cultural facility, including art galleries, libraries or
museums, open to the public or connected with a permitted
educational use and not conducted as a private gainful business.
(4) Use 12: auditorium, community center, adult education center or
other similar facility operated by an educational, philanthropic or
religious institution, subject to the following provisions:
(a) The use shall not be conducted as a private gainful business.
(b) No outdoor recreation area shall be located nearer to any lot
line than the required front yard depth.
(5) Use 13: day nursery, nursery school, kindergarten or other agency
giving day care to children, provided that outdoor play areas shall
be sufficiently screened and sound insulated so as to protect the
neighborhood from inappropriate noise and other disturbance.
(6) Use 14: recreational facility owned or operated by the Borough or
other governmental agency.
(7) Use 15: recreational facility owned or operated by a
nongovernmental agency, subject to the following additional
provisions:
(a) The use shall be conducted as a private gainful business.
(b) No outdoor active recreation area shall be located nearer to
any lot line than the required front yard.
(c) Outdoor play areas shall be sufficiently screened to protect the
neighborhood from inappropriate noise and other disturbance.
(8) Use 16: private club or lodge, subject to the following additional
provisions:
(a) The use shall not be conducted as a private gainful business.
(b) The use shall be for members and guests only.
(9) Use 17: nursing home:
(a) A nursing home, also commonly known as a "convalescent
home," is a licensed establishment which provides full-time
convalescent or chronic care, or both, for three or more
individuals who are not related by blood or marriage to the
operator and who, by reason of chronic illness or infirmity, are
unable to care for themselves. No surgical nor obstetrical
services shall be provided in such a home; a hospital or
sanitarium shall not be construed to be included in this
definition.
(b) Provided that:
§ 450-14 PENNS GROVE CODE § 450-14
1:482
[1] A lot area of not less than two acres is provided.
[2] No more than 100 patients shall be accommodated at any
one time.
[3] Landscaping and planting, including evergreens, shall be
provided and maintained.
(10) Use 18: hospital:
(a) A hospital, for the purpose of this chapter, is a licensed
establishment which provides health services primarily for
inpatient medical or surgical care of the sick or injured,
including such related facilities as laboratories, outpatient
departments, training facilities, central service facilities and
staff offices as an integral part of the establishment.
(b) Provided that:
[1] A lot area of not less than two acres shall be provided.
[2] Landscaping and planting, including evergreens, shall be
provided and maintained.
(11) Use 19: medical center:
(a) A group of facilities providing health services such as medical
research facilities, including laboratories, outpatient
departments, training facilities, medical offices and central
service facilities operated as an integral part of the facility, and
commercial uses supplementary to it.
(b) Provided that:
[1] Lot and parking requirements are met for hospital,
medical office and laboratory (Uses 18 and 23) to the
extent to which each type is represented at the medical
center.
[2] Landscaping and planting are provided and maintained.
C. Business or office uses. Business or office uses shall be as follows:
(1) Use 20: professional service limited to offices of physicians,
lawyers, clergymen, teachers, dentists, architects, engineers,
professional planners, insurance agents, opticians and medical and
related offices, which do not involve the actual storage, exchange
or delivery of merchandise on the premises, provided that:
(a) The use shall have frontage on and access to a collector or
arterial highway. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
(b) Such use shall be carried on wholly indoors and within the
principal building.
§ 450-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-14
1:483
(c) There shall be no use of show windows nor display nor
advertising visible outside the premises to attract customers or
clients other than one nonilluminated sign not exceeding four
square feet in area.
(2) Use 21: business service limited to banks and offices for real estate,
stock and bond brokers, accountants, adjusters, appraisers, and
utility companies, provided that the additional provisions of Use 20
are met.
(3) Use 22: business service limited to governmental offices.
(4) Use 23: health service limited to medical or dental offices,
laboratories and clinics, provided that the additional provisions of
Use 20 are met.
(5) Use 24: veterinary office or animal hospital, defined herein as any
building used for the treatment, housing or boarding of small
domestic animals such as dogs, cats, goats, rabbits and birds or
fowl by a veterinarian.
(6) Use 25: trade or professional school, music or dancing school.
D. Commercial uses. Commercial uses shall be as follows:
(1) Use 26: retail shop, stores for the retail sale of antiques, books,
beverages, confections, drugs, dry goods, flowers, foodstuffs, gifts,
garden supplies, hardware, household appliances, jewelry, notions,
periodicals, stationery, tobacco, paint, wearing apparel and other
similar goods, but not including stores requiring extensive outdoor
display or which allow food or beverages to be consumed on or
immediately about the premises.
(2) Use 26A: outdoor display, open air markets and food consumption
when directly related to permitted retail shop as a conditional use,
but cannot block sidewalk; temporary use only. [Added
10-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-20]
(3) Use 27: bulk commercial, stores for the sale of lumber,
automobiles, agricultural machinery, boats or any other items
requiring extensive outdoor display.
(4) Use 28: personal service, including barbershop, beauty parlor,
laundry or cleaning agency, self-service laundry and wearing
apparel.
(5) Use 29: repair service, including shops for appliances, watches,
guns, bicycles, locks, etc.
(6) Use 30: eating place for the sale and consumption of food and
beverages without drive-in or take-out service (service at table or
sit-down counter facilities only).
§ 450-14 PENNS GROVE CODE § 450-14
1:484
(7) Use 31: eating place for the sale and consumption of food and
beverages with drive-in or take-out service.
(8) Use 32: mortuary or funeral home, provided that the additional
provisions of Use 20 are met.
(9) Use 33: public entertainment facility, activities operated as a
gainful business, open to the public, for the purpose of public
entertainment or recreation, including but not limited to bowling
alleys, motion-picture theaters, health clubs, etc., but not including
outdoor facilities such as golf courses, driving ranges or
amusement parks. Adequate measures to prevent noise and other
noxious influences from disturbing nearby residential properties
must be taken.
(10) Use 34: motel, hotel, tourist home or building or group of buildings
for the accommodation of transient guests, chiefly motorists,
containing guest rooms for rent.
(11) Use 64: marina, subject to the standards of Article IV, Dimensional
Requirements, and Article V, Performance Standards, of this
chapter. [Added 10-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-20]
(12) Use 65: bar/nightclub. [Added 10-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-20]
(13) Use 66: liquor store for sale of package goods only in conjunction
with bar/nightclub. [Added 10-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-20]
(14) Use 67: tourist home (bed-and-breakfast); refers to the practice of
renting sleeping rooms, with common parlor area, for one night at
a time, on a transient basis. [Added 10-19-1999 by Ord. No.
99-20]
E. Automotive service uses. Automotive service uses shall be as follows:
(1) Use 35: parking area or garage, defined herein as a lot of record
upon which the parking or storing of automotive vehicles is the
primary use, provided that:
(a) Such area will be used for the parking of cars of employees,
customers or guests of existing establishments in the same
district where subject parking area is proposed.
(b) No sale, rental, service or repair operation shall be performed.
(c) The parking or storage of trucks or trailers shall not be
permitted.
(d) All parking areas shall meet the design standards for off-street
parking included in the Borough subdivision and site plan
review regulations.45
45.Editor's Note: See Ch. 400, Subdivision of Land, and Ch. 375, Site Plan Review.
§ 450-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-14
1:485
(e) All parking lots must conform to the provisions of § 450-48.
(2) Use 36: gasoline service station, subject to the following
provisions:
(a) All activities except those to be performed at the fuel pumps
shall be performed within a completely enclosed building.
(b) Fuel pumps shall be at least 20 feet from any street right-ofway.
(c) All automobile parts, dismantled vehicles and similar articles
shall be stored within a building or fully screened on all sides.
(d) Full-body paint spraying or body and fender work shall not be
permitted.
(3) Use 37: repair garage, including paint spraying and body and
fender work or car-washing facility, provided that all repair and
paint work is performed within an enclosed building or fully
screened on all sides.
(4) Use 38: sale of automotive accessories, parts, tires, batteries and
other supplies, provided that installation of parts shall be in an
enclosed structure or fully screened on all sides.
F. Transportation facilities. Transportation facilities shall be as follows:
(1) Use 39: bus or taxicab terminal.
(2) Use 40: school bus yard.
(3) Use 41: truck terminal.
(4) Use 42: railroad station or railway service.
(5) Use 43: helistop; any landing area used for the landing and taking
off of helicopters for the purpose of picking up or discharging
passengers or cargo, subject to the following additional provisions:
(a) A minimum landing area of 10,000 square feet with each
dimension being at least 100 feet; if a rooftop landing area, the
minimum landing area shall be 40 feet by 40 feet.
(b) Excepting rooftop landing areas, the entire landing area is to
be surrounded by a fence at least six feet in height.
(c) No fueling, refueling, service or storage facilities shall be
included.
(d) The proposed helistop will not adversely affect the adjoining
land uses, the safety and welfare of nearby residents or the
future growth and development of the area in which it is to be
located.
§ 450-14 PENNS GROVE CODE § 450-14
1:486
G. Utilities. Utilities shall be as follows:
(1) Use 44: communication facility, including telephone or telegraph
exchange, microwave relay station and radio or television
broadcasting studio.
(2) Use 45: supply utility, including water supply works and storage
and electric substations, plus necessary rights-of-way and
transmission lines, provided that:
(a) Except in COS and H-C/I Districts, no public business office
shall be operated in connection with such use.
(b) In no district shall any storage yard or storage building be
operated in connection with such use unless such storage
facility is essential to service customers in the district in which
it is located.
(c) All transmission lines shall be underground.
(d) A seventy-five-foot buffer yard shall be provided along all
property lines.
(3) Use 46: petroleum product and gas substation, provided that the
provisions of Subsection G(2)(c) and (d) (Use 45) above are met.
(4) Use 47: sanitary utility, including sewerage works, sewage
pumping station, plus associated collection line and right-of-way,
but not including refuse dump, incinerator or sanitary landfill,
provided that such facilities are intended to serve primarily
residents of the Borough of Penns Grove.
(5) Use 48: fire station.
(6) Use 49: fire signal.
H. Industrial use. Industrial uses shall be as follows:
(1) Use 50: wholesale business and storage, provided that:
(a) In COS District, such uses shall be restricted to offices.
(b) In H-C/I District, the storage provisions of Use 59 are met.
(2) Use 51: warehousing, not including outdoor storage unless the
provisions of Use 59 are met.
(3) Use 52: manufacturing, including the production, processing,
cleaning, printing, testing and distribution of materials, goods,
foodstuffs and other products. Manufacturing, processing or
assembling of small parts and products, such as electronic
instruments and devices, radios and phonographs, medical and
surgical instruments, optical products, pharmaceuticals, toiletries,
§ 450-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-14
1:487
jewelry, mechanical instruments and other similar small parts and
products.
(4) Use 53: laboratory for research, testing or experimentation.
(5) Use 54: contractor's office and storage, including building, cement,
electrical, heating, plumbing, masonry, painting and roofing
contractors, provided that the storage provisions of Use 59 are
met.
I. Accessory uses. Accessory uses shall be as follows:
(1) Use 55: home occupation; activities customarily carried on in a
dwelling unit which are clearly incidental and secondary to the use
of the dwelling for residential purposes, provided that:
(a) The home occupation shall be carried on wholly indoors and
within the principal building.
(b) There shall be no maintenance of a stock-in-trade, no use of
show windows nor display or advertising visible outside the
premises to attract customers or clients, other than home
occupation announcement signs as permitted and regulated in
Article VI, and no exterior storage of materials.
(c) No alterations, additions or changes to the structure shall be
permitted in order to accommodate or facilitate a home
occupation.
(d) No articles shall be sold or offered for sale except such as may
be produced on the premises.
(e) No repetitive servicing by truck for supplies and materials
shall be required.
(f) The home occupation shall be carried on only by members of
the immediate family residing in the structure.
(2) Use 56: residential accessory buildings, structures and uses.
(a) Residential accessory building or structure or use, including
but not limited to:
[1] Parking spaces for the parking of passenger automobiles,
but excluding parking of commercial vehicles other than
vehicles not exceeding one-half-ton loading capacity that
are needed for travel to and from work by residents of the
principal building and are completely enclosed within a
building, and also excluding repairs, sale of gas and other
such commercial uses.
[2] Structures such as fences and walls.
§ 450-14 PENNS GROVE CODE § 450-14
1:488
[3] Buildings such as storage sheds, bath houses and private
greenhouses.
[4] Private swimming pools wherever constructed as a
stationary or permanent structure or wherever
temporarily erected for use, provided that the provisions
of Chapter 404, Swimming Pools, are complied with.
[5] The keeping of one roomer, boarder or lodger as an
accessory use to any dwelling unit, if such roomer, boarder
or lodger is within the principal residential building.
(b) Residential buildings, other than those for domestic servants
and caretakers employed on the premises and for occasional
gratuitous guests, are not to be considered residential
accessory buildings, structures or uses.
(3) Use 57: temporary structure or use. A temporary permit may be
issued for structures or uses necessary during construction or
other special circumstances of a nonrecurring nature, subject to
the following additional provisions:
(a) The life of such permit shall not exceed six months, renewable
at three-month intervals.
(b) Such structure or use shall be removed completely upon
expiration of the permit without cost to the Borough.
(4) Use 58: accessory building or structure or uses customarily
incidental to the uses permitted in R-3, COS and H-C/I Districts in
connection with such uses, except outside storage, provided that
any use accessory to a use permitted only under a special exception
shall be established only if and as provided in such exception.
(5) Use 59: outside storage, other than storage as a primary use of the
land, necessary but incidental to the normal operation of a primary
use.
(a) Such shall be subject to the following provisions:
[1] No part of the street right-of-way, no sidewalks or other
areas intended or designed for pedestrian use, no required
parking areas and no part of the required front yard shall
be occupied by outside storage.
[2] Outside storage areas shall occupy an area of less than 1/2
the existing building coverage.
[3] Outside storage areas shall be shielded from view from the
public streets.
(b) Uses requiring more substantial amounts of land area for
storage may be exempt from the provisions of Subsection
§ 450-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-14
1:489
I(5)(a)[2] and [3] above when granted as a conditional use by
the Planning Board. Such uses shall be subject to the following
additional provisions:
[1] No more than 25% of the lot area shall be used in outdoor
storage.
[2] Particular uses appropriate for consideration under this
provision include, but are not limited to, bulk commercial
(Use 27), school bus yard (Use 40) and truck terminals
(Use 41). Among the uses that shall not be considered
appropriate for inclusion under this provision are retail
shops and stores (Use 26), repair shops for appliances
(Use 29), gasoline service station (Use 36), sale of
automotive accessories (Use 38), wholesale business (Use
50), warehousing (Use 51), manufacturing (Use 52) and
contractor offices and shops (Use 54).
(6) Use 60: outside display of goods, wares or merchandise, upon a
fixture, table, machine or other device for the display and/or sale of
merchandise, limited to the portion of the sidewalk adjacent to the
inside line thereof, extending not more than 24 inches toward the
curbline, where the sidewalk is sufficiently wide so that a free and
unencumbered walkway at least six feet in width remains available
for the use of pedestrians. Penalties for violation of these provisions
shall be as stated in the Borough ordinance.46
(7) Use 61: travel trailer, storage of, subject to the following
provisions:
(a) In all districts, no more than one trailer shall be stored on a lot.
(b) Such trailers shall be owned by the occupant of the lot upon
which the trailer is stored.
(c) Such trailers must be unoccupied.
(d) The provisions for outside storage included in Use 59 must be
complied with.
(e) Provisions in Subsection I(7)(a) and (b) above shall not apply to
the storage of trailers as a permitted principal use.
(8) Use 62: off-street parking, subject to the provisions and
requirements of Article VII.
(9) Use 63: sign, subject to the provisions and requirements of Article
VI.
46.Editor's Note: See §§ 450-88 and 450-89.
§ 450-14 PENNS GROVE CODE § 450-14
1:490
(10) Use 68: wind energy conversion system (WECS). [Added
4-19-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-6; amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-5]
(a) Wind energy conversion systems shall be permitted in the R-1
(Residential 1) District, R-2 (Residential 2) District, R-3
(Residential 3) District, COS (Commercial, Office, Service)
District and H-C/I (Highway-Commercial/Industrial) District as
a conditional use.
(b) In addition to submission of the site plan checklist items
required pursuant to this chapter, the following information
shall be provided:
[1] Location and elevation of proposed WECS.
[2] Location, dimension and type of existing structures and
uses on the site.
[3] Location of all aboveground utility lines on site within the
distance of the height of the WECS.
[4] Zoning designation of the adjacent properties within a
two-hundred-foot radius of the subject property.
(c) These conditions must be met when installing a WECS and
shall be provided to the Planning Board and the Construction
Code Official at the time conditional use approval and/or a
building permit is sought:
[1] All WECS generators, alternators or other components
shall be properly shielded and/or filtered so as to prevent
the emission of radio-frequency energy which would, or
may, cause any harmful interference with radio and/or
television broadcasting or reception. Appropriate certified
clearances must be provided, upon request, to the state,
county, local, and federal agencies such as the Federal
Aviation Administration, Department of Defense,
Department of Environmental Protection, Federal
Communications Commission, and any other governing
agency having appropriate interest and concern.
[2] The maximum aggregate and/or sustained level of noise
permitted, in any zone, due to the operation of a WECS
shall not exceed 50 decibels, as measured on the standard
dBa scale, measured at the property lines of the site.
[3] The installation of WECS in commercial and agricultural
property zones must meet all of the above criteria,
standards, and codes referred to, except for backyard
placements. The installation of a WECS will not be granted
approval if the structure or electromagnetic interference
§ 450-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-14
1:491
in any way jeopardizes the safety of commercial and/or
private aviation as may be the case for the Philadelphia
International Airport and the Penns Grove Borough
Airport.
[4] The WECS manufacturer shall document that a wind
energy conversion system mode has operated safely in
atmospheric conditions for a period of not less than three
months.
[5] All electric lines/utility wires shall be buried underground.
[6] The building permits for WECS shall be accompanied by
calculations and certification by a professional engineer,
licensed by the State of New Jersey, that all construction
and foundations proposed shall sustain wind loadings of
115 miles per hour.
[7] Any mechanical equipment associated and necessary for
operation, including a building for batteries and storage
cells, shall be enclosed with a six-foot fence. The
supporting tower shall also be enclosed with a six-foot
fence unless the base of the tower is not climbable for a
distance of 12 feet.
[8] The minimum distance between the ground and any part of
the rotor or blade of the WECS shall be 20 feet, as
measured from the lowest point of the arc of the blade.
[9] All WECS shall be located within the rear yard. The
minimum setback of the tower shall be not less than 1.5
feet times the height of the tower from any property line,
inhabited structure, or right-of-way for any overhead
electrical transmission or distribution lines. The
foundations and guy wire anchors must comply with all
applicable building codes.
[10] The maximum height allowable shall be 120 feet, unless
otherwise restricted by state or federal statutes or
restrictions by any other governing agency having
appropriate jurisdiction.
[11] The tower and generating unit shall be kept in good repair
and sound condition as not to threaten the health and
safety of any individual or animal.
[12] Upon abandonment of use, the tower and related
structures (including all footings, guy wires, etc.) shall be
dismantled and removed from the property within 60 days.
A performance bond shall be posted to assure the same.
§ 450-14 PENNS GROVE CODE § 450-15
1:492
§ 450-15. Sexually oriented businesses. [Added 5-2-2006 by Ord.
No. 2006-10]
A. Declaration and findings of policy; scope.
(1) Whereas sexually oriented businesses are a serious hazard to the
public health, welfare, safety and quality of life; and whereas
sexually oriented businesses have a demonstrable deleterious
effect on both the existing businesses and surrounding residential
areas; and whereas sexually oriented businesses create an
atmosphere which is inimical to the values of this significant
segment of the Borough's population; and whereas sexually
oriented businesses, when located in close proximity to each other,
contribute to urban blight and downgrade the quality of life in the
surrounding areas, now, therefore, it is the policy of the Borough of
Penns Grove to regulate sexually oriented businesses, to protect
the public health, welfare and safety and the quality of life.
[Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
(2) This section shall apply to the regulation of sexually oriented
businesses within the limits of the Borough of Penns Grove.
B. Location of sexually oriented businesses.
(1) A person violates this section if he operates or causes to be
operated a sexually oriented business within 3,500 feet of:
(a) A place of worship.
(b) Any school, whether public or private.
(c) A boundary of a residential zoning district as defined and
shown on the Zoning Map of the Borough of Penns Grove which
is included as a part of this chapter.
(d) Any other sexually oriented business.
(e) A public building or park.
(2) Measurements shall be made in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the
building or structure used as part of the premises where a sexually
oriented business is conducted to the nearest property line of the
premises of a place of worship, a school, a boundary of a residential
district, a public area, a lot devoted to residential use or another
sexually oriented business.
C. Development standards.
(1) Buildings used for sexually oriented businesses shall meet all
applicable safety standards of the Borough of Penns Grove,
including but not limited to adequate fireproofing of walls, floors,
§ 450-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-15
1:493
and ceilings, adequate fire escapes and exits and adequate
fireproofing of all book and/or film storage areas.
(2) Parking shall be provided at a ratio of one square foot of parking for
every square foot of building area. Such parking shall be paved,
striped and appropriately marked and otherwise comply with all
existing requirements for off-street parking plan and design
standards. In addition, all parking spaces shall be linked in an
internal circulation system with one access and one egress point to
and from the subject's site. No parking shall be allowed within the
buffer area designated in this section.
(3) All off-site improvements, such as curbs, gutters, sidewalks, drive
approaches, lighting, landscaping and street trees, shall be
provided as required by the Planning Board.
(4) The interior of the bookstore or adult facility shall be adequately
lighted and constructed so that every portion thereof is readily
visible to the clerk or other supervisory personnel from the counter
or other regular stations.
(5) Lobby and entrance areas should be designed so as to minimize
obstructions of sidewalks during operating hours.
(6) Advertisements, displays or other promotional material shall not be
shown or exhibited so as to be visible to the public from pedestrian
sidewalks or walkways or from other areas, public or semipublic,
and such displays shall be considered signs.
(7) No outdoor loudspeakers or sound equipment audible to the
exterior of the structure housing the sexually oriented business
shall be used. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
(8) All of the above items listed in this subsection shall be evaluated
subject to the following controls:
(a) Minimum site size. The minimum site size shall be two acres,
with a minimum width of 400 feet.
(b) Lot coverage. Coverage of the lots by the principal building
shall not exceed 5% of the total site area.
(c) Building height. Maximum height of the building shall not
exceed 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet.
(d) Buffer area. At a minimum, and except where otherwise noted,
there shall be a buffer area of 100 feet around the entire
perimeter of this site. This area shall be landscaped with a
double alternating row of evergreen trees, six feet in height at
time of planting, spaced eight feet on center. Such trees shall
augment natural landscaping. In the event that natural
landscaping is not available around the site, then additional
§ 450-15 PENNS GROVE CODE § 450-15
1:494
landscaping shall be provided in the form of another
alternating row of evergreen trees as prescribed herein.
(e) Building setback. The principal building shall be set back 150
feet from any road or front property line.
(f) All trash, refuse, articles or any matter to be disposed of shall
be shredded or cut in such a fashion so that the remains shall
not be readable, legible or discernible.
(g) Construction of all walls and partitions in buildings in which
movies, films or shows of any kind are shown shall be subject to
the following:
[1] In the construction of all walls and partitions in all rooms
or booths, material of not less than one-hour fire-resistant
time shall be used.
[2] All aisles in such establishments shall be not less than 50
inches in width. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-5]
[3] The light level in such establishments shall not be less than
10 footcandles at floor level.
[4] In every room of such establishments, there shall not be
fewer than two lighted exits within the constant and
unobstructed view of the occupants, which exits shall lead
directly to the outside of such building.
(h) Single use. No building, premises, structure or other facility
that contains any sexually oriented business shall contain any
other kind of sexually oriented business. No building, premises
or structure or other facility in which sexually oriented devices
are sold, distributed, exhibited or contained shall contain any
sexually oriented business. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-5]
D. Use regulations.
(1) No person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted into any
sexually oriented business premises at any time for any purpose. A
sign conspicuously posted shall give notice of this regulation.
(2) Hours of operation shall be no earlier than 9:00 a.m. nor later than
12:00 midnight, prevailing time, on weekdays and Saturdays. All
sexually oriented businesses shall be closed on Sundays.
§ 450-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-15
1:495

ARTICLE IV
Dimensional Requirements
§ 450-16. Purpose and intent.
The dimensional requirements for all zoning districts in the Borough of
Penns Grove are summarized in the Table of Dimensional Requirements
(§ 450-17). The purpose of the summary is as a reference in making
comparisons between dimensional requirements in the various districts.
Covered in this article are general dimensional requirements for special
circumstances applicable to all districts.
§ 450-17. District regulations; Table of Dimensional
Requirements.47
The regulations for each district pertaining to maximum overall density,
minimum lot area, minimum lot area per dwelling unit, minimum lot width,
minimum front yard, minimum side yard, minimum rear yard, maximum
height and maximum building coverage shall be as specified in this article
unless specifically stated for a particular use in the Table of Use
Regulations48 or in Article III or as permitted under Article V, Performance
Standards.
§ 450-18. Maximum density.
The maximum number of dwelling units per acre of land shall not exceed
the numbers specified in § 450-17 for the district involved.
§ 450-19. Lot area.
A. Where a minimum lot area is specified, no principal building or use
shall be created or established on any lot of lesser area, except as may
be permitted in § 450-17.
B. The lot area and yards required for any new building or use shall not
include any part of a lot that is required by any other building or use to
comply with the requirements of this chapter. No required lot area and
yard shall include any property, the ownership of which has been
transferred subsequent to the effective date of this chapter, if such
property was a part of the area required for compliance with the
dimensional requirements applicable to the lot from which such
transfer was made.
C. Lot coverage shall not exceed the requirements specified in § 450-17
for the district involved.
47.Editor's Note: The Table of Dimensional Requirements is included as an attachment to
this chapter.
48.Editor's Note: The Table of Use Regulations is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 450-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-20
1:497
§ 450-20. Minimum lot width.
Where a minimum lot width is specified, no principal building shall be
erected on any part of a lot which has a width less than specified, except as
may be permitted by § 450-21.
§ 450-21. Exceptions to minimum lot areas and lot widths.
§ 450-22. Traffic visibility across corners.
§ 450-23. Side yards on corner lots.
On a corner lot, the yard facing each street shall equal the required front
yard for lots facing that street.
§ 450-24. Spacing of nonresidential buildings on same lot.
Where two or more main buildings for other than residential uses are
proposed to be built upon property in one ownership, front, side and rear
yards are required only at lot lines abutting other property. See § 450-35 for
requirements for residential uses.
§ 450-25. Front yards to be open space. [Amended 5-5-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-4]
Where a minimum depth of front yard is specified in § 450-17, an open
space of at least the specified depth shall be provided between the legal
A. The provisions of § 450-17 shall not prevent the construction of a singlefamily
dwelling, provided that the yard requirements are observed, on
any lot which was lawful when created and which prior to the effective
date of this chapter was in separate ownership duly recorded by plan or
deed.
B. This exception shall not apply to any two or more contiguous lots in a
single ownership as of or subsequent to the effective date of this
chapter in any case where a reparceling or replatting could create one
or more lots which would conform to the provisions of § 450-17.
A. In any district, no structure, fence or planting shall be maintained
between a plane two feet above curb level and a plane seven feet above
curb level so as to interfere with traffic visibility across the corner
within that part of the required front or side yard which is within a
triangle bounded by the street lot line and a straight line drawn
between points on each lot 25 feet from the intersection of said lot lines
or extension thereof.
B. At each point where a private accessway intersects a public street or
road, a clear sight triangle of 10 feet measured from the point of
intersection of the street line and the edge of the accessway shall be
maintained, within which vegetation and other visual obstructions shall
be limited to a height of not more than two feet above the street grade.
§ 450-20 PENNS GROVE CODE § 450-25
1:498
right-of-way or the future right-of-way and the nearest point of any building
or structure. Only landscaped areas, signs and necessary drives and walks
shall be permitted in the required front yard, except as provided in
§§ 450-26 and 450-27.
§ 450-26. Projections into front yards. [Amended 5-5-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-5]
Ground story bays and porches not over half the length of the front wall may
project into any front yard 3 1/2 feet. Chimneys, flues, columns, sills and
ornamental features may project not more than one foot, and cornices and
gutters not more than two feet, over a required front yard. Handicap access
ramps and landings may project to allow for the minimum length and width
as required by the Building Code.49
§ 450-27. Fences and walls. [Amended 5-5-1998 by Ord. No. 98-4]
A. General requirements.
(1) All permitted fences shall be situated on a lot in such a manner that
the finished side of such fence shall face adjacent properties. All
fences shall be of a permanent type and appropriate for the
intended use. No fence of barbed wire, topped with metal spikes or
constructed of any material or in any manner which may be
dangerous to persons or animals shall be erected, except that
barbed wire may be used as provided in Subsection C(2).
[Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
(2) Fences shall be erected or constructed only after a permit for the
same has been obtained from the Zoning Officer, in any case, and
also from the Construction Code Official if the fence is six feet or
more in height. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
(3) All fences and walls will be retained in a safe, sound, upright
condition and are subject to inspection by the Construction Code
Official.
(4) All fences must be erected not less than four inches within the
property line, and no fence shall be erected so as to encroach upon
any legal or future right-of-way.
(5) Fencing requirements for swimming pools shall be maintained in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 404, Swimming Pools,
§ 404-9.
B. Fences, terraces and walls in residential districts.
(1) Subject to § 450-22, the provisions of § 450-17 shall not apply to
front fences, hedges or walls four feet or less in height above the
49.Editor's Note: See Ch. 223, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 450-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-27
1:499
§ 450-28. Exceptions to front yard requirements.
Subject to §§ 450-22 and 450-56I, the front yard requirements of § 450-17
shall not apply to off-street parking facilities in R-1 and R-2 Districts.
§ 450-29. Front yard reduction when adjacent to existing front
yards.
Where there is an existing building on each of two lots adjacent on either
side of a lot on which a proposed building is to be erected, where both
such existing buildings have an alignment nearer to the street than the
required front depth elsewhere specified in this chapter, and when both
such existing buildings are within 100 feet of the proposed building, the
average of the existing front yard depths of such adjacent lots shall be
the minimum required front yard depth of the lot on which the proposed
building is to be erected.
§ 450-30. Buildings and structures in side yards restricted.
Where a minimum width of side yard is specified in § 450-17, no building or
structure shall be erected within the specified distance from either side lot
line, except as permitted in § 450-31.
natural grade in the required front yard nor to terraces or steps not
over three feet high above the level of the floor of the ground story.
(2) Subject to § 450-22, the provisions of § 450-17 shall not apply to
side and rear fences, hedges or walls six feet or less in height above
the natural grade in the required side and rear yard nor to terraces
or steps not over three feet high above the level of the floor of the
ground story.
C. Fences, terraces and walls in commercial districts. Subject to § 450-48,
the provisions regarding fencing in residential districts shall also apply
in COS and H-C/I Districts, except that:
(1) No wall or fence shall be erected or altered to exceed eight feet in
height.
(2) Barbed wire may be used to top fencing in H-C/I Districts, provided
that the supports are facing inward and present no harm to the
public.
D. Permit required. No fence or wall shall be erected until a permit is
issued by the Zoning Officer. Any person applying for such permit shall
supply the Zoning Office with any plans, drawings, specifications and
survey plot plans as may be required to verify the location and
construction of said fence or wall. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-5]
§ 450-27 PENNS GROVE CODE § 450-31
1:500
§ 450-31. Projections into side yards. [Amended 5-5-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-5]
Bays, balconies, chimneys, flues and fire escapes may project into a
required side yard not more than 1/3 of its width and not more than four
feet in any case. Ground story bays and porches not over half the length of
the side wall may project into any side yard 3 1/2 feet, except as provided in
§ 450-26 as it applies to handicap access.50
§ 450-32. Buildings and structures in rear yards.
No building or structure shall be built within the minimum depth from the
rear lot line specified in § 450-17, except as permitted in § 450-33.
§ 450-33. Accessory buildings, structures and uses in rear yards.
Required rear yards may be occupied by an accessory garage for accessory
garage use and other permitted accessory buildings, structures or uses,
provided that:
§ 450-34. Rear yards in triangular lots.
In the case of a triangular lot with no rear lot line, the distance between any
point on the building and the corner of the lot farthest from the front lot line
shall be at least twice the minimum depth specified in § 450-17.
§ 450-35. Minimum building spacing.
The building spacing percent, as specified in § 450-17, is the minimum
percent ratio of horizontal distance between facing walls of any two
buildings on one lot, one of which is residential, and the height of the taller
of the two buildings.
A. Such accessory building, structure or use shall be situated not less than
half the distance required for side yards in the district in which such
building, structure or use is located and not less than 15 feet further
back from the street line than the rearmost portion of the principal
building (note: or not less than four feet from rear lot line); and
B. Such accessory building, structure or use shall not exceed 15 feet in
height.
A. The minimum horizontal distance between facing walls of any two
buildings on one lot, one of which is a residential building, shall be at
their closest point at least the greater of 25 feet or the distance which
bears the minimum ratio specified in § 450-17, Table of Dimensional
Requirements.
50.Editor's Note: Original § 200-31, Fences and terraces in side yards, which immediately
followed this section, was repealed 5-5-1998 by Ord. No. 98-4. See now § 450-27B(2).
§ 450-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-35
1:501
§ 450-36. Maximum height of buildings.
§ 450-37. Height exceptions.
Height limits, specified in § 450-17, may be exceeded by one foot for each
foot by which the width of the front, rear and side yards is increased beyond
the minimum yard requirements, up to a maximum of 80 feet.
§ 450-38. Lot coverage.
B. Facing walls are defined as walls opposite to and parallel with one
another or wall lines or extensions of wall lines of opposite walls which
intersect at angles of less than 65°.
A. No building shall exceed the maximum height of buildings specified in
§ 450-17, except as specified in § 450-37.
B. Height shall be measured from the mean elevation of the proposed
finished grade at the front of the building to the highest point of the roof
for flat roofs, to the decklines of mansard roofs and to the mean height
between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs.
A. The lot coverage is the maximum percent of the total land area which
may be covered by the ground floor area of any building or buildings.
B. For any building or group of buildings on a lot, neither the building
coverage nor the floor area requirements shall exceed the maximum
percentiles specified in § 450-17.
(1) The floor area ratio is the maximum square foot amount of total
floor area permitted for each square foot of land area.
(2) Where a maximum floor area ratio is specified in § 450-17, no
development shall be permitted which exceeds the floor area
permitted as specified.
§ 450-35 PENNS GROVE CODE § 450-38
1:502
ARTICLE V
Performance Standards
§ 450-39. Compliance required.
All uses and activities established after the effective date of this chapter
shall comply with the following standards.
§ 450-40. Structure orientation and siting. [Added 11-16-2004 by
Ord. No. 2004-25]
§ 450-41. Noise.
A. In reviewing applications for building permits, consideration shall be
given to the positioning and orientation of structures. The design and
layout of principal and accessory structures and parking areas shall be
reviewed to provide an aesthetically pleasing design and efficient
arrangement.
B. The layout of the structures and parking areas shall have substantially
the same orientation as the surrounding buildings in the neighborhood.
C. Requests for deviation from these standards shall require site plan
approval from the Planning Board.
A. The sound level of any operation (other than the operation of motor
vehicles or other transportation facilities, operations involved in the
construction or demolition of structures, emergency alarm signals or
time signals) shall not exceed the decibel levels in the designated
octave bands as stated below. The sound-pressure level shall be
measured with a sound-level meter and an octave-band analyzer that
conform to specifications published by the American Standards
Association. American National Standard Specification for Sound-Level
Meters, S1.4-1971, American National Standards Institute, Inc., New
York, New York, and the American Standard Specification for Octave,
Half Octave, and Third Octave Band Filter Sets, S1.11-1966 (R 1971,
American Standards Association, Inc., New York, New York), shall be
used.
B. Sound-pressure levels shall be measured at the property line upon
which the emission occurs. The maximum permissible sound-pressure
levels for smooth and continuous noise shall be as follows:
Frequency Band
(cycles per second)
Maximum Permitted Sound-
Pressure Level
(decibels)
0 to 150 67
150 to 300 59
300 to 600 52
§ 450-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-41
1:503
§ 450-42. Smoke.
No smoke shall be emitted from any chimney or other source of visible gray
opacity greater than No. 1 on the Ringelmann Smoke Chart as published by
the United States Bureau of Mines, except that smoke of a shade not darker
than No. 2 on the Ringelmann Chart may be emitted for not more than four
minutes in any thirty-minute period.
§ 450-43. Emissions.
Frequency Band
(cycles per second)
Maximum Permitted Sound-
Pressure Level
(decibels)
1,200 to 2,400 40
2,400 to 4,800 34
Above 4,800 32
C. If the noise is not smooth and continuous or is radiated during sleeping
hours, one or more of the corrections below shall be added to or
subtracted from each of the decibel levels given above:
Type of Operation or Character of Noise
Correction
(decibels)
Noise occurs between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m.
-3
Noise occurs less than 5% of any 1-hour period +5
Noise is of periodic character (hum, scream,
etc.) or is of impulsive character (hammering,
etc.) (In the case of impulsive noise, the
correction shall apply only to the average
pressure during an impulse, and impulse peaks
shall not exceed the basic standards given
above.)
-5
A. The emission of dust, dirt, fly ash, fumes, vapors or gases which can
cause any damage to human health, to animals or vegetation or to other
forms of property or which can cause any soiling or staining of persons
or property at any point beyond the lot line of the use creating the
emission is herewith prohibited.
B. No emission of liquid or solid particles from any chimney or other
source shall exceed 0.3 grain per cubic foot of the covering gas at any
point beyond the lot line of the use creating the emission. For
measurement of the amount of particles in gases resulting from
combustion, standard correction shall be applied to a stack
temperature of 500° F. and 50% excess air in stack at full load.
§ 450-41 PENNS GROVE CODE § 450-44
1:504
§ 450-44. Heat.
No use shall produce heat perceptible beyond its lot lines.
§ 450-45. Offensive odors.
No use shall emit odorous gases or other odorous matter in such quantities
as to be offensive at any point on or beyond its lot lines. The guide for
determining such quantities of offensive odors shall be the 50% response
level of Table 1 (Odor Thresholds in Air), Research on Chemical Odors:
Part 1, Odor Thresholds for 53 Commercial Chemicals, October 1968,
Manufacturing Chemists Association, Inc., Washington, D.C.
§ 450-46. Glare.
No use shall produce a strong, dazzling light or a reflection of a strong,
dazzling light beyond its lot lines.
§ 450-47. Vibrations.
No use shall cause earth vibrations or concussions detectable beyond its
lot lines without the aid of instruments, with the exception of that vibration
produced as a result of construction activity.
§ 450-48. Buffer yards.
Buffer yards are required in all COS and H-C/I Districts along the district
boundaries between themselves and residential districts. No commercial
and industrial uses shall hereafter be established, nor shall existing uses be
expanded, unless they meet the following buffer yard regulations:
A. The buffer yard shall be measured from the district boundary line or
from the near street line where a street serves as the district boundary
line.
B. Buffer yards shall be not less than 15 feet in width in the COS District
and not less than 30 feet in the H-C/I District.
C. The buffer yard may be coterminous with required front, side or rear
yards, and in case of conflict, the larger yard requirements shall apply.
D. In all buffer yards, the exterior fifteen-foot width shall be planted with
grass seed, sod or ground cover and shall be maintained and kept clean
of all debris, rubbish, weeds and tall grass in conformance with the
Borough ordinance.51
E. No structure, manufacturing or processing activity or storage of
materials shall be permitted in the buffer yard; however, parking of
passenger automobiles shall be permitted in the portion of the buffer
yard exclusive of the exterior fifteen-foot width.
51.Editor's Note: See Ch. 198, Brush, Grass, Weeds and Debris.
§ 450-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-48
1:505
§ 450-49. Waste storage and disposal.
F. All buffer yards shall include a dense screen planting of trees, shrubs or
other plant materials, or both, the full length of the lot line to serve as a
barrier to visibility, airborne particles, glare and noise. Such screen
planting shall be in accordance with the following requirements:
(1) Plant materials used in the screen planting shall be at least four
feet in height when planted and be of such species as will produce,
within two years, a complete visual screen of at least eight feet in
height.
(2) The screen planting shall be maintained permanently, and any
plant material which does not live shall be replaced within one year.
(3) The screen planting shall be so placed that at maturity it will not be
closer than three feet to any street or property line.
(4) In accordance with the provisions of § 450-22, a clear sight triangle
shall be maintained at all street intersections and at all points
where private accessways intersect public streets.
(5) The screen planting shall be broken only at points of vehicular or
pedestrian access.
G. No screen planting shall be required along streets which form district
boundary lines, provided that:
(1) No outdoor processing or manufacturing activity and no outdoor
storage of materials shall be so located to be visible from the
adjacent residential districts.
(2) Only the front of any proposed building shall be visible from the
adjacent residential districts.
H. Prior to the issuance of any zoning permit, complete plans showing the
arrangement of all buffer yards and the placement, species and size of
all plant materials and the placement, size, materials and type of all
fences to be placed in such buffer yard shall be reviewed by the Zoning
Officer to ascertain that the plans are in conformance with the terms of
this chapter.
A. No highly flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases shall be stored
in bulk above ground, except tanks or drums of fuel directly in
connection with energy devices, heating or appliances located or
operated on the same lot as the tanks or drums of fuel.
B. All outdoor storage facilities for fuel, raw materials and products and all
fuel, raw materials and products stored outdoors shall be enclosed by
an approved safety fence.
C. No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in such form or
manner that they may be transferred off the lot by natural causes or
§ 450-48 PENNS GROVE CODE § 450-49
1:506
forces, nor shall any substance which can contaminate a stream or
watercourse or otherwise render such stream or watercourse
undesirable as a source of water supply or recreation or which will
destroy aquatic life be allowed to enter any stream or watercourse.
D. All materials or wastes which might cause fumes or dust or which
constitute a fire hazard or which may be edible or otherwise attractive
to rodents or insects shall be stored outdoors only if enclosed in
containers adequate to eliminate such hazards.
§ 450-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-49
1:507

ARTICLE VI
Signs
§ 450-50. Purpose.
It is recognized that signs perform important functions in identifying
residences and businesses. It is hereby found and declared, however, that
control of signs is necessary to promote the health, safety and general
welfare by lessening hazards to pedestrian and vehicular traffic, by
preserving property values, by preventing unsightly and detrimental
development which has a blighting influence upon residential, business and
industrial uses, by preventing signs from reaching such excessive size that
they obscure one another to the detriment of all concerned and by securing
certain fundamentals of design for the Borough.
§ 450-51. Definitions. [Amended 9-16-1997 by Ord. No. 97-13;
6-16-1998 by Ord. No. 98-9]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SIGN — Any permanent or temporary structure or part thereof or any
device attached, painted or represented directly or indirectly on a structure
or other surface that shall display or include any letter, word, insignia, flag
or representation used as or which is in the nature of an advertisement,
announcement, visual communication, or direction or which is designed to
attract the eye or draw the attention of the public.
§ 450-52. Area.
Exception. Flags patriotic in nature and limited to federal, state and
local government flags are exempted from the provisions of this
chapter, provided that:
The maximum number of patriotic flags in business districts shall
be limited to five for each building; the area of any one flag shall
not exceed 20 square feet.
(1)
Flags shall be displayed no lower than eight feet from the
bottommost portion of the flag to the sidewalk.
(2)
A.
A. The area of a sign shall be construed to include all lettering, wording
and accompanying designs and symbols, together with the background,
whether open or enclosed, on which they are displayed (but not
including any supporting framework and bracing which are incidental
to the display itself).
B. Where the sign consists of individual letters or symbols attached to a
building, wall or window, the area shall be considered to be that of the
smallest rectangle or other regular geometric shape which
encompasses all of the letters and symbols.
§ 450-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-52
1:509
§ 450-53. Illumination.
§ 450-54. Location.
§ 450-55. Types.
C. In computing square foot area of a double-faced sign, only one side
shall be considered, provided that both faces are identical. If the
interior angle formed by the two faces of the double-faced sign is
greater than 45°, then both sides of such sign shall be considered in
calculating the sign area.
A. Directly illuminated sign. A directly illuminated sign shall be a sign
designed to give forth artificial light directly (or through transparent or
translucent material) from a source of light within such sign, including
but not limited to neon and exposed lamp signs. Festoon lighting is a
directly illuminated sign comprised of either:
(1) A group of incandescent light bulbs hung or strung overhead or on
a building or structure; or
(2) Light bulbs not shaded or hooded or otherwise screened to prevent
the direct rays of the light from shining on an adjacent property or
right-of-way.
B. Indirectly illuminated sign. An indirectly illuminated sign shall be a sign
illuminated with a light so shielded that no direct rays therefrom are
visible elsewhere on the lot where said illumination occurs. If such
shielding device is defective, such sign shall be deemed to be a directly
illuminated sign.
C. Flashing sign. A flashing sign shall be an illuminated sign on which the
artificial light is not maintained stationary and constant in intensity and
color at all times when in use.
D. Nonilluminated sign. A nonilluminated sign shall be a sign which is not
illuminated either directly or indirectly.
A. On-premises sign. An on-premises sign shall be a sign which advertises
or otherwise directs attention to an activity conducted on the same lot.
B. Advertising sign. An advertising sign shall be an off-premises sign
which advertises or otherwise directs attention to a commodity,
business, industry, home occupation or other similar activity which is
sold, offered or conducted elsewhere than on the lot upon which such
sign is located.
C. Business sign. A business sign shall be an on-premises sign which
advertises or otherwise directs attention to a business, commodity,
service, industry or other activity which is sold, offered or conducted
other than incidentally on the premises upon which such sign is located
or to which it is affixed.
§ 450-52 PENNS GROVE CODE § 450-55
1:510
§ 450-56. General restrictions.
A. Freestanding sign. A freestanding sign shall be a permanently affixed
self-supporting sign resting on or supported by means of poles or
standards either on the ground or on the roof of a building. The height
of freestanding signs on the ground shall be measured from the mean
elevation of the finished grade at the front of the building to the
uppermost portion of the sign. [Amended 6-16-1998 by Ord. No.
98-9]
B. Parallel sign. A parallel sign shall be a sign mounted parallel to a wall or
other vertical building surface. Parallel signs shall not extend beyond
the edge of any wall or other surface to which they are mounted and
shall not project more than eight inches from its surface. [Amended
7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
C. Projecting sign. A projecting sign shall be any sign mounted to a wall or
other vertical building surface other than a parallel sign. Projecting
signs shall not project more than two feet from the wall or surface to
which they are mounted, except as provided under § 450-58, nor in any
way interfere with normal pedestrian or vehicular traffic. [Amended
6-16-1998 by Ord. No. 98-9]
D. Nonstationary sign. A nonstationary sign shall be a sign which, by
means of some mechanical device, changes its position constantly or at
regular intervals by rotating around an axis or shifting in horizontal or
vertical alignment.
A. Prohibition. Flashing signs, nonstationary signs, neon signs exceeding
two square feet in area, handwritten signs, portable signs not
permanently affixed to either the ground or to a building and festoon
lighting, except as provided under Subsections L and M, shall not be
permitted in any district. Freestanding roof signs shall not be permitted
in any district, except as provided under § 450-58, provided that they do
not extend more than four feet above the roofline of a one-story
building. [Amended 6-16-1998 by Ord. No. 98-9]
B. Obstruction. No sign shall be erected or maintained within a distance of
10 feet from the intersection of any street lines or the intersection of a
street line and the edge of a private accessway, and 25 feet in the H-C/I
District, unless the location of the sign is situated at least eight feet
above the level of the street center line. [Amended 6-16-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-9]
C. Overhanging. No signs shall overhang any walkway or public right-ofway,
except as provided under § 450-58. [Amended 6-16-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-9]
D. Maintenance. All signs permitted in this article must be professionally
designed and constructed of durable materials and must be kept in
good condition and repair. Any sign which is allowed to become
§ 450-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-56
1:511
dilapidated shall be removed by the Borough at the expense of the
owner or lessee of the property on which it is located. [Amended
6-16-1998 by Ord. No. 98-9]
E. Nonconforming signs. Signs existing at the time of passage of this
chapter, which do not conform to the requirements of this chapter, shall
be considered nonconforming signs and may continue in nonconformity.
Once removed for repair, replacement or any other reason, a
nonconforming sign shall not be replaced unless with a conforming
sign; however, nonconforming signs may be repainted or repaired in
place, provided that such action does not exceed the dimensions of the
existing sign. All nonconforming signs must be registered with the
Zoning Office. [Amended 6-16-1998 by Ord. No. 98-9; 7-5-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-5]
F. Permit required. All signs shall require the issuance of a sign permit
from the Zoning Office before erection or replacement, except for
patriotic signs as described in § 450-51. A building permit shall also be
required by the Construction Code Official for any sign which is
permanently affixed to the ground, the building facade or the inside or
outside of windows. [Amended 6-16-1998 by Ord. No. 98-9;
7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
G. Separate frontage. If an establishment has walls fronting on two or
more streets, the provisions of § 450-58A(2) and (3) shall apply for each
street frontage. [Amended 6-16-1998 by Ord. No. 98-9]
H. Signs within street lines. Signs erected by a duly constituted
governmental body, including traffic signs and similar regulatory
notices, shall be allowed within street lines. No other signs shall be
permitted within street lines, except that this provision shall be waived
for parallel signs in areas where no front yard setback is required.
I. Yard requirements. No portion of any freestanding sign shall be located
closer to any lot line than 1/2 the required yard for the district in which
it is located, except for COS and H-C/I Districts. If this requirement
cannot be met, then freestanding signs shall be prohibited on such
properties. [Amended 6-16-1998 by Ord. No. 98-9]
J. Vehicular signs. Any vehicle to which a sign is affixed in such a manner
that carrying of such sign or signs no longer is incidental to the
vehicle's primary purpose but becomes a primary purpose in itself shall
be considered a freestanding sign and as such be subject to the
provisions regarding freestanding signs in the district in which such
vehicle is located.
K. Abandoned signs. For the purpose of this chapter, an abandoned sign(s)
is one that, after one year, said sign(s), including all hangers, brackets
or superstructures used in support or attached to said sign, no longer
represents the user or use of the structure or land to which said sign(s)
is attached or freestanding.
§ 450-56 PENNS GROVE CODE § 450-56
1:512
§ 450-57. Signs in residential and business districts.
L. Festoon lighting, which is to be defined as miniature, nonflashing lights
of a discrete nature, will be permitted in commercial and H-C/I Districts
if it lends to the attractiveness of the business and connects with the
overall appearance of the district as a whole. [Added 9-16-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-14; amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
M. Festoon lighting shall be clear in color and of an encased commercial
grade. [Added 9-16-1997 by Ord. No. 97-14]
N. Appearance. Any sign for which a permit is issued is approved for
appearance and condition as well as for dimension. Any change that
may affect the original appearance must be approved by the Zoning
Officer. [Added 6-16-1998 by Ord. No. 98-9; amended 7-5-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-5]
A. On-premises signs. The following types of signs and no other shall be
permitted: [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
(1) Official traffic signs.
(2) Professional accessory use or name signs indicating the name,
profession or activity of the occupant of a dwelling and trespassing
sign or signs indicating the private nature of a driveway or
premises, provided that the area on one side of any such sign shall
not exceed two square feet.
(3) Identification signs for schools, churches, hospitals or similar
institutions, provided that the area on one side of any such sign
shall not exceed 24 square feet, and identification signs for clubs,
lodges, estates or similar uses, provided that the area on one side
of any such sign shall not exceed 12 square feet.
(4) Temporary signs of mechanics and artisans, provided that such
signs shall be removed promptly upon completion of the work.
B. Off-premises signs. No off-premises signs shall be permitted except
directional or information signs of a public or semipublic nature, not
exceeding eight square feet in area. Not more than one such sign shall
be placed on each property unless such property fronts on more than
one street, in which case one such sign may be erected on each street
frontage. Such signs shall only be used for the purpose of stating or
calling attention to:
(1) The name or location of a town, village, hospital, community center,
public or private school, YMCA, YWCA, church, synagogue or other
place of worship.
(2) The name or place of meeting of an official or civic body such as a
chamber of commerce, board of trade or service club.
§ 450-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-57
1:513
§ 450-58. Signs in COS District.
(3) An event of public interest, such as public or general election;
church or public meeting; local, county and state fair; volunteer fire
department fair; and other similar community activities and
campaigns.
(4) Soil conservation, 4-H and similar projects.
C. Locational restrictions. [Amended 6-16-1998 by Ord. No. 98-9]
(1) Freestanding ground signs may not exceed five feet in height.
(2) Parallel and projecting signs, or portions of such signs, shall not be
located above the ceiling of the ground floor of any building nor
more than 12 feet above the upper surface of the nearest curb,
whichever is less, except in COS and H-C/I Districts.
A. On-premises signs. In the COS District, no on-premises signs shall be
permitted except as follows:
(1) All signs permitted in § 450-57 at the standard prescribed therein
except as otherwise provided in this section. [Amended
6-16-1998 by Ord. No. 98-9]
(2) Parallel and projecting business signs, provided that: [Amended
6-16-1998 by Ord. No. 98-9]
(a) The total area of all parallel signs for each establishment shall
not exceed one square foot for each foot length of the front
building wall or length of that portion of such wall which is
devoted to such establishment.
(b) The total area of all projecting signs shall not exceed eight
square feet nor shall any sign project from a building facade
more than four feet.
(c) A minimum clearance of nine feet must be maintained between
the upper surface of the nearest curb and the lowermost
portion of any parallel or projecting sign.
(d) The maximum height of parallel or projecting signs shall not
exceed 15 feet measured from the upper surface of the nearest
curb to the uppermost portion of the sign.
(e) Signs painted on or affixed to the inside or outside of windows
are considered parallel signs and are subject to the provisions
of Subsection A(2)(a), except for signs such as "Open" signs
and hours of operation signs as long as the total area of such
signs does not exceed two square feet.
(3) Freestanding business signs, provided that:
§ 450-57 PENNS GROVE CODE § 450-58
1:514
§ 450-59. Signs in H-C/I District.
§ 450-60. Temporary signs. [Added 6-16-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-5]
The following regulations shall apply to temporary signs which are
permitted in any zone:
(a) Only one such sign shall be permitted on each property for
each street frontage, subject to the provisions of § 450-56G.
(b) All freestanding signs in the COS District must conform to the
design standard as illustrated in this chapter with a total area
not to exceed 15 square feet. [Amended 6-16-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-9]
(c) The maximum height of freestanding business signs shall not
exceed five feet measured from the finished grade to the
uppermost portion of the sign. [Amended 6-16-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-9]
(d) Freestanding signs must be located no less than 10 feet from
the curb, measured to the forwardmost portion of the sign.
[Added 6-16-1998 by Ord. No. 98-9]
B. Off-premises signs. All off-premises signs permitted in § 450-57B at the
standards prescribed therein are permitted.
A. On-premises signs. In the H-C/I District, no on-premises signs shall be
permitted except as follows:
(1) All signs permitted in § 450-57A at the standards prescribed
therein.
(2) Parallel business signs subject to the following provisions:
(a) The total area of any parallel sign shall not exceed two square
feet for each foot of length of the front building wall or length
of that portion of such wall which is devoted to such
establishment or 50 square feet, whichever is less.
(b) No parallel sign shall be painted on or affixed to the inside or
outside of windows in such districts.
(3) Freestanding business signs, provided that:
(a) The area of all such signs shall not exceed one square foot for
each two feet of lot frontage or 100 square feet, whichever is
less, subject to the provisions of § 450-56G.
(b) The maximum height of freestanding business signs shall not
exceed 14 feet.
B. Off-premises sign. All off-premises signs permitted in § 450-57B at the
standards prescribed therein are permitted.
§ 450-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-60
1:515
A. Nonilluminated real estate signs announcing the sale, rental or lease of
the premises on which the sign is located and real estate signs
announcing an open house. The sign may be double-faced and, except
as noted below, only one sign announcing the sale, rental or lease of the
premises shall be permitted on each lot or parcel unless it fronts on
more than one street right-of-way or property line, unless attached to a
portion of a building that may be nearer to said street right-of-way or
property line. Temporary real estate signs announcing an open house
may be located so as to provide directions to the open house; however,
in no event shall such signs remain in place for a period exceeding 24
hours. Temporary signs shall not be located so as to obstruct traffic in
any way, and such signs shall not be located in any landscaped traffic
island. Any temporary sign erected pursuant to this subsection may be
erected on private property only with the authorization of the owner of
the property.
(1) The maximum size of the sign shall be in accordance with the
following schedule:
(a) Residential districts: eight square feet.
(b) Business, COS and H-C/I Districts: 12 square feet.
(2) All real estate signs announcing the sale, rental or lease of the
premises shall be removed within seven days after closing or
settlement on said property or the execution of the lease.
Temporary real estate signs announcing an open house or
providing directions therefor shall be removed within six hours
from the end of the open house event.
(3) Developments with four or more homes for sale may be advertised
on a sign not to exceed 24 square feet nor a twelve-foot height. One
such sign shall be permitted on each frontage if the development
fronts on more than one street. The sign shall be removed when all
of the homes or lots have been initially sold or rented.
(4) No temporary "For Sale" or "For Lease" sign shall exceed six feet in
height.
(5) The advertised use of the structure shall be in accordance with the
zoning in the district in which it is located.
(6) The penalty for a violation of this subsection shall be as provided in
§ 450-88 of this chapter for each violation. Each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate
offense. Each sign erected in violation of this subsection shall be
deemed a separate offense. The owner of any sign as identified on
such sign shall be liable for any penalty assessed for any sign
deemed to be in violation of this subsection. [Amended 7-5-2017
by Ord. No. 2017-5]
§ 450-60 PENNS GROVE CODE § 450-60
1:516
B. Temporary signs for advertising public functions or fund-raising events
for charitable or religious organizations shall be permitted for a period
of 30 days prior to and during the event and shall be removed within
five days after the event. The sign shall be nonilluminated, not larger
than 24 square feet in area, not exceeding eight feet in height and may
be erected flat against the building or freestanding.
C. Temporary political signs and signs not related to a political campaign
but containing political expressions may be erected for a period of 60
days prior to any scheduled election date. Campaign signs shall be
removed within 15 days after the election. Political signs in residential
zones shall not exceed 16 square feet, the dimension shall not exceed
four feet on any side, and they shall not exceed the height limitation for
residential zones. Political signs in all other zones shall not exceed the
maximum size and height limitation for the zone in which they are
placed. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 19:44A-22.3, temporary political
signs aiding or promoting the nomination, election or defeat of any
candidate or providing political information on a political candidate or
aiding the passage or defeat of any public question or providing
political information on any public question shall clearly state on the
face thereof the name and business or residence address of the
committee, group or person that financed the temporary political sign
and shall contain a statement that the temporary political sign has been
financed by that group, committee or person.
D. Relocation information signs for a period of 30 days. Relocation signs
shall be restricted to the present location of the relocating business and
the future location of the relocating business. The signs, one each at the
present and the future business sites, shall not be in excess of
standards set forth for the zone in which the business is located.
E. Construction signs. One sign announcing the name of architects,
engineers and/or contractors, the building enterprise and related
information shall be permitted at a site under construction, alteration
or repair, provided that the sign shall not exceed 24 square feet in area
and that the sign shall be removed before a certificate of occupancy is
issued.
F. Commercial temporary signs and banners. The construction, erection,
replacement or alteration of any temporary sign or banner advertising a
grand opening or special sales event on a commercial premises shall be
permitted subject to the following standards:
(1) One temporary sign or banner not exceeding 24 square feet
designed to advertise a grand opening celebration of a commercial
establishment may be erected and maintained on the commercial
premises which is the subject of said grand opening celebration for
a period of 14 days prior to said event and for seven days
thereafter. Streamers, pennants, balloons and other like accessory
decorations may also be erected during the above time period.
§ 450-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-60
1:517
(2) One temporary sign or banner not exceeding 24 square feet
designed to advertise a special sales event may be erected and
maintained on the commercial premises conducting said event for a
period not in excess of 30 calendar days. The erection of a
temporary sign or banner advertising a special sales event shall be
limited to four events per year per commercial establishment.
(3) Temporary signs or banners shall not be so installed as to create a
traffic or fire hazard to create a condition that adversely affects
public safety.
(4) Temporary signs or banners not permitted by this chapter are
prohibited. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
(5) Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this
Subsection F shall be subject to a penalty as provided in § 450-88 of
this chapter. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
[Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
(6) It is the duty of the Zoning Officer to enforce these regulations and
the penalties hereunder and to investigate all banners which are
alleged to be unsafe, a menace to the public, or erected or
displayed in violation of the provisions of this section.
G. Noncommercial banners. Nonprofit and public organizations and
agencies shall be permitted to erect or display a banner which shall
comply with the standards and procedures as set forth this section.
H. There shall be no fees imposed or approvals required for the erection of
any temporary sign which satisfies the requirements of this section.
§ 450-60 PENNS GROVE CODE § 450-60
1:518
ARTICLE VII
Off-Street Parking and Loading
§ 450-61. Required off-street parking spaces.
Off-street parking spaces shall be provided and satisfactorily maintained in
accordance with the following provisions for each use defined in § 450-14
which, after the effective date of this chapter, is erected, enlarged or altered
for use for any of the following purposes:
A. Residential (Uses 1 through 5 and 8): two spaces per dwelling unit.
B. Residential multiple-family mid-rise (Use 6): 1.25 spaces per dwelling
unit, except for senior citizen structures which require one space per
two dwelling units.
C. Residential (Use 7): one space per three beds.
D. Institutional, recreational and educational (Uses 9 through 16 and 33):
one space per five seats plus one space per two employees on the
premises. In schools where fixed seats are not provided, one space for
every 300 square feet of floor area intended to be used by patrons,
guests, members, clients or customers plus one space per two
employees on the premises at any one time. [Amended 7-5-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-5]
E. Institutional (Uses 17 through 19): 1 1/2 spaces for each patient bed,
not including cribs and bassinets. For Use 19, the requirements under
Subsection F shall be met also.
F. Office (Uses 20 through 25): one space for every 300 square feet of
gross floor area devoted to office use, except within a zoning district
designated as COS where off-street parking shall be provided as
follows: No off-street parking spaces shall be required for the first 400
square feet of gross floor area devoted to office use. For each additional
600 square feet, or portion thereof, of gross floor area devoted to office
use, one off-street parking space shall be provided and maintained.
Such requirements within a zoning district designated as COS may be
decreased or waived when authorized as a conditional use if the Board
finds that such requirements are impracticable or would require
destruction of important architectural or landscape elements, the
unreasonableness of such regulations is clearly demonstrated and
sufficient public parking is provided. [Amended 6-17-1986 by Ord.
No. 86-5]
G. Retail and consumer service (Uses 26 through 31): one space for every
300 square feet of gross floor area devoted to patron use or one space
for each five seats, whichever is greater, plus one space for each two
employees, except within a zoning district designated as COS where offstreet
parking shall be provided as follows: No off-street parking spaces
shall be required for the first 400 square feet of gross floor area
devoted to patron use. For each additional 800 square feet, or portion
§ 450-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-61
1:519
thereof, of gross floor area devoted to patron use, one off-street parking
space shall be provided and maintained. Such requirements within a
zoning district designated as COS may be decreased or waived when
authorized as a conditional use if the Board finds that such
requirements are impracticable or would require destruction of
important architectural or landscape elements, the unreasonableness
of such regulations is clearly demonstrated and sufficient public
parking is provided. [Amended 8-5-1980 by Ord. No. 80-11;
6-17-1986 by Ord. No. 86-5]
H. Mortuary or funeral home (Use 32): one off-street parking space for
each four seats provided for patron use or at least one off-street parking
space for each 50 square feet of gross floor area used or intended to be
used in the operation of the establishment, whichever requires the
greater number of off-street parking spaces, plus one additional space
for each full-time employee.
I. Motel, hotel or tourist home (Uses 34 and 67): one space for each unit.
In addition, Subsection G above shall be applicable for any eating place,
including banquet facilities, on the premises. [Amended 7-5-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-5]
J. Automotive service (Uses 36 through 38): one space for every 150
square feet of gross floor area plus one space for every employee.
K. Transportation facilities (Uses 39 through 43): off-street parking spaces
as the Board shall determine adequate to serve customers, patrons,
visitors, employees and vehicles normally parked on the premises.
L. Communication facilities, supply and sanitary utilities (Uses 44 through
47): two off-street parking spaces at each terminal or substation plus
one space for each full-time employee.
M. Fire station (Use 48): six off-street parking spaces for each fire truck
where no community room is a part of the building, or, where a
community room is provided, two off-street parking spaces for each fire
truck plus one off-street parking space for each 300 square feet of
community room.
N. Industrial (Uses 50 through 54): three spaces for every five employees
on the premises at any one time. Wherever multideck or underground
parking is provided, the maximum permitted building coverage shall be
increased by 100 square feet for each berth provided underground, 50
square feet for each berth provided on a two-story aboveground
parking structure, and 25 feet for each berth provided on an additional
deck. A parking structure shall not be defined as a building when
computing building coverage.
O. Customary home occupation (Use 55): one off-street parking space in
addition to spaces otherwise required.
§ 450-61 PENNS GROVE CODE § 450-61
1:520
§ 450-62. General requirements for parking facilities.
P. No requirements: Uses 35, 49, 56 through 63 and 68. [Amended
7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
Q. Marina (Use 64): one space per five boat berths and one space per 500
square feet of dry boat storage area, plus one space per employee on
the largest shift. [Added 10-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-20]
R. Bar/nightclub (Use 65): one space per 100 square feet of gross floor
area. [Added 10-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-20]
S. Liquor store (Use 66) in combination with bar only (use 65): one space
per 100 square foot of gross floor area. [Added 10-19-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-20]
A. Existing parking. Structures and uses in existence at the date of
adoption of this chapter shall not be subject to the requirements of this
article so long as the kind or extent of use is not changed, provided that
any parking facility now serving such structures or uses shall not in the
future be reduced below such requirements.
B. Change in requirements. Whenever there is an alteration of a structure
or a change or extension of a use which increases the parking
requirements according to the standards of § 450-61, the total
additional parking required for the alteration, change or extension shall
be provided in accordance with the requirements of that section;
however, when the use of the existing structure is changed or
intensified without substantial addition to the structure, the additional
parking normally required may be reduced or waived by conditional use
in accordance with § 450-11 if the Board finds that the provisions of
§ 450-61 are impracticable or would require destruction of important
architectural or landscape elements.
C. Conflict with other uses. No parking area shall be used for any use that
interferes with its availability for the parking need it is required to
serve.
D. Continuing character of obligation.
(1) All required parking facilities shall be provided and maintained as
long as the use exists which the facilities were designed to serve.
Off-street parking facilities shall not be reduced in total extent after
their provision, except upon the approval of the Board and then
only after proof that, by reason of diminution in floor area, seating
area, the number of employees, or change in other factors
controlling the regulation of the number of parking spaces, such
reduction is in conformity with the requirements of this article.
(2) Reasonable precautions shall be taken by the owner or sponsor of
particular uses to assure the availability of required facilities to the
employees or other persons whom the facilities are designed to
§ 450-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-62
1:521
§ 450-63. Design standards for parking facilities.
The design standards specified in the Borough of Penns Grove subdivision
and site plan review regulations shall be required for all off-street parking
facilities with a capacity of three or more vehicles built after the effective
date of this chapter.52
§ 450-64. Off-street loading spaces.
serve. Such facilities shall be designed and used in such a manner
as to at no time constitute a nuisance, a hazard or unreasonable
impediment to traffic.
E. Joint use. Two or more uses may provide for required parking in a
common parking lot if the total space provided is not less than the sum
of the spaces required for each use individually. However, the number
of spaces required in a common parking facility may be reduced below
this total by special exception if it can be demonstrated to the Board
that the hours or days of peak parking needed for the uses are so
different that a lower total will provide adequately for all uses served by
the facility. [Amended 6-17-1986 by Ord. No. 86-5]
F. Fractional spaces. Where the computation of required parking space
results in a fractional number, any fraction of the next highest number
shall be counted as one.
G. Location of parking spaces. Required off-street parking spaces shall be
on the same lot or premises with the principal use served. Where this
requirement cannot be met, they shall be within 300 feet of the same
principal use. Off-premises parking shall be either owned by the
principal use or leased on a long-term basis of five years or longer.
Required off-street parking spaces in Districts R-1 and R-2 shall not be
designated or maintained and provided for in the front yard minimum
setback area. [Amended 8-5-1980 by Ord. No. 80-11]
H. Maintenance of parking areas. On parking areas for three or more
vehicles, the area not landscaped and so maintained, including
driveways, shall be graded, surfaced with asphalt or other suitable
material and drained to the satisfaction of the Borough Engineer to the
extent necessary to prevent dust, erosion or excessive water flow
across streets or adjoining properties. All off-street parking spaces for
three or more vehicles shall be marked to indicate their location.
A. Off-street loading requirements as specified below shall be provided on
any lot on which a building exceeding 6,000 square feet of gross floor
area for business or industry is hereafter erected.
(1) Every department store, freight terminal or railroad yard, hospital,
retail establishment, storage warehouse or wholesale
52.Editor's Note: See Ch. 375, Site Plan Review, and Ch. 400, Subdivision of Land.
§ 450-62 PENNS GROVE CODE § 450-64
1:522
establishment, sanitarium, industrial plant or manufacturing
establishment shall provide off-street truck loading or unloading
berths as specified in the following table:
Aggregate Gross Floor Area
Devoted to Each Use
(square feet)
Required Number of
Berths
Under 6,000 No requirement
6,000 up to 19,999 1
20,000 up to 79,999 2
80,000 up to 127,999 3
128,000 up to 191,999 4
192,000 up to 255,999 5
256,000 up to 319,999 6
320,000 up to 391,999 7
For each additional 72,000 1 additional
(2) Every auditorium, convention hall, exhibition hall, funeral home,
office building, restaurant, hotel, sports arena or welfare institution
shall provide off-street truck loading and unloading berths as
specified in the following table:
Aggregate Gross Floor Area
Devoted to Each Use
(square feet)
Required Number of
Berths
Under 30,000 No requirement
30,000 up to 44,999 1
45,000 up to 119,999 2
120,000 up to 197,999 3
198,000 up to 290,999 4
291,000 up to 389,999 5
390,000 up to 488,999 6
489,000 up to 587,999 7
588,000 up to 689,999 8
For each additional 105,000 1 additional
B. Design and layout of off-street loading facilities.
(1) Off-street loading facilities shall be designed to conform to
applicable requirements of the Borough of Penns Grove subdivision
and site plan review regulations.53
53.Editor's Note: See Ch. 375, Site Plan Review, and Ch. 400, Subdivision of Land.
§ 450-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-64
1:523
(2) All required loading facilities shall be provided and maintained in
accordance with the following requirements:
(a) They shall be provided and maintained as long as the use exists
which the facilities where designed to serve.
(b) They shall not be reduced in total extent after their provision
except when such reduction is in conformity with the
requirements of this article.
(c) Reasonable precautions shall be taken by the owner or sponsor
of particular uses to assure the availability of required facilities
to the delivery and pickup vehicles that they are designed to
serve.
§ 450-64 PENNS GROVE CODE § 450-64
1:524
ARTICLE VIII
Nonconforming Structures, Lots and Uses
§ 450-65. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE OR LOT — A structure or lot that does
not conform to a dimensional regulation prescribed by this chapter for the
district in which it is located or to regulations for signs, off-street parking,
off-street loading or accessory buildings, but which structure or lot was in
existence at the effective date of this chapter and was lawful at the time it
was established.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use of a building or lot that does not conform
to a use regulation prescribed by this chapter for the district in which it is
located, but which was in existence at the time it was established and is
duly registered under the provisions of § 450-73.
§ 450-66. Continuation.
The lawful use or existence of a building or structure or the lawful use of
any parcel of land as existing and lawful at the time of the enactment of this
chapter or any amendment thereto may, except as provided in this chapter,
be continued, although such use does not conform to the provisions of this
chapter or subsequent amendments.
§ 450-67. Alterations and extensions.
A. A use of land or structure which does not conform to the regulations of
Article III, Use Regulations, shall not be altered, reconstructed,
extended or enlarged, except in accordance with the following
provisions:
(1) Such alteration or extension shall be permitted only by special
exception under the provisions of Article X and only upon the same
lot as in existence at the date the use became nonconforming.
(2) Any increase in volume, area or extent of the nonconforming use
shall not exceed an aggregate of more than 50% during the life of
the nonconformity.
B. A structure which does not conform to the regulations of this chapter,
other than Article III, Use Regulations, may be altered, reconstructed
or enlarged, provided that no such nonconformity is increased beyond
its extent on the date that it became nonconforming, provided that if
the use of a structure also falls under Subsection A of this section, any
change shall be subject to the provisions of that subsection.
§ 450-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-68
1:525
§ 450-68. Restoration.
No structure damaged by fire or other causes to the extent of more than
75% of its fair market value shall be repaired, reconstructed or used, except
in conformity with the regulations of this chapter. Structures with damage
to the extent of 75% or less of the fair market value may be reconstructed,
repaired or used for the same nonconforming use subject to the following
provisions:
§ 450-69. Abandonment. [Amended 1-4-1983 by Ord. No. 83-1]
Whenever a nonconforming structure and/or a nonconforming individual
use has been discontinued for a period of one year, such structure and/
or nonconforming individual use shall have been considered abandoned.
Such structure and/or nonconforming individual use shall not thereafter be
reestablished, and any future use shall be in conformity with the provisions
of this chapter.
§ 450-70. Change of use.
Once changed to a conforming use, no structure or land shall be permitted
to revert to a nonconforming use. A nonconforming use may be changed to
another nonconforming use only under the following conditions:
A. The reconstructed structure shall not exceed the height, area or volume
of the damaged structure, except as provided in § 450-67.
B. Reconstruction shall begin within one year from the date of the damage
and shall be carried on without interruption.
A. Such change shall be permitted only by conditional use under the
provisions of Article X.
B. The applicant shall show that the nonconforming use cannot reasonably
be changed to a use permitted in the district where such
nonconforming use is located.
C. The applicant shall show that the proposed change will be less
objectionable in external effects than the existing nonconforming use
with respect to:
(1) Traffic generation and congestion, including truck, passenger car
and pedestrian traffic.
(2) Noise, smoke, dust, fumes, vapors, gases, heat, odor, glare or
vibration.
(3) Storage and waste disposal.
(4) Appearance.
§ 450-68 PENNS GROVE CODE § 450-71
1:526
§ 450-71. Displacement of conforming use prohibited. [Amended
7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
No nonconforming use shall be extended to displace a conforming use.
§ 450-72. Changes in district boundaries.
Whenever the boundaries of a district shall be changed so as to transfer an
area from one district to another of a different classification, the foregoing
provisions shall also apply to any nonconforming uses or structures existing
therein.
§ 450-73. Registration of nonconforming uses.
The Zoning Officer shall provide for the registration of all uses which are
nonconforming under the terms of this chapter within a reasonable time
after the effective date of this chapter. The record of nonconforming uses
shall certify, after inspection, the extent and kind of use and disposition
of the buildings and land. Upon notification, each occupant or owner of
a premises used for a nonconforming use shall make available such
information as may be necessary to determine the extent and nature of the
nonconforming use.
§ 450-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-73
1:527

ARTICLE IX
Performance Standard Subdivisions
§ 450-74. Purpose.
The purpose shall be to:
§ 450-75. Definitions.
A. Provide standards to control the amount of open space and impervious
surfaces within a development; to control the intensity of development
in areas of sensitive natural resources or natural features in order to
reduce or eliminate adverse environmental impacts; to protect the
people's right to clean air, pure water and the natural, scenic, historic
and aesthetic values of the environment; and to protect natural
resources which are a part of the ecological system to which we are all
bound and therefore are the common property of all the people,
including generations yet to come, and must be protected to ensure the
health, safety and welfare of all the people.
B. Provide standards for all types of dwelling units so that all the people
may have access to decent, sound and sanitary housing, and to meet the
goals of the Federal Housing Act of 1949.
C. Provide incentives to meet housing or environmental goals or to provide
public or special facilities.
D. Provide standards of performance which make the unique
characteristics of the land or site the determinants of its capacity for
residential use.
A. The additional definitions which follow are needed for the clarity of this
article.
B. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALLUVIAL SOILS — Areas subject to periodic flooding as defined in
Chapter 252, Flood Damage Prevention.
CONDOMINIUM — An ownership arrangement, not a land use;
therefore, it is allowed in any district and under the same restrictions
as the residential land uses that it comprises. A condominium shall not
negate lot or other requirements intended to provide adequate light,
air and privacy. A condominium is a dwelling unit which has all of the
following characteristics:
The unit (the interior and associated exterior areas designated for
private use in the development plan) is owned by the occupant.
(1)
(2) The unit may be any permitted dwelling type.
§ 450-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-75
1:529
FOREST — Areas, groves or stands of mature or largely mature trees
(i.e., greater than six inches caliper) covering an area greater than
1/4 acre, or groves of mature trees (greater than 12 inches caliper)
consisting of more than 10 individuals.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE RATIO — A measure of the intensity of use of a
piece of land. It is measured by dividing the total area of all impervious
surfaces within the site by the net buildable site area.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACES — Those that do not absorb rain. All
buildings, parking areas, driveways, roads, sidewalks and any areas in
concrete and asphalt shall be considered impervious surfaces within
this definition. In addition, other areas determined by the Engineer to
be impervious within the meaning of this definition will also be classed
as impervious surfaces.
LAKES and PONDS — Natural or artificial bodies of water which retain
water year round. Artificial ponds may be created by dams or may
result from excavation. The shoreline of such water bodies shall be
measured from the maximum condition rather than permanent pool, if
there is any difference.
LOT AREA PER DWELLING UNIT, AVERAGE — The average lot area
for all dwelling units of a single type. Individual lots may be smaller or
larger than the average, provided that the average size is maintained
and that all other standards of this chapter are met.
OPEN SPACE — Land used for recreation, resource protection, amenity
or buffers, which is freely accessible to all residents and is protected
by the provisions of this chapter and Chapter 400, Subdivision of Land,
to ensure that it remains in such uses. "Open space" does not include
land occupied by buildings, roads or road rights-of-way, nor does it
include the yards or lots of single-family or multifamily dwelling units
or parking areas as required by the provisions of this chapter. Open
space shall be left in a natural state except in the case of recreation
uses which may contain impervious surfaces. Such impervious surfaces
shall be included in the calculation of the impervious surface ratio.
OPEN SPACE RATIO — A measure of the intensity of land use. It is
arrived at by dividing total amount of open space within the site by the
site area.
SITE — A parcel or parcels of land intended to have one or more
buildings or intended to be subdivided into one or more lots.
SITE AREA — All land area within the site as defined in the deed. Actual
area shall be from a survey rather than the deed.
All or a portion of the exterior open space and any community
interior spaces are owned and maintained in accordance with the
provisions for open space, roads or other development features as
specified in this chapter and Chapter 400, Subdivision of Land.
(3)
§ 450-75 PENNS GROVE CODE § 450-75
1:530
§ 450-76. Optional regulations.
Any landowner in Zone R-1 or R-2 may desire to develop his site under the
regulations set forth below rather than in § 450-17. The developer shall then
be governed by the provisions of this article.
§ 450-77. Performance standards.
All performance standard subdivisions shall meet the standards set forth
in the Table of Performance Standards. The development must meet all of
these standards, depending on the design, mix of units, shape, size and
natural properties of the site. Any one of the performance standards in this
or other sections of this chapter may limit how many units can be placed on
a given site.
Table of Performance Standards
District Density
Open Space
Ratio
Impervious
Surface Ratio
Minimum Total
Site Area
(acres)
R-1 4.9
5.9
0.40
0.35
0.32
0.35
3
5
R-2 8.0
14.0
0.30
0.25
0.42
0.44
3
5
STEEP SLOPES — Areas where the average slope exceeds 8% which,
because of this slope, are subject to high rates of stormwater runoff
and, therefore, erosion.
SUBDIVISION, PERFORMANCE STANDARD — A method for
developing land for residential use utilizing performance standards
(including but not limited to open space ratio, density, impervious
surface ratio and other standards as set forth in §§ 450-76 through
450-82) rather than the dimensional requirements set forth in the Table
of Dimensional Requirements.54 "Performance standard subdivisions"
allow the grouping or clustering of dwelling units, permitting a variety
of housing types to encourage better, more flexible designs. The
subdivision as a whole must meet the prescribed standards for open
space, density and impervious surfaces.
WETLANDS — Areas known as "marshes," "swamps" or "wetlands,"
including all areas greater than 1/4 acre, where standing water is
retained for a portion of the year and unique vegetation has adapted to
the area.
54.Editor's Note: The Table of Dimensional Requirements is included as an attachment to
this chapter.
§ 450-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-78
1:531
§ 450-78. Permitted uses.
Permitted uses shall be as follows:
A. Single-family detached.
(1) A single-family residence on an individual lot with private yards on
all four sides of the house.
(2) Dimensional requirements:
(a) Lot area minimum: 8,000 square feet.
(b) Lot area average: 10,000 square feet.
(c) Maximum building coverage: 30%.
(d) Floor area ratio: 60%.
(e) Minimum yards: front, 35 feet; side, 10 feet; and rear, 40 feet.
(f) Minimum lot width at setback: 70 feet.
(g) Parking: two off-street spaces per dwelling unit.
B. Single-family detached, lot line.
(1) For a single-family residence on an individual lot, the building is set
on one of the side property lines. An easement for maintenance on
the adjoining lot is one of the requirements for this type of
construction. Windows on the lot line side of a dwelling are
prohibited.
(2) Dimensional requirements:
(a) Lot area average: 8,000 square feet.
(b) Lot area minimum: 6,500 square feet.
(c) Maximum building coverage: 30%.
(d) Maximum floor area ratio: 60%.
(e) Minimum yards: front, 20 feet; and rear, 40 feet.
(f) Minimum lot width at setback lines: 65 feet.
(g) Building spacing: 30 feet.
(h) Parking: two off-street parking spaces.
C. Duplex.
(1) A duplex is a single-family semidetached dwelling unit having only
one dwelling unit from ground to roof and only one wall in common
with another dwelling unit.
§ 450-78 PENNS GROVE CODE § 450-78
1:532
(2) The dimensional requirements shall be as follows:
(a) Table of Dimensional Requirements.
Type
Minimum
Lot Area
per
Dwelling
Unit
(square
feet)
Average
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Off-Street
Parking
Spaces
Minimum
Lot Width
at
Building
Setback
(feet)
1-bedroom 3,200 3,600 1.75 36
2-bedroom 3,600 4,000 2.00 40
3-bedroom 4,000 4,500 2.00 40
4-bedroom 4,200 4,700 2.25 45
5-bedroom 4,500 5,000 2.50 45
(b) General.
[1] Maximum impervious surface (on lot): 0.30.
[2] Floor area ratio: 0.70.
[3] Building setback line: 30 feet.
[4] Minimum side yard: 10 feet.
D. Patio house.
(1) The patio house is a single-family detached or semidetached unit,
with one dwelling unit from ground to roof, having individual
outside access. The lot shall be fully enclosed by a wall of four feet
to six feet in height. All living spaces, i.e., living rooms, den and
bedrooms, shall open into a major open area or patio.
(2) The dimensional requirements shall be as follows:
(a) Table of Dimensional Requirements.
Type
Minimum
Lot Area
per
Dwelling
Unit
(square
feet)
Average
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Off-Street
Parking
Spaces
Minimum
Lot Width
at
Building
Setback
(feet)
1-bedroom 2,800 3,000 1.75 40
2-bedroom 3,400 3,600 2.00 40
3-bedroom 3,800 4,000 2.00 40
§ 450-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-78
1:533
Type
Minimum
Lot Area
per
Dwelling
Unit
(square
feet)
Average
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Off-Street
Parking
Spaces
Minimum
Lot Width
at
Building
Setback
(feet)
4-bedroom 4,000 4,200 2.25 45
5-bedroom 4,200 4,500 2.50 45
(b) General.
[1] Maximum impervious surface ratio (on lot): 0.35.
[2] Minimum patio area: 0.65.
[3] Maximum floor area ratio: 0.60.
[4] Maximum height: 24 feet.
[5] Minimum patio dimension: 20 feet.
E. Multiplex.
(1) The multiplex is an attached dwelling. It may be single-family
attached or multifamily. In general, all units have independent
outside access, but this is not necessary. Units may be arranged in
a variety of configurations: side by side, back to back or vertically.
The essential feature is the small number of units attached. No
more than five units shall be attached in any group, and groups
shall average four units per structure.
(2) The dimensional requirements shall be as follows:
(a) Table of Dimensional Requirements.
Type
Minimum Lot
Area per
Dwelling Unit
(square feet)
Average Lot
Area per
Dwelling Unit
(square feet)
Off-Street
Parking
Spaces
Efficiency 800 1,000 1.25
1-bedroom 1,500 1,700 1.75
2-bedroom 2,200 2,400 2.00
3-bedroom 2,500 2,800 2.00
4-bedroom 2,700 3,000 2.25
(b) General.
[1] Maximum impervious ratio (on lot): 0.30.
§ 450-78 PENNS GROVE CODE § 450-78
1:534
[2] Minimum building setback line:
[a] Roads: 30 feet.
[b] Parking areas: 20 feet.
[3] Minimum building spacing: 24 feet.
[4] Minimum lot area (for building): 8,000 square feet.
[5] Minimum lot width (for building) at setback line: 80 feet.
[6] Maximum height: three stories.
F. Atrium house.
(1) The atrium house is a single-family, attached, one-story dwelling
unit with individual outside access. The lot shall be fully enclosed
by a wall at least seven feet high. A private yard, herein called an
atrium, shall be included on each lot. All living spaces, i.e., living
rooms, den and bedrooms, shall open into the atrium.
(2) The dimensional requirements shall be as follows:
(a) Table of Dimensional Requirements.
Type
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Average
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Off-Street
Parking
Spaces
Minimum
Lot Width
(feet)
1-bedroom 1,200 1,375 1.75 35
2-bedroom 1,700 1,850 2.00 35
3-bedroom 1,950 2,100 2.00 40
4-bedroom 2,150 2,300 2.25 40
5-bedroom 2,300 2,500 2.50 40
(b) General.
[1] Maximum impervious surface ratio (on lot): 0.65.
[2] Minimum atrium area: 0.35.
[3] Maximum floor area ratio: 0.65.
[4] Maximum height: 12 feet.
[5] Minimum atrium dimension: 16 feet.
[6] Minimum atrium area: 288 square feet.
[7] Minimum secondary atrium area: 48 square feet.
G. Townhouse (note: only in R-2 Zone).
§ 450-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-78
1:535
§ 450-79. Environmental standards.
The developer shall determine what environmental or natural features are
present on the site and shall meet the following standards of environmental
protection. Site alterations, including regrading the existing topography,
filling lakes, ponds, marshes or floodplains, clearing vegetation or altering
watercourses prior to the submission of plans for development shall be a
violation of this chapter. Where alterations occur, restoration of the site to
its original condition shall be required.
(1) The townhouse is a single-family attached domicile with one
dwelling unit from ground to roof having individual outside access.
Rows of attached townhouses shall average eight dwelling units.
(2) The dimensional requirements shall be as follows:
(a) Table of Dimensional Requirements.
Type
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Average
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Off-Street
Parking
Spaces
Minimum
Lot Width
(feet)
1-bedroom 1,500 1,600 1.75 18
2-bedroom 1,700 1,800 2.00 20
3-bedroom 1,900 2,000 2.00 22
4-bedroom 2,000 2,200 2.25 24
5-bedroom 2,200 2,400 2.50 26
(b) General.
[1] Maximum impervious surface ratio (on lot): 0.40.
[2] Maximum floor area ratio: 0.75.
[3] Minimum building setback:
[a] Street: 30 feet.
[b] Parking area: 20 feet.
[c] Pedestrian walk: 15 feet.
[4] Minimum building spacing: 30 feet.
A. Floodplains. All such lands shall remain as permanent open space,
except that roads may cross the floodplain where design approval is
obtained.
B. Alluvial soils. All such lands shall remain as permanent open space,
except that roads may cross the floodplain where design approval is
§ 450-78 PENNS GROVE CODE § 450-79
1:536
§ 450-80. Buffer yards.
A buffer yard shall be required. The buffer yard shall be part of the open
space and not part of the yard assigned to the dwelling units. In the various
districts, the following standards shall apply:
obtained. Where floodplains are defined, they shall be used rather than
alluvial soils. [Amended 6-17-1986 by Ord. No. 86-5]
C. Steep slopes. In areas of steep slopes, i.e., those above 8%, the
following standards shall apply:
(1) Eight percent to 15%. No more than 40% of such areas shall be
developed and/or regraded or stripped of vegetation.
(2) Fifteen percent to 25%. No more than 30% of such areas shall be
developed and/or regraded or stripped of vegetation.
(3) Twenty-five percent or more. No more than 15% of such areas shall
be developed and/or regraded or stripped of vegetation.
D. Forest. No more than 40% of such forests may be cleared or developed.
The remaining 60% shall be maintained as permanent open space.
[Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
E. Lakes, ponds, wetlands or watercourses. These areas shall be left as
permanent open space. No development, filling, piping or diverting
shall be permitted except for required roads.
F. Pond shorelines. The shorelines of ponds (bodies of water less than two
acres in area) shall, to a depth of 150 feet from the shorelines, contain
no more than 10% impervious surfaces. At least 80% shall be
permanent open space. This provision applies to wetlands of less than
two acres.
G. Stormwater. All developments shall limit stormwater runoff so that no
more runoff is generated than that of the site in its natural condition.
Where farm field or disturbed earth is the existing condition, meadow
shall be used as the starting base of such calculations instead of the
actual condition. All runoff calculations shall be based on a onehundred-
year, twenty-four-hour storm. The method for such
calculations shall be that contained in United States Department of
Agriculture, Soil Conservation Engineering Field Manual, Notice 4 of
April 30, 1971, as amended.
H. Soil erosion and sedimentation. All developments shall protect streams,
lakes and ponds from sedimentation and shall control erosion. In
addition, all developments shall submit an erosion control plan as part
of the preliminary land development plan. [Amended 6-17-1986 by
Ord. No. 86-5]
§ 450-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-80
1:537
District
Width of Buffer
Yard
(feet)
Maximum Percentage of
Open Space in Buffer
Yard
R-1 20 30%
R-2 20 40%
§ 450-81. Off-street parking.
In situations where duplex, patio, atrium, townhouse or multiplex units are
used and where garages or driveways are used as the off-street parking, an
additional 0.25 space per dwelling unit of overflow off-street parking shall
be required.
§ 450-82. Bonus density.
A. A bonus density of up to 20% may be achieved by meeting specific
criteria beyond the basic performance standards. All other standards of
this chapter must be met in order to get the bonus. The various bonuses
are additive.
B. Specific criteria.
(1) Open space. Increasing the open space ratio by five percentage
points (for example, from 0.35 to 0.40 or 0.85 to 0.90) gets a bonus
of 5%, except in the R-2 District where the bonus shall be 10%.
(2) Moderate-income housing. For each unit of nonsubsidized housing
with two or more bedrooms built to sell below federal Section 235
mortgage limits, an additional dwelling may be built. The maximum
bonus shall be 15%.
(3) Recreation facilities. Where the developer provides recreation
facilities for the general public in accordance with
recommendations from the County and Municipal Planning Boards,
a bonus shall be awarded as follows: 10% in R-2 Districts and 5% in
all R-1 Districts. Eligible recreation facilities include, but are not
limited to, play fields, trail systems, boating access areas and
parking.
(4) Ownership. Where the developer provides for individual ownership
of dwelling units through sale or condominium, bonus shall be
awarded in accordance with the following:
District
Percent Ownership/
Bonus
Percent Ownership/
Bonus
R-1 100%/10% 60%/5%
R-2 50% or more/10% 25%/5%
§ 450-80 PENNS GROVE CODE § 450-82
1:538
(5) Road and transportation. Where the developer provides the
following specific improvements, a bonus of 10% may be awarded:
(a) Provision of rail or bus station and parking.
(b) Provision of money for extension or improvement of major local
streets requiring condemnation.
(c) Improvement of roads beyond site boundaries.
§ 450-82 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-82
1:539

ARTICLE X
Administration
§ 450-83. Zoning Officer. [Amended 9-19-1978 by Ord. No. 78-9;
6-17-1986 by Ord. No. 86-5; 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
§ 450-84. Permit required. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
A permit shall be required prior to the erection or structural alteration of
any building, structure or portion thereof and prior to the use or change
in use of a building or land and prior to the change or extension of a
nonconforming use. Applications for permits shall be made in writing to the
Zoning Officer on such forms as may be furnished by the Borough. Such
application shall contain all information necessary for the Zoning Officer to
ascertain whether the proposed erection, alteration, use or change in use
complies with the provisions of this chapter.
A. Appointment. There is hereby created the position of Zoning Officer,
who shall be appointed by the Mayor and approved by Borough Council.
B. Duties. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to see to the
enforcement of all ordinance provisions relating to zoning to ensure
compliance with the Borough ordinances.
C. Stop order. The Zoning Officer shall have the power to order all work
stopped on construction, alteration, repair or use of buildings and
property in the Borough when such work or use is in violation of any
provision of the zoning ordinances. Such work or use shall not be
resumed after the issuance of such an order, except on the written
permission of the Zoning Officer, provided that if the stop order is an
oral one, it shall be followed by a written stop order within an hour.
Such written stop order may be served by a police officer of the
Borough of Penns Grove.
D. Entry powers. The Zoning Officer shall have the power to make or cause
to be made an entry into any building or premises for the purpose of
making reasonable inspections for probable cause at any reasonable
hour.
E. Exceptions. Permits for uses which are a special exception or variance
to requirements of this chapter shall be issued only upon order, or as
otherwise provided by law or this chapter, of the Planning Board.
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in plans or
construction of a lawful use, the construction of which is started before
the effective date of this chapter and which is completed within one
year of the effective date of this chapter.
§ 450-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-85
1:541
§ 450-85. Issuance of permits. [Amended 6-17-1986 by Ord. No.
86-5; 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
Permits shall be granted or refused within 10 days after the written
application has been filed with the Zoning Officer, except where Planning
Board site plan review is required.
§ 450-86. Temporary permits.
A temporary permit may be authorized by the administrative officer
pursuant to § 450-13.
§ 450-87. Fees.
Fees for permits shall be paid in accordance with a fee schedule to be
adopted by Council, and all such fees shall be paid into the Borough
treasury. Each applicant for an appeal, special exception or variance shall,
at the time of making application, pay a fee in accordance with the
aforementioned fee schedule.55
§ 450-88. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-19-1978 by Ord. No.
78-9; 6-17-1986 by Ord. No. 86-5; 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
For each and every violation of any provision of this chapter, the owner,
contractor or other persons interested as general agent, architect, building
contractor, owner, tenant or any other persons who commit, take part or
assist in any violation of this chapter or who maintain any building or
premises in which any violation of this chapter shall exist and who shall
have refused to abate said violation after being ordered to do so, or who
shall disregard a stop order or any other order issued by the Zoning Officer,
shall be subject to any and all fines and penalties set forth in § 1-2 of the
Code of the Borough of Penns Grove.
§ 450-89. Additional remedies.
In addition to the remedy or remedies hereinbefore provided, any person,
persons, company or corporation violating this chapter or any provision
or section thereof may be proceeded against by the Borough of Penns
Grove or the appropriate official of the Borough by appropriate action or
by proceeding in equity or otherwise to prevent and enjoin any threatened
violation of this chapter.56
55.Editor's Note: See Ch. 85, Land Use Procedures and Fees, Art. V.
56.Editor's Note: Original Art. XI, Board of Adjustment, which immediately followed this
section and was amended 6-17-1986 by Ord. No. 86-5, was repealed 7-5-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-5.
§ 450-85 PENNS GROVE CODE § 450-89
1:542
ARTICLE XI
Appeals and Amendments
§ 450-90. Appeal procedure. [Amended 6-17-1986 by Ord. No. 86-5]
Appeal procedure shall be as provided in Chapter 85, Land Use Procedures
and Fees.
§ 450-91. General amendment procedure. [Amended 7-5-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-5]
Borough Council reserves the right to amend, change, modify or repeal
any regulation, limitations and restrictions of this chapter, including the
Zoning Map. No such amendment, change, modification or repeal shall be
adopted until after a public hearing is held thereon by Borough Council
at which parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be
heard. In addition to the notice required by law, notices of such hearing
shall be mailed to every civic association or association of residents in the
Borough which shall have registered its name and address for this purpose
with the Clerk of the Borough. Failure to give such notices by mail shall not,
however, invalidate any such amendment, change, modification or repeal.
No amendment or change shall become effective unless the ordinance
proposing such amendment or change shall first have been submitted to the
Planning Board for approval, disapproval or suggestions, and the Planning
Board shall have a reasonable time, but not more than 35 days, for
consideration and report. In the case of an unfavorable report by the
Planning Board, such amendment or change shall not become effective
except by a favorable vote of 2/3 of Borough Council.
§ 450-92. Amendments pursuant to owners' petition.
Whenever the owners of 50% or more of the frontage in any area wherein
a change of zoning regulations is sought shall present to Borough Council a
petition, duly signed and acknowledged, requesting an amendment, change,
modification or repeal of the regulations prescribed for or of the Zoning
Map, including such area, it shall be the duty of Borough Council to hold a
public hearing thereon and cause notice thereof to be given in the manner
prescribed in § 450-91 hereof.
§ 450-93. Protest against amendment.
In case of a protest against such proposed change signed by the owners
of 20% or more either of the area of the lots or land included in such
proposed change or of the lots of land on either side thereof or directly
opposite thereto extending 100 feet therefrom (exclusive of street space),
such change shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of 2/3
of all the members of the Borough Council.
§ 450-90 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-93
1:543

ARTICLE XII
Riparian Zones
[Added 11-19-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-9]
§ 450-94. Purpose and statutory authority.
The purpose of this article is to designate riparian zones and to provide for
land use regulation therein in order to protect the streams, lakes, and other
surface water bodies of the Borough of Penns Grove in order to provide
compliance with N.J.A.C. 7:15-5.25(g)3 which requires municipalities to
adopt an ordinance that prevents new disturbance for projects or activities
in riparian zones. Authority is provided or limited as follows:
§ 450-95. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACID-PRODUCING SOILS — Soils that contain geologic deposits of iron
sulfide minerals (pyrite and marcasite) which, when exposed to oxygen
from the air or from surface waters, oxidize and produce sulfuric acid.
Acid-producing soils, upon excavation, generally have a pH of 4.0 or lower.
After exposure to oxygen, these soils generally have a pH of 3.0 or lower.
Information regarding the location of acid-producing soils in New Jersey can
be obtained from local Soil Conservation District offices.
APPLICANT — A person, corporation, government body or other legal entity
applying to the Planning Board or the Construction Code Official proposing
to engage in an activity that is regulated by the provisions of this article
A. Compliance with the riparian zone requirements of this article does not
constitute compliance with the riparian zone or buffer requirements
imposed under any other federal, state or local statute, regulation or
ordinance.
B. Use powers given to the Borough of Penns Grove under the provisions
of the New Jersey Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.,
which authorizes each municipality to plan and regulate land use in
order to protect public health, safety, and welfare through the
protection and maintenance of native vegetation in riparian areas. The
Borough of Penns Grove is also empowered to adopt and implement this
article under provisions provided by the following legislative authorities
of the State of New Jersey:
(1) Water Pollution Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:10A-1 et seq.
(2) Water Quality Planning Act, N.J.S.A. 58:11A-1 et seq.
(3) Spill Compensation and Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:10-23.11 et seq.
(4) Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.
(5) Flood Hazard Area Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:16A-50 et seq.
§ 450-94 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-95
1:545
and that would be located in whole or in part within a regulated riparian
zone.[Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
CATEGORY ONE WATERS or C1 WATERS — Shall have the meaning
ascribed to this term by the Surface Water Quality Standards, N.J.A.C.
7:9B, for the purposes of implementing the anti-degradation policies set
forth in those standards, for protection from measurable changes in water
quality characteristics because of their clarity, color, scenic setting, and
other characteristics of aesthetic value, exceptional ecological significance,
exceptional recreational significance, exceptional water supply significance,
or exceptional fisheries resources.
INTERMITTENT STREAM — A surface water body with definite bed and
banks in which there is not a permanent flow of water and shown on
the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection Geographic
Information System (GIS) hydrography coverages or, in the case of a special
water resource protection area (SWRPA) pursuant to the stormwater
management rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h), C1 waters as shown on the USGS
quadrangle map or in the county soil surveys.
LAKE, POND or RESERVOIR — Any surface water body shown on the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection Geographic Information
System (GIS) hydrography coverages or, in the case of a special water
resource protection area (SWRPA), pursuant to the quadrangle map or
in the county soil surveys that is an impoundment, whether naturally
occurring or created in whole or in part by the building of structures, for
the retention of surface water. This excludes sedimentation control and
stormwater retention/detention basins and ponds designed for treatment of
wastewater.
PERENNIAL STREAM — A surface water body that flows continuously
throughout the year in most years and shown on the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection Geographic Information System
(GIS) hydrography coverages or, in the case of a special water resource
protection area (SWRPA) pursuant to the stormwater management rules at
N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h), C1 waters as shown on the USGS quadrangle map or in
the county soil surveys.
RIPARIAN ZONE — The land and vegetation within and directly adjacent
to all surface water bodies, including but not limited to lakes, ponds,
reservoirs, and perennial and intermittent streams, up to and including
their point of origin, such as seeps and springs, as shown on the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection's GIS hydrography coverages or,
in the case of a special water resource protection area (SWRPA) pursuant
to the stormwater management rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h), C1 waters as
shown on the USGS quadrangle map or in the county soil surveys. There is
no riparian zone along the Atlantic Ocean nor along any man-made lagoon
or oceanfront barrier island, spit or peninsula.
SPECIAL WATER RESOURCE PROTECTION AREA or SWRPA — A threehundred-
foot area provided on each side of a surface water body designated
as a C1 water or tributary to a C1 water that is a perennial stream,
intermittent stream, lake, pond, or reservoir, as defined herein and shown
§ 450-95 PENNS GROVE CODE § 450-95
1:546
on the USGS quadrangle map or in the county soil surveys within the
associated HUC 14 drainage, pursuant to the stormwater management
rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h).
SURFACE WATER BODY(IES) — Any perennial stream, intermittent stream,
lake, pond, or reservoir, as defined herein. In addition, any regulated water
under the Flood Hazard Area Control Act rules at N.J.A.C. 7:13-2.2 or
state open waters identified in a letter of interpretation issued under the
Freshwater Wetlands Protection Act rules at N.J.A.C. 7:7A-3 by the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, Division of Land Use
Regulation, shall also be considered surface water bodies.
THREATENED OR ENDANGERED SPECIES — A species identified
pursuant to the Endangered and Nongame Species Conservation Act,
N.J.S.A. 23:2A-1 et seq., the Endangered Species Act of 1973, 16 U.S.C.
§ 1531 et seq., or the Endangered Plant Species List, N.J.A.C. 7:5C-5.1, and
any subsequent amendments thereto.
TROUT MAINTENANCE WATER — A section of water designated as trout
maintenance in the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection's
Surface Water Quality Standards at N.J.A.C. 7:9B.
TROUT PRODUCTION WATER — A section of water identified as trout
production in the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection's
Surface Water Quality Standards at N.J.A.C. 7:9B.
§ 450-96. Establishment of riparian zones.
A. Riparian zones adjacent to all surface water bodies shall be protected
from avoidable disturbance and shall be delineated as follows:
(1) The riparian zone shall be 300 feet wide along both sides of any
Category One water (C1 water) and all upstream tributaries
situated within the same HUC 14 watershed.
(2) The riparian zone shall be 150 feet wide along both sides of the
following waters not designated as C1 waters:
(a) Any trout production water and all upstream waters (including
tributaries);
(b) Any trout maintenance water and all upstream waters
(including tributaries) within one linear mile as measured
along the length of the regulated water;
(c) Any segment of a water flowing through an area that contains
documented habitat for a threatened or endangered species of
plant or animal, which is critically dependent on the surface
water body for survival, and all upstream waters (including
tributaries) within one linear mile as measured along the
length of the regulated water; and
(d) Any segment of a water flowing through an area that contains
acid-producing soils.
§ 450-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-96
1:547
§ 450-97. Exceptions.
(3) For all other surface water bodies, a riparian zone of 50 feet wide
shall be maintained along both sides of the water.
B. The portion of the riparian zone that lies outside of a surface water
body is measured landward from the top of bank. If a discernible bank is
not present along a surface water body, the portion of the riparian zone
outside the surface water body is measured landward as follows:
(1) Along a linear fluvial or tidal water, such as a stream, the riparian
zone is measured landward of the feature's center line;
(2) Along a nonlinear fluvial water, such as a lake or pond, the riparian
zone is measured landward of the normal water surface limit;
(3) Along a nonlinear tidal water, such as a bay or inlet, the riparian
zone is measured landward of the mean high water line; and
(4) Along an amorphously shaped feature such as a wetland complex,
through which water flows but which lacks a discernible channel,
the riparian zone is measured landward of the feature's center line.
C. The applicant or designated representative shall be responsible for the
initial determination of the presence of a riparian zone on a site and for
identifying the area on any plan submitted to the Borough of Penns
Grove in conjunction with an application for a construction permit,
subdivision, land development, or other improvement that requires plan
submissions or permits. This initial determination shall be subject to
review and approval by the Municipal Engineer, governing body, or its
appointed representative, and, where required, by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection.
A. The following new disturbances for projects or activities in riparian
zones are excepted:
(1) Redevelopment within the limits of existing impervious surfaces; or
(2) New disturbance in the riparian zone necessary to protect public
health, safety or welfare; to provide an environmental benefit; to
prevent extraordinary hardship on the property owner peculiar to
the property; or to prevent extraordinary hardship, provided that
the hardship was not created by the property owner, that would not
permit a minimum economically viable use of the property based
upon reasonable investment.
B. An exception to any of the disturbances listed in Subsection A(1) above
shall be granted by the Borough Engineer upon proof, by virtue of
submission of appropriate maps and drawings, that the proposed
redevelopment is within the limits of impervious surfaces that existed at
the time of passage of this article and shall be in conformance with the
§ 450-96 PENNS GROVE CODE § 450-97
1:548
§ 450-98. Adjustments.
Adjustments to the riparian zones established by this article are allowed to
the extent they comply with the Stormwater Management Rules (N.J.A.C.
7:8), the Flood Hazard Area Control Act Rules (N.J.A.C. 7:13), and the
Highlands Water Protection and Planning Act Rules (N.J.A.C. 7:38) and
shall be subject to review and approval by the New Jersey Department
of Environmental Protection, unless exempt. The following adjustments to
riparian zones are allowed:
Stormwater Management Rules, N.J.A.C. 7:8, and the Flood Hazard
Area Control Act Rules, N.J.A.C. 7:13.
C. For all riparian zones an exception to any of the disturbances listed in
Subsection A(2) above shall be granted by the Planning Board upon
proof, by virtue of submission of appropriate maps, drawings, reports
and testimony, that the disturbance protects public health, safety or
welfare; provides an environmental benefit; prevents extraordinary
hardship on the property owner peculiar to the property; or prevents
extraordinary hardship, provided the hardship was not created by the
property owner, that would not permit a minimum economically viable
use of the property based upon reasonable investment. Hardship
variances may be granted by the Planning Board in cases of preexisting
lot (existing at the time of adoption of this article) when there is
insufficient room outside the riparian zone for uses permitted by the
underlying zoning and there is no other reasonable or prudent
alternative to placement in the riparian zone, including obtaining
variances from setback or other requirements that would allow
conformance with the riparian zone requirements.
D. Appeals of a determination by the Borough Engineer made in
accordance with Subsection B above may be made to the Planning
Board. The party contesting the determination or decision shall have
the burden of proof in case of any such appeal.
A. The proposed disturbance in a riparian zone is for a linear development
with no feasible alternative route. If the riparian zone is associated with
Category One waters, the linear development must also meet the
requirements for special water resource protection areas under the
stormwater management rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h);
B. The proposed disturbance in a riparian zone is in accordance with a
stream corridor restoration or stream bank stabilization plan or project
approved by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection;
C. The proposed disturbance of a riparian zone is necessary to provide for
public pedestrian access or water-dependent recreation that meets the
requirements of the Freshwater Wetlands Protection Act Rules, N.J.A.C.
7:7A, the Flood Hazard Area Control Act Rules, N.J.A.C. 7:13; or the
Coastal Zone Management Rules, N.J.A.C. 7:7; or
§ 450-97 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-98
1:549
§ 450-99. Appeals; conflicts; interpretation.
§ 450-100. Enforcement. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
A prompt investigation shall be made by the appropriate personnel of the
Borough of Penns Grove of any person or entity believed to be in violation
hereof. If, upon inspection, a condition which is in violation of this article
is discovered, the Borough may initiate a civil action in the Special Part of
the Superior Court, or in the Superior Court, if the primary relief sought is
injunctive or if penalties may exceed the jurisdictional limit of the Special
Civil Part, by the filing and serving of appropriate process. Nothing in
this article shall be construed to preclude the right of the Borough of
Penns Grove pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3A2-25 to initiate legal proceedings
hereunder in Municipal Court. The violation of any section or subsection
of this article shall constitute a separate and distinct offense independent
of the violation of any other section or subsection or of any order issued
pursuant to this article. Each day a violation continues shall be considered
a separate offense.
D. The proposed disturbance of a riparian zone is required for the
remediation of hazardous substances performed with the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection or federal oversight pursuant
to the Spill Compensation and Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:10-23.11a et
seq., or the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation
and Liability Act of 1980, 42 U.S.C. § 9601 et seq.
A. Any party aggrieved by the location of the riparian zone boundary
determination under this article may appeal to the Borough Engineer
under the provisions of this article. The party contesting the location of
the riparian zone boundary shall have the burden of proof in case of any
such appeal.
B. Any party aggrieved by any determination or decision of the Borough
Engineer under this article may appeal to the Borough Council of Penns
Grove. The party contesting the determination or decision shall have
the burden of proof in case of any such appeal.
C. Conflicts. All other ordinances, parts of ordinances or other local
requirements that are inconsistent or in conflict with this article are
hereby superseded to the extent of any inconsistency or conflict, and
the provisions of this article apply.
D. Interpretation.
(1) Interpretation. This article shall be so construed as not to conflict
with any provision of New Jersey or federal law.
(2) The provisions of this article shall be cumulative with, and not in
substitution for, all other applicable zoning, planning and land use
regulations.
§ 450-98 PENNS GROVE CODE § 450-100
1:550
ARTICLE XIII
Solar Arrays
[Added 6-8-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-8]
§ 450-101. Permitted uses; rooftop and building-mounted solar
collectors; ground-mounted arrays and freestanding solar
collectors.
A. Solar energy systems shall be permitted accessory uses to the
permitted principal and other accessory uses on a lot and shall not
involve the production of power for off-premises consumption nor shall
such a use constitute the principal use of any lot. This prohibition shall
not be interpreted to preclude the occasional sale of excess power from
a solar energy system back to the public electric utility provider. For
systems intended for uses other than the ones stated, or for any
commercial projects, site plan approval is required.
B. Either rooftop and building-mounted solar collectors or groundmounted
arrays and freestanding solar collectors are permitted to be
installed but not both.
C. Rooftop and building-mounted solar collectors are permitted in all
zoning districts, subject to the following requirements:
(1) Installation of rooftop and building-mounted solar collectors shall
require a zoning permit from the Zoning Officer and a building
permit from the Construction Code Official prior to installation.
[Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
(2) Solar panels may extend a maximum of six inches above the roof,
further provided that the panels follow the pitch of the roof and do
not exceed the maximum permitted height of the prevailing zone.
(3) No part of the solar panels or solar energy system shall extend
beyond the edge of the roof.
(4) All visible solar collector parts, including frames and support
structures, shall be nonreflective.
(5) A rooftop and building-mounted solar collection system shall be no
larger than 1,200 square feet on a residential structure.
(6) See § 450-103 for zoning permit application requirements.
(7) Rooftop installations must not interfere with any operation of
plumbing fixtures protruding from the rooftop level, as required by
the New Jersey Plumbing Codes.
D. Ground-mounted arrays and freestanding solar collectors are permitted
as accessory structures in all zoning districts only if mounting is
determined, by the Zoning Officer, to be impractical by the property or
home owner, subject to the following requirements:
§ 450-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-101
1:551
§ 450-102. General requirements.
(1) Installation of ground-mounted arrays and freestanding solar
collectors shall require a zoning permit from the Zoning Officer and
a building permit from the Construction Code Official prior to
installation. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
(2) The total surface area of all ground-mounted and freestanding
solar collectors on the lot shall not exceed 1,200 square feet.
(3) The location of the ground-mounted arrays and freestanding
collectors shall comply with the setback for an accessory use in that
zone.
(4) Solar panels may be installed on a ground-mounted apparatus only
on lots with a minimum lot size of two acres and only in the rear
yard. All ground-mounted systems must be set back at least 50 feet
from the boundary lines.
(5) Ground-mounted arrays shall not exceed 10 feet in height, when
oriented at maximum tilt.
(6) All visible solar collector parts, including frames and support
structures, shall be nonreflective.
(7) Ground-mounted arrays shall be excluded from the calculation of
the lot (impervious) coverage if mounted on a lawn or a vegetated
area.
(8) Submission of a plot plan that shows the location of the proposed
ground-mounted array and freestanding solar collectors. A minor
site plan shall be required if the total surface area of all groundmounted
and freestanding solar collectors on the lot exceeds 1,200
square feet.
(9) See § 450-103 for zoning permit application requirements.
A. Applications for a solar energy system shall include information
demonstrating compliance with the provisions of this article.
B. To the extent reasonably possible, solar panels, regardless of whether
they are roof-mounted or ground-mounted, shall be oriented and/or
screened year round so that glare is directed away from adjoining
properties and streets.
C. To the extent reasonably possible, solar energy systems shall be
designed using such features as colors, materials, textures, screening
and landscaping so as to blend into their settings and avoid visual
blight.
D. Solar energy systems shall not be used for the display of advertising.
§ 450-101 PENNS GROVE CODE § 450-102
1:552
§ 450-103. Zoning permit.
A zoning permit shall be required for the installation of a solar energy
system. The application for a zoning permit shall include the following
documents and information. The information submitted by the applicant
must demonstrate compliance with the provisions of this article. In the
event the Zoning Officer does not believe the provisions of this article will
E. Where site plan approval is required elsewhere in this chapter for a
development or activity, the site plan review shall include review of the
adequacy, location, arrangement, size, design, and general site
compatibility of solar collectors.
F. All solar collector installations must be performed by a qualified solar
installer, and prior to operation the electrical connections must be
inspected by the Construction Code Official or other appropriate
electrical inspection agency as determined by the Borough. In addition,
any interconnection to the public utility must be inspected by the
appropriate public utility. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
G. When solar storage batteries are included as part of the solar collector
system, they must be placed in a secure container or enclosure meeting
the requirements of the New Jersey State Building Code when in use
and when no longer used shall be disposed of in accordance with the
laws and regulations of Salem County and other applicable laws and
regulations.
H. Clearing of natural vegetation for the installation of a solar energy
system shall be limited to that which is necessary for the construction,
operation and maintenance of the system and as otherwise prescribed
by applicable laws, regulations and ordinances.
I. Any trees to be removed to accommodate the installation of a solar
energy system shall be accompanied by a plan demonstrating the need
to remove the trees. An applicant shall locate a solar energy system so
that tree removal is not required to the extent practical.
J. Any ancillary buildings and any outside storage associated with a solar
energy system must, to the extent reasonably possible, use materials,
colors, textures, screening and landscaping that will blend the facility
into the natural setting and existing environment (i.e., in an agricultural
setting accessory buildings could be designed to look like barns).
Appropriate landscaping and architecture shall be provided to screen
accessory structures from roads and adjacent residences.
K. The solar energy systems shall remain painted or finished in the color
or finish that was originally applied by the manufacturer. The exterior
surface of any visible components shall be a nonreflective, neutral color
like white, grey or another nonobtrusive color. Finishes shall be matt or
nonreflective.
§ 450-102 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-103
1:553
be satisfied, an applicant may request a variance from the Penns Grove
Planning Board.
§ 450-104. Abandonment and decommissioning.
Any solar energy system that has generated no electricity for a period of
12 months shall be deemed to be abandoned and shall be decommissioned
within a six-month period of such abandonment and subject to the following
requirements:
A. Structural engineering information and data for rooftop and groundmounted
arrays from a licensed New Jersey engineer shall be provided.
B. The zoning permit application shall be accompanied by a plot plan
which includes the following as applicable:
(1) Property lines and dimensions.
(2) Location, dimension, and types of existing major structures on the
property.
(3) Location, dimension, and type of the proposed solar energy system.
(4) Orientation of the solar energy system.
(5) The right-of-way of any public road that is contiguous with the
property.
(6) Overhead utility lines and easements.
(7) Proposed screening for ground-mounted systems and equipment.
(8) Location and size of existing trees within and next to the area of the
proposed ground-mounted system, as well as any tree proposed to
be altered or removed.
(9) The manufacturer's solar energy system specification/cut sheets
certified by a licensed New Jersey engineer, including
manufacturer and model.
(10) Notification of the utility company for interconnection purposes.
(11) The locations of landmark and specimen trees.
C. Fee. The application for a zoning permit for a solar energy system must
be accompanied by the zoning permit fee. The fee for such a permit
shall be $100.
D. Expiration. A permit issued pursuant to this section shall expire if:
(1) The solar system is not installed and functioning within 24 months
from the date the permit is issued; or
(2) The energy system is out of service or otherwise unused for a
continuous twelve-month period.
§ 450-103 PENNS GROVE CODE § 450-104
1:554
§ 450-105. Connection to electric utility. [Amended 7-5-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-5]
Solar systems that connect to the electric utility shall comply with New
Jersey's Net Metering and Interconnection Standards for Class I Renewable
Energy Systems at N.J.A.C. 14:8-4.
§ 450-106. Signs.
§ 450-107. Installation standards.
A. Decommissioning shall include the removal of the entire solar panel
array and all associated facilities and equipment connected thereto
from the premises and the cleaning and restoration of the area to a preinstallation
condition.
B. If said decommissioning has not been completed within the requisite
six-month period, then the Borough's Zoning Officer shall provide
written notice by certified mail to the landowner requiring that
decommissioning be completed within 30 days of the receipt of said
notice.
C. If the decommissioning has not been completed within 30 days of the
receipt of said notice, the Borough may either undertake the
decommissioning and charge the landowner and/or facility owner and
operator for all of the costs and expenses thereof, including reasonable
attorney's fees, or take appropriate legal action to compel the
decommissioning. All costs incurred by the Borough shall be billed to
the landowner and, if not paid within 60 days of billing, shall become a
lien against the property in the same manner that unpaid taxes would
become a lien pursuant to the laws of the State of New Jersey.
A. A minimum of one sign shall be posted near ground level on the
interconnection cabinet warning of high voltage. In addition, the
following information shall be posted on a label or labels on the
interconnection cabinet of the solar energy system:
(1) The maximum power output of the system.
(2) Nominal voltage and maximum current.
(3) Manufacturer's name, address and telephone number, serial
number and model number.
(4) Emergency and normal shutdown procedures.
B. Should the solar energy system interconnection cabinet be located on
the inside of a structure, a sign notifying the existence of a solar energy
system shall be placed on the outside of the building, near the electrical
and/or gas meter, in order to notify emergency personnel of the solar
energy system.
§ 450-104 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-107
1:555
A. Solar energy system construction shall be in accordance with the
appropriate sections of the Basic Building Code, as adopted and as
currently amended by the State of New Jersey, and any future
amendments and/or revisions to the same.
B. The installation of a solar energy system shall conform to the National
Electrical Code, as adopted by the New Jersey Department of
Community Affairs and/or any other applicable agency with jurisdiction.
The installation of a solar energy system is subject to any and all
Atlantic City Electric Company requirements for interconnection, its
successors and assigns, and/or those designated by state authority, in
perpetuity.
C. The structural design and fastening details of any solar energy system
shall be signed and sealed by a professional engineer licensed in the
State of New Jersey, certifying that the structural design complies with
all of the standards set forth for safety and stability in all applicable
codes then in effect in the State of New Jersey and all sections referred
to hereinabove.
D. The property owner and/or installer of the solar panel installation must
receive approvals from any outside agencies having jurisdiction over
the project prior to the installation.
E. At the discretion of the Penns Grove Construction Code Official, the
Borough reserves the right to require the applicant to obtain and
submit an as-built survey upon completion of the solar energy system,
evidencing the exact location and height of the structures, to ensure
said installation is made in accordance with the requirements of the
Borough of Penns Grove. [Amended 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
F. All electric lines/utility wires shall be buried underground, as
applicable, and by applicable regulation and/or code. All electric lines/
utility wires leading down the side of the structure from rooftop
installations shall be placed and tacked as aesthetically as possible.
G. When a building or cabinet is necessary for storage cells or related
mechanical equipment, it must be documented as to the necessity. The
building may not exceed 120 square feet in area nor eight feet in height
and must be located at least the number of feet equal to the accessory
building setback requirements of the zoning district from any property
line. Any mechanical equipment associated with and necessary for
operation, including any building or cabinet for batteries and storage
cells, shall be equipped with a lock, and a small sign shall be posted on
the outside of the building or cabinet notifying of the existence of solar
energy system batteries and storage cells in order to notify emergency
personnel.
H. A solar energy system shall not add, contribute to or be calculated to
cause an increase in the requirements for building coverage of all
§ 450-107 PENNS GROVE CODE § 450-107
1:556
§ 450-108. Exemption for existing systems.
Solar energy systems installed prior to the adoption of this article are
exempt from the requirements of this article.
§ 450-109. Administration and enforcement.
buildings and/or the maximum lot impervious surface(s) coverage of
any lot, parcel and/or property.
I. Any approval of a solar energy system does not create any actual or
inferred solar energy system easement against adjacent property and/
or structures. The owner and/or property owner of a solar energy
system shall not infer or claim any rights to protective writs to any
caused shadows or operating ineffectiveness against future
development adjacent to or higher than the property location of the
solar energy system. The approval of any solar energy system granted
by the Borough of Penns Grove under this article shall not create any
future liability or infer any vested rights to the owner and/or property
owner of the solar energy system on the part of the Borough of Penns
Grove, or by any other officer or employee thereof, for any future claims
against said issuance of approval of the solar energy system that result
from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully
made thereunder.
J. The Atlantic City Electric Company, its successors and assigns, and/or
those designated by state authority shall be notified in writing of any
proposed interface with that company's grid prior to installing such
interface and shall conform to any legislated requirements governing
installations of solar energy conversion systems so as to comply with
the utility tariff specifications. A copy of said notification shall be
submitted at time of application.
A. It is unlawful for any person to construct, install, or operate a solar
energy system that is not in compliance with this article.
B. Any person who fails to comply with any provision of this article shall be
subject to enforcement and penalties as stipulated in this chapter and
article.
C. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the Mayor and
Council and/or administrative officers of the Borough of Penns Grove
from using any other lawful means to enforce this article.
D. This article shall be administered by any Borough of Penns Grove
official, as designated.
E. Any Borough official may enter any property for which a permit has
been applied for and/or issued under this article to conduct an
inspection to determine whether the conditions stated in the permit
have been met.
§ 450-107 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-109
1:557
F. The Borough may issue orders to abate any violation of this article. The
Borough may issue a citation for any violation of this article.
§ 450-109 PENNS GROVE CODE § 450-109
1:558
ARTICLE XIV
Development Fees
[Added 7-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
§ 450-110. When effective.
This article shall take effect upon approval by the Superior Court of the
State of New Jersey or appropriate state regulatory agency of the State of
New Jersey.
§ 450-111. Findings and purposes.
§ 450-112. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AFFORDABLE HOUSING — Any housing unit with an acquisition price or
rent level not exceeding the maximum resale or rent level for low- and
moderate-income housing as set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:94 et seq.
COAH — The New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing, established under
the Fair Housing Act of 1985, and which has primary jurisdiction for the
administration of low- and moderate-income housing obligation in
accordance with sound regional planning considerations in the state.
DEVELOPMENT FEES — Money paid by an individual, person, partnership,
association, company, or corporation for the improvement of property as
permitted in N.J.A.C. 5:94 et seq.
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — The value of a property determined
by the Borough Tax Assessor through a process designed to ensure that
all property in the Borough is assessed at the same assessment ratio or
ratios required by law. Estimates at the time of building permit may be
A. The New Jersey Supreme Court, in Holmdel Builders Ass'n v. Holmdel
Twp., 121 N.J. 550 (1990), determined that mandatory development
fees are both statutorily and constitutionally permissible. The Court
further anticipated that COAH would promulgate appropriate
development fee rules specifying, among other things, the standards for
these development fees. The purpose of this article is to provide such
rules pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:94 et seq.
B. The Borough Council finds and declares that the creation and
preservation of affordable housing in the Borough serves the public
interest. Maintaining and improving a stock of sound affordable
housing requires affirmative steps by local government working
cooperatively with public bodies at all levels and with the private sector.
The purpose of this article is to create in the Borough of Penns Grove a
trust fund from payment of development fees to assist in the marshaling
of public and private moneys dedicated to affordable housing projects
and programs.
§ 450-110 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-112
1:559
obtained by the Tax Assessor utilizing estimates for construction cost. Final
equalized assessed value will be determined at project completion by the
Tax Assessor.
SUBSTANTIVE CERTIFICATION — A determination by COAH approving the
Borough's Housing Element and Fair Share Plan in accordance with the
provisions of the Fair Housing Act and the rules and criteria as set forth
therein. A grant of substantive certification shall be valid for a period of 10
years in accordance with the terms and conditions contained therein.
§ 450-113. Development fee schedule.
§ 450-114. Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions.
A. Residential development.
(1) Residential development fees shall be 1.5% of the equalized
assessed value for residential development, within the R-1, R-2,
R-3, COS, M-1 and M-2 Districts, which is not exempt from the
provisions of this subsection as set forth in this article, provided
that no increase in density is permitted.
(2) If a "d" variance is granted by the Borough Planning Board
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d(5), then the additional residential
units realized (above what is permitted by right under the existing
zoning) will incur a bonus development fee of 6% rather than the
development fee of 1.5%. However, if the zoning on a site has
changed during the two-year period preceding the filing of the "d"
variance application, the base density for the purposes of
calculating the bonus development fee shall be the highest density
permitted by right during the two years preceding the filing with
the Borough Planning Board of the "d" variance application.
B. Nonresidential development.
(1) Nonresidential development fees shall be 2.5% of the equalized
assessed value for nonresidential development, within all zoning
districts, which is not exempt from the provisions of this subsection
as set forth in this article.
(2) If a "d" variance is granted by the Borough Planning Board
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d(4), then the additional floor area
ratio (FAR) realized (above what is permitted by right under the
existing zoning) will incur a bonus development fee of 6% rather
than the development fee of 2.5%. However, if the zoning on a site
has changed during the two-year period preceding the filing of the
"d" variance application, the base density for the purposes of
calculating the bonus development fee shall be the highest density
permitted by right during the two years preceding the filing with
the Borough Planning Board of the "d" variance application.
§ 450-112 PENNS GROVE CODE § 450-114
1:560
§ 450-115. Collection of development fees.
The Borough shall collect 50% of the fee on any specific development prior
to and as a condition of the issuance of the building permit therefor. The
remaining portion shall be collected prior to and as a condition of the
issuance of the certificate of occupancy. Once the final equalized assessed
value of a particular development has been determined by the Tax Assessor,
and such final equalized assessed value is greater than the estimated
equalized assessed value, the developer shall, within 10 business days from
receipt of notification from the Borough, pay to the Borough the difference
between the development fees required to be paid by the developer once
such final equalized assessed value has been determined and the estimated
development fees actually paid by the developer. The failure of the
developer to make timely payments of the aforesaid deficiency shall entitle
the Borough to file, without notice to the developer, a lien against the
subject development. In the event that the Borough shall file such lien, the
Borough may add to the aforesaid deficiency amount reasonable attorney
fees to file and discharge such lien, together with any and all costs incurred
A. Except as provided in § 450-113A(2) above, developers of low- and
moderate-income units shall be exempt from development fees.
B. Development fees may only be collected for any residential structure
which requires the installation of a new foundation (excluding
foundations required for an addition to or renovation of an existing
residential structure or a foundation required for an accessory
structure to an existing residential structure).
C. All forms of new nonresidential construction shall be subject to
development fees; provided, however, that development fees may only
be collected for improvements which add usable or rentable footage to
an existing nonresidential structure. In the event that a development
fee is collected for a nonresidential structure and thereafter usable or
rentable footage is obtained through modification of said structure, a
development fee may be collected for the additional usable or rentable
footage based upon the increase in the equalized assessed value of the
improved structure.
D. Developments that have received preliminary or final approval prior to
the adoption and final publication of this article shall be exempt from
development fees unless the developer seeks a substantial change in
the approval.
E. The Borough exempts the following types of development from
imposition of development fees:
(1) Development by the Borough or any of its instrumentalities; and
(2) Development by charitable or not-for-profit entities formed and
legally established in accordance with the laws of the State of New
Jersey.
§ 450-114 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-115
1:561
to file and discharge said lien. In the event that the estimated equalized
assessed value proves to have been too high, the Borough shall promptly
refund the difference between the estimated development fees actually paid
by the developer and the development fees required to be paid by the
developer once such final equalized assessed value has been determined.
§ 450-116. Contested fees.
Imposed and collected development fees that are challenged shall be placed
in an interest-bearing escrow account by the Chief Financial Officer of
the Borough. If all or a portion of the contested fees are returned to
the developer, the accrued interest on the returned amount shall also be
returned.
§ 450-117. Housing trust fund.
All development fees shall be deposited with the Chief Financial Officer of
the Borough in a separate designated interest-bearing housing trust fund.
The development fees placed in the housing trust fund shall be deemed
"dedicated revenues" as such term is defined in N.J.S.A. 40A:4-36. In
establishing the housing trust fund, the Borough shall provide written
authorization, in the form of a three-party escrow agreement between the
Borough, the bank and COAH, to permit COAH to direct the disbursement
of the funds as provided for in N.J.A.C. 5:94-6.16(b). This three-party escrow
agreement shall be submitted to COAH within seven days from the opening
of the trust fund account. All interest accrued in the housing trust fund shall
only be used on eligible affordable housing activities approved by COAH.
§ 450-118. Use of money.
A. The Borough shall use revenues collected from development fees for
any activity approved by COAH for addressing the Borough's fair share
obligation. Such activities include, but are not limited to, rehabilitation,
new construction, regional contribution agreements, purchase of new
land for low- and moderate-income housing, improvement of land to be
used for low- and moderate-income housing, extension and/or
improvement of roads and infrastructure to low- and moderate-income
housing sites, assistance designed to render units to be more affordable
and administration of the implementation of the Housing Element and
Fair Share Plan. The expenditure of all money shall conform to a
spending plan approved by COAH.
B. Funds shall not be expended to reimburse the Borough for past housing
activities.
C. After subtracting development fees collected to finance a regional
contribution agreement, a rehabilitation program or a new construction
project that are necessary to address the municipality's affordable
housing obligation, at least 30% of the balance remaining shall be used
to provide affordability assistance to low- and moderate-income
households in affordable units included in a municipal Fair Share Plan.
§ 450-115 PENNS GROVE CODE § 450-118
1:562
§ 450-119. Monitoring.
The Borough shall complete and return to COAH all monitoring forms
related to the collection of development fees, expenditures of revenues,
and implementation of the spending plan (discussed in § 450-120 below)
certified by COAH. Financial reports, annual program implementation, and
monitoring reports shall be completed by the Borough on forms designed by
COAH.
§ 450-120. Spending plans.
The Borough shall submit to COAH a spending plan for the development
fees collected by it prior to the expiration of its substantive certification
period. Plans to spend development fees shall consist of the following
information:
One-third of the affordability assistance portion of development fees
collected shall be used to provide affordability assistance to those
households earning 30% or less of median income by region.
(1) Affordability assistance programs may include down payment
assistance, security deposit assistance, low-interest loans, and
rental assistance.
(2) Affordability assistance to households earning 30% or less of
median income may include buying down the cost of low-income
units in a municipal Fair Share Plan to make them affordable to
households earning 30% or less of median income. The use of
development fees in this manner shall entitle a municipality to
bonus credits pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:94-4.22.
(3) Payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site and funds
from the sale of units with extinguished controls shall be exempt
from the affordability assistance requirement.
D. No more than 20% of the revenues collected from development fees
shall be expended on administration, including but not limited to
salaries and benefits for Borough employees or consultant fees
necessary to develop or implement a rehabilitation program, a new
construction program, a regional contribution agreement, a housing
element and fair share plan, and an affirmative marketing program.
Administrative funds may be used for income qualification of
households, monitoring the turnover of sale and rental units, and
compliance with COAH's monitoring requirements. Development fees
shall not be used to defray the costs of existing staff.
A. A projection of revenues anticipated from imposing fees on
development, based on historic activity;
B. A description of the administrative mechanism that the Borough will
use to collect and distribute revenues;
§ 450-118 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-120
1:563
§ 450-121. Conditions for action by COAH.
C. A description of the anticipated use of all development fees;
D. A schedule for the creation or rehabilitation of housing units;
E. In the event that the Borough envisions being responsible for public
sector or nonprofit construction of housing, a pro form statement of the
anticipated costs and revenues associated with the development;
F. The manner through which the Borough will address any expected or
unexpected shortfall if the anticipated revenues from development fees
are not sufficient to implement the plan;
G. A description of the funds anticipated; and
H. A schedule for spending.
A. In the event that any of the conditions set forth in Subsection B of this
section occur, COAH shall be authorized, on behalf of the Borough, to
direct the manner in which all development fees collected pursuant to
§ 450-117 shall be expended. Should any such condition occur, such
revenues shall immediately become available for expenditure at the
direction of COAH upon the Borough Clerk's receipt of written
notification from COAH that such a condition has occurred.
B. Occurrence of the following may result in COAH taking an action
pursuant to Subsection A of this section:
(1) Failure to submit a spending plan pursuant to § 450-120 above
within the time limits imposed by COAH;
(2) Failure to meet deadlines for information required by COAH in its
review of the Borough's Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, or
its spending plan;
(3) Failure to proceed through COAH's administrative process toward
substantive certification in a timely manner;
(4) Failure to address COAH's conditions for approval of a plan to
spend development fees within the deadlines imposed by COAH;
(5) Failure to address COAH's conditions for substantive certification
within the deadlines imposed by COAH;
(6) Failure to submit accurate monitoring reports within the time limits
imposed by COAH;
(7) Failure to implement the spending plan for development fees within
the time limits imposed by COAH, or within reasonable extensions
granted by COAH;
(8) Expenditure of development fees on activities not permitted by
COAH;
§ 450-120 PENNS GROVE CODE § 450-121
1:564
§ 450-122. Effect of expiration of substantive certification.
The ability of the Borough of Penns Grove to impose, collect and expend
development fees shall expire with the expiration of its substantive
certification unless the Borough has filed a revised and adopted Housing
Element and Fair Share Plan, has petitioned for substantive certification
for the succeeding round, and has received COAH's approval of a revised
development fee ordinance prior to the expiration. If the Borough fails to
act before the expiration of its substantive certification, the Borough may
only resume the imposition and collection of development fees by filing
a revised and adopted Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, petitioning
for substantive certification for the succeeding round and after receiving
COAH's approval of a revised development fee ordinance. The Borough of
Penns Grove shall not impose a development fee on a development that
receives preliminary or final approval after the expiration of its substantive
certification, nor shall the Borough retroactively impose a development fee
on such a development. The Borough of Penns Grove shall not expend
development fees after the expiration of its substantive certification.
(9) Revocation of the Borough's substantive certification; or
(10) Other good cause demonstrating that the revenues are not being
used for the intended purpose.
§ 450-121 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-122
1:565
Derivation Table
Chapter DT
DERIVATION TABLE
§ DT-1. Derivation Table of 1986 Code to 2017 Code
NCM = Not Code material (legislation is not general or permanent in nature).
REP = Repealed effective with adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, Art. II.
NI = Not included in Code but saved from repeal.
NLP = New legislation is pending.
Chapter/Title From 1986 Code Location in 2017 Code
Part I: Administrative Legislation
Ch. 1, General Provisions
Art. I, Adoption of Code by Borough Council NLP; see Ch. 1, Art. II
Art. II, Ordinances Adopted During
Codification
–
Art. III, Aiding and Abetting Persons Who
Violate Ordinances
Ch. 1, Art. I
Ch. 2, Ambulance Squad Ch. 6
Ch. 5, Bills, Payment of REP
Ch. 10, Credit Searches REP
Ch. 12, Defense and Indemnification Superseded by Ord. No.
2004-14; see Ch. 36
Ch. 14, Ethics, Code and Regulations Ch. 47
Ch. 15, Fire Department
Art. I, General Provisions Ch. 55, Art. I
Art. II, Junior Firemen's Auxiliary Ch. 55, Art. II
Ch. 18, Open Public Records Ch. 132, Art. I
Ch. 20, Health, Board of Ch. 68
Ch. 23, Housing Authority Ch. 73
Ch. 30, Land Use Procedures and Fees
Part 1, General Procedures Ch. 85, Part 1
Part 2, Fees Ch. 85, Part 2
Ch. 35, Meetings Ch. 92
Ch. 38, Municipal Court
Art. I, General Provisions Ch. 25, Art. I
Art. II, Assistant Court Clerk Ch. 25, Art. II
§ 450-122 PENNS GROVE CODE § DT-1
1:566
Chapter/Title From 1986 Code Location in 2017 Code
Art. III, Public Defender Application Fee Ch. 25, Art. III
Ch. 45, Officers and Employees
Art. I, Appointed Officials, Deputy Clerk,
Deputy Construction Official and Chief
Financial Officer
Ch. 103, Art. I
Art. II, Housing Inspector Ch. 103, Art. II
Art. III, Deputy Tax Collector REP
Art. IV, Assistant to the Treasurer and/or Tax
Clerk
Ch. 103, Art. III
Art. V, Hearing Authority Ch. 103, Art. IV
Art. VI, Maintenance Supervisor REP
Art. VII, Tax Assessor Clerk REP
Art. VIII, Assistant to the General Assistance
Director
REP
Art. IX, Safety Coordinator Ch. 103, Art. V
Art. X, Housing and Urban Development
Special Program Coordinator
REP
Art. XI, Housing and Urban Development
Special Program Coordinator - Certifying
Agent
REP
Art. XII, Borough Administrator REP
Art. XIII, Deputy Registrar Ch. 103, Art. VI
Ch. 48, Contractor Pay-to-Play Ch. 21, Art. I
Ch. 50, Police Department
Art. I, General Provisions Ch. 116, Art. I
Art. II, Police Clerk Ch. 116, Art. II
Art. III, Administrative Secretary Repealed by Ord. No. 93-1
Art. III, Fees for Police Reports and Other
Information
REP; see now Ch. 132, Art.
I
Ch. 51, Prison Labor Program Ch. 120
Ch. 52, Recreation Department Ch. 135
Ch. 53, Recycling Committee REP
Ch. 54, Hiring Preferences Ch. 110, Art. I
Ch. 55, Salaries and Compensation Ch. 147
Ch. 59, Sewerage Authority Ch. 151
Ch. 63, Shade Tree Commission Ch. 154
Part II: General Legislation
Ch. 75, Alarms Ch. 170
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:567
Chapter/Title From 1986 Code Location in 2017 Code
Ch. 79, Alcoholic Beverages
Art. I, Licensing and Sale Ch. 173, Art. I
Art. II, Sales to Persons Under Legal Age REP
Art. III, Consumption on Public and Private
Property
Ch. 173, Art. II
Ch. 80, Alleys Ch. 198, Art. II
Ch. 82, Amusement Devices Ch. 177
Ch. 86, Animals Ch. 181
Ch. 90, Bad Checks Ch. 217
Ch. 92, Bicycles
Art. I, Registration of Bicycles Ch. 192, Art. II
Art. II, Bicycle Helmets REP
Ch. 96, Brush, Grass, Trash and Weeds Ch. 198, Art. I
Ch. 99, Buildings, Numbering of Ch. 203
Ch. 100, Buildings, Unfit Ch. 206
Ch. 106, Certificates of Occupancy Ch. 213
Ch. 107, Certificates of Registration REP
Ch. 109, Construction Codes, Uniform Ch. 223
Ch. 113, Curfew Ch. 229
Ch. 114, Public Peace and Safety Ch. 336
Ch. 115, Graffiti Ch. 272
Ch. 116, Drugs
Art. I, Drug-Free School Zone Map Ch. 236
Ch. 119, Fire Insurance Claims Ch. 286, Art. I
Ch. 123, Fire Prevention REP
Ch. 127, Flood Damage Prevention Ch. 252
Ch. 131, Gambling and Games of Chance Ch. 259
Ch. 133, Garage Sales Ch. 263
Ch. 137, Garbage, Rubbish and Refuse Ch. 382
Ch. 141, Gasoline Stations REP
Ch. 146, Hazardous Substances Ch. 278
Ch. 152, Litter, Residential and Commercial Ch. 298
Ch. 154, Loitering
Art. I, Borough Property REP
Ch. 161, Noise Ch. 315
Ch. 164, Parades and Assemblies Ch. 324
§ DT-1 PENNS GROVE CODE § DT-1
1:568
Chapter/Title From 1986 Code Location in 2017 Code
Ch. 165, Parental Responsibility REP
Ch. 167, Parks and Recreation Areas Ch. 332
Ch. 171, Peddling and Soliciting Ch. 340, Art. I
Ch. 175, Property Maintenance
Art. I, General Standards Ch. 347, Art. I
Art. II, Habitable Floor Area Ch. 347, Art. II
Art. III, Electrical Service Ch. 347, Art. III
Art. IV, Violations and Penalties Ch. 347, Art. IV
Art. V, Property Maintenance Standards for
Creditors
Ch. 347, Art. V
Ch. 176, Public Works Department Ch. 124
Ch. 178, Recycling Repealed by Ord. No.
2010-7; see Ch. 382
Ch. 179, Redevelopment Agency Ch. 141
Ch. 179A, Rental Property
Art. I, Registration and Licensing Ch. 359, Art. I
Ch. 180, Roller-Skating and Skateboarding Ch. 192, Art. I
Ch. 186, Smoke Detectors Ch. 247, Art. I
Ch. 188, Stormwater Management Ch. 387
Ch. 189, Streets and Sidewalks
Art. I, Maintenance of Sidewalks, Curbs and
Gutters
Ch. 395, Art. I
Art. II, New Construction and
Reconstruction
Ch. 395, Art. II
Art. III, Snow Removal From Sidewalks Ch. 395, Art. III
Art. IV, Obstructions Ch. 395, Art. IV
Art. V, Street Obstructions and Openings Ch. 395, Art. V
Ch. 192, Subdivision of Land Ch. 400
Ch. 195, Swimming Pools Ch. 404
Ch. 201, Taxation
Art. I, Property Improvement Exemption Ch. 410, Art. I
Art. II, Abatement for Residential,
Commercial and Industrial Improvements
and Projects
Ch. 410, Art. II
Art. III, Assessment of Certain Fees Ch. 410, Art. III
Ch. 204, Taxicabs Ch. 413
Ch. 207, Trailers and Trailer Camps Ch. 420
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:569
Chapter/Title From 1986 Code Location in 2017 Code
Ch. 212, Vehicles, Abandoned Superseded by Ord. No.
95-6; see Ch. 298
Ch. 215, Vehicles and Traffic Ch. 432
Ch. 216, Vehicles, Motorized Recreational Ch. 436
Ch. 220, Zoning Ch. 450
Part III: Board of Health Legislation
Ch. 225, General Provisions
Art. I, Adoption of Code by Board of Health
(reference statement only)
–
Ch. 230, Food and Beverage Vending
Machines
REP
Ch. 235, Public Health Nuisances Ch. 318
Ch. 240, Solid Waste REP
Appendix
Ch. A250, Public Utilities NCM
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
KEY:
NCM = Not Code material (legislation is not general or permanent in nature).
REP = Repealed effective with adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, Art. II.
NI = Not included in Code but saved from repeal.
NLP = New legislation is pending.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2002-4 2-19-2002 Cable television franchise NCM
2002-5 Salaries amendment NCM
2002-6 5-21-2002 Redevelopment agency
amendment
See Ch. 141
2002-7 5-21-2002 Peddling and soliciting:
charitable solicitation in
roadways
Ch. 340, Art. II
2002-8 Tabled
§ DT-1 PENNS GROVE CODE § DL-1
1:570
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2002-9 8-7-2002 Redevelopment agency
amendment
See Ch. 141
2002-10 Eliminate position of Chief
of Police
Not adopted
2002-11 Create position of 2nd
Lieutenant
Not adopted
2002-12 Zoning amendment See Ord. No.
2003-1
2002-13 Salaries amendment NCM
2002-14 Salaries amendment NCM
2002-15 Salaries amendment NCM
2002-16 Site plan review Ch. 375
2002-17 Bond NCM
2002-18 Salaries amendment NCM
2002-19 Salaries amendment NCM
2002-20 Salaries amendment NCM
2002-21 Salaries amendment NCM
2002-22 Salaries amendment NCM
2002-23 6-4-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 432
2003-1 3-18-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 450
2003-2 CAP expenditure NCM
2003-3 6-4-2003 Streets and sidewalks:
sports equipment in streets
Ch. 395, Art. VI
2003-4 10-7-2003 Shopping carts Ch. 371
2003-5 Real estate sale NCM
2003-6 Salaries amendment NCM
2003-7 Salaries amendment NCM
2003-8 Salaries amendment NCM
2003-9 Salaries amendment NCM
2003-10 Salaries amendment NCM
2003-11 8-6-2003 Police Department
guidelines for promotion
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2007-13
2003-12 Salaries amendment NCM
2003-13 Salaries amendment NCM
2003-14 Salaries amendment NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:571
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2003-15 10-7-2003 Certificates of occupancy
amendment; property
maintenance: general
standards amendment
Ch. 213; Ch. 347,
Art. I
2003-16 CAP expenditure NCM
2003-17 Salaries amendment NCM
2004-1 CAP index rate NCM
2004-2 Salaries amendment NCM
2004-3 Salaries amendment NCM
2004-4 Real estate sale NCM
2004-5 Certificates of occupancy
amendment
Ch. 213
2004-6 Salaries amendment NCM
2004-7 Bond amendment NCM
2004-8 CAP expenditure NCM
2004-9 Street vacation NCM
2004-10 Street vacation NCM
2004-11 Number not used
2004-12 Number not used
2004-13 Police Department
guidelines for promotion
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2007-13
2004-14 Defense and
indemnification
Ch. 36
2004-15 5-18-2004 Police Department: general
provisions amendment
See Ch. 116, Art. I
2004-16 Number not used
2004-17 10-19-2004 Officers and employees:
appointed officials
amendment; Public Works
Department amendment
Ch. 103, Art. I; Ch.
124
2004-18 10-19-2004 Officers and employees:
appointed officials
amendment; Public Works
Department amendment
Ch. 103, Art. I; Ch.
124
2004-19 10-19-2004 Officers and employees:
appointed officials
amendment; Public Works
Department amendment
Ch. 103, Art. I; Ch.
124
§ DL-1 PENNS GROVE CODE § DL-1
1:572
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2004-20 10-19-2004 Officers and employees:
appointed officials
amendment
Ch. 103, Art. I
2004-21 10-19-2004 Municipal Court: Assistant
Court Administrator
amendment
Ch. 25, Art. II
2004-22 10-19-2004 Municipal Court: general
provisions amendment
Ch. 25, Art. I
2004-23 Salaries amendment NCM
2004-24 Salaries amendment NCM
2004-25 11-16-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 450
2004-26 CAP improvement NCM
2004-27 12-21-2004 Municipal Court: fees for
discovery
Ch. 25, Art. IV
2005-1 1-18-2005 Police Department: general
provisions amendment
See Ch. 116, Art. I
2005-2 CAP ordinance NCM
2005-3 Street vacation NCM
2005-4 CAP ordinance NCM
2005-5 CAP ordinance NCM
2005-6 CAP ordinance NCM
2005-7 10-18-2005 Rental property:
registration and licensing
amendment
No copy available
2005-8 Salaries amendment NCM
2005-9 Bond NCM
2005-10 9-6-2005 Drug-free school zones
amendment
Ch. 236
2005-11 Salaries amendment NCM
2005-12 10-18-2005 Bicycles and play vehicles:
bicycle registration
amendment
Ch. 192, Art. II
2005-13 11-1-2005 Authorizing Redevelopment
Agency note and contract
NCM
2005-14 Voided
2005-15 Voided
2005-16 Voided
2005-17 Voided
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:573
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2005-18 Voided
2005-19 Voided
2005-20 Salaries amendment NCM
2005-21 Salaries amendment NCM
2005-22 Salaries amendment NCM
2005-23 Salaries amendment NCM
2005-24 Salaries amendment NCM
2005-25 Salaries amendment NCM
2005-26 12-20-2005 Officers and employees:
Administrative
Enforcement Officer
REP
2005-27 Salaries amendment NCM
2005-28 Voided
2005-29 Voided
2006-1 2-21-2006 Redevelopment agency
amendment
See Ch. 141
2006-2 2-7-2006 Animals amendment Ch. 181
2006-3 2-7-2006 Stormwater pollution
control: illicit connection
Ch. 390, Art. I
2006-4 2-7-2006 Stormwater pollution
control: containerized yard
waste
Ch. 390, Art. II
2006-5 2-7-2006 Stormwater pollution
control: yard waste
collection program
Ch. 390, Art. III
2006-6 2-7-2006 Stormwater pollution
control: pet waste
Ch. 390, Art. IV
2006-7 2-7-2006 Stormwater pollution
control: improper disposal
of waste
Ch. 390, Art. V
2006-8 Street vacation NCM
2006-9 CAP budget NCM
2006-10 5-2-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 450
2006-11 Salaries amendment NCM
2006-12 Salaries amendment NCM
2006-13 Salaries amendment NCM
2006-14 Salaries amendment NCM
§ DL-1 PENNS GROVE CODE § DL-1
1:574
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2006-15 4-4-2006 Rental property:
registration and licensing
amendment
Ch. 359, Art. I
2006-16 Number not used
2006-17 Property deed NCM
2006-18 5-2-2006 Public peace and safety
amendment
See Ch. 336
2006-19 Salaries amendment NCM
2006-20 Security pledge NCM
2006-21 Bond NCM
2006-22 9-5-2006 Brush, grass, weeds and
debris
REP
2006-23 9-5-2006 Stormwater management Ch. 387
2006-24 Salaries amendment NCM
2006-25 Salaries amendment NCM
2006-26 Salaries amendment NCM
2006-27 Records: public access to
records
Ch. 132, Art. I
2006-28 Bond NCM
2007-1 Salaries amendment NCM
2007-2 Salaries amendment NCM
2007-3 Salaries amendment NCM
2007-4 Salaries amendment NCM
2007-5 Salaries amendment NCM
2007-6 Salaries amendment NCM
2007-7 4-4-2007 Animals amendment Ch. 181
2007-8 CAP ordinance NCM
2007-9 Bond NCM
2007-10 9-18-2007 Alcoholic beverages:
licensing and sale
amendment
Ch. 173, Art. I
2007-11 Bond NCM
2007-12 Bond NCM
2007-13 7-3-2007 Repeal Ord. Nos. 2003-11
and 2004-13
Repealer only
2007-14 Tabled
2007-15 Salaries amendment NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:575
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2007-16 Salaries amendment NCM
2008-1 Salaries amendment NCM
2008-2 Salaries amendment NCM
2008-3 Salaries amendment NCM
2008-4 Emergency appropriation NCM
2008-5 Emergency appropriation NCM
2008-5A CAP bank NCM
2008-6 4-1-2008 Land use procedures and
fees: fees amendment
Ch. 85, Part 2
2008-7 4-1-2008 Uniform construction codes
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2015-1; see Ch.
223
2008-8 8-6-2008 Graffiti Ch. 272
2008-9 Salaries amendment NCM
2008-10 Salaries amendment NCM
2008-11 8-6-2008 Parks and recreation areas
amendment
Ch. 332
2008-12 9-2-2008 Noise amendment Ch. 315
2008-13 9-2-2008 Unfit and abandoned
buildings: unfit buildings
amendment
Ch. 206, Art. I
2008-14 Salaries amendment NCM
2008-15 Salaries amendment NCM
2008-16 Salaries amendment NCM
2009-1 2-17-2009 Ambulance squad
amendment
Ch. 6
2009-2 3-18-2009 Motorized recreational
vehicles
Ch. 436
2009-3 CAP bank NCM
2009-4 4-21-2009 Brush, grass, weeds and
debris: general regulations
amendment
Ch. 198, Art. I
2009-5 Not adopted
2009-6 6-3-2009 Code of Ethics Ch. 47
2009-7 6-3-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 432
2009-8 Tabled
2009-9 7-7-2009 Curfew amendment Ch. 229
§ DL-1 PENNS GROVE CODE § DL-1
1:576
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2009-10 Property sale NCM
2009-11 8-5-2009 Recycling amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 2010-7
2009-12 Tabled
2009-13 9-15-2009 Police Department: general
provisions amendment
Ch. 116, Art. I
2009-14 Voided
2009-15 11-4-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 432
2009-16 12-21-2009 Personnel policies: hiring
preferences amendment
Ch. 110, Art. I
2009-17 Salaries amendment NCM
2010-1 Salaries amendment NCM
2010-2 2-16-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 432
2010-3 2-16-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 432
2010-4 Salaries amendment NCM
2010-5 4-20-2010 Alcoholic beverages:
licensing and sale
amendment
Ch. 173, Art. I
2010-6 CAP bank NCM
2010-7 5-18-2010 Brush, grass, weeds and
debris: alleys; solid waste;
streets and sidewalks:
street openings
amendment
Ch. 198, Art. II; Ch.
382; see Ch. 395,
Art. V
2010-8 6-15-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 432
2010-9 6-15-2010 Garage sales amendment Ch. 263
2010-10 Parades and assemblies Not adopted
2010-11 8-4-2010 Parades and assemblies Ch. 324
2010-12 Salaries amendment NCM
2010-13 9-7-2010 Brush, grass, weeds and
debris: general regulations
amendment
Ch. 198, Art. I
2010-14 Number not used
2010-15 Bond NCM
2010-16 9-21-2010 Animals amendment Ch. 181
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:577
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2010-17 Tabled
2010-18 Not adopted
2010-19 Not adopted
2010-20 Salaries amendment Vetoed
2010-21 12-28-2010 Streets and sidewalks:
street openings
amendment
See Ch. 395, Art. V
2011-1 3-1-2011 Contracts: awarding of
public contracts
Ch. 21, Art. I
2011-2 Salaries amendment NCM
2011-3 Salaries amendment NCM
2011-4 Salaries amendment NCM
2011-5 CAP bank NCM
2011-6 4-19-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 450
2011-7 6-8-2011 Police Department: general
provisions amendment
Ch. 116, Art. I
2011-8 Alley vacation NCM
2011-9 6-21-2011 Personnel policies: defined
contribution retirement
program
Ch. 110, Art. II
2011-10 Property sale NCM
2011-11 10-18-2011 Police Department: general
provisions amendment
Ch. 116, Art. I
2011-12 Voided
2011-13 10-4-2011 Stormwater pollution
control: refuse containers
and dumpsters
Ch. 390, Art. VI
2011-14 10-4-2011 Stormwater pollution
control: private storm drain
inlet retrofitting
Ch. 390, Art. VII
2011-15 CAP appropriation NCM
2012-1 2-7-2012 Police Department: general
provisions amendment
Ch. 116, Art. I
2012-2 Not adopted
2012-3 2-21-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 432
2012-4 CAP bank NCM
2012-5 Salaries amendment NCM
§ DL-1 PENNS GROVE CODE § DL-1
1:578
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2012-6 Property sale NCM
2012-7 Salaries amendment NCM
2012-8 5-1-2012 Animals amendment Ch. 181
2012-9 5-15-2012 Parks and recreation areas
amendment
Ch. 332
2012-10 CAP appropriation NCM
2012-11 8-8-2012 Uniform construction codes
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2015-1; see Ch.
223
2012-12 Salaries amendment NCM
2012-13 Alley vacation NCM
2012-14 Property sale NCM
2012-15 Number not used
2012-16 Bond NCM
2013-1 CAP bank NCM
2013-2 9-3-2013 Public peace and safety
amendment
See Ch. 336
2013-3 10-15-2013 Returned checks
amendment
Ch. 217
2013-4 Salaries amendment NCM
2013-5 Salaries amendment NCM
2013-6 Salaries amendment NCM
2013-7 Salaries amendment NCM
2013-8 Tabled
2013-9 11-19-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 450
2013-10 Number not used
2013-11 Bond NCM
2014-1 2-4-2014 Hazardous substances Ch. 278
2014-2 CAP appropriation NCM
2014-3 CAP bank NCM
2014-4 5-6-2014 Certificates of occupancy
amendment
Ch. 213
2014-5 6-4-2014 Parks and recreation areas
amendment
Ch. 332
2014-6 6-4-2014 Streets and sidewalks:
street openings
amendment
Ch. 395, Art. V
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:579
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2014-7 7-1-2014 Vacating alleyway NCM
2014-8 8-12-2014 Unfit and abandoned
buildings: abandoned
properties
Ch. 206, Art. II
2014-9 9-2-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 432
2014-10 10-7-2014 Appropriation NCM
2014-11 10-21-2014 Salaries amendment NCM
2014-12 10-21-2014 Property maintenance:
standards for creditors
Ch. 347, Art. V
2015-1 3-3-2015 Uniform construction codes Ch. 223
2015-2 3-3-2015 Unfit and abandoned
buildings: vacant property
registration
Ch. 206, Art. III
2015-3 Exceed budget and
establish cap bank
NCM
2015-4 Temporary signs Tabled
2015-5 6-16-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 450
2015-6 5-5-2015 Bond NCM
2015-7 6-3-2015 Property maintenance:
general standards
amendment
Ch. 347, Art. I
2015-8 7-7-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 432
2015-9 Bond NCM
2015-10 Sale of property NCM
2016-1 4-19-2016 Redevelopment plan
amendment
NCM
2016-2 Void
2016-3 2-16-2016 Redevelopment
amendment
Ch. 141
2016-4 Tractor trailers Tabled
2016-5 3-1-2016 Salaries amendment NCM
2016-6 4-5-2016 Exceed budget and
establish cap bank
NCM
2016-7 5-3-2016 Salaries amendment NCM
2016-8 6-8-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 450
§ DL-1 PENNS GROVE CODE § DL-1
1:580
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2016-9 5-3-2016 Redevelopment Agency
dissolved
NCM
2016-10 5-17-2016 Flood damage prevention Ch. 252
2016-11 6-8-2016 Redevelopment plan
amendment
NCM
2016-12 6-8-2016 Redevelopment plan
amendment
NCM
2016-13 6-8-2016 Salaries amendment NCM
2016-14 7-5-2016 Appropriation NCM
2016-15 7-5-2016 Appropriation NCM
2016-16 7-5-2016 Street vacation NCM
2016-17 7-5-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 432
2016-18 9-6-2016 Salaries amendment NCM
2016-19 Approving severance pay Not adopted
2016-20 Approving severance pay Not adopted
2016-21 Number not used
2016-22 12-6-2016 Approving severance pay NCM
2017-1 3-7-2017 Accepting donation of
property
NCM
2017-2 4-18-2017 Exceed budget and
establish cap bank
NCM
2017-3 4-18-2017 Continuing length of
service awards program
NCM
2017-4 Sale of fire trucks NCM
2017-5 7-5-2017 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. II
2017-6 7-5-2017 Underage consumption of
alcoholic beverages
Ch. 173, Art. III
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:581