Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code by Mayor and Council
[Adopted 3-26-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-004]
§ 1-1. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the Borough of Park Ridge of
a general and permanent nature adopted by the Mayor and Council of the
Borough of Park Ridge, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters
and sections by General Code, and consisting of Chapters 1 through 101,
together with an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and
enacted as the “Code of the Borough of Park Ridge,” hereinafter known and
referred to as the “Code.”
§ 1-2. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, except
such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or
continued in force.
§ 1-3. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
§ 1-4. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Borough Clerk and shall remain there for use and examination by the public
until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this ordinance shall be
adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk of the Borough of Park
Ridge by impressing thereon the Seal of the Borough, as provided by law,
and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Clerk of the
Borough, to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same
during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-5. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the governing
body to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the “Code of the Borough of Park
Ridge” shall be understood and intended to include such additions and
amendments. Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the
Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided
hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as
amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:3
§ 1-6. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the Borough of Park Ridge, pursuant to law, shall cause
this Adopting Ordinance to be published, in the manner required, in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. Sufficient copies of the
Code shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk for inspection by the
public at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and
publication of this Adopting Ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of
the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered
to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk or someone authorized and directed by
the Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the
Code required to be filed in his or her office for the use of the public. All
changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the
Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until
such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code
book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-8. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the Clerk, or an authorized agent of the Clerk, upon the payment of a fee
authorized by the Borough. The Clerk shall also arrange for procedures for
the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-9. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Borough of
Park Ridge to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section or
any part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to one or more
of the following: a fine of not more than $1,250, imprisonment for not more
than 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, in the
discretion of the Judge imposing the same.
§ 1-10. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed
to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts
thereof.
§ 1-6 PARK RIDGE CODE § 1-11
1:4
§ 1-11. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-12. Inconsistent ordinances repealed.
§ 1-13. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in §
1-12 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Except as provided in § 1-13, Ordinances saved from repeal, below, all
ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions
contained in the Code adopted by this ordinance are hereby repealed;
provided, however, that such repeal shall only be to the extent of such
inconsistency, and any valid legislation of the Borough of Park Ridge
which is not in conflict with the provisions of the Code shall be deemed
to remain in full force and effect.
B. The prior Code of the Borough of Park Ridge, Parts I and II, as adopted
by the Mayor and Council July 8, 1974 by Ord. No. 74-16, as amended
and supplemented, is hereby repealed. Part III, Board of Health
Legislation, of said prior Code, as adopted by the Board of Health
August 14, 1974, is not affected by this ordinance, and shall continue in
full force and effect.
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to 12-11-2012.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
§ 1-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:5
§ 1-14. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
G. Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of
the Borough's indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges or the approval
of the municipal budget.
J. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
K. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
L. Any ordinance adopting or amending the Zoning Map.
M. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain grammatical
changes and other minor changes were made in one or more of said
ordinances. It is the intention of the Mayor and Council that all such
changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so changed
had been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the following changes, amendments or revisions are made
herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance.
(Chapter and section number references are to the ordinances as they
have been renumbered and appear in the Code.)
(1) Chapter 84, Soil Removal.
(a) Section 84-7 is amended to read in part as follows: “…shall be
accompanied by an original plus 13 copies of a topographical
map of the lot…”
(2) Chapter 87, Subdivision and Site Plan Review.
(a) Section 87-5 is amended to repeal Subsection C, Planning
Board and Board of Adjustment acting as approving authority.
(b) Section 87-6C(3) is amended to read: “The fee for reproducing
electronic minutes shall be the cost to the municipality for
purchasing the CD/disc.”
(c) Section 87-7C(4) is amended to read in part as follows: “The
approving authority shall also cause notice of the hearing…”
§ 1-13 PARK RIDGE CODE § 1-14
1:6
(d) Section 87-7E is amended to read in part as follows: “…the
development of property be given by personal service or
certified mail, return receipt requested, to:”.
(e) Section 87-7I(1) is amended to read in part as follows: “A copy
of the decision shall be mailed by the approving authority,
return receipt requested, within 10 days…”
(f) Section 87-9, Subdivision classification, is repealed.
(g) (a) Section 87-11 is amended to read in part as follows: “The
application shall be accompanied by an original and 24 copies
of the proposed subdivision…”
(h) Section 87-17A is amended to read in part as follows: “The
application shall be accompanied by an original and 24 copies
of the proposed subdivision…”
(i) The first sentence of § 87-21A is amended to read as follows:
“The application shall be accompanied by an original and 24
copies of the proposed final subdivision.”
(3) Chapter 101, Zoning.
(a) Section 101-5 is amended to delete the table entries for RD-1
and RD-2.
(b) Chapter 101 is amended to repeal Article XIIIA, RD-1 and RD-2
Redevelopment Zones.
§ 1-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:7
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANIZATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Claims approval and payment — See Ch. 6.
Pascack Joint Municipal Court — See Ch. 8.
Fire Department — See Ch. 14.
Board of Health — See Ch. 17.
Police Department — See Ch. 26.
Municipal Pool Commission — See Ch. 28.
County services and facilities — See Ch. 34.
§ 1-14 PARK RIDGE CODE § 1-14
1:8
ARTICLE I
Elective Officials
§ 2-1. Mayor; election, term.
The Mayor shall be chosen at the general election by popular ballot of the
eligible voters of the Borough of Park Ridge. He shall serve for a term
of four years, which shall begin at 12:00 noon on January 1 following the
election.
§ 2-2. Powers and duties of Mayor.
The Mayor shall have all the powers and duties provided by state statute.
He shall, inter alia, see to the faithful execution of the laws of the state
and ordinances of the Borough, recommend to the Council those measures
he deems necessary or expedient, maintain peace and good order and
have power to suppress riots and tumultuous assemblies, all as provided
in N.J.S.A. 40A:60-5. He shall nominate and, with the advice and consent
of Council, appoint all officers in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:60-5 and
40A:60-6. As provided by N.J.S.A. 40A:60-5, he shall preside over meetings
of the Council and may, in the event of a tie, cast the deciding ballot.
Otherwise he shall not vote. He may veto ordinances in accordance with
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:60-5. Such veto may be overcome by a twothirds
vote of the Council. His approval of all disbursements is required in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:87-50, except as set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:87-51.1
§ 2-3. Council: composition, terms.
As provided by state statute, the members of the Borough Council shall be
chosen at the general election by popular ballot of the eligible voters of
the Borough of Park Ridge. The Council shall consist of six members. Their
terms of office shall be for three years, beginning at 12:00 noon on January
1 following their election, and arranged in such a manner that the terms of
two Councilmen shall expire at the end of each year.
§ 2-4. Compensation of Mayor and Councilmen.2
Compensation for the Mayor and Councilmen shall be fixed by vote of
a majority of the members of the Council in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:87-583 and shall be governed by the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:9-165 and
40A:9-165.1.
§ 2-5. (Reserved)4
1. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:87-50 and 40:87-51 were repealed by L. 1987, c. 379. For current
statutory provisions on boroughs, see N.J.S.A. 40A:60-1 et seq.
2. Editor's Note: As to salaries and compensation, see Article VII of this chapter.
3. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:87-58 was repealed by L. 1987, c. 379.
4. Editor's Note: Original § 2-5, Tax Collector, was repealed 10-14-1980 by Ord. No. 80-14.
For current provisions regarding the Tax Collector, see § 2-22.1.
§ 2-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-5.1
1:9
§ 2-5.1. (Reserved)5
§ 2-6. Vacancies.
Vacancies occurring in any elective office shall be filled by appointment
lasting until the first of January following the next annual election and until
the election and qualification of a successor pursuant to the procedure set
forth in N.J.S.A. 40:87-13.6
A. Councilmen. Vacancies shall be filled in the following manner: The
Mayor shall nominate and, with the advice and consent of the Council,
appoint a person to fill the Council vacancy until January 1 of the
following year. If such vacancy shall occur at so short a period of time
before the next annual election that such office cannot be filled at such
election, the vacancy shall be filled in the same manner as though the
same had occurred immediately after such election and said vacancy
shall be filled at the next subsequent annual election for such portion of
the term, if any, as may still remain unexpired. The Mayor shall make
such nomination within 30 days after the office becomes vacant. If the
Mayor fails to nominate within said 30 days or the Council fails to
confirm any nomination made by the Mayor, then after the expiration of
said 30 days, the Council shall appoint a person to fill said vacancy. No
appointment shall be made except by a vote of a majority of the
members of the Council present at the meeting, provided that at least
three affirmative votes shall be required for such purpose, the Mayor to
have no vote thereon except in case of a tie.
B. Mayor. A vacancy in the office, whether by resignation or otherwise,
shall be filled by the Council until the next annual election; the person
then elected to fill such vacancy shall serve for the unexpired term only
(N.J.S.A. 40:87-11).7 The vacancy may be filled by any member of the
Council or a registered voter of Park Ridge.
C. Tax Collector. A vacancy shall be filled by appointment until January 1
following the next annual election, and the term of the person elected
shall be for the unexpired time or for a four-year term if the prior Tax
Collector had tenure. (N.J.S.A. 40:87-13;8 40A:9-141)
5. Editor's Note: Original § 2-5.1, Tax Assessor, was repealed 10-14-1980 by Ord. No. 80-14.
For current provisions regarding the Tax Assessor, see § 2-22.2.
6. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:87-13 was repealed by L. 1975, c. 213.
7. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:87-11 was repealed by L. 1979, c. 83.
8. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:87-13 was repealed by L. 1975, c. 213.
§ 2-5.1 PARK RIDGE CODE § 2-6
1:10
ARTICLE II
The Council
§ 2-7. Powers.
The powers of the Council are those vested by authority of statutory law as
enumerated in N.J.S.A. 40A:60-6, and as provided elsewhere in this chapter
and amendments thereto.
§ 2-8. Organization.
The Mayor shall preside over all meetings of the Council, which shall
organize annually on January 1 or during the first seven days of January in
each year.9
§ 2-9. President of Council.
§ 2-10. Acting Mayor.
§ 2-11. Meetings and conferences. [Amended 10-14-1980 by Ord.
No. 80-14]
A. The Council shall, at its organizational meeting, elect from its number a
President of the Council. He shall hold office for one year until the next
organizational election. If the Council fails to elect a President at the
designated time, the Mayor shall appoint a President and no
confirmation by the Council shall be necessary.10
B. It shall be the duty of the President to preside at all meetings of the
Council in the absence of the Mayor, but he shall not lose his right of
debate or vote on all questions before the Council while presiding.11
A. If the Mayor is absent from the Borough for three days or is otherwise
unable to act, the President of the Council shall perform the duties of
the Mayor. The Mayor shall notify the President in writing if he intends
to be absent for more than three days at any one time, and the
President shall become Acting Mayor upon receipt of such notice and
continue to act until the Mayor's return.12
B. In case of the inability of the President to assume the duties of Acting
Mayor, the member of the Council having the longest term of service
shall act temporarily for the President.
A. Regular meetings.13 The Council shall meet annually on January 1 or
during the first seven days of January in each year. All Council meetings
9. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:60-3.
10.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:60-3.
11.Editor's Note: See case of Freinl vs Borough of Dumont, 108 N.J.L. 245, 157A 382.
12.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:60-3.
13.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:60-3.
§ 2-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-11
1:11
§ 2-12. Quorum.
Three Councilmen and the Mayor, or, in the absence of the Mayor, four
Councilmen, shall constitute a quorum, but a smaller number may meet and
adjourn from time to time.15
§ 2-13. Roll call votes; minutes.
The vote upon every resolution or ordinance shall be taken by roll call,
and the yeas and nays shall be entered on the minutes. After approval
at public meetings, the official copy of the minutes of each meeting shall
be countersigned by the presiding officer, either the Mayor or the Council
President, and by the Clerk.
§ 2-14. Rules of Council.
All regular and special meetings of the Council shall be open to the public.
The rules of procedure to be followed and rules for the consideration of
nominations submitted by the Mayor and for the conduct of other business
of the Council shall be as adopted at the annual organizational meeting.
shall be held within the Borough. The Council shall meet regularly
thereafter at least once a month at such time and place as the Council
may, by resolution, direct. When the time for any regular meeting of
the Council falls on a legal holiday, as prescribed by law, such meeting
shall be held at the same hour on the next succeeding day which is not
a legal holiday or at such other time as the Council may designate.
B. Special meetings. The Mayor shall, when necessary, call special
meetings. In case of his neglect or refusal, any four members of the
Council may call a special meeting at such time and place in the
Borough as they may designate. In all cases, 48 hours' written notice of
such meetings shall be given to all members. Such notice may be
waived by a written waiver of notice signed by all of the Councilmen
and the Mayor, or by motion duly made, seconded and adopted.
C. (Reserved)14
14.Editor's Note: Original Subsection C, Council conferences, was repealed 10-14-1980 by
Ord. No. 80-14.
15.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:60-3.
§ 2-11 PARK RIDGE CODE § 2-14
1:12
ARTICLE III
Local Legislation
§ 2-15. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LOCAL LEGISLATION — Includes "ordinance" and "resolution" as defined
by N.J.S.A. 40:49-1 and duly enacted according to law.
§ 2-16. Adoption and publication of ordinances.
All ordinances of the Borough of Park Ridge shall be introduced, read,
heard, published and enacted in the manner provided by law. Each
ordinance passed by the Council shall be returned by the Mayor to the Clerk
after the Mayor has signed or approved it. If the Mayor neither signs nor
disapproves the ordinance within five days from the date of its delivery
to the Mayor, it shall, as provided by N.J.S.A. 40:93-8,16 take effect in like
manner as if signed. The publication of ordinances shall be governed by the
provisions set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:93-2.
§ 2-17. Reconsideration of ordinances vetoed by Mayor;
certification.
A. The Council shall reconsider any ordinance returned without approval
by the Mayor within the time permitted by law, together with a
statement setting forth his objections thereto or to any item or part
thereof. Such reconsideration shall take place at the next meeting of
the Council.
B. Whenever an ordinance has been reconsidered by the Council following
a veto by the Mayor, the Clerk shall append to such ordinance a
certification of the action of the Council upon such reconsideration, in
substantially the following form:
16.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:93-1 through 40:93-9 were repealed by L. 1987, c. 379. For
current statutory provisions regarding boroughs, see N.J.S.A. 40A:60-1 et seq.
§ 2-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-17
1:13
§ 2-18. Effectiveness without signature; certification.
Whenever an ordinance shall take effect without the Mayor's signature by
reason of his failure to return it to the Council by filing it with the Clerk
within five days after it has been presented to him, the Clerk shall append
to such ordinance a certificate in substantially the following form:
"I HEREBY CERTIFY that the above ordinance was adopted by the Borough
Council on the ______ day of ____________, 20___, and was presented to the
Mayor duly certified on the ______ day of ____________, 20___, and upon his
failure to sign it or to return and file it with the Clerk within five days
thereafter, the said ordinance took effect in like manner as if the Mayor had
signed it.
Dated: _______________
Borough Clerk"
§ 2-19. Record of local legislation required.
The Clerk shall record all ordinances and resolutions in permanent books
which shall be provided for that purpose, and shall cause the codification
to be revised accordingly. After each ordinance, he shall also record and
certify the proof of publication thereof as required by law. Each ordinance
recorded shall be signed by the Mayor and Clerk, who shall attest that it
was duly adopted upon a date stated, and it shall be deemed to be a public
record of the ordinance.
"I HEREBY CERTIFY that the above ordinance adopted by the Council
of the Borough of Park Ridge on the ______ day of ____________, 20___,
was delivered to me on the ______ day of ____________, together with
the Mayor's statement of the reasons for which he was constrained to
withhold his approval of such ordinance, item or part thereof.
On reconsideration thereof, on the ______ day of ____________, (the
Council duly resolved by the affirmative vote of 2/3 of its members
to enact such ordinance, item or part thereof, notwithstanding the
Mayor's veto) or (the Mayor's veto was sustained).
Dated _______________
Borough Clerk"
§ 2-17 PARK RIDGE CODE § 2-19
1:14
ARTICLE IV
Appointive Officials
§ 2-20. Appointment procedures; terms.
Certain offices of the Borough shall be filled by appointment unless
otherwise specified; such appointments shall be made by the Mayor, with
the advice of and consent of the Council, including vacancies, which shall
be for the unexpired term only. The method of appointment shall be as
provided in N.J.S.A. 40A:60-5. The term for each office shall be as provided
by statute and Borough ordinances.
§ 2-21. (Reserved)17
§ 2-22. Clerk: appointment, term, powers and duties.
A. Appointment and term. (N.J.S.A. 40A:9-133 et seq.) A Municipal Clerk
shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the
Council. The term of office of Municipal Clerk shall be for three years
from the first day of January in the year in which he or she was
appointed. [Amended 10-14-1980 by Ord. No. 80-14]
B. General duties. The Clerk shall attend all meetings of the Council, keep
a correct record of all its proceedings, have the power and authority to
take and administer oaths and affirmations in Borough matters, and
perform all the functions of municipal clerks as specified by law. In
addition, he shall perform such other duties as the Council may require.
(N.J.S.A. 40A:60-1 et seq.)
C. Records. In addition to recording ordinances and resolutions of a
permanent character, the Clerk shall have custody of and shall safely
keep all records, books and documents of the Borough, except those
committed by ordinance to any other office or transferred thereto by
the Mayor and Council. He shall, upon request and upon the payment of
the fees prescribed therefor by resolution of the Council for the use of
the Borough, furnish a certified copy of such paper in his custody, under
the corporate Seal of the Borough. (N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5)
D. Filing of rules, regulations. All rules or general regulations made by any
department, officer, agency or authority of the municipality shall be
filed with the Clerk. The Clerk shall maintain a current compilation of
all such rules and regulations, which shall be available for public
inspection in his office during business hours.
E. Seal. The Clerk shall cause the Corporate Seal of the Borough to be
affixed to instruments and writings when authorized by ordinance or
resolution of the Council or when necessary to exemplify any document
on record in his office or to certify any act or paper which, from the
17.Editor's Note: Original § 2-21, Municipal Comptroller: appointment, term, duties, was
repealed 7-12-1976 by Ord No. 76-14.
§ 2-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-22
1:15
records in his office, shall appear to have been a public act of the
Borough or a public document. He shall not affix said seal or cause it
to be affixed to any other instrument or writing or other paper, unless
required by state statute or ordinance of the Borough of Park Ridge.
(N.J.S.A. 40A:60-1; 2A:82-1418)
F. Duties regarding sureties, bonds, leases; reports required. The Clerk,
subject to the supervision of the Mayor and Council, shall:
(1) Be the depository and custodian of all official surety bonds
furnished by or on account of any officer or employee, all insurance
policies upon or with respect to risks insured for the benefit of the
Borough or to protect it against any claim, demand or liability
whatsoever, and all formal contracts for work, labor services,
supplies, equipment and materials to which the municipality may
be a party. (N.J.S.A. 40A:5-34)
(2) Be the depository for and have custody of all performance bonds
running to the Borough as obligee, or any other form of security
given by any contractor, subdivision developer or other persons on
account of work done or to be done in or for the Borough.
(3) Have custody of all leases of property owned by the Borough.
(4) Report to the Council, at such time as may be required, on the
coverage, premium and expiration date of each surety bond and
insurance contract and the terms of leases and their expiration
dates.
(5) The Municipal Clerk shall be reviewed annually by the Personnel
Committee. Its performance evaluation report shall be presented to
the Mayor and Council and privately to the Municipal Clerk by the
Council President. [Added 12-22-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-24]
G. Additional duties. The Clerk shall also:
(1) Administer the provisions of the Borough ordinances with
reference to the licensing of occupations and activities for which
licenses are required by law or ordinance to be obtained from the
Clerk.
(2) Keep a calendar of all matters pending before the Council.
(3) Issue certificates regarding the approval of land subdivisions which
have been duly approved by the Planning Board, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55-1.24.19
(4) The Borough Clerk is authorized to approve the granting of raffle
and bingo licenses as is provided by law. For purposes of this
subsection, the Municipal Clerk is now the issuing authority for
18.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 2A:82-14 was repealed by L.1999, c. 319.
19.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:55-1.24 was repealed by L.1975, c. 291.
§ 2-22 PARK RIDGE CODE § 2-22
1:16
§ 2-22.1. Tax Collector. [Added 10-14-1980 by Ord. No. 80-14]
§ 2-22.2. Tax Assessor. [Added 10-14-1980 by Ord. No. 80-14]
bingo and raffle licenses in the Borough of Park Ridge. [Added
8-8-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-15]
A. Appointment and term. (N.J.S.A. 40A:9-141 et seq.)
(1) A Tax Collector shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice
and consent of the Council. The term of office of the Tax Collector
shall be for four years from the first day of January in the year in
which he or she was appointed.
B. Powers and duties. (N.J.S.A. 40A:9-141 et seq.) The Tax Collector shall:
(1) Collect and hold all moneys assessed or raised by taxes upon real
and personal property within the Borough.
(2) Maintain such records as required by law, including but not limited
to:
(a) Sums received each day for taxes and names of persons on
whose account the taxes are received.
(b) A record and account of the tax collections of the Borough.
(3) Within 60 days of the end of the fiscal year or when so required by
Council, submit a full report and true statement of Borough
finances from the beginning of the official year, as well as a list of
the delinquent taxpayers for the previous year. Two copies of such
report and list shall, at the required time, be filed with the Clerk.
Deposits of Borough funds and additional reports to the governing
body shall be made as required by law.
(4) Disburse moneys as authorized by a warrant ordered by the
Council, signed, numbered and attested as provided by law.
(N.J.S.A. 40A:9-141 et seq.)
(5) The Tax Collector shall be reviewed annually by the Personnel
Committee. Its performance evaluation report shall be presented to
the Mayor and Council and privately to the Tax Collector by the
Council President. [Added 12-22-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-24]
C. Compensation. (N.J.S.A. 40A:9-141) The compensation of the Tax
Collector shall be as provided pursuant to § 2-39 of the Code of the
Borough of Park Ridge.
A. Appointment and term. (N.J.S.A. 40A:9-146 et seq.) A Tax Assessor shall
be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council.
The term of office of the Tax Assessor shall be for four years from the
first day of July in the year in which he or she was appointed.
§ 2-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-22.2
1:17
§ 2-23. Deputy Borough Clerk: appointment, term, duties.
§ 2-24. (Reserved)20
§ 2-25. Municipal Treasurer: appointment, term, duties. [Amended
8-16-1976 by Ord. No. 76-17; 6-12-1984 by Ord. No. 84-5]
B. Powers and duties. (N.J.S.A. 40A:9-141 et seq.) The Tax Assessor shall
possess and perform such powers and duties as granted or required by
law and as the Council may, or ordinance or resolution, require.
C. Compensation. (N.J.S.A. 40A:9-149) The compensation of the Tax
Assessor shall be provided pursuant to § 2-39 of the Code of the
Borough of Park Ridge.
A. The position of Deputy Borough Clerk is created pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:9-135.
B. The Deputy Clerk shall perform all of the duties of an assistant Borough
clerk and, in addition thereto, shall have all powers and perform all the
duties of the Borough Clerk during such times and for such specific
periods as the Borough Clerk shall be absent.
C. The Deputy Clerk shall be appointed by resolution of the Mayor and
Council and shall be appointed for the term of one year, commencing
January 1 of the year in which he is appointed.
D. The provisions of Subsection C above shall not apply where the Deputy
Clerk shall have been certified as a permanent employee by the New
Jersey Division of Civil Service. In that event and upon said
certification, said Deputy Clerk may be removed only for cause as set
forth in civil service procedure.
A. Appointment and term.21 A Municipal Treasurer shall be appointed by
the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council, and shall hold
office for a term of one year, or until his or her successor has been
appointed and qualified, subject to the tenure provisions of the
applicable laws of the State of New Jersey. The Municipal Treasurer
shall also act as the Municipal Finance Officer, provided that the
statutory requirements are met.
B. Duties. The Municipal Treasurer shall have the custody of the general
funds of the Borough and the Department of Public Works and Public
Utilities, including the Division of Electric Utilities and the Division of
Water Utilities. The Municipal Treasurer shall also perform such lawful
duties as may be assigned by the Mayor and Council or the Borough
Administrator and shall otherwise have such power and duties as may
be prescribed from time to time by the ordinances of the Borough, and
20.Editor’s Note: Original § 2-24, Judge: appointment, term, duties, was repealed 3-22-2011
by Ord. No. 2011-006; see now Ch. 8, Pascack Joint Municipal Court.
21.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:9-1.2; 40A:9-140.1 et seq.; 40A:9-152 et seq.
§ 2-22.2 PARK RIDGE CODE § 2-25
1:18
§ 2-26. Municipal Engineer: qualifications, duties, appointment,
term.
§ 2-27. Public Utilities Superintendent/Road Superintendent.
[Amended 6-12-1984 by Ord. No. 84-5; 4-11-1989 by Ord. No. 89-6]
the laws of the State of New Jersey. The Municipal Treasurer shall
report to the Borough Administrator. [Amended 4-11-1989 by Ord.
No. 896]
C. The Municipal Treasurer shall be reviewed annually by the Personnel
Committee. Its performance evaluation report shall be presented to the
Mayor and Council and privately to the Municipal Treasurer by the
Council President. [Added 12-22-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-24]
A. Qualifications. To be eligible for appointment, the appointee shall hold a
degree in civil engineering from a recognized college of engineering
and be licensed in the State of New Jersey.
B. Duties. The Municipal Engineer shall perform the duties as required by
law and the ordinances of the Borough of Park Ridge.
C. Appointment. The Municipal Engineer shall be appointed by the Mayor,
with the advice and consent of the Council.
D. Term. The term of office of the Municipal Engineer shall be for one year
unless otherwise provided by law.
A. Appointment and term. The Public Utilities Superintendent/Road
Superintendent shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the Council and shall hold office at the pleasure of the
governing body and until his or her successor has been appointed and
qualified, subject to the tenure provisions of the applicable laws of the
State of New Jersey. In connection with the foregoing, the Mayor and
Council shall entertain any recommendations from the Advisory Council
- Board of Public Works in the Department of Public Works and Public
Utilities.
B. Duties.
(1) The Public Utilities Superintendent/Road Superintendent shall:
(a) Have the primary responsibility and authority for the
supervision of the care and maintenance of public streets,
roads, avenues, buildings, grounds, places and facilities,
sewers, motor vehicles and other equipment of the Borough,
excepting therefrom the maintenance of Borough Hall, library
and pistol range.
(b) Have the primary responsibility and authority for supervision
of the construction, operation and maintenance of the electric
and water systems of the Borough.
§ 2-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-27
1:19
§ 2-28. General Supervisor, Roads: appointment, term, duties.
[Amended 6-12-1984 by Ord. No. 84-5; 8-13-1984 by Ord. No. 85-8;
4-11-1989 by Ord. No. 89-6]
(c) Recommend extensions to and improvements in the electric
and water systems.
(d) Exercise supervision over the following supervisors and
divisions:
[1] Supervisor of the Division of Roads, Parks, Public
Buildings and Recycling.
[2] Supervisor of the Division of Electric Utilities.
[3] Supervisor of the Division of Water Utilities, Sewers and
Vehicle Maintenance.
(e) Perform such additional lawful duties as may from time to time
be assigned by the Board of Public Works or the Mayor and
Council.
(2) The Public Utilities Superintendent/Road Superintendent shall
report to the Advisory Council, Board of Public Works.
(3) The Public Utilities Superintendent/Road Superintendent shall be
reviewed annually and a performance evaluation report will be
presented by the Advisory Council, Board of Public Works in the
Department of Public Works and Public Utilities. [Added
12-22-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-24]
A. Creation of office; appointment; term. The position of General
Supervisor, Roads, is hereby created. The position shall be filled by
appointment of the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council,
subject to certification by the New Jersey Department of Civil Service,
and the appointee shall hold office at the pleasure of the Mayor and
Council and until his or her successor has been appointed and qualified
subject to the tenure provisions of the applicable laws of the State of
New Jersey.
B. Duties.
(1) The General Supervisor, Roads, shall have supervision of and
responsibility for:
(a) The Division of Roads, Parks, Public Buildings and Recycling.
(b) Public parks, grounds and buildings.
(c) Public roads, streets, avenues and sidewalks.
(d) The Borough's mandatory recycling program.
§ 2-27 PARK RIDGE CODE § 2-28
1:20
§ 2-29. General Supervisor, Electric Distribution.22 [Added
6-12-1984 by Ord. No. 84-5; 4-11-1989 by Ord. No. 89-6]
(e) Equipment related to the performance of duties set forth
herein.
(2) The General Supervisor, Roads, shall:
(a) Cause to be repaired and maintained the Borough property,
facilities, programs and related equipment for which he has
assigned responsibility.
(b) Discharge and perform such other lawful duties as may be
assigned from time to time.
(c) Report to the Public Utilities Superintendent/Road
Superintendent.
A. Creation of office; appointment; term. The position of General
Supervisor, Electric Distribution, is hereby created. The position shall
be filled by appointment of the Mayor with the advice and consent of
the Council, subject to certification by the New Jersey Department of
Civil Service, and the appointee shall hold office at the pleasure of the
Mayor and Council and until his or her successor has been appointed
and qualified, subject to the tenure provisions of the applicable laws of
the State of New Jersey.
B. Duties.
(1) The General Supervisor, Electric Distribution, shall have
supervision over and responsibility for:
(a) The Division of Electric Utilities.
(b) The construction, operation and maintenance of the electric
system of the Borough and the extension and improvement
thereof at the direction of the Public Utilities Superintendent/
Road Superintendent.
(c) The performance of such additional lawful duties as may from
time to time be assigned by the Public Utilities Superintendent/
Road Superintendent.
(2) The General Supervisor, Electric Distribution, shall report to the
Public Utilities Superintendent/Road Superintendent. In the
absence of the General Supervisor, Water, the General Supervisor,
Electric Distribution, shall be in charge.
22.Editor's Note: Original § 2-29, Building Inspector: appointment, duties, term, has been
superseded by the enactment of the State Uniform Construction Code Act (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-119 et seq.), which Act provides for a Construction Official and a Building Subcode
Official. For regulations providing for the enforcement of said Act, see Ch. 50,
Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 2-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-29.1
1:21
§ 2-29.1. (Reserved)23
§ 2-29.2. General Supervisor, Water: appointment, term, duties.
[Amended 6-12-1984 by Ord. No. 84-5; 4-11-1989 by Ord. No. 89-6]
§ 2-29.3. (Reserved)24
§ 2-30. Zoning Officer: appointment, term, duties; alternate.
[Amended 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-04]
Designation to the office of Zoning Officer and designation of an alternate
Zoning Officer to perform the duties of the Zoning Officer in the absence
of the Zoning Officer shall be made by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the Borough Council of the Borough of Park Ridge. The term of
office shall be for one year, commencing on January 1 of the year in which
A. Creation of office; appointment; term. The position of General
Supervisor, Electric Distribution, is hereby created. The position shall
be filled by appointment of the Mayor with the advice and consent of
the Council, subject to certification by the New Jersey Department of
Civil Service, and the appointee shall hold office at the pleasure of the
Mayor and Council and until his or her successor has been appointed
and qualified, subject to the tenure provisions of the applicable laws of
the State of New Jersey.
B. Duties.
(1) The General Supervisor, Water, shall have supervision over and
responsibility for:
(a) The Division of Water Utilities, Sewers and Vehicle
Maintenance.
(b) The construction, operation and maintenance of the water and
sewer systems of the Borough and the extensions and
improvement thereof at the direction of the Public Utilities
Superintendent/Road Superintendent.
(c) The performance of such additional lawful duties as may from
time to time be assigned by the Public Utilities Superintendent/
Road Superintendent.
(2) The General Supervisor, Water, shall report to the Public Utilities
Superintendent/Road Superintendent. In the absence of the Public
Utilities Superintendent/Road Superintendent, the General
Supervisor, Water, shall report to the General Supervisor, Electric
Distribution.
23.Editor's Note: Original § 2-29.1, Supervisor of Buildings and Grounds: appointment, term,
duties, as amended, was repealed 8-13-1985 by Ord. No. 85-8. For current provisions, see
§ 2-28.
24.Editor's Note: Original § 2-29.3, Supervisor of Mechanical Repairs: appointment, term,
duties, as added 6-12-1984 by Ord. No. 84-5, was repealed 4-11-1989 by Ord. No. 89-6.
§ 2-29.1 PARK RIDGE CODE § 2-30
1:22
appointed. Any vacancy in the office shall be filled by the Borough Council
for the unexpired term only. The duties of the Zoning Officer are set forth in
Chapter 101, Zoning, of the Code of the Borough of Park Ridge.
§ 2-31. Health personnel.
Appointive officials relative to the health regulations of the Borough are as
set forth In Chapter 17, Health, Board of, of the Code of the Borough of Park
Ridge. Such provisions cover the appointment and the terms of office of a
Sanitary Inspector and a Registrar of Vital Statistics and the designation by
the Board of Health of a President and a Secretary.25
§ 2-32. Attorney: appointment, term.
The Borough Attorney shall be appointed by the Mayor and Council for the
term of one year from the first day of January of the year of his appointment
and until his successor has been appointed and qualified. He shall be an
attorney at law of New Jersey but need not be a resident of the Borough.26
§ 2-33. Powers and duties of Attorney.
A. The Attorney shall have such powers and perform such duties as are
provided for his office by general law or the ordinances of the Borough
of Park Ridge. He shall represent the Borough in all judicial and
administrative proceedings in which the municipality may be a party or
have an interest, and shall, at the direction of the governing body,
represent its elected and appointed officers, departments and agencies
in judicial and administrative proceedings in which they shall be a party
or have an interest. He shall give all legal counsel and advice where
required by the Council or any member thereof and shall, in general,
serve as the legal advisor to the Council on all matters of Borough
business. In furtherance of such general powers and duties but without
limitation thereto, the Borough Attorney shall:
(1) Draft or approve as to form and sufficiency all legal documents,
contracts, deeds, ordinances and resolutions made, executed or
adopted by or on behalf of the municipality.
(2) With the approval of the Council, conduct appeals from orders,
decisions or judgments affecting any interest of the Borough as he
may in his discretion determine to be necessary or desirable or as
directed by Council.
(3) Subject to the approval of the Council, have power to enter into any
agreement, compromise or settlement of any litigation in which the
Borough is involved.
25.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 26:3-19.
26.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:9-139; 40A:9-156.
§ 2-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-33
1:23
§ 2-34. Tax Search Officer: appointment, term, duties.
The Borough Council shall, from time to time by resolution, designate a
bonded official of the municipality to make examinations of its records as
to unpaid municipal liens and to certify the results thereof. Said official,
designated the "Tax Search Officer," shall thereafter be vested with the
power to make official certificates of searches for municipal liens. The
official designated as the Tax Search Officer shall continue in that capacity
until a new resolution is passed by the Borough Council designating a
replacement, and no other official other than the Tax Search Officer shall
make any official certificate of municipal lien searches.27
(4) Render opinions in writing or verbally upon any question of law
submitted to him by the Council or any member thereof with
respect to their official powers and duties, and perform such duties
as may be necessary to provide legal counsel to the Council and
Mayor in the administration of municipal affairs.
(5) Supervise and direct the work of such additional attorneys and
technical and professional assistants as the Council may authorize
for special or regular employment in or for the municipality.
B. The following duties of the Borough Attorney shall be covered by his
annual retainer:
(1) Attendance at all public and caucus meetings of the governing
body.
(2) Preparation of all resolutions.
(3) Preparation of all ordinances and amendments to ordinances,
except bonding ordinances and except those which, because of the
introduction of some new concept or for other reason, will require
extra service.
(4) Preparation of contracts which relate to the services and purchases
of municipal departments in the normal functions of the municipal
body.
(5) Rendering of legal opinions to and consulting with the Mayor and
Council and municipal department heads. Counsel would be
available for such consultations and legal opinions on all inquiries
by phone or by letter.
All other services shall be on a fee basis as authorized by the
Mayor and Council. All invoices for legal services shall by subject
to Council approval.
27.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 54:5-11.
§ 2-33 PARK RIDGE CODE § 2-35
1:24
§ 2-35. Fire Surgeon: appointment, duties.
A physician shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the consent of the
Borough Council, to be known as the "Fire Surgeon." He shall examine
all members of the Fire Department and all appointees to the Department
whenever required by the Fire Committee and shall report in writing the
results of such examinations, with his opinion as to the physical fitness
for fire work of the person examined. He shall be called whenever the
services of a physician are required by the Fire Department. Compensation
of the Fire Surgeon shall be fixed by the Borough Council. The Mayor may
also appoint, with the consent of the Borough Council, an alternate Fire
Surgeon.
§ 2-35.1. Police Physician: appointment, term, duties. [Amended
1-16-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-1]
A physician shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the consent of the
Borough Council, to be known as the "Police Physician." He shall examine
all members of the police force and appointees to the force whenever
required by the Police Committee, and shall report in writing the result
of such examinations, with his opinion as to the physical fitness for police
work of the person examined. He shall be called whenever the services
of a physician are required by the Police Department. The Mayor may
also appoint, with the consent of the Borough Council, an alternate Police
Physician.
§ 2-35.2. Borough Administrator. [Added 9-13-1976 by Ord. No.
76-19; amended 6-12-1984 by Ord. No. 84-5; 12-13-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-30; 11-10-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-23]
A. The position of part-time Borough Administrator of the Borough of Park
Ridge is hereby created, and employment of a qualified person for that
position is hereby authorized.
B. Method of appointment; term and qualifications.
(1) The Borough Administrator shall be appointed by the Mayor with
the advice and consent of the Council. The Borough Administrator's
employment shall be evidenced by a contract approved by the
Mayor and Council.
(2) The term of office of the Borough Administrator shall be at the
pleasure of the Mayor and Council.
(3) The Borough Administrator may be removed by a two-thirds vote of
the Mayor and Council, the resolution of removal to become
effective three months after its adoption. The Mayor and Council
may provide, however, that the resolution shall have immediate
effect, provided that there shall be paid to the Administrator
forthwith any unpaid balance of his/her salary and his/her salary
for the next three months following adoption of the resolution.
§ 2-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-35.2
1:25
(4) The Borough Administrator shall be appointed on the basis of
administrative qualifications, with special regard to education and
training in government affairs and experience therein. Members of
the Mayor and Council may not receive such appointment during
their term or within two years after the expiration of said term.
(5) The Borough Administrator shall be reviewed annually by the
Personnel Committee in November, and its performance evaluation
report shall be presented to the Mayor and Council and privately to
the Borough Administrator by the Council President.
C. Disability or absence. During any approved absence or disability of the
Borough Administrator, an officer or employee of the Borough may be
appointed by the Mayor and Council to temporarily perform the duties
and responsibilities of the position.
D. Compensation. The compensation of the Borough Administrator shall
be fixed by the Borough Council by appropriate ordinance.28
E. Duties and responsibilities.
(1) The Borough Administrator shall work with the administrative
team, which shall include the Borough Clerk, the CFO and the
Director of Operations.
(2) The Borough Administrator shall have the responsibility and
authority to perform the following duties as may be assigned to him
or her by the Mayor with the consent of the Borough Council:
(a) Serve as the chief administrative officer of the Borough.
(b) Attend all meetings of the Mayor and Council and other
boards, as required, with the right to participate in all
discussions, but without the right to vote.
(c) Advise the Mayor and Council on policy decisions.
(d) Execute all laws of the State of New Jersey and execute
ordinances and resolutions of the Borough.
(e) Recommend the appointment and/or removal of all employees
for whose selection and removal no other method is provided
by law.
(f) As instructed by the Council, negotiate contracts which are
subject to the approval of the Mayor and Council.
(g) Represent, or so direct the administrative team to represent,
the Borough, with the approval of the Mayor and Council, in its
relations with the federal government, state, county and other
28.Editor's Note: See Art. VII, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 2-35.2 PARK RIDGE CODE § 2-35.2
1:26
municipalities and assess the Borough's interest in contracts,
franchises and other business transactions.
(h) Investigate the affairs of any officer, employee or department
at the request of the Mayor and Council or the Board of Public
Works, as appropriate, and report thereon.
(i) Working with the residents of the Borough, ensure that all
resident inquiries or complaints are properly followed up by
the appropriate Borough Department.
(j) Work with the Borough Clerk, CFO and Director of Operations
to establish and maintain effective personnel practices and
maintain appropriate records of all employees, including the
development of a systematic review of employee performance.
(k) Carry out, or so direct the administrative team to carry out, all
policies established by the Mayor and Council.
(l) Oversee and disseminate information to the Mayor and
Council.
(m) Working with the CFO, prepare the annual and capital budgets,
in consultation with department heads, and submit them to the
Mayor and Council at a date in accordance with procedures
established by the Council.
(n) Working with the Mayor and Council, CFO, Borough Clerk and
Director of Operations, annually establish the priority of
capital projects needed in the Borough, research the projects
and budget the necessary funding to adequately and
realistically complete the projects in a prudent and expedient
time frame.
(o) Working with the Borough Clerk, receive copies of all reports
and documents required by the Mayor and Council of all
Borough department heads, officers, employees, committees,
commissions, authorities and/or contractors/vendors.
(p) Working with the Director of Operations, the CFO and the
Borough Clerk, develop procedures for the purchase and
distribution of materials, supplies and equipment.
(q) Serve as one of the Borough's purchasing agents. In such
capacity, the Borough Administrator shall purchase, in
accordance with the provisions of the governing statutes and
generally accepted purchasing practices, all supplies and
equipment for the various agencies, boards, departments and
other offices of the Borough.
(r) Delegate to such individuals, officers or departments as may be
appropriate, as he or she may deem necessary for the efficient
administration of the Borough.
§ 2-35.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-35.2
1:27
§ 2-35.3. Municipal Disaster Control Director. [Added 10-14-1980
by Ord. No. 80-14]
A Municipal Disaster Control Director shall be appointed by the Mayor from
among the residents of the Borough. The term of office of the Municipal
Disaster Control Director shall be for three years from the first day of
January in the year in which he or she was appointed.29
§ 2-35.4. Rate Counsel. [Added 4-11-1989 by Ord. No. 89-7]
(s) Keep the Mayor and Council informed as to federal aid projects
and state aid projects and any other aid programs or grants
that the Borough may qualify for.
(t) Perform such other duties as may be required by ordinance,
resolution or direction of the Borough Council.
(u) Work with the Director of Operations and Board of Public
Works with respect to the financial, personnel, administrative
and office operations of the Electric Utility Department and
Water Utility Department. The Borough Administrator shall
report to the Mayor and Council on all other matters.
F. Consistence with law. Nothing herein shall derogate from or authorize
the Borough Administrator to exercise the powers and duties of elected
officials of the Borough and of the boards and agencies thereof
established pursuant to law.
A. It is ordained and established that the position of Rate Counsel be
created within the Borough of Park Ridge.
B. The position of Rate Counsel shall be for a period of one year and shall
be held by an attorney licensed to practice law in the State of New
Jersey. The attorney shall be appointed by the Mayor and Council of the
Borough of Park Ridge only upon the recommendation of the Personnel
Committee of the Board of Public Works. The compensation for the Rate
Counsel shall be paid from the annual budget of the Department of
Public Works and Public Utilities.
C. The Rate Counsel so appointed need not be a resident of the Borough of
Park Ridge.
D. The duties of Rate Counsel shall include giving legal counsel,
representation, advice and opinions where required by the Board of
Public Works as to any issue directly or indirectly affecting the Board,
the establishment, continuance and creation of electric or water rates
in the Borough of Park Ridge, management of the Department of Public
Works and Public Utilities and any other related issues referred to Rate
Counsel by the Board.
29.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. App. 9-40.1.
§ 2-35.2 PARK RIDGE CODE § 2-35.5
1:28
§ 2-35.5. Rate Engineer. [Added 4-11-1989 by Ord. No. 89-8]
§ 2-35.6. Chief Financial Officer. [Added 4-11-1989 by Ord. No.
89-9]
A. It is ordained and established that the position of Rate Engineer be
created within the Borough of Park Ridge.
B. The position of Rate Engineer shall be for a period of one year and shall
be held by a licensed engineer of the State of New Jersey. The engineer
shall be appointed by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Park
Ridge only upon the recommendation of the Personnel Committee of the
Board of Public Works and Public Utilities. The compensation for the
Rate Engineer shall be paid from the annual budget of the Department
of Public Works and Public Utilities.
C. The Rate Engineer so appointed needs not be a resident of the Borough
of Park Ridge.
D. The duties of the Rate Engineer shall include giving advice and other
services where required by the Board of Public Works as to any issue
directly or indirectly affecting the Board, the establishment,
continuance and creation of electric or water rates in the Borough of
Park Ridge, management of the Department of Public Works and Public
Utilities, water and electric system requirements and design and other
related issues referred to the Rate Engineer by the Board.
A. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.10, the Mayor and Council of the
Borough of Park Ridge hereby create the position known as "Chief
Financial Officer."
B. The Chief Financial Officer as created by this section shall have all of
the responsibilities as so designated by state statute, N.J.S.A.
40A:9-140.1 et seq.
C. The Chief Financial Officer shall be certified as a financial officer by
receiving from the Division of Local Government Services a Municipal
Finance Officer certificate representing that the person is qualified for
that certificate pursuant to law.
D. The Chief Financial Officer shall be compensated in accordance with
this chapter of the Code of the Borough of Park Ridge.
E. The Chief Financial Officer who has received the certificate shall ensure
that the certificate is continually in full force and effect, and he shall not
let the certificate lapse.
F. The Treasurer, appointed pursuant to Article II, § 2-25, of the Borough
of Park Ridge Administrative Code, shall be the Chief Financial Officer
of the Borough of Park Ridge, provided that the Treasurer qualifies in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.1 et seq.
§ 2-35.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-35.6
1:29
§ 2-36. Other appointive officers.
There shall be such other appointive officers as the Council may deem
necessary. Such other positions shall be established by ordinance, and such
officer shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of
the Council. Terms shall be one year and until their successors have been
appointed and qualified.30
§ 2-36.1. Duties of the Board of Public Works. [Added 4-9-1991 by
Ord. No. 91-10]
G. The Chief Financial Officer may be removed for failure to qualify as a
Chief Financial Officer and for all other reasons provided by law.
A. The Board of Public Works, as established by this article, shall have the
duties vested in it by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Park
Ridge pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:A-60-7. The Board is specifically vested
with the power to provide for the proper maintenance and operation of
the water, electric, public works and sanitary sewer system owned or
operated by the Borough of Park Ridge and to employ such professional
advisors in the manner set forth in this article. All laws now in force or
in any way applicable to the rights, privileges and duties vested in or
imposed upon the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Park Ridge are
hereby continued in full force and made applicable to the Board of
Public Works. The Board is further vested with the authority to examine
the water and electric rates to become effective upon approval of the
Mayor and Council and changes in water rates to become effective upon
approval by the Board of Public Utilities of the State of New Jersey after
approval of the Mayor and Council. The Board shall submit to the Mayor
and Council, in conjunction with any proposed utility rate change,
written explanations which set forth the reasons necessary for the rate
change to be made.
B. From time to time, the Board shall recommend to the Mayor and
Council increases in water or electrical rates to be charged to the users
of these utilities. These recommendations shall be in writing, with a
written explanation why the rate changes are necessary, and shall be
the recommendation of 2/3 of the membership of the Board of Public
Works. The Mayor and Council shall, upon receipt of these
recommendations, adopt an ordinance which shall be the legislation
necessary to create any rate changes as proposed by the Board of
Public Works, unless 2/3 of the authorized membership of the governing
body refuses to adopt such an ordinance.
C. Sale or lease of public utility systems. [Added 12-27-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011-037]
(1) In the event that the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Park
Ridge adopt an ordinance to either lease or sell the public water
30.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:9-156.
§ 2-35.6 PARK RIDGE CODE § 2-36.1
1:30
§ 2-36.2. Personnel Committee. [Added 4-9-1991 by Ord. No. 91-10]
utility and/or electric utility system public utility system(s), the
approval of such action shall be subject to a public referendum
approved by a majority of the legal voters voting in such election in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:62-3 et seq.
(2) In the event that the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Park
Ridge adopt an ordinance to either lease or sell its public utility
system(s) in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:62-3 et seq., and same is
subsequently approved by a majority of the legal voters voting in a
public referendum to be held at the next general election, then in
such event, a majority vote of the members of the Council then
present at such meeting shall be required to dissolve the Park
Ridge Board of Public Works. This shall be the only method to
dissolve the Park Ridge Board of Public Works.
A. The Board of Public Works and Public Utilities is specifically authorized
to create a Personnel Committee, which shall consist of three members.
Two members of the Personnel Committee shall be members of the
Board, designated by the Board, and the third member shall be the
Council liaison to the Board of Public Works. It shall be the sole function
of this Personnel Committee to recommend to the Mayor and Council
the hiring of personnel. The Personnel Committee is specifically
charged with the responsibility to recommend to the Mayor and Council
by the reorganization date of the Mayor and Council each year or within
two weeks thereof a recommendation for the hiring of a rate counsel
and a rate engineer.
B. Upon receipt of the recommendation of the Personnel Committee as to
the hiring of rate counsel and a rate engineer, the Mayor and Council
shall appoint the person or persons recommended by the Personnel
Committee forthwith upon the terms and conditions recommended by
the Personnel Committee. The Personnel Committee shall certify to the
Mayor and Council that there is or will be sufficient budget funds
available to pay for these professionals.
C. The Personnel Committee shall forward to the Mayor and Council its
recommendations for replacement of personnel whose positions were
approved as part of the annual budget in the year a vacancy in that
position occurred. Upon receipt of the recommendations of the
Personnel Committee for the hiring of a person to fill the vacancy in that
year, the Mayor and Council shall appoint the person or persons
recommended, upon the terms and conditions recommended by the
Personnel Committee, to fill the budgeted vacant position.
§ 2-36.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-36.2
1:31

ARTICLE V
Departments, Boards and Commissions
§ 2-37. Enumeration; establishment; organization; powers and
duties; compensation. [Amended 10-14-1980 by Ord. No. 80-14]
The following departments, boards, commissions, committees, bureaus and
organizations have been established and are hereby continued or are
hereby established in the Borough of Park Ridge. Compensation, if any, of
the various personnel on such entities shall be set from time to time by
ordinance or resolution of the Council.
A. Department of General Government. A Department of General
Government is hereby established, which shall include the following:
(1) Office of the Mayor and Borough Council.
(2) Office of the Borough Administrator.
(3) Office of the Municipal Clerk.
(4) Office of the Tax Collector-Treasurer.
(5) Office of the Tax Assessor.
(6) Municipal Court. The organization, composition and other
provisions related to the Municipal Court are as set forth in
Chapter 8, Pascack Joint Municipal Court, of the Code of the
Borough of Park Ridge.
(7) Recreation and Cultural Committee. [Amended 12-23-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-14]
(a) Name. The Committee shall be entitled the "Park Ridge
Recreation and Cultural Committee."
(b) Purpose. It is the purpose of the Park Ridge Recreation and
Cultural Committee to establish recreational and cultural
programs for the benefit of the citizens of the Borough of Park
Ridge. It is the direction of the Mayor and Council to this
Committee that the programs so created shall be designed to
be of greatest interest to the greatest number of individuals, to
be performed, held or operated on Borough facilities or
Borough properties and at minimal or no cost to the citizens.
The Mayor and Council further direct that this Committee
create diverse programs which recognize all portions of the
population of the Borough and the particular heritage of any
group and the historical significance of the municipality.
(c) Organization. There shall be a Park Ridge Recreation and
Cultural Committee consisting of no more than 30 members.
Each member shall have an annual term and shall be appointed
by the Mayor of the Borough of Park Ridge at the
§ 2-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-37
1:33
reorganization meeting of the Mayor and Council in January of
each year.
(d) Officers. The Park Ridge Recreation and Cultural Committee
shall, at the first regularly scheduled meeting each year, elect
from among its membership the following officers:
[1] Chairperson.
[2] Vice Chairperson.
[3] Recording/Corresponding Secretary.
[4] Treasurer.
(e) Meetings. The Park Ridge Recreation and Cultural Committee
shall meet at least nine times each year, and times and places
of these meetings shall be established by the members of the
Committee and posted on the bulletin board in the Borough of
Park Ridge on a regular basis.
(f) Duties of the Chairperson. The Chairperson shall be the
presiding officer who shall preside over the orderly business of
the committee at each meeting. A quorum of 33.3% of the
membership shall be required to call a meeting to order. The
Chairperson may call special meetings at the request of five
members on 48 hours' notice to all membership.
(g) Standing committees. The Committee shall establish
subcommittees in all areas of cultural or recreational
significance and/or represent ongoing events in the
municipality, including but not limited to alumni football,
concerts, publicity, egg hunt, Halloween, movies, ski trips,
theater, sporting events, picnics, tennis, tree lighting, physical
fitness, day camp and any other subcommittees which the
committee may feel should be created to administer a
particular event. Non-Committee members may be appointed
by the Committee to oversee and/or participate on
subcommittees and/or events.
(h) Reporting to the governing body. The Park Ridge Recreation
and Cultural Committee shall submit an annual report to the
Mayor and Council in February of each year for the preceding
year which will set forth in detail the activities of the
Committee and proposed activities of the Committee. The
Committee shall respond to requests for information for
budget and other planning purposes by administrative officials
of the Borough of Park Ridge.
(i) Membership. All members are expected to participate and
attend a minimum of three meetings of the committee and
participate in a minimum of three events. All persons who seek
§ 2-37 PARK RIDGE CODE § 2-37
1:34
to be (re)appointed may be recommended for (re)appointment
to the Mayor by the Committee.
(j) Voting. All issues shall be decided by a vote of the members
attending a given meeting with a simple majority of those
voting being needed for passage. No monetary expenditures in
excess of $100 shall be made without the approval of the
Committee. All purchases shall be made in accordance with
Chapter 6, Claims Approval and Payment, of the Borough
Code.
(8) Board of Health. (N.J.S.A. 26:3-6) A Board of Health has been
established and is hereby continued in the Borough of Park Ridge.
The organization, composition and other provisions related to this
Board are as set forth in Chapter 17, Health, Board of, of the Code
of the Borough of Park Ridge.
(9) Senior Citizens Advisory Committee. As provided by a resolution of
the governing body on April 9, 1979, a seven-member Senior
Citizens Advisory Committee has been established and is hereby
continued in the Borough of Park Ridge. Members shall be
nominated annually by the Mayor and appointed with the advice
and consent of the Council.
B. Department of Land Use. A Department of Land Use is hereby
established in the Borough of Park Ridge, which Department shall
include the following:
(1) Zoning Board of Adjustment. (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69 et seq.) The
organization, composition and other provisions related to this
Board are as set forth in Article II of Chapter 74, Land Use
Procedures, of the Code of the Borough of Park Ridge.
(2) Planning Board. (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23 et seq.) The organization,
composition and other provisions covering this Board are as set
forth in Article I of Chapter 74, Land Use Procedures, of the Code
of the Borough of Park Ridge.
(3) Construction Code Office. (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.) The
organization, composition and other provisions covering this office
are as set forth in Chapter 50, Construction Codes, Uniform, of the
Code of the Borough of Park Ridge.
(4) Office of the Administrative Clerk, Zoning and Planning. An Office
of the Administrative Clerk, Zoning and Planning is hereby
established in the Borough of Park Ridge. The Office shall consist of
the Administrative Clerk, Zoning and Planning and the Zoning
Officer. It shall provide administrative assistance to the Zoning and
Planning Boards and to the Construction Code Office. Further, the
Zoning Officer shall be the enforcement official for Chapter 55,
Dwellings, Appearance of,31 Chapter 64, Garbage, Rubbish and
Trash, Chapter 69, House Numbering, Chapter 84, Soil Removal,
§ 2-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-37
1:35
Chapter 86, Streets and Sidewalks, and Chapter 101, Zoning, of the
Code of the Borough of Park Ridge, and shall cause summonses to
be issued for violations thereof.
C. Police Department.
(1) A Police Department has been established and is hereby continued
in the Borough of Park Ridge. The organization, composition and
other provisions related to the Department are as set forth in
Chapter 26, Police Department, of the Code of the Borough of Park
Ridge.
(2) A Police Reserve Unit has been established and is hereby continued
with the Police Department of the Borough of Park Ridge. The Chief
of Police shall designate a liaison to the Police Reserve Unit. Said
liaison shall be a sworn member of the Police Department. The
officers of the Police Reserve shall consist of a Chief, a Captain and
sufficient lieutenants and sergeants to adequately supervise and
direct the unit. Said officers shall be elected to three-year terms at
the December meeting by the active members of the Police Reserve
Unit. All officers shall hold office until their successors are elected
and approved with the advice and consent of the Mayor and
Council. [Amended 11-9-1994 by Ord. No. 94-17]
(3) A Junior Police Reserve has been established and is hereby
continued as an auxiliary to the Police Reserve Unit. The
organization, composition and other provisions related to the
Junior Police Reserves are as set forth in Article XII of Chapter 26,
Police Department, of the Code of the Borough of Park Ridge.
D. Fire Department. A Fire Department has been established and is hereby
continued in the Borough of Park Ridge. The organization, composition
and other provisions related to the Department are as set forth in
Chapter 14, Fire Department, of the Code of the Borough of Park Ridge.
E. Bureau of Fire Prevention. A Bureau of Fire Prevention has been
established and is hereby continued in the Borough of Park Ridge. The
organization, composition and other provisions related to this Bureau
are as set forth in Chapter 60, Fire Prevention, of the Code of the
Borough of Park Ridge.
F. Drug Advisory Committee. A Drug Advisory Committee has been
established and is hereby continued in the Borough of Park Ridge. The
organization, composition and other provisions related to this
Committee are as set forth in Chapter 11, Drug Advisory Committee, of
the Code of the Borough of Park Ridge.32
31.Editor's Note: Chapter 55 was repealed 11-12-1985 by Ord. No. 85-17. See also Chapter
80, Property Maintenance.
32.Editor's Note: Former Chapter 11, Drug Advisory Committee, was repealed 5-12-1992 by
Ord. No. 92-14.
§ 2-37 PARK RIDGE CODE § 2-37
1:36
G. Library Board of Trustees. (N.J.S.A. 40:54-9 et seq.) A Library Board of
Trustees has been established and is hereby continued in the Borough
of Park Ridge pursuant of N.J.S.A. 40:54-9 et seq. The Board of Trustees
shall be composed of seven members. One of the members shall be the
Mayor, one shall be the Superintendent of Schools and five shall be
citizens to be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of
the Council. At least four of the citizen members shall be residents of
the Borough of Park Ridge. The citizen members of the Board shall be
appointed for five-year terms. The Mayor and the Superintendent of
Schools, respectively, may appoint an alternate to act in his or her place
and stead, with authority to attend all meetings of the Board and, in his
or her absence, to vote on all questions before the Board. The powers
and duties of the Library Board of Trustees shall be as prescribed in
N.J.S.A. 40:54-9 et seq.
H. Municipal Pool Commission. A Municipal Pool Commission has been
established and is hereby continued in the Borough of Park Ridge. The
organization, composition and other provisions related to this
Commission are as set forth in Chapter 28, Pool Commission,
Municipal, of the Code of the Borough of Park Ridge.
I. Youth Guidance Council. (N.J.S.A 9:22-1 et seq.) A Youth Guidance
Council has been established and is hereby continued in the Borough of
Park Ridge. The organization, composition and other provisions related
to this Council are as set forth in N.J.S.A. 9:22-1 et seq.
J. Public Buildings and Grounds Department. A Public Building and
Grounds Department has been established and is hereby continued in
the Borough of Park Ridge. The Department shall be responsible for the
maintenance and repair of municipal buildings, including but not
limited to the Borough Hall, Library and pistol range.
K. Roads and Parks Department. A Roads and Parks Department is hereby
established in the Borough of Park Ridge. The Department shall be
responsible for the maintenance of public streets, avenues, sidewalks,
parks and grounds and of the equipment relating thereto and such
other public areas as lawfully may be assigned. [Amended 6-12-1984
by Ord. No. 84-5]
L. Sewer Department. A Sewer Department has been established and is
hereby continued in the Borough of Park Ridge. The Department shall
be responsible for the maintenance of the Borough sanitary sewer
system at the direction of the Supervisor of Water Distribution and
Sewer Maintenance. [Amended 6-12-1984 by Ord. No. 84-5]
M. Board of Public Works. (N.J.S.A. 40:89-1 et seq.) A Board of Public
Works has been established and is hereby continued in the Borough of
Park Ridge. The organization, composition and provisions related to the
Board are as set forth in Chapter 29, Public Works, Board of, of the
Code of the Borough of Park Ridge.
§ 2-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-37
1:37
N. Electric Utility Department. An Electric Utility Department has been
established and is hereby continued in the Borough of Park Ridge. The
Department shall be responsible for the maintenance, repair and
operation of the Borough electric distribution systems at the direction
of the Board of Public Works and the Superintendent of Electric
Distribution. [Amended 6-12-1984 by Ord. No. 84-5]
O. Water Utility Department. A Water Utility Department has been
established and is hereby continued in the Borough of Park Ridge. The
Department shall be responsible for the maintenance, repair and
operation of the Borough wells, storage, pumping and distribution
system at the direction of the Board of Public Works and
Superintendent of Electric Distribution. [Amended 6-12-1984 by
Ord. No. 84-5]
P. Department of Vehicle Maintenance. Department of Vehicle
Maintenance is hereby established in the Borough of Park Ridge. The
Department shall be responsible for the maintenance of all Borough
vehicles and related equipment and shall ensure that all such Borough
property is maintained in good working order. [Added 6-12-1984 by
Ord. No. 84-5]
Q. Tri-Borough Public Safety System. A Tri-Borough Public Safety System
has been established in the Boroughs of Montvale, Park Ridge and
Woodcliff Lake, and is hereby continued in the Borough of Park Ridge.
The system shall be responsible for the operation and maintenance of
the Tri-Borough radio room located within the Borough of Park Ridge.
[Added 6-12-1984 by Ord. No. 84-5]
§ 2-37 PARK RIDGE CODE § 2-37
1:38
ARTICLE VI
Civil Service
§ 2-38. Civil service classifications.
A. Pursuant to the adoption of the provisions of the Civil Service Act of the
State of New Jersey,33 the Mayor and Council have adopted an
ordinance creating civil service classifications for Borough employees
in accordance with specifications established by the New Jersey Civil
Service Commission.
B. A copy of the schedules containing the civil service classifications shall
be kept on file in the office of the Borough Clerk for examination and
inspection by the public.
C. Residency. [Added 1-27-1998 by Ord. No. 98-4]
(1) In accordance with the General Laws of the State of New Jersey
and the ordinances of the Borough of Park Ridge, all duly qualified
applicants for appointment to any classified position in the Borough
of Park Ridge shall be classified in the categories set forth below
and appointed in the order and manner specified therein:
[Amended 9-8-1998 by Ord. No. 98-14]
(a) Residents of the Borough of Park Ridge.
(b) Residents of the County of Bergen.
(c) Residents of contiguous New Jersey counties.
(d) Other residents of the State of New Jersey.
(e) All other qualified applicants.
(2) The residency status described herein is determined as of the
closing date of the application acceptance by the New Jersey
Division of Personnel pursuant to law.
33.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 11A:1-1 et seq.
§ 2-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-38
1:39

ARTICLE VII
Salaries and Compensation
§ 2-39. Annual salaries.
§ 2-40. Use of disbursing organization or services for payment of
claims. [Added 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-018]
A. The salaries and compensation of all officers and employees of the
Borough of Park Ridge shall be as set forth in the annual Salary
Ordinance.
B. A copy of the current Salary Ordinance shall be kept on file in the office
of the Borough Clerk for examination and inspection by the public.
A. Approval of the use of disbursing organization/servicer for payment of
claims. The use of a servicer for payment of payroll agency claims is
hereby authorized. The servicer shall be permitted to perform the
following tasks:
(1) Date of collection;
(2) Servicer report preparation;
(3) Calculation of withholding;
(4) Direct deposit of payroll disbursements; and
(5) Municipal transfer of funds to disbursing organization's account for
subsequent payment.
B. Approval officer.
(1) The Chief Financial Officer is hereby designated as the approval
officer responsible for authorizing and supervising activities of the
servicer/disbursing organization. [See N.J.S.A. 40A:5-17(a)(1)].
(2) The duties of the approval officer shall include the reconciliation
and analysis of all general ledger accounts affected by the activities
of the servicer/disbursing organization.
(3) The approval officer shall be authorized to enter into an agreement
with the disbursing organization/servicer that will allow holding of
funds pending transmittal of those funds to a payee. The disbursing
organization/servicer shall be authorized to hold the funds pending
transmittal to a payee.
C. Compliance with laws. The Borough specifically adopts, as if set forth at
length and verbatim, all requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:30-17.1 et seq.
§ 2-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-40
1:41
Chapter 6
CLAIMS APPROVAL AND PAYMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative organization — See Ch. 2.
§ 6-1. Purchase procedures designated. [Amended 3-10-1969 by
Ord. No. 69-3; 8-16-1976 by Ord. No. 76-18; 7-11-1977 by Ord. No.
77-20]
Any and all purchases to be made by the Borough of Park Ridge, or any
department thereof, which do not require sealed bids pursuant to statute
shall be in accordance with the method designated herein, as follows:
A. Approvals. All purchases in excess of $250 shall be made on requisition
and purchase order forms approved by the Borough Administrator and
Borough Treasurer. All purchase requisitions in excess of $250 must be
approved by the Borough Administrator, who will assign a purchase
order number, and by the Borough Treasurer, who shall verify that
sufficient funds exist in the departmental line item from which the
purchase is to be charged. In the case where the Borough Administrator
has determined to approve a purchase in an amount less than $500, a
voucher may be certified by the Chief Financial Officer with the
approval of the Borough Administrator and sent to the Borough
Treasurer for disbursement. All such payments shall require ratification
by the governing body in the month following payment. [Amended
7-8-1980 by Ord. No. 80-8; 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8;
11-9-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-35]
B. Requisition forms.
(1) Requisition forms are to be submitted by the appropriate
department head to the office of the Borough Administrator, setting
forth fully the materials to be purchased or services to be rendered,
including the unit price, the total cost, the preferred supplier and
the departmental account to be charged.
(2) In all cases, the purchasing of goods and services will conform to
the Local Public Contracts Law (N.J.S.A. 40A:11 et seq.).
C. Purchase order distribution. The vendor copy of the purchase order and
a voucher shall be forwarded to the vendor or supplier. The
commitment copy shall be forwarded to the Borough Treasurer to be
recorded as an encumbrance against the department. The purchasing
copy with the requisition form shall be retained in the office of the
Borough Administrator, and the department and receiving copies shall
be forwarded to the department head.
§ 2-40 PARK RIDGE CODE § 6-1
1:42
§ 6-2. Submission of voucher. [Amended 3-10-1969 by Ord. No.
69-3; 8-16-1976 by Ord. No. 76-18; 7-11-1977 by Ord. No. 77-20]
Any person, partnership, association or corporation claiming payment from
the Borough of Park Ridge shall present to the Borough Administrator a bill
of demand on a voucher form of the borough detailing goods or services
rendered, duly certified or supported by an affidavit of claimant, pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40A:5-16. All vouchers shall be submitted to the office of the
Borough Administrator not later than 12:00 noon on the Friday preceding
the first Monday of the month. Any voucher submitted after the deadline
shall be held for payment until the following month.
§ 6-3. Approval for payment. [Amended 7-8-1974 by Ord. No. 74-16;
8-16-1976 by Ord. No. 76-18; 7-11-1977 by Ord. No. 77-20;
11-9-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-35]
D. Receipt of goods or completion of services. Upon delivery of the goods
ordered or completion of the services rendered, the department head or
the departmental representative shall sign the vendor's invoice and
have said invoice attached to the receiving copy of the purchase order.
The department head shall sign the receiving copy and forward same to
the Borough Administrator to be attached to the properly executed
voucher from the vendor or supplier.
E. Voucher approval. By no later than 12:00 noon of the first Monday of
the month, the department head shall sign all vouchers to be paid in
that month.
A. All vouchers, after being signed by the head of each department, shall
be presented to the committee head and one additional member of the
Borough Council for payment approval. After such approval is given,
the vouchers shall be filed with the Borough Treasurer, who shall
present all claims for approval by the Borough Council at its next
regular meeting.
B. With respect to the payment of purchases for the Electric and Water
Department made by the Borough's Board of Public Works, all such
claims for payment shall be reviewed and certified by the Borough's
designated certifying and approval agent or alternate designated
certifying approval agent in the absence of the designated certifying
and approval agent, who shall have such authority as conferred under
N.J.S.A. 40A:5-17 and shall act in accordance with the procedures set
forth in within the chapter. The certifying and approval agent or
alternate designated certifying approval agent in the absence of the
designated certifying and approval agent shall immediately provide a
report to the Mayor and Council detailing the claims approved for
payment and disbursed and those claims not approved for payment.
[Amended 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-019]
§ 6-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-4
1:43
§ 6-4. Disapproved claims considered by Council. [Amended
3-10-1969 by Ord. No. 69-3; 8-16-1976 by Ord. No. 76-18; 7-11-1977
by Ord. No. 77-20]
Any claim disapproved by the Borough Administrator or the Finance
Chairman shall be voted upon by the members of the Borough Council and
may be approved by a majority vote.
§ 6-5. Presentation of claims to Council; approval by resolution.
[Amended 3-10-1969 by Ord. No. 69-3]
Claims shall be approved by the Borough Council, by resolution, allowing
a detailed list to be accepted and made a part of the minutes without the
necessity of reading each and every claim.
§ 6-6. Record of approved claims.
The Borough Clerk shall record all claims in the official minutes of the
Borough Council by inserting therein a copy of the resolution approving said
claims and a list of those claims approved.
§ 6-7. Approval noted on claims. [Amended 7-11-1977 by Ord. No.
77-20]
The Borough Treasurer shall indicate on each said claim that it has been
approved for payment, with the date of approval noted on the claim.
§ 6-8. Preparing checks for payment. [Amended 7-11-1977 by Ord.
No. 77-20]
§ 6-9. Payrolls and payroll deductions. [Amended 7-11-1977 by Ord.
No. 77-20]
A. The Borough Treasurer's office shall forthwith prepare the necessary
checks for the payment of approved claims. Said checks shall be signed
by the Mayor and countersigned by the Borough Clerk and the Borough
Treasurer and, upon completion of such, shall be forwarded by the
Borough Treasurer to the claimants.
B. The Borough Treasurer shall record said payments in the approved
books and/or ledgers and shall prepare a monthly summary of
expenditures and encumbrances by department and by categories of
expense within each department.
A. All payroll payments shall be made in accordance with the approved
Salary Ordinance of the Borough of Park Ridge34 from time cards which
have been approved by the department heads.
B. The Borough Treasurer shall be responsible for all matters related to
employee and Borough contributions to the pension systems.
34.Editor's Note: see Ch. 2, Article VII.
§ 6-4 PARK RIDGE CODE § 6-10
1:44
§ 6-10. Reimbursements. [Amended 8-13-1973]
The Mayor and Council may, by resolution, provide for and authorize
payment of advances to officers and employees of the borough towards their
expenses for authorized travel and expenses incident thereto. Any such
resolution shall provide for the verification and adjustment of such expenses
and advances and the repayment of excesses advanced, by means of a
detailed bill of items or demand and the certifications or affidavit required
by N.J.S.A. 40A:5-16, which shall be submitted within 10 days after the
completion of the travel for which an advance was made.
Chapter 8
PASCACK JOINT MUNICIPAL COURT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative organization — See Ch. 2.
§ 8-1. Court established.
A. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1, there is hereby created a joint municipal
court composed of the Borough of Park Ridge and the Boroughs of
Woodcliff Lake and Montvale (collectively, the "municipalities") all
located in Bergen County, New Jersey, to be known as the "Pascack Joint
Municipal Court."
B. The Pascack Joint Municipal Court will be governed by a shared
services agreement among the aforesaid municipalities and is subject
to the terms thereof which will embody the provisions of this chapter.
C. Montvale shall provide the Joint Court facilities, personnel, and
resources at the Montvale Municipal Building located at 12 Mercedes
Drive, Montvale, and all Joint Court sessions shall be held at the
Montvale location.
(1) Joint Court facilities will include the courtroom, office(s) and
storage space for court administration, judge's chamber,
prosecutor's office, and archive storage.
(2) Joint Court personnel will include a Judge, Prosecutor, Public
Defender, Court Administrator and Court staff, as well as standard
security personnel.
(3) Joint Court resources will include, but not be limited to, stateprovided
computer hardware and software, audio-visual
equipment, appropriate municipal court forms, and manual and
electronic payment processing.
§ 6-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-1
1:45
§ 8-2. Effective date and duration.
The effective date for the creation of the Pascack Joint Municipal Court
shall be the later of April 1, 2011, or the date of approval by the State of
New Jersey Administrative Office of Courts and the Assignment Judge of
the Superior Court of New Jersey, Bergen County. The Court shall remain in
effect until December 31, 2018, unless subsequently extended or renewed
by the municipalities.
§ 8-3. Jurisdiction.
The jurisdiction of the Pascack Joint Municipal Court shall be coextensive
with the territory of the Boroughs of Park Ridge, Woodcliff Lake and
Montvale.
§ 8-4. Joint Court Advisory Committee.
D. The Joint Court operations shall be managed by Montvale as a "joint
court" pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1b, using one set of books and one
court calendar.
E. The municipalities will each receive and retain all net revenues
generated by all cases on their respective court dockets as is currently
provided and in accordance with applicable statutes.
A. A Joint Court Advisory Committee (herein referred to as the "Advisory
Committee") is created and shall consist of two Council members from
each municipality together with the respective Borough Administrators
of the municipalities. The Mayors of the municipalities shall be ex
officio members of the Advisory Committee. The Advisory Committee
shall periodically meet as may be necessary to ensure that all of the
obligations under this agreement are being satisfied.
(1) Each municipality shall have one vote regardless of the number of
Advisory Committee representatives appointed.
(2) The Advisory Committee shall meet at such times and places as
deemed necessary, but in no event less than annually, and shall be
responsible for raising and addressing questions or concerns
related to Joint Court operations and long-term planning. A
meeting of the Advisory Committee may be called by the Joint
Court Judge or by any two municipalities.
(3) The Advisory Committee shall review the qualifications of all Court
professionals being considered for appointment to the Joint Court.
The Court professionals shall be recommended by the majority vote
of the Advisory Committee.
B. Each municipality shall annually notify the other municipalities of the
name(s) of its Advisory Committee representatives and identify their
representative with primary voting responsibility and their alternate
§ 8-1 PARK RIDGE CODE § 8-4
1:46
§ 8-5. Assignment of responsibilities.
voting member, no later than 15 days after its respective municipal
reorganization meeting.
C. All Advisory Committee actions must be approved by a simple majority
of the voting members, except as otherwise provided.
D. Initial Joint Court Administration personnel shall be selected by the
Advisory Committee from among the current court staff of the
municipalities. Thereafter, responsibility for hiring, administration,
oversight, and discipline of all Joint Court Administration personnel
shall be the sole responsibility of Montvale, except as otherwise
provided by law. Montvale shall be responsible for payment of the
salary, wages, and any associated benefits provided to these employees,
subject to contribution as set forth in this chapter. The services of these
employees will be made available to the municipalities, as needed.
A. Responsibilities of Montvale.
(1) Montvale shall act as the lead agency in the delivery of Joint Court
facilities, personnel, and resources.
(2) The law enforcement officers of Montvale shall coordinate their
court calendar requirements with the Joint Court, which shall hold
regular court sessions as determined by the Judge.
(3) Montvale shall coordinate the Joint Court calendar for case
hearings with the supported municipalities. Wherever practical,
case hearings requiring prisoner transport for each municipality
will be held together in order to minimize demands on the local
police forces.
(4) Judge and other professional personnel.
(a) Montvale shall discontinue the use of its current professionals
upon commencement of the Joint Court and shall appoint and/
or employ the professionals selected by the Advisory
Committee.
(b) Montvale shall be responsible for payment of the salary, wages,
and any associated benefits that may be provided to these
Court professionals for the term of the agreement, subject to
contribution as set forth in this chapter.
(c) The services of all appointed Court professionals will be made
available to all municipalities per the joint court calendar.
(5) Montvale shall provide standard courtroom security for all Court
sessions. Prisoner transport shall be the responsibility of the
municipality requiring such prisoner transport. Extraordinary
security measures requiring additional security personnel shall be
§ 8-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-5
1:47
§ 8-6. Appointment of Municipal Court Judge; powers, duties and
qualifications.
determined by the Judge. The cost of providing extraordinary
security will be shared equally by the municipalities.
(6) Montvale will be responsible for arranging the repairs,
maintenance, or replacement of any damaged or unusable
facilities, furniture and/or resources in the Joint Court facilities and
the public municipal hall. Montvale and the supported
municipalities will share equally the cost of all such repairs,
maintenance and replacement. It is understood and agreed that the
Joint Court is responsible for a pro rata share of repairs,
maintenance and/or replacement of facilities, furniture and
resources that are utilized by the Joint Court and other entities in
Montvale, such as the Planning Board and governing body, and that
the Joint Court's pro rata share of such costs are properly
attributable to the Joint Court for purposes of this agreement.
B. Responsibilities of Park Ridge and Woodcliff Lake.
(1) The municipalities of Park Ridge and Woodcliff Lake shall be
deemed the "supported municipalities" under the terms of this
chapter.
(2) The law enforcement officers of the supported municipalities shall
coordinate their court calendar requirements with the Court
Administrator of the Joint Court.
(3) Each municipality shall retain the right to hire its own Court
professionals if desired, as provided by the New Jersey Statues,
under separately negotiated employment contracts and at its sole
cost.
(4) The supported municipalities shall discontinue use of their current
Court Administration personnel upon commencement of the Joint
Court and shall appoint and/or employ the Court Administration
employees selected by the Advisory Committee.
(5) The supported municipalities shall provide for their own prisoner
transport.
A. There shall be one joint Municipal Court Judge. Pursuant to Article VI,
Section VI of the New Jersey Constitution, the Judge of the Joint Court
shall be nominated and appointed by the Governor, with the advice and
consent of the Senate. Any and all recommendations made to the
Governor for such nomination and appointment shall be made by the
Advisory Committee in consultation with the Vicinage Assignment
Judge. During any vacancy in the office of Judge of the Joint Court, the
Acting Judge shall be appointed by the Vicinage Assignment Judge, in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 2B:12-6.
§ 8-5 PARK RIDGE CODE § 8-6
1:48
§ 8-7. Municipal Court Prosecutor.
There shall be one Prosecutor of the Municipal Court who shall prosecute
all cases in the Municipal Court. The Prosecutor shall be appointed for
a one-year term by the Advisory Committee and the municipalities in
accordance with the procedures set forth in this chapter. The compensation
of the Prosecutor shall be determined by the Advisory Committee, and
such compensation shall be allocated and billed to each municipality as
set forth herein. Additionally, there shall be one Alternate Prosecutor of
the Municipal Court who shall be utilized in the event of conflicts or
unavailability of the Prosecutor. The appointment and compensation of the
Alternate Prosecutor shall be made in the same manner as the appointment
of the Prosecutor.
§ 8-8. Public Defender.
There shall be one Public Defender of the Municipal Court who shall
represent those defendants assigned by the Municipal Court Judge. The
Public Defender shall be appointed for a one-year term by the Advisory
Committee and the municipalities in accordance with the procedures set
forth in this chapter. The compensation of the Public Defender shall be
determined by the Advisory Committee and such compensation shall be
allocated and billed to each municipality as set forth herein. Additionally,
there shall be one Alternate Public Defender of the Municipal Court who
shall be utilized in the event of conflicts or unavailability of the Public
Defender. The appointment and compensation of the Alternate Public
Defender shall be made in the same manner as the appointment of the
Prosecutor.
B. The Municipal Court Judge shall have and possess the qualifications
and shall have, possess and exercise all the functions, duties, powers
and jurisdiction conferred by law or ordinance. The Judge shall be an
attorney at law of the State of New Jersey. Whenever the Municipal
Court Judge is unable to sit as such, he/she may designate any other
judge of any municipal court to sit for him/her temporarily and hold the
Municipal Court. Any such judge shall possess all of the powers of the
Municipal Court Judge.
C. The Municipal Court Judge shall faithfully carry out all of the duties and
responsibilities of a municipal court judge and shall abide by all rules
and regulations established for municipal courts and municipal court
judges by the Administrative Office of the Courts.
D. The Municipal Court Judge shall have full management authority or
judicial operations of the Court. Administrative operations shall be
under the control of the Advisory Committee to the extent permitted by
law and authorized by agreement of the municipalities.
E. The compensation of the Municipal Court Judge shall be determined by
the Advisory Committee and such compensation shall be allocated and
billed to each municipality as set forth herein.
§ 8-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-9
1:49
§ 8-9. Municipal Court Administrator.
§ 8-10. Deputy Municipal Court Administrator.
There may be one or more Deputy Court Administrators of the Municipal
Court who shall be appointed in accordance with the procedures set forth
in § 8-4, provided that funds are provided for such purpose in the Municipal
Court budget. Deputy Municipal Court Administrators shall perform the
functions assigned to them by the Municipal Court Judge and the
Administrator. The compensation of the Deputy Administrator shall be
determined by the Advisory Committee and such compensation shall be
allocated and billed to each municipality as set forth herein.
A. There shall be an Administrator of the Municipal Court who shall
perform the functions and duties prescribed for the Administrator by
law, by the rules applicable to municipal courts and by the Municipal
Court Judge. The Administrator shall be appointed in accordance with
the procedures set forth in this chapter. The compensation of the
Administrator shall be determined by the Advisory Committee and such
compensation shall be allocated and billed to each Municipality as set
forth herein. The Administrator's duties shall include, but not be limited
to:
(1) Carrying out the rules, regulations, policies and procedures
relating to the operations of the Municipal Court.
(2) Interviewing and speaking to persons wishing to file criminal
complaints or quasi-criminal complaints or wishing information in
this regard.
(3) Receiving complaints and dispensing information relating to
Municipal Court matters.
(4) Maintaining the financial records of the Municipal Court, including
receiving and accounting for fines and costs.
(5) Attending Municipal Court; recording pleas, judgments and
dispositions; arranging trial calendars; signing Municipal Court
documents; preparing and issuing warrants and commitments and
other Municipal Court-related documents.
(6) Maintaining and classifying records and files of the Municipal
Court;
(7) Maintaining, forwarding, receiving and reporting such records,
reports and files as required by the appropriate agencies.
(8) Carrying out such additional duties as may be required in order to
fulfill the duties of Administrator.
§ 8-9 PARK RIDGE CODE § 8-11
1:50
§ 8-11. Necessary clerical and other assistance.
There may be appointed such other necessary clerical and other assistant
staff for the Municipal Court as is necessary for the efficient operation of the
Municipal Court, who shall be appointed in accordance with the procedures
set forth in this chapter for administrative personnel. The compensation of
these employees shall be determined by the Advisory Committee and such
compensation shall be allocated and billed to each municipality as set forth
herein.
§ 8-12. Withdrawal by municipality.
A municipality may withdraw from participation in the Joint Municipal Court
by delivering written notice to the Joint Court and all municipalities of
its intentions to withdraw no less than one full year prior to the date of
withdrawal. All withdrawals shall be effective January 1, no earlier than one
full year subsequent to the date of notice of withdrawal. Withdrawal of one
or more municipalities from the Joint Court shall not preclude the other
municipalities from forming or continuing a joint municipal court on terms
acceptable to them.
§ 8-13. Additional Joint Court members.
Montvale may solicit other municipalities to the Joint Court. In the event
that a contract with an additional municipality is pending or contemplated,
Montvale will present the anticipated impacts on staffing and operating
expenses to the Advisory Committee and recommend adjustments to the
annual base fee associated with providing Joint Court facilities, personnel,
and resources, as appropriate. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any
amendment to include an additional municipality shall require approval by
all municipalities as required by law and the agreement authorized by this
chapter.
§ 8-14. Budget and accounting.
A. The Administrator shall prepare or have prepared a budget for the
Municipal Court which shall be submitted to the governing body of each
municipality no later than October 1 of each year. The budget shall set
forth an estimate of all expenses and projected revenues for the
upcoming calendar year and shall be in a form that is consistent with
municipal budgets. By November 15 of each year, the Advisory
Committee members shall adopt a budget in accordance with the
procedures set forth in this chapter. If a budget and appointments are
not approved by that date, then one or more meetings shall be held
among the Advisory Committee, the Administrator and the Municipal
Court Judge until such time as a budget and appointments agreeable to
all members are agreed upon by December 31. Any irreconcilable
differences shall be decided by the Vicinage Assignment Judge.
B. Accounting records for the expenses associated with Joint Court
operations will be maintained by Montvale and shall be available for
§ 8-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-14
1:51
§ 8-15. Insurance.
inspection by municipalities upon request. Review of actual expenses
associated with the delivery of Joint Court services will be done at least
annually by the Advisory Committee.
C. Full accounting records of each calendar year's Joint Court operations
will be available no later than the statutory municipal audit filing date
of June 30 of the following year.
A. Each of the supported municipalities will keep in force, at their
respective sole expenses, comprehensive general liability insurance
with insurance companies licensed in the State of New Jersey or with
the Bergen County Municipal Joint Insurance Fund, which insurance
shall be evidenced by certificates and/or polices as determined by
Montvale.
B. Each of the supported municipalities shall respectively provide this
comprehensive general liability insurance with a combined single limit
of $1,000,000/$3,000,000 aggregate for bodily injury and property
damage. A "claims made" policy is not acceptable. This insurance shall
indicate on the certificate of insurance the following coverages:
(1) Operations.
(2) Use of independent contractors and/or subcontractors.
(3) Products and completed operations.
(4) Broad form contractual.
(5) Broad form property endorsement.
C. Each certificate or policy shall require that a thirty-day notice shall be
given to Montvale by registered mail, return receipt requested, if any
policy or any individual coverage is altered or cancelled. All such
notices shall name the municipality and identify the agreement or
municipal contract number if applicable.
D. Certificates of insurance shall be delivered to the Borough of Montvale,
prior to the commencement of the agreement authorized by this
chapter, and all certificates of insurance shall name "the Borough of
Montvale, its officers, employees and agents" as additional insured
thereon.
E. The insurance required under this section shall protect each of the
supported municipalities and all subcontractors respectively, against
damage claims which may arise from operations under this chapter
whether such operations are by the insured or by anyone directly or
indirectly employed by the supported municipalities and also against
any of the special hazards which may be encountered in the
performance of the Joint Court agreement authorized by this chapter.
§ 8-14 PARK RIDGE CODE § 8-15
1:52
§ 8-16. Contribution and revenue distribution.
F. All policies and certificates of insurance shall be approved by each of
the municipalities prior to the inception of any work done under the
Joint Court agreement authorized by this chapter.
A. Contribution.
(1) The supported municipalities shall each pay a percentage of the
total costs incurred annually for the use of the Joint Court facilities,
personnel, and resources ("operational costs"). This percentage
will be equal to the ratio of court revenue realized by each
municipality to total court revenue for all municipalities. The
Advisory Committee shall review the cost allocator percentage on
an annual basis. The percentage used to allocate responsibility for
operational costs shall not be revised more than once per year.
(2) Each supported municipality shall pay its share of the operational
costs quarterly, no later than the 15th day of April, July, October,
and January, directly to the Borough of Montvale. This payment
entitles each of the supported municipalities to the full use of the
Joint Court facilities, personnel, and resources.
(3) The municipalities recognize that Montvale will incur some capital
costs and implementation expenses associated with the
establishment of the Joint Court, including those specifically and
uniquely required by the State of New Jersey Administrative Office
of Courts and the Assignment Judge of the Superior Court of New
Jersey, Bergen County. Proposed capital costs and implementation
expenses will be reviewed by the Advisory Committee and, if
deemed reasonable by a majority of the Advisory Committee, will
be apportioned equally among each of the municipalities to this
agreement for payment. The supported municipalities each agree
to pay Montvale their equal share of capital costs and
implementation expenses within 60 days after submission of the bill
and invoice.
(4) Municipal checks for payment shall be made out to the Borough of
Montvale, reference the invoice number on the memo line, and be
returned to the Municipal Treasurer, Borough of Montvale, 12
Mercedes Drive, Montvale, New Jersey 07645.
B. Revenue.
(1) All municipal revenue accounts will be reconciled on or before the
15th day of each month per New Jersey Court Rule 7:14-4,
Financial Control. Supporting financial data by municipality from
the Joint Court information system will be used to establish the
accurate amounts to be transferred to each party to the Joint Court
agreement.
§ 8-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-16
1:53
§ 8-17. Payment dispute.
As provided in the Uniform Shared Services and Consolidation Act, P.L.
2007, c.63 (N.J.S.A. 40a:65-1 et seq.), in the event of any dispute as to the
amount to be paid under the terms of the Joint Court agreement, the full
amount shall be paid without prejudice to the disputing parties. If through
subsequent negotiation, litigation, or settlement, the amount due shall be
determined, agreed to, or adjudicated to be less than was actually so paid,
Montvale shall promptly pay the excess owed.
§ 8-18. Authorization for shared services agreement.
The governing body of the Borough of Park Ridge is hereby authorized to
enter into a shared services agreement embodying the provisions of this
chapter pursuant to the Uniform Shared Services and Consolidation Act,
N.J.S.A. 40A:65-1 et seq. (the "Act") in accordance with the terms thereof.
In the event of a discrepancy between this chapter and the Uniform Shared
Services and Consolidation Act and any amendments thereto, the Act shall
take precedence.
Chapter 10
DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 23.
§ 10-1. Defense of civil actions. [Amended 6-10-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-09]
Whenever any civil proceeding has been brought against any official or
employee of the Borough for any action or omission within the scope of
the performance of the duties of such office, position or employment, the
Borough, including penalties arising from the employee's or official's
specialized licensing, upon request, will defray all costs of defending such
action, including reasonable counsel fees and expenses, together with costs
of appeal, if any. The official or employee will be indemnified for all such
(2) Checks for monthly revenue will be made out to the municipalities
within three business days of municipal revenue account
reconciliation and mailed to the appropriate municipal building
address.
(3) Municipality income accounting will be done monthly to track and
report on the monthly revenue transfer from Joint Court to each
municipality; and a quarterly municipal income summary will be
generated showing all income by municipality by month and for the
quarter.
§ 8-16 PARK RIDGE CODE § 10-1
1:54
costs of defense resulting from the official's or employee's civil violation
of state or federal law if, in the opinion of the governing body, the acts
committed by the official or employee upon which the claims are based
did not constitute actual fraud, actual malice, willful misconduct or an
intentional wrong.
§ 10-2. Payment of claims. [Amended 6-10-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-09]
§ 10-3. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply retroactively to any and all causes of action
accruing prior to this date, including any pending causes of action.
§ 10-4. Compliance.
Every employee or official, in order to make a request for indemnification as
provided in this chapter, shall establish to the best of his or her abilities that
he or she has followed all required procedures and practices in the Borough
and, where applicable, has followed any legal opinion, court decisions,
civil service directives or other laws and regulations in the performance
of his or her duties which gave rise to the claim which is the basis for
the indemnification. The Mayor and Council may deny any request for
indemnification if it finds that the official or employee has not complied with
this section.
§ 10-5. Scope.
No official or employee shall be indemnified for failure to comply with
the Local Public Contracts Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq., or the Local
Government Ethics Law, N.J.S.A 40A:9-22 et seq.
A. The Borough will indemnify and save harmless each official or employee
from financial loss resulting from any action described above in this
section, including claims, losses, expenses, judgment, attorney's fees,
court costs and expert or technical witness fees, and any amount paid in
settlement thereof and actually and reasonably incurred in connection
therewith to the extent reasonably incurred in connection therewith to
the extent permitted by law. Expenses thus incurred may be paid in
advance of final disposition of the action.
B. In addition to the foregoing, the official or employee will be indemnified
for exemplary or punitive damages resulting from the official's or
employee's civil violation of state or federal law if, in the opinion of the
governing body, the acts committed by the official or employee upon
which such damages are based did not constitute actual fraud, actual
malice, willful misconduct or an intentional wrong.
§ 10-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-5
1:55
Chapter 11
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 11, Drug Advisory Committee, adopted 11-9-1970 by
Ord. No. 70-20, was repealed 5-12-1992 by Ord. No. 92-14.]
Chapter 12
DRUG AND ALCOHOL POLICY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 40.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 77A.
Tobacco — See Ch. 123.
§ 12-1. Statement of policy.
The Mayor and Council approves and adopts the following regulations
regarding alcohol, narcotic drugs and/or other controlled dangerous
substances:
A. No alcoholic beverages, narcotic drugs and/or other controlled
dangerous substances shall be brought onto, consumed, distributed,
dispensed or manufactured within the confines of any of the Borough's
municipal buildings, including its parks and recreational facilities.
B. The consumption and/or use of alcoholic beverages, narcotic drugs or
any other controlled dangerous substances by any employee of the
Borough during either regular or overtime hours and lunch hours is
strictly forbidden if said person carries a weapon or operates a motor
vehicle or machinery as part of their duties.
C. No alcoholic beverages, narcotic drugs and/or other controlled
dangerous substances shall be carried, transported or consumed within
any vehicle or truck or on any equipment under the jurisdiction of the
Borough.
D. The operation and/or maintenance of any vehicles and/or equipment by
any employee who may be under the influence of alcohol, narcotic
drugs and/or other controlled dangerous substances to any degree
whatsoever is expressly forbidden. This prohibition covers any
employee who may report to work in an intoxicated fashion or is found
to be under the influence of narcotic drugs and/or any other controlled
dangerous substances. The operation and use of vehicles and
equipment includes but shall not be limited to any automobiles, trucks
of whatever size or character, snowplow and spreader equipment, chain
saws, power tools, lawn mowers, recycling equipment and any other
§ 10-5 PARK RIDGE CODE § 12-1
1:56
§ 12-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICANT — Any individual tentatively selected:
EMPLOYEE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM (EAP) — The Borough of Park Ridge
based counseling program that offers assessment, short-term counseling
and referral services to employees for a wide range of drug, alcohol and
mental health problems and monitors the progress of employees while in
treatment.
equipment used and operated by the Department of Public Works or
Police Department.
E. Nature and type of drug testing to be instituted. The Borough of Park
Ridge plan includes the following types of drug testing:
(1) Applicant testing.
(2) Random testing of those employees in sensitive positions that have
been designated as "testing designated positions."
(3) Reasonable suspicion testing.
(4) Accident or unsafe practice testing.
(5) Voluntary testing.
(6) Testing as part of or as a follow-up to counseling or rehabilitation.
F. Drugs for which individuals are tested. The Borough of Park Ridge will
test for the following drugs: marijuana, cocaine, amphetamines, opiates
and phencyclidine (PCP), as well as alcohol.
G. Scope. This chapter shall be effective immediately for all Borough of
Park Ridge employees.
H. Union cooperation. The active participation and support of labor
organizations can contribute to the success of this program. The Mayor
and Council will seek ways in which recognized bargaining unit
representatives might assist in program implementation, such as in
acquainting employees with rehabilitation facilities and be enhancing
employee confidence in the program. The Mayor and Council will
continue to observe agreements already reached and will include union
representatives in general orientation programs.
A. For employment with the Borough of Park Ridge; or
For a testing designated position and who has not, immediately prior to
the selection, been subject to random testing.
B.
§ 12-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-2
1:57
EMPLOYEES ASSISTANCE PROGRAM ADMINISTRATOR — The individual
designated by the Mayor and Council to be responsible for ensuring the
development, implementation and review of the Borough EAP.
MEDICAL REVIEW OFFICER — The individual responsible for receiving
laboratory results generated from the Borough of Park Ridge Drug-Free
Workplace Program who is a licensed physician with knowledge of
substance abuse disorders and the appropriate medical training to interpret
and evaluate all positive test results together with an individual's medical
history and any other relevant biomedical information.
ILLEGAL DRUGS — A controlled substance included in Schedule I or II,
as defined by Section 802(6) of Title 21 of the Unites States Code, the
possession of which is unlawful under Chapter 13 of that Title. The term
"illegal drugs" does not mean the use of a controlled substance pursuant to
a valid prescription or other uses authorized by law. For the purposes of this
chapter, illegal drugs shall include alcohol.
RANDOM TESTING — A system of drug testing imposed without
individualized suspicion that a particular individual is using illegal drugs
and may either be:
EMPLOYEES IN SENSITIVE POSITIONS —
SUPERVISOR — An employee having authority to hire, direct, assign,
promote, reward, transfer, furlough, lay off, recall, suspend, discipline or
remove other employees, to adjust their grievances or to effectively
recommend such action, if the exercise of the authority is not merely routine
or clerical in nature but requires the consistent exercise of independent
judgment. [5 U.S.C. § 7103(a)(10)]
Uniform unannounced testing of designated testing employees
occupying a specified area, element or position; or
A.
A statistically random sampling of such employees based on a neutral
criterion, such as social security numbers.
B.
Employees in positions designated by the Mayor and Council as "special
sensitive," "critical sensitive" or "noncritical sensitive" under Chapter
7631 of the Federal Personnel Manual or employees in positions
designated by the Mayor and Council as "sensitive" in accordance with
Executive Order No. 10450, as amended.
A.
Employees granted access to classified information or who may be
granted access to classified information pursuant to a determination of
trustworthiness by the Mayor and Council under Section 4 of Executive
Order No. 12356.
B.
C. Law enforcement officers.
Other positions that the Mayor and Council determines involve law
enforcement, the protection of life and property, public health or safety
or other functions requiring a high degree of trust and confidence.
D.
§ 12-2 PARK RIDGE CODE § 12-2
1:58
TESTING DESIGNATED POSITIONS (TDPS) — Employment positions
within the Borough of Park Ridge which have been designated for random
testing under the definition of "random testing" of this chapter.
VERIFIED POSITIVE TEST RESULT — A test result that was positive on
an initial FDA approved immunoassay test, confirmed by a gas
chromatography/mass spectrometry assay (or other confirmatory tests
approved by the Department of Health and Human Services) and reviewed
and verified by the Medical Review Officer in accordance with this plan and
the Mandatory Guidelines for Federal Workplace Drug Testing Programs.
§ 12-3. Employee Assistance Program.
A. Function. The Borough of Park Ridge's EAP plays an important role in
preventing and resolving employee alcohol and drug use by
demonstrating the Borough's commitment to eliminating alcohol and
illegal drug use; providing employees an opportunity, with appropriate
assistance, to discontinue their alcohol or drug use; providing
educational materials to supervisors and employees on drug use issues;
assisting supervisors in confronting employees who have performance
and/or conduct problems and making referrals to appropriate
treatment and rehabilitative facilities; and following up with individuals
during the rehabilitation period to track their progress and encourage
successful completion of the program. The EAP, however, shall not be
involved in the collection of urine samples or the initial reporting of test
results. Specifically, the EAP shall:
(1) Provide counseling and assistance to employees who self-refer for
treatment or whose alcohol or drug tests have been verified
positive and monitor employees' progress through treatment and
rehabilitation.
(2) Provide needed education and training to all levels of the Borough
on types and effects of alcohol and drugs, symptoms of drug use
and its impact on performance and conduct, relationship of the EAP
to drug testing and related treatment, rehabilitation and
confidentiality issues.
(3) Ensure that confidentiality of test results and related medical
treatment and rehabilitation records is maintained in accordance
with this chapter.
B. Referral and availability. Any employee found to be using alcohol or
drugs shall be referred to the EAP. The EAP shall be administered
separately from the testing program and shall be available to all
employees without regard to a finding of drug use. The EAP shall
provide counseling or rehabilitation for all referrals, as well as
education and training regarding alcohol and illegal drug use. The EAP
is available not only to Borough employees but, when feasible, to the
families of employees with drug problems and to employees with family
members who have drug problems. In the event that the employee is
§ 12-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-3
1:59
§ 12-4. Supervisory training.
not satisfied with the program of treatment or rehabilitation, such
employee may seek review prior to completion of the program. The
decision of the EAP Administrator shall be final and shall not be subject
to further administrative review. Regardless of the treatment program
chosen, the employee remains responsible for successful completion of
the treatment, and assertions that the counselor failed to consider one
or more of the factors and policies expressed in this chapter and in
§ 12-6C(5) in making a referral shall not constitute either an excuse for
continuing to use illegal drugs or a defense to disciplinary action if the
employee does not complete treatment.
C. Leave allowance. Employees shall be allowed up to one hour (or more
as necessitated by travel time) of excused absence for each counseling
session, up to a maximum of four hours, during the assessment/referral
phase of rehabilitation. Absences during duty hours for rehabilitation
treatment must be charged to the appropriate leave category in
accordance with law and leave regulations.
D. Record and confidentiality. All EAP operations shall be confidential in
accordance with § 12-14 of this plan relating to records and
confidentiality.
E. Structure. The Personnel Administrator shall be responsible for
oversight and implementation of the Borough EAP and will provide,
with the support of the Mayor and Council, high-level direction and
promotion of the EAP.
A. Objectives. As supervisors have a key role in establishing and
monitoring an alcohol and drug-free workplace, the Borough of Park
Ridge shall provide training to assist supervisors in recognizing and
addressing illegal drug use by Borough employees. The purpose of
supervisory training is to understand:
(1) Agency policies relevant to work performance problems, alcohol or
drug use and the Borough EAP.
(2) The responsibilities of offering EAP services.
(3) How employee performance and behavioral changes should be
recognized and documented.
(4) The roles of the Medical Review Officer, medical staff, supervisors,
personnel and the EAP personnel.
(5) The ways to use the Borough EAP.
(6) How the EAP is linked to the performance appraisal and the
disciplinary process.
(7) The process of reintegrating employees into the workplace.
§ 12-3 PARK RIDGE CODE § 12-4
1:60
§ 12-5. Employee education.
B. Implementation. The Personnel Administrator shall be responsible for
implementing supervisory training and shall develop a training package
to ensure that all employees and supervisors are fully informed of the
Borough's Alcohol and Drug-Free Workplace Plan.
C. Training package. Supervisory training shall be required of all
supervisors and may be presented as a separate course or be included
as part of an ongoing supervisory training program. Training shall be
provided as soon as possible after a person assumes supervisory
responsibility. Training courses should include:
(1) Overall agency policy.
(2) The prevalence of various employee problems with respect to drugs
and alcohol.
(3) The EAP approach to handling problems, including the supervisors
role and relationship to the EAP.
(4) How to recognize employees with possible problems.
(5) Documentation of employee performance or behavior.
(6) Skills in confronting employees with possible problems.
(7) Agency procedures for referring employees to the EAP.
(8) Disciplinary action and removals from sensitive positions as
required by Section 5(c) of the Executive Order.
(9) Reintegration of employees into the workforce.
(10)Written materials which the supervisor can use at the work site.
A. Objectives. The EAP Administrator shall offer alcohol and drug
education to all Borough employees. During education should include
education and training to all levels of the Borough of Park Ridge on:
(1) Types and effects of drugs.
(2) Symptoms of alcohol and drug use and the effects on performance
and conduct.
(3) The relationship of the EAP to drug testing.
(4) Other relevant treatment, rehabilitation and confidentiality issues.
B. Means of education. The means of education shall be as follows:
(1) Distribution of written materials.
(2) Videotapes.
§ 12-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-5
1:61
§ 12-6. Special duties and responsibilities; implementation.
(3) Lunchtime employee forums.
(4) Employee alcohol and drug awareness days.
A. Alcohol and Drug Program Coordinator. The Borough of Park Ridge
shall have an Alcohol and Drug Program Coordinator assigned to carry
out the purposes of this plan. The Alcohol and Drug Program
Coordinator shall be responsible for implementing, directing,
administering and managing the alcohol and drug program within the
Borough. The Alcohol and Drug Program Coordinator shall serve as the
principal contact with the laboratory and for collection activities in
assuring the effective preparation of the testing portion of the program.
In carrying out his or her responsibilities, the Alcohol and Drug
Program Coordinator shall, among other duties:
(1) Arrange for all testing authorized under this order.
(2) Ensure that all employees subject to random testing receive
individual notice as described in § 12-7B of this plan prior to
implementation of the program and that such employees return a
signed acknowledgment of receipt form.
(3) Document, through written inspection reports, all results of
laboratory inspections conducted.
(4) Coordinate with and report to the Mayor and Council on Alcohol
and Drug Program Coordinator activities and findings that may
affect the reliability or accuracy of laboratory results.
(5) In coordination with the EAP Administrator, publicize and
disseminate drug program educational materials and oversee
training and education sessions regarding drug use and
rehabilitation.
(6) Coordinate all Alcohol and Drug Program Coordinator duties in
field offices, wherever possible, to conserve resources and to
efficiently and speedily accomplish reliable and accurate testing
objectives.
B. Employee Assistance Program Administrator. The EAP Coordinator
shall:
(1) Implement and operate the EAP within the Borough component
assigned to the coordinator.
(2) Provide counseling and treatment services to all employees
referred to the EAP by their supervisors or on self-referral and
otherwise offer employees the opportunity for counseling and
rehabilitation.
§ 12-5 PARK RIDGE CODE § 12-6
1:62
(3) Coordinate with the Mayor and Council, the Medical Review Officer
and supervisors, as appropriate.
(4) Work with the Alcohol and Drug Program Coordinator to provide
educational materials and training to managers, supervisors and
employees on illegal drugs in the workplace.
(5) Assist supervisors with performance and/or personnel problems
that may be related to illegal drug use.
(6) Monitor the progress of referred employees during and after the
rehabilitation period and provide feedback to supervisors in
accordance with CFR Part 2, Confidentiality of Alcohol and Drug
Abuse Patient Records.
(7) Ensure that the training is provided to assist supervisors in the
recognition and documentation of facts and circumstances that
support a reasonable suspicion that an employee may be using
illegal drugs.
(8) Maintain a list of rehabilitation or treatment organizations which
provide counseling and rehabilitative programs and include the
following information on each organization:
(a) Name, address and phone number.
(b) Types of services provided.
(c) Hours of operation, including emergency hours.
(d) The contact person's name and phone number.
(e) Fee structure, including insurance coverage.
(f) Client specialization.
(g) Other pertinent information.
(9) Periodically visit rehabilitative or treatment organizations to meet
administrative and staff members, tour the site and ascertain the
experience, certification and educational level of staff and the
organization's policy concerning progress reports on clients and
posttreatment follow-up.
C. Employee assistance counselors. The employee assistance counselors
shall:
(1) Serve as the initial point of contact for employees who ask or are
referred for counseling.
(2) Be familiar with all applicable law and regulations, including drug
treatment and rehabilitation insurance coverage available to
employees through the Federal Health Benefits Program.
§ 12-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-6
1:63
(3) Meet the qualifications as determined by the EAP Administrator
and be trained in counseling employees in the occupational setting
and in identifying drug use.
(4) Document and sign the treatment plan prescribed for all employees
referred for treatment, after obtaining the employee's signature on
this document.
(5) In making referrals, consider the:
(a) Nature and severity of the problem.
(b) Location of the treatment.
(c) Cost of the treatment.
(d) Intensity of the treatment environment.
(e) Availability of the inpatient/outpatient care.
(f) Other special needs, such as transportation and child care.
(g) The preferences of the employee.
D. Medical Review Officer. The Borough of Park Ridge shall have a Medical
Review Officer assigned to carry out the purposes of this order. The
Medical Review Officer shall, among other duties:
(1) Receive all laboratory test results.
(2) Assure that an individual who has tested positive has been afforded
an opportunity to discuss the test result.
(3) Consistent with confidentiality requirements, refer written
determinations regarding all verified positive test results to the
EAP Administrator, including a positive drug test result form
indicating that the positive result has been verified, together with
all the relevant documentation and a summary of findings.
(4) Confirm with the appropriate personnel official whether an
individual who has been tentatively selected for employment with
the Borough has obtained a verified positive test result.
(5) Coordinate with and report to the Mayor and Council on all
activities and findings on a regular basis.
E. Supervisors. Supervisors will be trained to recognize and address
alcohol and illegal drug use by employees and will be provided
information regarding referral of employees to the EAP, procedures and
requirements for drug testing and behavioral patterns that give rise to
a reasonable suspicion that an employee may be using illegal drugs.
Except as modified by the Mayor and Council to suit specific program
responsibilities, first-line supervisors shall:
§ 12-6 PARK RIDGE CODE § 12-6
1:64
§ 12-7. Notice; acknowledgment; relief.
(1) Attend training sessions on alcohol and illegal drug use in the
workplace.
(2) Initiate a drug test based on reasonable suspicion as described in
§ 12-10.
(3) Refer employees to the EAP for assistance in obtaining counseling
and rehabilitation upon a finding of illegal drug use.
(4) Initiate appropriate disciplinary action upon a finding of illegal
drug use.
(5) In conjunction with personnel specialists, assist higher level
supervisors and the EAP Administrator in evaluating employee
performance and/or personnel problems that may be related to
illegal drug use. A higher level supervisor shall review and concur,
in advance, with all tests ordered on the basis of a reasonable
suspicion in accordance with § 12-10.
F. Implementation. Each department shall implement the Drug-Free
Workplace Plan and ensure that the plan is efficiently and effectively
accomplished in accordance with this order and all other applicable
regulations.
G. Government contractors. Wherever existing facilities are inadequate to
implement this order, the Medical Review Officer shall ensure that
contract laboratories chosen to perform the drug screening tests are
duly certified according to Subpart C of the Mandatory Guidelines for
Federal Workplace Drug Testing Programs and that any other contracts
to implement this order conform to the technical specifications of the
Mandatory Guidelines.
A. A general notice from the Mayor and Council announcing the testing
program, as required by the Executive Order, Section 4(a), will be
provided to all employees no later than 60 days prior to the
implementation date of the plan outlining:
(1) The purpose of the Alcohol and Drug-Free Workplace Plan.
(2) That the plan will include both voluntary and mandatory testing.
(3) That those who hold positions selected for random testing will also
receive an individual notice, prior to the commencement of the
testing, indicating that their position has been designated a
"testing designated position."
(4) The availability and procedures necessary to obtain counseling and
rehabilitation through the EAP.
(5) The circumstances under which testing may occur.
§ 12-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-7
1:65
(6) That opportunity will be afforded to submit medical documentation
of lawful use of an otherwise illegal drug.
(7) That the laboratory assessment is a series of tests which are highly
accurate and reliable and that, as an added safeguard, laboratory
results are reviewed by the Medical Review Officer.
(8) That positive test results verified by the Medical Review Officer
may only be disclosed to the employee, the appropriate EAP
Administrator, the appropriate management officials necessary to
process an adverse action against the employee or a court of law or
administrative tribunal in any adverse personnel action.
(9) That all medical and rehabilitation records in an EAP will be
deemed confidential patient records and may not be disclosed
without the prior written consent of the patient and an authorizing
court order or otherwise as permitted by federal law implemented
at 42 CFR 2.
B. Individual notice. In addition to the information provided in the general
practice, an individual notice will be distributed to all employees in
testing designated positions explaining:
(1) That the employee's position has been designated a "testing
designated position."
(2) That the employee will have the opportunity to voluntarily admit to
being a user of illegal drugs and to receive counseling or
rehabilitation.
(3) That the employee's position will be subject to random testing no
sooner than 30 days following the notice.
C. Signed acknowledgment. Each employee in a testing designated
position shall be asked to acknowledge, in writing, that the employee
has received and read the notice which states that the employee's
position has been designated for random drug testing and that refusal
to submit to testing shall result in initiation of disciplinary action up to
and including dismissal. If the employee refuses to sign the
acknowledgment, the employee's supervisor shall note on the
acknowledgment form that the employee received the notice. This
acknowledgment, which is advisory only, shall be centrally collected for
easy retrieval by the supervisor. An employee's failure to sign the notice
shall not preclude testing of that employee or otherwise affect the
implementation of this order since the general sixty-day notice will
previously have notified all agency employees of the requirement to be
drug-free.
D. Administrative relief. If an employee believes his or her position has
been wrongly designated a "testing designated position," that employee
may file an administrative appeal to the Mayor and Council which has
authority to remove the employee from the testing designated position
§ 12-7 PARK RIDGE CODE § 12-7
1:66
§ 12-8. Finding of alcohol or drug use; disciplinary consequences.
list. The appeal must be submitted by the employee, in writing, to
the Mayor and Council within 15 days of notification setting forth all
relevant information. The Mayor and Council shall review the appeal
based upon the criteria applied in designating that employee's position
as a testing designated position.
A. Determination. An employee may be found to use alcohol or illegal
drugs on the basis of any appropriate evidence, including, but not
limited to:
(1) Direct observation.
(2) Evidence obtained from an arrest or criminal conviction.
(3) A verified positive test result.
(4) An employee's voluntary admission.
B. Mandatory Administrative Actions. The Borough of Park Ridge shall
refer an employee found to use alcohol or illegal drugs to the EAP and,
if the employee occupies a sensitive position, immediately remove the
employee from that position without regard to whether it is a testing
designated position. At the discretion of the Mayor and Council,
however, and as part of an EAP, an employee's return would not
endanger public health or safety or national security.
C. Range of consequences. Disciplinary action taken against an employee
found to use alcohol or illegal drugs may include the full range of
disciplinary actions, including removal. The severity of the action
chosen will depend on the circumstances of each case and will be
consistent with the Executive Order. The Borough of Park Ridge shall
initiate disciplinary action against any employee found to use illegal
drugs but shall not discipline an employee who voluntarily admits to
illegal drug use in accordance with § 12-8F of this chapter. Such
disciplinary action, consistent with the requirements of any governing
collective bargaining agreement and other ordinances and regulations,
may include any of the following measures, but some disciplinary
actions must be initiated:
(1) Reprimanding the employee, in writing.
(2) Placing the employee in an enforced leave status.
(3) Suspending the employee for 14 days or less.
(4) Suspending the employee for 15 days or more.
(5) Suspending the employee until the employee successfully
completes the EAP or until the Borough of Park Ridge determines
that action other than suspension is more appropriate.
§ 12-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-8
1:67
(6) Terminating the employee from employment.
D. Initiation of mandatory removal from service.
(1) The Borough of Park Ridge shall initiate action to remove an
employee for:
(a) Refusing to obtain counseling or rehabilitation through an EAP
as required by the Executive Order after having been found to
use illegal drugs.
(b) Not refraining from illegal drug use after a first finding of such
use.
(2) All letters to propose and decide on a separation action should be
worked out in consultation with the Personnel Administrator.
E. Refusal to take an alcohol or drug test when required. An employee who
refuses to be tested when so required will be subject to the full range of
disciplinary action, including dismissal. No applicant who refuses to be
tested shall be extended an offer of employment. Attempts to alter or
substitute the specimen provided will be deemed a refusal to take the
drug test when required.
F. Voluntary referral.
(1) Under Executive Order No. 12564, the Borough is required to
initiate action to discipline any employee found to use illegal drugs
in every circumstance, except that such discipline is not required
for an employee who:
(a) Voluntarily admits his or her drug use.
(b) Completes counseling or an EAP.
(c) Thereafter refrains from drug use.
(2) Because the order permits an agency to create a safe harbor for an
employee who meets all three of these conditions, the Borough has
decided to create such a safe harbor and will not initiate
disciplinary action against employees who satisfy the provisions of
this section.
(3) A fundamental purpose of the Borough of Park Ridge's Drug-Free
Workplace Plan is to assist employees who themselves are seeking
treatment for drug use. For this reason, the Borough of Park Ridge
will not initiate disciplinary action against any employee who meets
all three of these conditions:
(a) Voluntarily identifies himself/herself as a user of illegal drugs
prior to being identified by other means.
(b) Obtains counseling or rehabilitation through an EAP.
§ 12-8 PARK RIDGE CODE § 12-8
1:68
§ 12-9. Random testing.
(c) Thereafter refrains from using illegal drugs.
(4) This self-referral option allows any employee to step forward and
identify himself/herself as an illegal drug user for the purpose of
entering a drug treatment program under the EAP. In stepping
forward and consistent with § 12-8F, an employee may volunteer
for a drug test as a means of identification. Although this selfidentification
test may yield a verified positive test result, such
result shall not subject an employee to discipline assuming the
three safe harbor requirements are met.
(5) Since the key to this provision's rehabilitative effectiveness is an
employee's willingness to admit his or her problem, this provision is
not available to an employee who requests protection under this
provision after:
(a) Being asked to provide a urine sample in accordance with this
plan.
(b) Having been found to have used illegal drugs pursuant to this
chapter.
A. Sensitive positions designated for random testing. The Executive Order
requires random testing for employees in sensitive positions, subject to
Borough criteria. As specified in the definition of "employees in
sensitive positions" of this chapter, the Mayor and Council has
determined that some of these sensitive positions are testing
designated positions subject to random testing. The position titles
designated for random drug testing are listed in the definition of
"employees in sensitive positions," along with the criteria and
procedures applied in designating such positions for drug testing,
including justification for such criteria and procedures.
B. Determining the testing designated position.
(1) Among the factors the Mayor and Council has considered in
designating a testing designated position is the extent to which the
Borough of Park Ridge has positions which:
(a) Authorize employees to carry firearms.
(b) Give employees access to sensitive information.
(c) Authorize employees to engage in law enforcement.
(d) Require employees to engage in activities affecting public
health or safety.
(2) These positions are characterized by critical safety or security
responsibilities. The job functions associated with the positions
protect life and property or law enforcement. These positions are
§ 12-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-9
1:69
§ 12-10. Reasonable suspicion testing.
identified for random testing because they require the highest
degree of trust and confidence. The Mayor and Council reserves
the right to add or delete positions determined to be testing
designated positions pursuant to the criteria established in the
Executive Order and this plan. Moreover, the Mayor and Council
has determined, pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 290ee-1(b)(2)(B), that all
positions which have been or will be designated as testing
designated positions under this plan are sensitive positions and are
therefore exempted from coverage under 42 U.S.C. § 290ee-1(b).
C. Implementing random testing.
(1) In implementing the program of random testing the Drug Program
Coordinator shall:
(a) Ensure that the means of random selection remains
confidential.
(b) Evaluate periodically whether the numbers of employees
tested and the frequency with which those tests will be
administered satisfy the Borough of Park Ridge's duty to
achieve a drug-free work force.
(2) The number of sensitive employees occupying testing designated
positions and the frequency with which random tests will be
administered are specified in the definition of "employees in
sensitive positions."
D. Notification of selection. An individual selected for random testing and
the individual's first-line supervisor shall be notified the same day the
test is scheduled, preferably within two hours of the scheduled testing.
The supervisor shall explain to the employee that the employee is under
no suspicion of taking drugs and that the employee's name was selected
randomly.
E. Deferral of testing.
(1) An employee selected for random drug testing may obtain a
deferral of testing if the employee's first-line and higher level
supervisors concur that a compelling need necessitates a deferral
on the grounds that the employee is:
(a) In a leave status (sick, administrative or leave without pay).
(b) In official travel status away from the test site or is about to
embark on official travel scheduled prior to testing notification.
(2) An employee whose random drug test is deferred will be subject to
an unannounced test within the following 60 days.
A. Grounds.
§ 12-9 PARK RIDGE CODE § 12-10
1:70
§ 12-11. Applicant testing.
(1) Reasonable suspicion testing may be based upon, among other
things:
(a) Observable phenomena, such as direct observation of drug use
or possession and/or the physical symptoms of being under the
influence of a drug;
(b) A pattern of abnormal conduct or erratic behavior;
(c) Arrest or conviction for a drug-related offense or the
identification of an employee as the focus of a criminal
investigation into illegal drug possession, use or trafficking;
(d) Information provided either by reliable and credible sources or
independently corroborated; or
(e) Newly discovered evidence that the employee has tampered
with a previous drug test.
(2) Although reasonable suspicion testing does not require certainty,
mere hunches are not sufficient to meet this standard.
B. Procedures. If an employee is suspected of using illegal drugs, the
appropriate supervisor will gather all information, facts and
circumstances leading to and supporting this suspicion and report the
same to that supervisor's immediate supervisor. When high-level
concurrence of a reasonable suspicion determination has been made,
the appropriate supervisor will promptly prepare a written report
detailing the circumstances which formed the basis to warrant the
testing. This report should include the appropriate dates and times of
reported drug-related incidents, reliable/credible sources of
information, rationale leading to the test and the action taken.
C. Obtaining the sample. The employee may be asked to provide the urine
sample under observation in accordance with this chapter.
D. Supervisory training. In accordance with § 12-4, supervisors will be
trained to address illegal drug use by employees, to recognize facts that
give rise to reasonable suspicion and to document facts and
circumstances to support a finding of reasonable suspicion. Failure to
receive such training, however, shall not invalidate otherwise proper
reasonable suspicion testing.
A. Objectives. To maintain the high professional standards of the Borough
of Park Ridge work force, it is imperative that individuals who use
illegal drugs be screened out during the initial employment process
before they are placed on the employment rolls of the Borough. This
procedure will have a positive effect on reducing instances of illegal
drug use by employees working within the Borough of Park Ridge and
§ 12-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-11
1:71
§ 12-12. Additional types of drug testing.
will provide for a safer working environment; for these reasons, drug
testing shall be required of all applicants as defined in this chapter.
B. Vacancy announcements.
(1) Every vacancy announcement for positions designated for
applicant testing shall state:
"All applicants tentatively selected for this position will be
required to submit to urinalysis to screen for illegal drug use prior
to appointment."
(2) In addition, each applicant will be notified that appointment to the
position will be contingent upon a negative drug test result. Failure
of the vacancy announcement to contain this statement notice will
not preclude applicant testing if advance written notice is provided
applicants in some other manner.
C. Procedures. The Alcohol and Drug Program Coordinator shall direct
applicants to an appropriate collection facility. The drug test must be
undertaken as soon after notification as possible and no later than 48
hours after notice to the applicant. Where appropriate, applicants may
be reimbursed for reasonable travel expenses. Applicants shall be
advised of the opportunity to submit medical documentation that may
support a legitimate use for a specific drug and that such information
will be reviewed only by the Medical Review Officer to determine
whether the individual is licitly using an otherwise illegal drug.
D. Personnel officials. Upon notification that an individual has been
tentatively selected for employment with the Borough of Park Ridge,
the Personnel Administrator shall assure, after consultation with the
Medical Review Officer, that a drug test has been conducted on that
individual and determine whether the test result is a verified positive
result.
E. Consequences. The Borough of Park Ridge will decline to extend a final
offer of employment to any applicant with a verified positive test result,
and such applicant may not reapply to the Borough of Park Ridge for a
period of six months. The Personnel Administrator working on the
applicant's certificate shall be directed to object to the applicant on the
basis of failure to pass the physical, a lack of personal characteristics
necessary to relate to public employment or failure to support the goals
of the Borough of Park Ridge. The Borough of Park Ridge shall inform
such applicant that a confirmed presence of an illegal drug in the
applicant's urine precludes the Borough of Park Ridge from hiring the
applicant.
A. Accident or unsafe practice testing. The Borough of Park Ridge is
committed to providing a safe and secure work environment.
Employees involved in on-the-job accidents or who engage in unsafe on-
§ 12-11 PARK RIDGE CODE § 12-12
1:72
§ 12-13. Test procedures.
duty job-related activities that pose a danger to others or the overall
operation of the Borough of Park Ridge may be subject to testing. Based
on the circumstances of the accident or unsafe act, the department
head may initiate testing when such circumstances involve:
(1) Death or personal injury requiring immediate hospitalization; or
(2) Damage to government or private property in excess of $1,000.
B. Voluntary testing. In order to demonstrate their commitment to the
Borough of Park Ridge's goal of a drug-free workplace and to set an
example for other Borough employees, employees not in testing
designated positions may volunteer for unannounced random testing by
notifying the Drug Program Coordinator. These employees will then be
included in the pool of testing designated positions subject to random
testing and be subject to the same conditions and procedures.
Volunteers shall remain in the testing designated positions pool until
they withdraw from participation by notifying the Drug Program
Coordinator of such intent at least 48 hours prior to a scheduled test.
C. Follow-up testing. All employees referred through administrative
channels who undergo a counseling or rehabilitation program for illegal
drug use through the EAP will be subject to unannounced testing
following completion of such a program for a period of one year. Such
employees shall be tested at the frequency stipulated in the abeyance
contract or, in the alternative, at an increased frequency of once a
month. Such testing is distinct from testing which may be imposed as a
component of the EAP.
A. Mandatory Guidelines for Federal Workplace Drug Testing. The
Borough of Park Ridge shall adhere to the Mandatory Guidelines for
Federal Workplace Drug Testing Programs promulgated by the
Department of Health and Human Services consistent with the
authority granted by Executive Order No. 12564 and to the
requirements of Section 503 of the Act. The Borough of Park Ridge's
drug testing component shall have professionally trained collection
personnel, quality assurance requirements for urinalysis procedures
and strict confidentiality requirements.
B. Privacy assured. Any individual subject to testing under this plan shall
be permitted to provide urine specimens in private and in a rest room
stall or similar enclosure so that the employee is not observed while
providing the sample. Collection site personnel of the same gender as
the individual tested, however, may observe the individual provide the
urine specimen when such personnel have reason to believe the
individual may alter or substitute the specimen to be provided.
Collection site personnel may have reason to believe that a particular
individual may alter or substitute the specimen to be provided when:
§ 12-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-13
1:73
(1) The individual:
(a) Is being tested pursuant to § 12-10 relating to reasonable
suspicion testing;
(b) Has previously been found by the Borough of Park Ridge to be
an illegal drug user; or
(c) Has previously tampered with a sample; or
(2) Facts and circumstances suggest that the individual:
(a) Is an illegal drug user;
(b) Is under the influence of drugs at the time of the test; or
(c) Has equipment or implements capable of tampering with or
altering urine samples; or
(3) The specimen:
(a) Has a temperature outside the range of 32.5° C to 37.7° C/
90.5° F to 99.8° F; or
(b) Shows signs of contaminants.
C. Failure to appear for testing. Failure to appear for testing without
deferral will be considered refusal to participate in testing and will
subject an employee to the range of disciplinary actions, including
dismissal, and for an applicant to the cancellation of an offer of
employment. If an individual fails to appear at the collection site at the
assigned time, the collector shall contact the Drug Program
Coordinator to obtain guidance on action to be taken.
D. Opportunity to justify a positive test result.
(1) When a confirmed positive result has been returned by the
laboratory, the Medical Review Officer shall perform the duties set
forth in the Mandatory Guidelines. For example, the Medical
Review Officer may choose to conduct employee medical
interviews, review employee medical history or review any other
relevant biomedical factors. The Medical Review Officer must
review all medical records made available by the tested employee
when a confirmed positive test could have resulted from legally
prescribed medication. Evidence to justify a positive test result may
include but is not limited to:
(a) A valid prescription; or
(b) A verification from the individuals physician verifying a valid
prescription.
(2) Individuals are not entitled, however, to present evidence to the
Medical Review Officer in a trial-type administrative proceeding,
§ 12-13 PARK RIDGE CODE § 12-13
1:74
§ 12-14. Records and reports.
although the Medical Review Officer has the discretion to accept
evidence in any manner. If the Medical Review Officer determines
there is no justification for the positive result, such result will then
be considered a verified test result. The Medical Review Officer
shall immediately contact the EAP Administrator and appropriate
management official upon obtaining a verified positive test result.
E. Employee counseling and assistance. While participating in a
counseling or rehabilitation program and at the request of the program,
the employee may be exempted from the random testing designated
positions pool for a period not to exceed 60 days or for a time period
specified in an abeyance contract or rehabilitation plan approved by the
Mayor and Council. Upon completion of the program, the employee
immediately shall be subject to follow-up testing pursuant to this
chapter.
F. Savings clause. To the extent that any of the procedures specified in
this section are inconsistent with any of those specified in the
Mandatory Guidelines for Federal Workplace Drug Testing Programs
promulgated by the Department of Health and Human Services, or any
subsequent amendment thereto, such Mandatory Guidelines or
amendment shall supersede the procedures specified in this section,
but only to the extent of the inconsistency.
A. Confidentiality of test results.
(1) The laboratory may disclose laboratory test results only to the
Medical Review Officer or the staff of the Medical Review Officer.
Any positive test result which the Medical Review Officer justified
by acceptable and appropriate medical or scientific documentation
to account for the result as other than the intentional ingestion of
an illegal drug will be treated as a negative test result and may not
be released for purposes of identifying illegal drug use. Test results
will be protected under the provisions of the Privacy Act, 5 U.S.C.
§ 552a et seq. and Section 503(e) of the Act and may not be
released in violation of either act. The Medical Review Officer may
maintain only those records necessary for compliance with this
order. Any records of the Medical Review Officer, including drug
test results, may be released to any management official for
purposes of auditing the activities of the Medical Review Officer,
except that the disclosure of the results of any audit may not
include personal identifying information on any employee. In order
to comply with Section 503(e) of the Act, the results of a drug test
of a Borough employee may not be disclosed without the prior
written consent of such employee, unless the disclosure would be:
(a) To the Medical Review Officer;
§ 12-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-14
1:75
(b) To the EAP Administrator in which the employee is receiving
counseling or treatment or is otherwise participating;
(c) To any supervisory or management official within the Borough
of Park Ridge having authority to take adverse personnel
action against such employee; or
(d) Pursuant to the order of a court of competent jurisdiction or
where required by the United States government to defend
against any adverse personnel action.
(2) For purposes of this section, "management official" includes any
management, government, security or personnel official whose
duties necessitate review of the test results in order to process
adverse personnel action against the employee. In addition, test
results with all identifying information removed shall also be made
available to the Borough of Park Ridge personnel, including the
Drug Program Coordinator, for data collection and other activities
necessary to comply with Section 503(f1) of the Act.
B. Employee access to records.
(1) Any employee who is the subject of a drug test shall, upon written
request, have access to any records relating to:
(a) Such employee's drug test.
(b) The results of any relevant certification, review or revocation
of certification proceedings, as referred to in Section
503(a)(1)(A)(ii)(111) of the Act.
(2) Except as authorized by law, an applicant who is the subject of a
drug test, however, shall not be entitled to this information.
C. Confidentiality of records in general. All drug testing information
specifically relating to individuals is confidential and should be treated
as such by anyone authorized to review or compile program records. In
order to efficiently implement this order and to make information
readily retrievable, the Drug Program Coordinator shall maintain all
records relating to reasonable suspicion testing, suspicion of tampering
with evidence and any other authorized documentation necessary to
implement this order. All records and information of the personnel
actions taken on employees with verified positive test results should be
forwarded to the Servicing Personnel Office. Such shall remain
confidential, locked in a combination safe, with only authorized
individuals who have a need to know having access to them.
D. Employee Assistance Program records. The EAP Administrator shall
maintain only those records necessary to comply with this order. After
an employee is referred to an EAP, the EAP will maintain all records
necessary to carry out its duties. All medical and/or rehabilitation
records concerning the employee's drug abuse, including EAP records
§ 12-14 PARK RIDGE CODE § 12-14
1:76
of the identify, diagnosis, prognosis or treatment, are confidential and
may be disclosed only as authorized by 42 CFR 2, including the
provision of written consent by the employee. With written consent, the
patient may authorize the disclosure of those records to the patient's
employer for verification of treatment or for a general evaluation of
treatment progress. [42 CFR 2.1 et seq. (1986), revised regulations
promulgated at 52 2 FR 21796, June 9, 1987]
E. Maintenance of records. The Borough of Park Ridge shall establish or
amend a record keeping system to maintain the records of the Borough
of Park Ridge Drug-Free Workplace Program consistent with the
Borough of Park Ridge Privacy Act System of Records and with all
applicable federal laws, rules and regulations regarding confidentiality
of records, including the Privacy Act (5 U.S.C. § 552a). If necessary,
records may be maintained as required by subsequent administrative or
judicial proceedings or at the discretion of the Borough of Park Ridge.
The record keeping system should capture sufficient documents to meet
the operational and statistical needs of this order and include:
(1) Notices of verified positive test results referred by the Medical
Review Officer.
(2) Written material justifying reasonable suspicion testing or evidence
that an individual may have altered or tampered with a specimen.
(3) Anonymous statistical reports.
(4) Other documents the Drug Program Coordinator, Medical Review
Officer or EAP Administrator deems necessary for efficient
compliance with this order.
F. Records maintained. Any contractor hired to satisfy any part of this
order shall comply with the confidentiality requirements of this order
and all applicable federal laws, rules, regulations and guidelines.
G. Statistical information. The Drug Program Coordinator shall collect and
compile anonymous statistical data for reporting the number of:
(1) Random tests, reasonable suspicion tests, accident or unsafe
practice tests, follow-up tests or applicant tests administered.
(2) Verified positive test results.
(3) Voluntary drug counseling referrals.
(4) Involuntary drug counseling referrals.
(5) Terminations or denials of employment offers resulting from refusal
to submit to testing;.
(6) Terminations or denials of employment offers resulting from
alteration of specimens.
§ 12-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-14
1:77
§ 12-15. Position titles designated for random testing.
The following are position titles designated for random testing:
Chapter 14
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative organization — See Ch. 2.
Police Department — See Ch. 26.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 60.
(7) Terminations or denials of employment offers resulting from failure
to complete a drug abuse counseling program.
(8) Employees who successfully complete the EAP.
A. All members of the Park Ridge Police Department.
B. All crossing guards.
C. All employees authorized to drive or operate municipal-owned vehicles.
D. All employees authorized to drive or operate their own vehicles on
Borough business.
§ 12-14 PARK RIDGE CODE § 12-15
1:78
ARTICLE I
Creation of Department
[Adopted 12-9-1963]
§ 14-1. Composition of Department; qualifications for membership.
[Amended 12-27-1972 by Ord. No. 72-23; 7-8-1974 by Ord. No.
74-16]
The Fire Department shall consist of a Chief, First Assistant Chief, Second
Assistant Chief, Captain, Lieutenant and firemen as herein provided.
Membership in said Fire Department shall be open to any resident of the
Borough of Park Ridge who is at least 18 years of age and is less than
40 years of age; is sound in body and in good health, sufficient to satisfy
the Fire Board; is able to read, write and speak the English language well
and intelligently; is of good moral character; has not been convicted of any
criminal offense involving moral turpitude and has submitted to and passed
a medical and physical examination conducted by the Fire Surgeon of the
Borough within seven days prior to the appointment date.
§ 14-1.1. Criminal background check. [Added 11-29-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011-034]
A. All Fire Department applicants, subsequent to the adoption of this
section, must submit to fingerprinting by the fingerprint vendor
contracted with the State of New Jersey for such volunteer positions for
the purpose of completing a criminal background check of the
applicant. This requirement shall also apply to any member of the Fire
Reserve, at such time as they apply for membership to the regular
department.
B. The results of the applicant's criminal history check will be returned to
the Park Ridge Police Department. The Chief of the Police Department,
or his designee, will complete a local records check, along with a
criminal background check, as allowed by law. The Police Chief, or his
designee, will then provide a written statement to the Borough
Administrator stating that either the applicant has no disqualifying
criminal history or a summary of any disqualifying criminal charges or
convictions.
C. The Borough Administrator will promptly advise the Chief of the Fire
Department if the applicant meets the Borough's standards for
membership or, after consulting with the Borough Attorney, will advise
the Fire Chief that the applicant does not meet these standards and
may not be granted membership. If an applicant wishes to discuss the
decision made related to them, he may meet with the Borough
Administrator and Borough Attorney to review the basis for that
determination.
D. Any person convicted of a crime of the first or second degree as set
forth under the New Jersey Code of Criminal Justice, or its equivalent in
§ 14-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-1.1
1:79
§ 14-2. Officers and members of company; roll kept by Borough
Clerk.
Each company shall have one Captain, one Lieutenant and as many active
men as may be deemed necessary, but not in excess of 25. The Borough
Clerk shall keep a complete roll of the active and exempt members of
the Fire Department, designating the date of admission, exemption and
resignation and the respective company to which they belong.
§ 14-3. Fire Board; members. [Amended 7-8-1974 by Ord. No.
74-16]
A Fire Board, as heretofore established, is hereby continued. It shall consist
of the Mayor, members of the Fire Committee of the Borough Council, Chief,
First and Second Assistant Chiefs and the Borough Clerk, who shall have no
vote.
§ 14-4. Meetings of Board; powers. [Amended 7-8-1974 by Ord. No.
74-16]
Meetings of the Fire Board shall be held upon the call of the Mayor or the
Chief of the Fire Department, as needed. The Board shall have control of
the management of the Department when not upon active duty, subject to
the approval of the governing body.
§ 14-5. Adoption of bylaws and rules.
The Fire Board shall from time to time adopt a code or bylaws and rules for
the control, management and government of the Fire Department. The code
any other jurisdiction of the United States, shall be ineligible for
membership in the Park Ridge Volunteer Fire Department.
E. Any person convicted of a crime of the third or fourth degree as set
forth under the New Jersey Code of Criminal Justice, or its equivalent in
any other jurisdiction of the United States, may be eligible for
membership in the Park Ridge Volunteer Fire Department, subject to
review and recommendation of the Borough Council and the Board of
Fire Officers.
F. No other Borough Official or employee will be given access to, or be
informed of, the information received from the criminal history check.
G. The Borough authorizes the Fire Department to pay any fee required by
the state in relation to this investigation.
H. The Park Ridge Volunteer Fire Department will not accept any member
on a probationary status until all background checks are completed and
information is returned from the state.
I. All other requirements for membership within the Park Ridge Volunteer
Fire Department will remain in full force and effect until changed.
§ 14-1.1 PARK RIDGE CODE § 14-5
1:80
or codes or bylaws and rules as adopted by the Fire Board shall not become
operative and effective until approved by the Mayor and Council.
§ 14-6. Annual election of Department officers. [Amended 7-8-1974
by Ord. No. 74-16]
The Chief, First and Second Assistant Chiefs, Captain and the Lieutenant of
the Department shall be elected annually on the first Thursday of December
in each year by the active members of the Department. All officers of the
Department shall hold over until their successors are elected and approved
by the Mayor and Council. Election of Department officers shall be by
ballot and the candidate receiving the highest number of votes cast shall be
declared elected, subject to the approval of the Mayor and Council.
§ 14-7. Appointment of company officers. [Amended 7-8-1974 by
Ord. No. 74-16]
Company Captains and Lieutenants shall be appointed annually by the
Department officers on the first Thursday of December in each year.
§ 14-8. Designation of companies.
The companies of the Fire Department shall be known and designated,
without reference to their equipment, as "Company No. .......... of the
Borough of Park Ridge Fire Department." Each company shall be known by
a numeral designated by the Mayor and Council.
§ 14-9. Annual inspection.
An official inspection of the Department shall be made annually by the
governing body of the Borough. The time for such inspection shall be
designated by the governing body.
§ 14-10. Place of keeping fire apparatus. [Amended 7-8-1974 by
Ord. No. 74-16]
All fire apparatus belonging to the Borough shall be kept at the firehouse on
Park Avenue or at such other places as the Council may designate.
§ 14-11. Exemption certificates: requirements for granting.
An exemption certificate shall be granted to each member of the Fire
Department who has served the time prescribed by law. No member shall
be granted an exemption certificate unless he has served the required time
and has also performed the yearly fire duty required of him for the number
of years required by the laws of the state for granting such certificate. The
time served and the percentage of fire duty shall be certified by the Captain
of the company and the Fire Chief.
§ 14-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-12
1:81
§ 14-12. Issuance of exemption certificates.
Certificates of exemption shall be ordered by the governing body upon
recommendation of the Fire Chief and Fire Board. They shall be signed by
the Mayor and Fire Chief and attested by the Borough Clerk.
§ 14-12 PARK RIDGE CODE § 14-12
1:82
ARTICLE II
Junior Firemen
[Adopted 6-9-1969 by Ord. No. 69-9]
§ 14-13. Training.
The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Park Ridge may, on application of
the respective fire companies, provide for training of new firemen who shall
be designated as "junior firemen."
§ 14-14. Eligibility.
Any person who is a resident of the Borough of Park Ridge and who is at
least sixteen (16) years of age and less than eighteen (18) years of age may
become a junior fireman.
§ 14-15. Application. [Amended 7-8-1974 by Ord. No. 74-16]
Any person desiring to become a junior fireman shall make application to
the Chief or Assistant Chief of the Fire Department and shall complete
an application prescribed by the Mayor and Council therefor. The name of
the applicant shall then be submitted, together with a report of a medical
examination, to the Mayor and Council, which, if it approves such applicant,
shall designate such applicant as a junior fireman.
§ 14-16. Duties. [Amended 11-13-1984 by Ord. No. 84-13]
The duties of the junior firemen shall be such as are lawfully assigned by
the Chief of the Fire Department or as may be prescribed by the Mayor and
Council.
§ 14-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-16
1:83

ARTICLE III
Length of Service Awards Program
[Adopted 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-00135]
§ 14-17. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish a Length of Service Awards
Program (LOSAP) for active volunteer members of the Borough's Fire
Department and Tri-Borough Ambulance Corps. The LOSAP program is
designed to enhance the ability of the Borough to provide fire and first
aid protection and help the Fire and First Aid Squads recruit and maintain
membership.
§ 14-18. Program established.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-183, there is hereby established, within the
Borough of Park Ridge, an emergency services volunteer length of service
award program, hereinafter referred to as LOSAP.
§ 14-19. Annual contributions.
§ 14-20. Approval of program by voters.
The LOSAP program shall be deemed effective as of November 2, 1999,
which is the date when said program was approved and ratified by the
voters of the Borough of Park Ridge.
§ 14-21. Increase in annual contribution; appropriated amounts in
budget.
A. The LOSAP program shall provide for the fixed annual contribution to a
tax-deferred income account for each eligible volunteer for fire and first
aid members that satisfies a criteria set forth in this article.
B. The LOSAP program shall provide for an annual contribution for each
eligible volunteer member who accumulates a minimum of 100 points
during a calendar year pursuant to a point system attached hereto and
made a part hereof.36
C. Effective with the year 2009, the annual contribution amount for each
year of future service for each eligible volunteer member shall be
$1,392.97. The annual contribution for the volunteer members of the
Tri-Boro Volunteer Ambulance Corps shall be shared equally with the
Borough of Woodcliff Lake and the Borough of Montvale.
A. After ratification of the LOSAP as provided in this article, the maximum
annual contribution may be increased without public hearing or public
35.Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded Ord. No. 99-10, adopted 8-10-1999 and
made effective 11-2-1999 upon approval and ratification by the Borough voters, creating
the LOSAP.
36.Editor's Note: The point systems are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 14-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-21
1:85
question, provided such increased contributions do not exceed the
number calculated by multiplying the original contribution as approved
by public question by the consumer price index factor. The consumer
price index factor shall be established as set forth in N.J.S.A.
40A:14-185.
B. Any amounts appropriated annually for a LOSAP program shall be
included in the budget of the municipality as a separate line item.
§ 14-21 PARK RIDGE CODE § 14-21
1:86
Chapter 17
HEALTH, BOARD OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
As to legislation adopted by the Board of
Health, consult Part III of this Code.
§ 17-1. Board continued.
The Board of Health of the Borough of Park Ridge as heretofore established
is hereby continued.
§ 17-2. Composition; appointment; alternates. [Amended 1-27-1998
by Ord. No. 98-2]
§ 17-3. Terms of office; vacancies.
A. The Board of Health of the Borough of Park Ridge, in addition to having
seven members, who shall be appointed by the Mayor and Council, shall
be allowed two alternate members. Each alternate shall be designated
to title of the appointment by the Mayor and Council as Alternate
Number One and Alternate Number Two.
B. The alternate members' terms shall be for two years, except that
Alternate Number One shall be appointed first for a period of two years
and Alternate Number Two shall be appointed first for a period of one
year so as not more than one alternate membership becomes vacant in
any one year. The vacancy which occurs in the alternate membership
may be filled by the Mayor and Council for the unexpired term. After
the expiration of the initial terms, each alternate member shall be
appointed for a term of two years.
C. Alternate members are not permitted to act on any matter where they
have a direct or indirect personal or financial interest as provided by
law. An alternate member may, after public hearing, if requested by the
member, be removed by the governing body for cause.
D. An alternate member may participate in the discussions of the
proceedings of the Board of Health but may not vote, except in the
absence or disqualification of a regular member. Any vote of the Board
of Health shall not be delayed in order that a regular member may vote
instead of an alternate member. In the event that a choice must be
made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate Number One
shall always be the one that votes first.
A. After the expiration of the terms of office by the original members of its
Board,37 the terms of their successors shall be three years each,
§ 14-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-3
1:87
§ 17-4. Minutes of proceedings; reports to Council. [Amended
7-8-1974 by Ord. No. 74-16]
It shall be the duty of the Board of Health of the Borough to keep full
minutes of its proceedings, to file one copy of the monthly minutes with the
Mayor and Council and to make a report thereof to the Mayor and Council
on the first day of January and July of each year. The said Board of Health
shall also report to the Mayor and Council, in detail, the items of their
expenses.
§ 17-5. Organization; officers.
Chapter 18
HOUSING TASK FORCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Rental unit registration — See Ch. 81.
§ 18-1. Creation.
There is hereby created within the Borough of Park Ridge an agency to be
known as the "Housing Task Force" as a means and method to coordinate
oversight enforcement of residential and rental licensing property in the
Borough.
§ 18-2. Membership; selection of representatives.
commencing on the first day of January annually. [Amended 7-8-1974
by Ord. No. 74-16]
B. All vacancies occurring in the said Board of Health for any cause shall
be filled for the unexpired term only.
A. The Board of Health of the Borough shall elect a President from among
its own members.
B. Pursuant to and in accordance with law, the Board of Health of the
Borough shall appoint a Secretary and such other subordinate officers
and agents as it deems necessary and fix the terms of such
appointments and the compensation of the appointees.
A. The Task Force shall consist of representatives of the following
agencies within the Borough of Park Ridge: Construction Code, Zoning
37.Editor's Note: The provisions of this section concerning the terms of the original
members, adopted 11-7-1894 and amended 12-13-1961, read in part as follows: "The
terms of office of two of such members shall expire on the 31st day of December 1961; of
two of such members shall expire on the 31st day of December 1962, and of three of such
members shall expire on the 31st day of December 1963."
§ 17-3 PARK RIDGE CODE § 18-2
1:88
§ 18-3. Purpose.
The purpose of the Housing Task Force shall be to facilitate the regulation
and registration of rental housing units within the Borough of Park Ridge.
§ 18-4. Criteria used to determine compliance.
The Task Force will be responsible for determining compliance with the
Park Ridge ordinances. In assessing such units, the Task Force shall review
appropriate documentation and make a determination based upon the
following criteria:
§ 18-5. Powers, duties and responsibilities.
In achieving its purpose, the Housing Task Force shall have the following
powers, duties and responsibilities:
Officer; Police Department representative, Fire Prevention Bureau
official; Board of Health representative, Borough Administrator;
Borough Attorney; Housing Inspector.
B. The representatives shall be selected by each of the respective
agencies.
A. Appropriately signed CO or CCO.
B. Appropriate zoning resolution if required.
C. Building permits.
D. Tax Department files (dating back to appropriate Zoning Code change).
E. Utility bills.
F. Income tax returns.
G. Registration filings.
H. License filings.
A. The Task Force shall meet at a minimum once every 60 days to
coordinate common complaints and observations, review progress on
concerns and establish appropriate chains of action to effectuate
corrections;
B. To make recommendations from time to time to the Mayor and Council
relative to ordinance amendments or other matters pertinent to its
charge;
C. To arrange for a mechanism for the sharing of any information relative
to housing units within the Borough of Park Ridge between and among
all of the member agencies, except as and where limited by applicable
law;
§ 18-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-5
1:89
Chapter 20
LOCAL ASSISTANCE BOARD
§ 20-1. Establishment.
There is hereby established a Local Assistance Board for the Borough of
Park Ridge pursuant to the General Public Assistance Law, N.J.S.A. 44:8-107
et seq.
§ 20-2. Membership; compensation.
§ 20-3. Terms.
D. To report observed violations of the applicable codes and regulations to
the agency having the power of enforcement over same with
appropriate memos and documentation and to assist in such
prosecutions through the production of testimony or evidence as
needed; and
E. To conduct inspections as required by Borough ordinances for
determination of compliance. Inspections may be done by an employee
designated by the Mayor and Council, but shall be from one of the
agencies which are members of the Housing Task Force.
A. The Local Assistance Board shall be composed of three persons, at least
one of whom shall be a woman, who shall be appointed by the Mayor
with the approval of Council.
B. Members of the Local Assistance Board shall serve without
compensation but shall be allowed their necessary and actual expenses.
C. One member of the Local Assistance Board may, at the pleasure of the
governing body, be appointed from among the membership of the
Council of the borough.
A. The terms of the members of the Local Assistance Board shall be as
follows:
(1) The term of any member appointed from among the membership of
the Council shall be for one year.
(2) The term of any other member shall be for two years.
(3) The terms of the members shall expire in alternate years.
B. The term of each member of the Board shall begin on the first day of
January, and each member shall continue in office until his or her
successor shall be appointed and shall qualify.
§ 18-5 PARK RIDGE CODE § 20-4
1:90
§ 20-4. Vacancies.
Vacancies on the Board shall be filled for the unexpired terms only.
§ 20-5. Officers; term and duties of Director of Welfare.
Chapter 23
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative organization — See Ch. 2.
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 10.
Drug and alcohol policy — See Ch. 12.
Fire Department — See Ch. 14.
Board of Health — See Ch. 17.
Local Assistance Board — See Ch. 20.
Police Department — See Ch. 26.
Municipal Pool Commission — See Ch. 28.
Senior Citizens Advisory Committee — See
Ch. 33.
Joint Municipal Tax Assessor — See Ch. 36.
A. Officers. The Board shall organize and select a Chairman and a
Secretary and shall appoint a Director of Welfare, who shall be the first
executive and administrative officer of the Board.
B. Director of Welfare.
(1) The Director of Welfare shall hold office for a term of five years
from the date of his or her appointment and shall be paid such
salary as may be fixed by the Board subject to the approval by the
Mayor and Council. In case of a vacancy in the office of the Director
of Welfare, one temporary or acting director may be appointed to
serve for not more than 90 days.
(2) The duties of the Director of Welfare shall be as set forth in N.J.S.A.
44:8-118 et seq.
§ 20-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-5
1:91

ARTICLE I
Animal Cruelty Investigator
[Adopted 6-8-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-3]
§ 23-1. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Animal Cruelty Investigator.
§ 23-2. Appointment and term of office.
The Animal Cruelty Investigator shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the Borough Council and shall serve a term which
is one year, commencing January 1 of the year of appointment and ending
December 31 of that year or until a successor shall be appointed and
qualified.
§ 23-3. Duties.
The duties of the Animal Cruelty Investigator shall include but not to be
limited to the following:
§ 23-4. Qualifications.
To be appointed to the position of Animal Cruelty Investigator a person
must hold a certified animal control officer certificate from the State of
New Jersey and have and maintain the New Jersey State Animal Cruelty
Investigators Certification pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.16a.
A. Enforce all laws and ordinances enacted for the protection of animals,
including but not limited to, animal control, animal welfare and animal
cruelty laws of the state and local ordinances.
B. Conduct investigations and initiate and prosecute complaints and/or
violations of animal cruelty control, animal welfare or animal cruelty
laws of the State of New Jersey and local ordinances.
C. Engage in the apprehension and arrest and detection of offenders who
have violated animal control, animal welfare and animal cruelty laws of
the State of New Jersey as well as local ordinances.
D. Working in consultation and cooperation with the Park Ridge Police
Department, the Animal Control Officer and other animal cruelty
investigators under the discretion of the Animal Control Officer as well
as the Borough Administrator when applicable, and when necessary
cooperatively determining whether probable cause exists for the
application and issuance of a search or arrest warrant implementing
same.
§ 23-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-4
1:93

ARTICLE II
Crossing Guards
[Adopted 9-11-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-014]
§ 23-5. Position and compensation.
Crossing guards employed by the Borough of Park Ridge shall be part-time
employees compensated on an hourly basis for actual hours worked. Hours
of employment, assignment to posts and conditions of employment shall be
established at the sole discretion of the Borough. Crossing guards in the
employment of the Borough on the date of adoption of this article shall be
paid at the rate of $20.50 per hour. Crossing guards hired after the date
of adoption of this article shall receive a starting pay of $15.50 per hour
and shall receive an increase in hourly pay of $1 for each year of the first
five years in continuous employment thereafter until receiving hourly pay of
$20.50. Salaries paid to crossing guards may be fixed in the future as part
of the Borough's annual salary ordinance.
§ 23-6. Sick days.
Crossing guards shall be granted paid sick leave for five days during each
calendar year. Sick leave shall be defined to mean a necessary absence from
duty due to the crossing guard's illness or disease. Sick days shall not be
cumulative beyond a calendar year except by those crossing guards who are
employed at the time of adoption of this article. Crossing guards who do not
utilize five sick days shall be paid one day's pay for each two unused sick
days.
§ 23-7. Excused snow days.
Crossing guards who are scheduled to work during the week in which
schools are closed due to inclement weather shall be paid for the days
schools are closed. Crossing guards who are scheduled to work during days
when schools have a delayed opening or an early closing shall be paid full
day's pay.
§ 23-8. Holidays.
Crossing guards shall be paid on the following holidays if schools are closed
and if scheduled to work the week of the holiday. Paid holidays shall include
Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Day; President's Day; Good Friday; Memorial
Day; Veterans Day; Thanksgiving Day; the Friday after Thanksgiving;
Christmas Day and July 4, provided summer camp is in session and the
crossing guard is scheduled to work during summer camp.
§ 23-9. Bereavement.
Crossing guards shall be granted time off without loss of pay upon the death
of an immediate family defined to include spouse, child, parent, brother or
sister of a crossing guard. Bereavement leave shall be allowed on the date
§ 23-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-9
1:95
of death or the date of a funeral, but in no event more than three working
days.
§ 23-10. No additional benefits.
As part-time employees, crossing guards shall not be entitled to vacations,
leaves of absence or terminal leave.
§ 23-9 PARK RIDGE CODE § 23-10
1:96
Chapter 24
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 24, Planning Board, adopted 12-9-1963, as amended,
was repealed 1-24-1977 by Ord. No. 77-3. For current provisions
regarding the Planning Board, see Ch. 74, Land Use Procedures.]
Chapter 26
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative organization — See Ch. 2.
Pascack joint municipal court — See Ch. 8.
Drug and alcohol policy — See Ch. 12.
Alarm systems, police, fire and burglar — See
Ch. 41.
Peace and good order; parental
responsibility — See Ch. 78.
§ 23-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-10
1:97

ARTICLE I
Establishment
§ 26-1. Department continued. [Amended 12-13-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-28]
There is established in the Borough of Park Ridge, the Borough of Park
Ridge Police Department. The Department previously established is hereby
continued and is modified by this chapter. The Mayor and Council shall
constitute the appropriate authority and shall from time to time adopt and
promulgate rules and regulations for the government of the force and for
the discipline of its members.
§ 26-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-1
1:99

ARTICLE II
Organization
§ 26-2. Members; appointment. [Amended 12-13-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-28; 4-23-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-013]
A. The Police Department shall consist of the following officers and ranks
which have been created and are continued as follows:
(1) Chief of Police (not to exceed one position).
(2) Captain(s) (not to exceed one position).
(3) Lieutenant(s) (not to exceed two positions).
(4) Sergeant(s) (not to exceed five positions).
(5) Police officers (not to exceed 12 positions).
B. The number of members of the Police Department shall be under the
absolute control of the governing body of the Borough of Park Ridge.
The governing body shall appoint such officers into such ranks as it
deems necessary. The creation of positions and ranks does not require
the Mayor and Council to appoint an officer to that position. All
appointments of the Police Department shall be in the discretion of the
Mayor and Council.
§ 26-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-2
1:101

ARTICLE III
Qualifications
§ 26-3. Appointment. [Amended 12-13-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-28]
No person shall be appointed a police officer of the Police Department of
the Borough of Park Ridge without possessing the requisite qualifications
described by the applicable statutes of the State of New Jersey and the
entrance requirements as promulgated herein.
§ 26-4. General eligibility requirements.
In order to be eligible for appointment to the position of police officer, each
applicant shall:
§ 26-5. Entrance examination requirements.
Except as specifically provided otherwise in this chapter, no person shall be
appointed to the Police Department unless they shall have:
A. Be a citizen of the United States.
B. Be of sound body and of good health sufficient to satisfy the Board of
Trustees of the Police and Fireman's Retirement System of New Jersey
as to their eligibility for membership in the retirement system.
C. Be able to read, write, and speak the English language well and
intelligently.
D. Be of good moral character and have not been convicted of any criminal
offense involving moral turpitude.
E. Be a resident of the State of New Jersey.
F. Be a graduate of a high school or vocational high school or possess an
approved high school equivalent certificate. [Amended 6-13-2000 by
Ord. No. 2000-9]
G. Be at least 18 years old and not more than 35, as of the closing date of
the required civil service examination.
A. Filed a written application on the form prescribed by the New Jersey
Department of Personnel for the position in the Park Ridge Police
Department.
B. Submitted Police Department forms and supporting documents
completed, as requested by the Chief of Police. [Amended 12-13-2005
by Ord. No. 2005-28]
C. Qualified by passing the required Department of Personnel entrance
tests, including written, oral, medical and physical examinations.
§ 26-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-5
1:103
D. Submitted to and passed a medical, oral, physical and psychological
examination as directed by the Borough.
E. Been certified for appointment in accordance with the Department of
Personnel rules.
F. Met all other minimum requirements enumerated in this chapter.
§ 26-5 PARK RIDGE CODE § 26-5
1:104
ARTICLE IV
Disqualification for Appointment to the Police Department
§ 26-6. Terms for disqualification.
No applicant shall be considered for appointment to the Police Department
who:
A. Lacks the established qualification requirements for the position which
he has applied or been tested.
B. Is physically, mentally, or emotionally unfit to perform effectively the
duties of the position in which he seeks employment.
C. Is addicted to the habitual use of drugs or intoxicating liquors.
D. Has been convicted of any indictable offense or has been convicted of
any crime or offense involving moral turpitude.
E. Has been dismissed for cause from any governmental service.
F. Has made false statements of a material fact or has practiced or
attempted to practice any deception or fraud in his application, in his
test or in securing his eligibility for appointment.
§ 26-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-6
1:105

ARTICLE V
Oath of Office
§ 26-7. Oath required; copy on file.
Every officer of the Police Department shall, before entering upon the
performance of his duties, take and subscribe an oath or affirmation to bear
true faith and allegiance to the government established in this state under
the authority of the people, to support the Constitution of the United States
and the Constitution of the State of New Jersey and to faithfully, impartially
and justly discharge and perform all the duties of his office, which oaths or
affirmations shall be filed with the Borough Clerk and a copy thereof in the
Police Department personnel files. The oath or affirmation shall conform to
law as the same may be changed from time to time.
§ 26-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-7
1:107

ARTICLE VI
Probationary Period for All Appointees
§ 26-8. Term; permanent appointment. [Amended 12-13-2005 by
Ord. No. 2005-28]
All appointments of the Police Department shall be for a probationary or
temporary period, as provided by law, and no person holding such regular
appointment as a police officer shall hereafter begin or accept a permanent
appointment in the Borough unless such person has successfully completed
a police training course at an approved police training academy.
§ 26-9. Discharge of trainees.
At or before the end of such working test period, the appointing authority
may discontinue the service of any such appointee if, in the opinion of such
appointing authority, the working test indicates that the appointee is unable
or unwilling to perform the duties of his position satisfactorily or is of such
reputation, habits and dependability as not to merit continuance in the
police service.
§ 26-10. Grounds for discontinuation of service; written notice.
A. A person may not be continued or appointed permanently to a position
for the following:
(1) Failure to qualify in the use of police weapons or inability to
understand the functioning, application and use of any police
equipment.
(2) Overall evaluation of performance of less than 70% shall be
sufficient reason for discontinuation of service of any such
appointee.
(3) Conduct unbecoming a police officer would include any conviction
for a fourth-degree crime or greater, driving while intoxicated, or
an offense involving moral turpitude.
(4) Any other conduct which would violate state law, the oath of office
or the standards of this chapter.
B. In each such case, the appointing state authority shall give written
notice to the appointee whose service is discontinued and to the State
of New Jersey Department of Personnel of the action taken, together
with the reasons.
§ 26-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-10
1:109

ARTICLE VII
Chief of Police
§ 26-11. Head of police force; powers and duties.
The Chief of Police, if such position is established and filled, shall be the
head of the police force. The Chief shall be directly responsible to the Mayor
and Council for the efficiency and routine day to day operations thereof, and
the Chief shall, pursuant to policies established by the Mayor and Council:
§ 26-11.1. Vacancy in position; authority of Borough Administrator.
[Added 12-26-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-25]
When the position of Police Chief is vacant, the Borough Administrator shall
assume supervision and control of the Police Department. The Borough
Administrator shall have and exercise the following authority and shall
perform the following duties:
A. Administer and enforce rules and regulations and special emergency
directives for the disposition and discipline of the force, the officers and
personnel.
B. Have, exercise and discharge the functions, powers and duties of the
force.
C. Prescribe the duties and assignments of all subordinates and other
personnel.
D. Delegate so much of the Chief's authority as deemed necessary for the
efficient operation of the force to be exercised under his direction and
supervision.
E. Report at least monthly to the Mayor and Council Authority in such
form as shall be prescribed by such authority on the operation of the
force during the preceding month and make such other reports as may
be requested by the Mayor and Council, the Police commission and the
Borough Administrator. [Amended 12-13-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-28]
A. The Borough Administrator shall, subject to the terms and provisions of
this chapter, generally supervise, manage, and direct the Police
Department and its law enforcement and civilian personnel.
B. The Borough Administrator shall, in the exercise of the authority vested
in him, revise such departmental rules and regulations and issue and/or
revise such departmental orders and operations procedures as may be
necessary to provide for the proper operation, administration and
management of the Police Department.
C. The Borough Administrator shall provide for the assignment of law
enforcement functions to the command and other sworn officers of the
§ 26-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-11.1
1:111
Police Department as is necessary to provide for the general safety of
the Borough at all times, including times of public emergency.
D. The Borough Administrator shall, as he may deem advisable from time
to time, direct any specific police duty or duties to be performed by
members of the Police Department, and any special police officers
assigned thereto.
E. The Administrator shall establish rules and/or operations procedures
providing for the imposition of discipline not requiring a departmental
hearing, and he may delegate to subordinate superior officers the
authority to impose minor discipline when the right to a hearing is
waived; provided, however, that the record of the underlying charges,
and the proposed discipline, shall be submitted to the Administrator for
review and, if the disciplinary penalty is either a written reprimand or a
suspension of five days or less, that said penalty shall be submitted to
the Administrator for approval. This section shall not be construed to
apply to matters of immediate suspension, whereby superior officers
exercise their right to relieve subordinate officers of their duties
pending further departmental review.
F. In exercising any and all of the above duties and responsibilities, he
shall submit a report regularly each month to the Mayor and Council
and to the Police Commissioner.
G. The Borough Administrator shall assume such authorities regularly
exercised by the Police Chief, except that of law enforcement authority
which may only be performed by sworn police officers.
H. The Borough Administrator shall:
(1) Exercise disciplinary authority over all members of the Department
in accordance with existing Borough policy and collective
bargaining agreements.
(2) Hear all disciplinary matters as required by the rules of the Police
Department and/or the Department of Personnel, or he may
delegate the hearing function to such other departmental officers
or to such persons as he may deem appropriate.
(3) Be authorized to impose discipline in all matters for which a
hearing is prescribed, except that recommendations of demotion or
dismissal shall be presented to the Mayor and Council for a final
determination.
I. The Borough Administrator shall from time to time meet with command
officers of the Department to review the current status of departmental
operations and to provide for departmental cooperation and
communications with other law enforcement and public safety
agencies.
§ 26-11.1 PARK RIDGE CODE § 26-11.1
1:112
ARTICLE VIII
Police Officers
§ 26-12. Duties.
It shall be the duty of every officer of the Police Department to observe and
enforce all laws of the State of New Jersey and ordinances of the Borough of
Park Ridge pertaining to his authority and responsibility. It shall be his duty
to do and to perform all the acts required by general law and ordinances
of the Borough and the rules and regulations of the Police Department as
directed by the Chief of Police.
§ 26-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-12
1:113

ARTICLE IX
Suspensions
§ 26-13. Suspension without pay.
The Chief of Police may suspend without pay any officer in the Department
for any period not exceeding five days pending the filing of formal charges
on account of inefficiency, incompetency, misconduct, negligence,
insubordination or other sufficient cause afforded by law.
§ 26-14. Temporary emergency suspensions.
Temporary emergency suspensions may be ordered by the officer in charge
or any other superior officer whenever the conduct or action of a
subordinate officer of the Department is deemed necessary. All such
suspensions shall be reported immediately, in writing, to the Chief of Police
for his approval.
§ 26-15. Report of suspensions; hearing. [Amended 12-13-2005 by
Ord. No. 2005-28]
All suspensions will be reported by the Chief of Police by the governing
body, which shall confirm the suspension or order the suspension set aside
or modify or direct such other disciplinary action as required according to
the gravity of the alleged defense(s) or violations. The officer so charged
shall be entitled to a hearing. Such suspensions and/or requests for more
disciplinary action will be guided by the department of personnel
regulations.
§ 26-16. Reason and procedure for suspension; appeals.
A. No police officer of the Police Department shall be suspended as
punishment, fined, reduced in rank or removed from office, except for
the reasons allowed by law and in accordance with the procedures
prescribed by the Department of Personnel.
B. Any officer so suspended, fined or demoted shall have the same right of
appeal to the Department of Personnel as provided in the case of
removals.
§ 26-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-16
1:115

ARTICLE X
Rules and Regulations
§ 26-17. Adoption and continuance.
The rules and regulations of the Police Department heretofore adopted
are hereby continued until altered or amended in the manner provided in
§ 26-18.
§ 26-18. Promulgation. [Amended 12-13-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-28]
The governing body shall adopt written rules and regulations prepared by
the head of the police force, for the government and control of the Police
Department. Each officer shall be presented with a copy of the rules and
regulations, together with any amendments thereof or additions thereto as
adopted from time to time by resolution of the governing body. The power
to adopt shall include the power to reject and modify rules and regulations
recommended by the head of the Department.
§ 26-19. Transmittal of instructions.
All matters now or hereafter made the responsibility of the Police
Department by actions of the governing body shall be forwarded through
the Police Commissioner of the governing body to the Chief of Police,
who shall issue the necessary instructions to the members of the Police
Department.
§ 26-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-19
1:117

ARTICLE XI
Matrons, Special Police Officers and School Traffic Guards
§ 26-20. Appointment; term.
The Mayor shall have the power to appoint, with advice and consent of the
governing body, matrons, special police officers and school traffic guards
for a term not to exceed one year.
§ 26-21. Qualifications.
No person shall be appointed a matron, special police officer, or school
traffic guard unless that person is a citizen of the United States, able to
read, write and speak the English language, physically qualified and of good
moral character and shall not have been convicted of any crime.
§ 26-22. Status; termination of office.
The matrons, special police officers and school traffic guards appointed
under this article shall not be members of the Police Department, and their
powers, rights and duties shall immediately cease and terminate at the
expiration of the term for which they were appointed or upon revocation of
their appointment as provided for herein.
§ 26-23. Compensation.
Matrons, special police officers and school traffic guards shall receive such
compensation as fixed by the Mayor and Council annually.
§ 26-24. Training; supervision.
All matrons, special police officers and school traffic guards shall be
appropriately trained and work under the direction and supervision of the
Chief of Police.
§ 26-25. Weapons.
No special police officer shall carry a firearm or other weapon when off duty.
§ 26-26. Revocation of appointment.
Every appointment of a matron, special police officer or school traffic guard
made in accordance with this article shall not be subject to revocation
without good cause and without an opportunity for a hearing before the
Mayor and Council.
§ 26-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-26
1:119

ARTICLE XII
Police Reserves
§ 26-27. Continuation.
There is hereby established and continued within the Borough of Park
Ridge, Bergen County, New Jersey, an auxiliary to the Park Ridge Police
Department to be known as the "Park Ridge Police Reserves." This reserve
unit has been established under the Civil Defense and Disaster Control
Act and is governed by the New Jersey Office of Emergency Management.
Volunteer reserve officers shall be accepted for duty, trained and regulated
through the office of the Chief of Police.
§ 26-28. Rules and regulations.
The Park Ridge Police Reserves will maintain a current set of rules and
regulations that will remain subject to the approval of the Chief of Police
and adopted by the Mayor and Council.
§ 26-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-28
1:121

ARTICLE XIII
Employment of Off-Duty Police Officers
[Added 6-22-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-20]
§ 26-29. Rate of compensation.
The rate of compensation for contracting the services of off-duty law
enforcement officers shall be based on a rate of time and 1/2 of the officer's
then current hourly rate.
§ 26-30. Vehicle usage.
An additional fee of $10 per hour shall be charged for any vehicle usage
as assigned by the Police Chief for up to seven consecutive hours or any
part of the calendar day. A charge of $125 shall be charged for any vehicle
usage as assigned by the Police Chief in excess of seven consecutive hours
or any part of the calendar day. Whenever possible, the oldest usable Police
Department vehicle will be assigned.
§ 26-31. Additional fees.
An additional fee of 20% of the total estimated fees in §§ 26-29 and 26-30
above is hereby established to cover administrative costs, overhead and outof-
pocket expenses of the Borough of Park Ridge.
§ 26-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-31
1:123
Chapter 28
POOL COMMISSION, MUNICIPAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Swimming pools — See Ch. 88.
§ 28-1. Establishment and creation; appointing authority.
There is hereby established and created a Municipal Pool Commission of
the Borough of Park Ridge, the members of which shall be appointed by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of the governing body of Park Ridge.
§ 28-2. Membership; terms; vacancies. [Amended 2-10-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009-01]
Said Commission shall consist of seven citizens of the Borough of Park
Ridge, all of whom shall be residents of the Borough of Park Ridge, to be
appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Council. The terms of the
two new members shall be for three years. Upon the expiration of existing
members' terms, all subsequent terms shall be for three years. When a
vacancy exists, the members of the Commission shall be consulted with on
recommendation for appointment.
§ 28-3. Service without compensation. [Amended 7-8-1974 by Ord.
No. 74-16]
The Commissioners shall serve without salary or other compensation, but
their necessary expenses shall be allowed and paid by the municipality and
they shall receive full family membership in the Municipal Pool without cost
to them.
§ 28-4. Powers and duties. [Amended 4-13-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-10]
A. The Commission is hereby authorized to:
(1) Manage, operate and improve the existing swimming pool facility
and, if the need arises, to conceive, plan, establish and construct
additional swimming pool facilities on behalf of and for the Mayor
and Council of the Borough of Park Ridge, subject to the approval
and prior authorization thereof by the Mayor and Council;
(2) Propose plans for the development and improvement of the facility;
(3) Propose methods or arrangements for the proper maintenance and
care of the facility;
§ 26-31 PARK RIDGE CODE § 28-4
1:124
(4) Formulate proposed rules, regulations, fees and rental charges for
the public use of the facility on an annual basis;
(5) Submit all such plans, methods, arrangements, rules and
regulations to the Borough Council for its consideration and action
thereon;
(6) Put into effect administrative and supervisory authority over such
plans, methods, arrangements, fees and rental charges, rules and
regulations as have been approved and authorized by the Borough
Council.
B. The Commission shall prepare and submit to the Borough Chief
Financial Officer its proposed budget for the operation of the facility
during the next following calendar year no later than February 15. The
Borough Council shall have the plenary power to approve, disapprove,
modify or revise such budget.
C. All purchases of supplies, equipment, construction work and services,
other than employees' services, shall be made through the office of the
Borough Purchasing Agent.
D. The estimated cost of services or material furnished by Borough
departments or Borough employees to the facility shall be charged to
the Commission's budget so that the total cost of the facility to the
Borough can be determined in accordance with standard municipal
accounting procedures consistently applied.
E. All financial records of the Commission shall be kept and preserved in
accordance with current law and standard municipal accounting
practices consistently applied. Such records shall be deemed public
records and shall be open to public inspection during reasonable
business hours in accordance with the New Jersey Open Public Records
Act.38
F. The Commission shall have full charge of the employment of all
personnel whose services are required for the operation, maintenance
and regulation of the facility, provided that provision for the payment of
the compensation of such personnel shall have been made in the
Commission's approved annual budget and in the annual salary
ordinance of the Borough.
G. The Commission may, in its discretion, by resolution, delegate to a pool
manager revocable employment powers, including the power to employ
and to terminate employment of such personnel as may be included in
the scope of the Commission's resolution.
H. By reason or the nature of the services to be rendered by the
Commission's personnel, the provisions of the Borough's personnel
policy with respect to holidays, hours of attendance and like matters not
38.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq.
§ 28-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-4
1:125
§ 28-5. Disposition of moneys collected; approval of expenditures;
fees.
§ 28-6. Free membership for senior citizen residents. [Added
7-8-1974 by Ord. No. 74-16; amended 2-14-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-002]
At the discretion of the Municipal Pool Commission, senior citizen residents
of the Borough may receive free memberships in the Municipal Pool.
Nonresident senior citizens are not eligible for free membership.
§ 28-7. Powers reserved by and to Borough Council. [Added
4-13-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-10]
All matters relating to the general supervision, control, operation,
maintenance and regulation to the swimming pool facility not expressly
delegated by this chapter to the Commission are hereby reserved by and
to the Borough Council, including (by way of example and not by way of
limitation of the generality of this reservation):
consistent with the operation of the facility shall not apply to such
personnel; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be deemed to
impair or modify the status, eligibility or any other right that may have
heretofore or may hereafter become vested in any person as a Borough
employee.
A. All moneys collected by the employees of the Borough operating the
pool and snack bar or turned over to the Commission shall be turned
over to the Tax Collector of the Borough of Park Ridge daily, and all bills
and expenditures in connection therewith shall be approved by the
Mayor and Council.
B. The Mayor and Council shall adopt a resolution on an annual basis
establishing the fees for membership in the Municipal Pool after
consulting with the members of the Municipal Pool Commission.
[Added 5-26-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-12]
A. The establishment, promulgation, charge and collection of reasonable
fees, rents and other charges for admission to and use and enjoyment of
the facility and the recreational privileges, entertainment and other
activities conducted thereon;
B. The power to make, alter, amend and repeal rules and regulations for
the supervision, regulation and control of all activities carried on,
sponsored, arranged and provided for in connection with the facility,
and for the protection of persons and property, and for the enforcement
of such rules and regulations;
C. The Mayor and Council shall adopt a resolution on an annual basis
establishing the membership fees and rules with respect to granting
nonresident memberships, including the maximum number of
§ 28-4 PARK RIDGE CODE § 28-7
1:126
Chapter 29
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 29, Public Works, Board of, adopted 12-9-1963, as
amended, was repealed 4-11-1989 by Ord. No. 89-6.]
Chapter 33
SENIOR CITIZENS ADVISORY COMMITTEE
§ 33-1. Membership; term of office; compensation.
The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Borough Council, shall
appoint the members of the Senior Citizens Advisory Committee, one of
whom shall be designated temporary presiding officer. Said committee shall
consist of no more than seven persons, all of whom shall be residents of
the Borough of Park Ridge. All appointments shall run until December 31
of each year. Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as an original
appointment. Members of the Senior Citizens Advisory Committee shall
receive no compensation for their services.
§ 33-2. Powers and duties.
nonresident memberships to be permitted. Nonresident memberships,
if permitted by resolution, shall only be granted to nonresidents who
are sponsored by a current member and approved by the Commission in
accordance with its rules and regulations. [Added 2-14-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-002]
A. The Senior Citizens Advisory Committee shall have the following
powers and duties:
(1) To study the needs of the senior citizens of the Borough of Park
Ridge and to advise said citizens of the available goods and services
to meet their needs.
(2) To conduct investigations and surveys of the housing needs of
senior citizens in the Borough of Park Ridge.
(3) To interview, negotiate with and screen any and all individuals or
firms necessary to meet the goals of the Committee, subject,
however, to the consent and prior approval of the governing body
with respect to the hiring or payment of any individual or firm so
interviewed, negotiated with or screened.
B. Committee conduct shall be on a strictly nonpartisan, nonsectarian
basis.
C. The Committee shall have no decisionmaking power unless so granted
by the Mayor and Council.
§ 28-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-3
1:127
§ 33-3. Records and reports.
The Senior Citizens Advisory Committee shall keep records of its meetings
and activities and shall make and submit the same to the Mayor and Council
at least annually on or about the first day of December of each year, or as
requested by the governing body.
§ 33-4. Bylaws and officers.
The Senior Citizens Advisory Committee is authorized and directed to adopt
bylaws concerning its procedural operation and to select its officers, which
shall consist of a Chairman as presiding officer, a Vice Chairman and a
Secretary as well as any other officers which may be established by the
bylaws hereinafter to be adopted by the Committee.
§ 33-5. Removal of members.
The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Park Ridge may, at its discretion,
remove any member of the Committee for failure to attend three
consecutive meetings of the Committee.
§ 33-6. Appropriations.
The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Park Ridge may, by resolution, fix,
determine and appropriate sums sufficient for the expenses of said Senior
Citizens Advisory Committee.
Chapter 34
SERVICES AND FACILITIES, COUNTY
§ 34-1. Authorization to contract for services and facilities.
The Borough of Park Ridge is hereby authorized, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:23-6 to 6.29, to enter into contracts with the Board of Chosen
Freeholders of the County of Bergen for the joint use by the Borough of
Park Ridge and other municipalities in the County of Bergen of the services
and facilities of the office of the Purchasing Agent of the County of Bergen
for the furnishing of gasoline and fuel oil requirements of the Borough of
Park Ridge and such other services or facilities, or both, which may be
determined to be required from time to time by the Borough of Park Ridge.
The services of said Purchasing Agent shall be without cost to the Borough
of Park Ridge.
§ 33-3 PARK RIDGE CODE § 34-1
1:128
Chapter 36
TAX ASSESSOR, JOINT MUNICIPAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative organization — See Ch. 2.
§ 36-1. Establishment of office.
The office of Joint Municipal Tax Assessor is hereby established and shall be
maintained by and for the Boroughs of Montvale, Park Ridge and Woodcliff
Lake, all in the County of Bergen, to assess real and personal property for
taxation within each of said municipalities, all as authorized under and by
virtue of the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48B-14 through N.J.S.A. 40:48B-21.
§ 36-2. Method of appointment; apportionment of costs and
expenses.
The governing bodies of the participating municipalities shall, by
agreement, provide for the appointment of a Joint Municipal Tax Assessor
and such other personnel as may be necessary for the apportionment of the
costs and expenses of the operation of such office among said participating
boroughs and for such other terms and conditions as may be necessary and
convenient for the establishment and maintenance of the office.
§ 36-3. Appointment; necessary personnel; apportionment of office
expenses.
The governing bodies of the participating municipalities shall, by
agreement, provide for the appointment of a Joint Municipal Tax Assessor
and other necessary personnel for the apportionment of the costs and
expenses of operation of such office among the participating municipalities,
for the addition of other municipalities in the same county and such other
terms and conditions as may be necessary and convenient for the
establishment and maintenance of the office. The apportionment of costs
and expenses may be based upon "apportionment valuations" determined
under N.J.S.A. 54:4-49, number of taxable properties, population, budgets
and such other factor or factors, or any combination thereof, as may be
provided in the agreement. The agreement shall be subject to approval by
resolution of the governing bodies of each of the municipalities prior to its
execution by such official or officials as may be authorized to execute such
agreement. A copy of every pertinent ordinance, resolution, agreement and
every amendment thereto shall be filed with the Director of the Division of
Taxation in the Department of the Treasury and the Director of the Division
of Local Finance in the Department of Community Affairs.
§ 34-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 36-4
1:129
§ 36-4. Personnel deemed employees of municipality having largest
valuation.
All employees in the office of the Joint Municipal Tax Assessor shall be
deemed to be the employees of the municipality having the largest
apportionment valuation determined under N.J.S.A. 54:4-49 on June 1, 1995.
§ 36-5. Personnel; term of office of assessor.
Such office of Joint Municipal Tax Assessor shall consist of a Tax Assessor
and such subordinate personnel as may, by the governing bodies of the
participating municipalities, be deemed necessary and proper to perform
the assessment function in each of said boroughs in accordance with law.
Any person who may hereafter be appointed to office as Joint Municipal
Assessor for said boroughs shall hold such office for an initial term of four
years, as shall be provided for by agreement of the governing bodies of
the participating municipalities, provided that any such person reappointed
as Joint Municipal Tax Assessor after serving four years in that capacity
shall thereafter hold his position during good behavior and efficiency
notwithstanding that such reappointment was for a fixed term of years, and
he shall not be removed therefrom for political reasons but only for good
cause shown and after a proper hearing before the Director of the Division
of Taxation of the State of New Jersey or his designee.
§ 36-6. Assessors holding office on effective date.
Any assessor of any municipality which has combined to form an office of
joint municipal tax assessor hereunder and who, on the effective date of this
chapter, held his office or position during good behavior and was not subject
to removal therefrom except for good cause shown after hearing, shall be
employed on the same basis as a member of the staff of the Joint Municipal
Tax Assessor at a salary not less than he was receiving at the time the joint
agreement is effective with respect to his municipality. Any assessor who
is serving as an assessor for each of the participating municipalities on the
effective date of this chapter and who is hereafter appointed as the initial
Joint Municipal Tax Assessor pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed to
have commenced the initial four-year term in office referred to in § 36-5
hereof on the date such person became first employed as an assessor by a
participating municipality.
§ 36-7. Separate maintenance of records.
The assessment function of the Joint Municipal Tax Assessor shall be
exercised in the same manner and to the same extent as though it was
exercised in each municipality separately, and the tax list and duplicate,
property record cards and all other records for each of the said boroughs
shall be maintained separately and shall be available for public inspection
pursuant to law.
§ 36-4 PARK RIDGE CODE § 36-8
1:130
§ 36-8. Method of termination agreement.
The joint agreement may be terminated upon the adoption of a resolution to
that effect by the governing bodies of any of the three governing bodies of
the aforesaid boroughs. Except by unanimous agreement, such termination
shall not be made effective earlier than June 30 next succeeding the
expiration of 12 full calendar months.
§ 36-9. When effective.
This chapter shall only become effective upon the adoption by the three
participating municipalities of substantially similar ordinances within six
calendar months after the first such ordinance is adopted.
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 39
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 39, Air Conditioning and Refrigeration, adopted
12-9-1963, as amended, was repealed 5-12-1992 by Ord. No. 92-14.]
Chapter 40
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 26.
Licensing — See Ch. 75, Arts. I and III.
Massage and somatic therapy
businesses — See Ch. 75C.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 77A.
Peace and good order; parental
responsibility — See Ch. 78.
§ 40-1. Number of licenses limited.
A. No more than eight plenary retail consumption licenses shall be issued
and outstanding in the Borough at the same time. No more than one
plenary retail consumption license shall be granted to one person.
[Amended 12-23-1986 by Ord. No. 86-35]
B. No more than one plenary retail distribution license shall be issued and
outstanding in the Borough at one time.
§ 36-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-2
1:131
§ 40-2. License fees. [Amended 5-11-1970 by Ord. No. 70-5;
10-11-1977 by Ord. No. 77-28; 3-13-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-1;
2-22-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-002]
The annual fees for the issuance and renewal of alcoholic beverage licenses
of the classes designated shall be as follows:
§ 40-3. Plenary retail consumption license; issuance restricted to
restaurants. [Amended 12-23-1986 by Ord. No. 86-35]
No plenary retail consumption license shall be issued except for a premises
operated as a restaurant or as a hotel or motel containing no less than 100
rooms. The word "restaurant," as used in this section, shall mean any place
to or for which a permit is or may be issued by the Borough Board of Health
permitting the sale of food for consumption on the premises.
§ 40-4. Other business prohibited on premises licensed for plenary
retail distribution. [Amended 12-23-1986 by Ord. No. 86-35]
No holder of a plenary retail distribution license shall sell or be permitted
or entitled to sell alcoholic beverages in or upon any premises in which
any other business is carried on, with the exception of a hotel or motel
containing no less than 100 rooms.
A. Plenary retail consumption license.
Year Fee
2011 $1,244
2012 $1,492
2013 $1,790
2014 $2,148
2015 $2,500 (maximum)
B. Plenary retail distribution license.
Year Fee
2011 $708
2012 $849
2013 $1,018
2014 $1,221
2015 $1,465
C. Club license: $70.
§ 40-2 PARK RIDGE CODE § 40-5
1:132
§ 40-5. Prohibited hours of sale. [Amended 7-12-1965 by Ord. No.
65-3; 7-23-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-010]
No licensee shall sell, serve, deliver or permit the consumption, or allow
or permit the sale, service or delivery, of any alcoholic beverages on the
licensed premises between the following hours on the following days:
§ 40-6. Closing of licensed premises during prohibited hours of
sale; clear view required.
§ 40-7. Sale to certain persons prohibited. [Amended 7-8-1984 by
Ord. No. 74-16; 12-23-1986 by Ord. No. 86-35]
No licensee shall sell, serve or deliver, or allow, permit or suffer the sale,
service or delivery of, any alcoholic beverage, directly or indirectly, to any
person under the age of 21 years or to any person actually or apparently
intoxicated or to any habitual drunkard or allow, permit or suffer the
consumption of any alcoholic beverage by any such person in or upon the
licensed premises or permit such persons to congregate in or about said
licensed premises.
§ 40-8. (Reserved)39
A. On Monday, between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
B. On Tuesday through Saturday, between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m.
C. On Sunday, between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m.
D. On New Year's Day when it is a weekday, between the hours of 5:00 a.m.
and 6:00 a.m.
E. On New Year's Day when it is a Sunday, between the hours of 5:00 a.m.
and 8:00 a.m.
A. During the hours when the sale of alcoholic beverages is prohibited, as
provided in § 40-5, the entire licensed premises shall be closed so that
all doors are locked and no patrons are present in the licensed premises
or premises connected therewith; provided, however, that this
requirement shall not apply to or prohibit the sale and service of food
and nonalcoholic beverages in bona fide hotels, in restaurants as
defined in N.J.S.A. 33:1-1t or in premises of clubs as set forth in N.J.S.A.
33:1-12, Paragraph 5, and in state regulations.
B. During the hours when sales are prohibited as prescribed in § 40-5, a
clear interior view, except toilet rooms therein, shall not be obstructed
by any screen, nontransparent glass, shade, blind, door, shutter,
merchandise or any other articles. Nothing in this subsection shall
apply to guest rooms and private dining rooms in hotels.
§ 40-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-9
1:133
§ 40-9. Loitering by intoxicated persons.
No licensee shall allow, permit or suffer any person actually or apparently
intoxicated to loiter in or about the licensed premises.
§ 40-10. Reports of disturbances to police.
Each licensee shall report forthwith to the police any disturbance, breach of
the peace or other improper conduct in or about the licensed premises.
§ 40-11. Public consumption. [Added 9-27-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-015]
§ 40-12. Consumption or possession by underage persons. [Added
11-9-1993 by Ord. No. 93-20; amended 11-13-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-14]
It shall be unlawful for a person under the legal age to possess or consume
alcoholic beverages on private property in the Borough of Park Ridge,
except as is provided for herein.
A. Consumption prohibited. Unless specifically addressed by statutes of
the State of New Jersey, no person shall consume any alcoholic
beverage or possess any opened alcoholic beverage in or upon:
(1) A public street, roadway, sidewalk, parking place, or any other
public or quasi-public place other than a place licensed for
consumption of alcoholic beverages upon the premises, or a
restaurant where the proprietor has given permission to consume
beer and wine upon the premises;
(2) A public conveyance;
(3) Any private property, not his or her own, without the permission of
the owner or other person having authority to grant such
permission.
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A hereof, the Borough
Council may, by resolution, permit the consumption or possession of
alcoholic beverages in any public or quasi-public place at a designated
time or times in connection with a special event, series of events, or
observance which has been authorized by the Borough Council.
C. No person shall sell, distribute, transfer, give or by any other means
supply any alcoholic beverage in any public or quasi-public place, or
while in or on a public street or thoroughfare, or while in a parked
vehicle on any street or public thoroughfare to any person who is under
the legal age to purchase alcoholic beverages.
39.Editor's Note: Former § 40-8, Distance between licensed premises, added 7-12-1965 by
Ord. No. 65-3, was repealed 2-14-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-001.
§ 40-9 PARK RIDGE CODE § 40-13
1:134
§ 40-13. Violations and penalties. [Added 11-9-1993 by Ord. No.
93-20; amended 11-13-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-14]
Those person or persons who violate this chapter will be subject to a fine of
$250 for the first offense and $350 for any subsequent offense. In addition,
they may also be subject to the imposition of a penalty which suspends
or postpones for six months the driving privileges of that person. Such
suspension or postponement shall be in accordance with the provisions of
P.L. 2000, c. 33.40
§ 40-14. Exemptions. [Added 11-13-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-14]
Chapter 41
ALARM SYSTEMS, POLICE, FIRE AND BURGLAR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 14.
Police Department — See Ch. 26.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 60.
§ 41-1. Purpose. [Amended 10-12-1982 by Ord. No. 82-21]
The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards and regulations for
the various types of alarm systems and proprietary systems which, either
audibly or by direct line, radio, telephone or other means, alert the Police
Department of the Borough of Park Ridge and elicit a response therefrom.
The objective of this chapter is to decrease the number of false alarms
A. Those persons who are under the legal age who are engaged in the
employment of an establishment, place or business which serves
alcoholic beverages and are required to deliver or place alcoholic
beverages on display are exempt from this chapter for the course of
their employment at that place.
B. Any underage person or persons who possess or consume alcoholic
beverages in connection with religious observance, ceremony or rite or
who consume or possess an alcoholic beverage in the presence of and
with the permission of a parent, guardian or relative, who has attained
the legal age to purchase and consume alcoholic beverages, is exempt
from this chapter.
C. As used herein, a "guardian" is a person who has qualified as a guardian
of the underage person pursuant to a testamentary or court
appointment. "Relative" means the underage person's grandparent,
aunt, uncle, sibling or any other person related by blood or affinity.
40.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:48-1.2.
§ 40-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 41-1
1:135
which are detrimental to the citizens of Park Ridge and which imperil
members of the Police Department of the Borough of Park Ridge.
§ 41-2. Scope. [Amended 10-12-1982 by Ord. No. 82-21]
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any person who operates,
maintains or owns any alarm system or proprietary system designed to
summon the Police Department, Fire Department or any other municipal
agency to any location in response to the alarm signal.
§ 41-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM SIGNAL — The transmission of a signal or message as the result of
the activation of an alarm system.
ALARM SYSTEM — Any mechanical or electrical device, including
telephone alarm devices, designed or used for the detection of an
unauthorized entry or fire in a building, structure, facility or enclosed
area, which transmits a signal or message, when activated, to police
headquarters.
ALARM USER — Any person on whose premises an alarm system is
maintained within the Borough.
FALSE ALARM — The activation of an alarm system through mechanical
failure, malfunction, improper installation or negligence of the owner or
lessee of an alarm system, or of his employees or agents, but does not
include alarms caused by hurricanes, tornadoes, earthquakes or other
violent conditions or by interruptions of electrical power on a communitywide
basis.
PERSON — Includes any natural person, partnership, corporation,
association, business, club or organization.
PROPRIETARY SYSTEM — An alarm used to alert or signal persons in and
on the premises in which the alarm is located of an attempted, unauthorized
intrusion and not transmitting such signal to police
headquarters.[Amended 10-12-1982 by Ord. No. 82-21]
TELEPHONE ALARM DEVICE — Any device which, when activated,
automatically transmits by telephone line a recorded alarm message or
electronic, mechanical alarm signal to any telephone instrument installed at
police headquarters or the communications system of the Borough.
§ 41-4. Registration; fee.
A. Every alarm user shall register any alarm system or proprietary system
covered by these regulations with the Chief of Police within 90 days
from the final passage of this chapter. The application for registration
shall contain, at least, the location of the device, the name and address
of the installer of the device, the type of device, provisions relating to
§ 41-1 PARK RIDGE CODE § 41-4
1:136
§ 41-5. General regulations. [Amended 10-12-1982 by Ord. No.
82-21]
false alarms and testing procedures, a list of persons to be contacted in
the event of an alarm and other information as may be required by the
Chief of Police. [Amended 10-12-1982 by Ord. No. 82-21]
B. No person may install or cause to be installed an alarm system or
proprietary system without first registering said alarm system or
proprietary system with the Police Department of the Borough of Park
Ridge. [Amended 10-12-1982 by Ord. No. 82-21]
C. The fee for the registration of an alarm system or proprietary system
shall be $10. No fee shall be charged to amend, revise or supplement an
application. Persons having alarms installed as of the effective date of
this chapter shall not be charged a fee; however, an application must be
made to ensure that all information is current and correct. [Amended
10-12-1982 by Ord. No. 82-21]
D. Registration fees are payable to the Borough of Park Ridge and are
separate and distinct from any fees which may be payable to alarm
companies maintaining alarm user systems. Public agencies, supported
by tax dollars, and religious organizations shall be required to meet all
registration requirements but shall be exempt from the payment of
registration fees, service fees and penalties provided herein; however,
said agencies and organizations are expected to abide by the spirit of
this chapter.
E. Restricted use of registration forms. The information contained in the
registration form required by this section and other information
received by the Chief of Police shall be regarded as confidential and
shall be securely maintained and restricted to inspection only by the
law enforcement officer or authorized personnel specifically assigned
the responsibility of handling and processing alarm user registration
forms in the course of official duties.
A. Persons having alarm systems or proprietary systems shall be required
to leave with the Chief of Police the name of a person or persons who
can be reached in case of a malfunction of the equipment in order that
the device can be temporarily disconnected. In lieu thereof, this
requirement can be fulfilled by leaving a tagged key to the premises
with the Chief of Police of the Borough of Park Ridge, provided that, in
so doing, the owner thereby releases the Borough of Park Ridge and the
Police Department from any claims of damage or loss in connection with
said entry.
B. Persons having alarm systems or proprietary systems which are being
tested or repaired shall notify the Police Department before tests or
repairs commence and after completion of the same so as to avoid the
possibility of activating a false alarm.
§ 41-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 41-6
1:137
§ 41-6. False alarms.
§ 41-7. Alarm system maintenance.
§ 41-8. Rule-making authority.
The Chief of Police may from time to time promulgate rules and regulations
supplementing this chapter in order to provide for recordkeeping and
efficient management of said system; provided, however, that said rules
and regulations, or any revisions thereof, shall not take effect until first
approved by resolution of the Borough Council.
§ 41-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person found guilty in the Municipal Court of the Borough of Park Ridge
of violating any provision of this chapter for which a fee or charge is not
otherwise fixed herein shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500 or
imprisonment for a period of not more than 90 days, or both.
Chapter 42
AMUSEMENT DEVICES, AUTOMATIC
A. In the case of false alarms, any person having knowledge thereof shall
immediately notify the Police Department in the fastest possible
manner.
B. The Chief of Police shall cause investigations to be made of all false
alarms and keep a record of said alarms on file. For such false alarms,
the Mayor and Council prescribe the following: For the first and second
false alarms in any given calendar year, there shall be a written warning
issued; for the third false alarm in the same calendar year, a service fee
of $25 shall be paid to the Borough of Park Ridge; for the fourth false
alarm and for each successive false alarm, a service fee of $50 for each
false alarm shall be charged. After four false alarms in any given
calendar year, the Mayor and Council reserves the right to require that
the alarm user appear before the governing body to explain why false
alarms are occurring and to report what steps are being taken to
reduce false alarms in the future.
A. The person shall assume sole responsibility for maintenance of all
equipment on a twenty-four-hour-per-day basis. Service to
malfunctioning equipment shall be provided within the eight-hour
period next following notification by the Police Department.
B. No telephone alarm device shall be installed which does not deactivate
within five minutes of its activation.
C. No external alarm device shall be installed which does not
automatically deactivate within 10 minutes of its initial activation.
[Added 10-12-1982 by Ord. No. 82-21]
§ 41-6 PARK RIDGE CODE § 42-1
1:138
§ 42-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTOMATIC AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any machine which, upon the
insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disc, may be operated by the public
generally for use as a game, entertainment or amusement, whether or not
registering a score, including but not limited to such devices as marble
machines, pinball machines, skill ball, mechanical grab machines and all
games, operations or transactions similar thereto under whatever name
they may be indicated. It shall include video-type games or machines or
similar devices that use a display screen for points, lines and dots of light
that can be manipulated to simulate games or other types of entertainment.
It shall not include, nor shall this chapter apply to, music-playing devices.
DISTRIBUTOR — Any person who supplies any automatic amusement
device to another for use in his place of business, whether under lease or
any similar arrangement.
OPERATOR — Any person in whose place of business any automatic
amusement device is placed or kept for operation by the public.
PERSON — Any person, firm or corporation or partnership.
§ 42-2. License requirement; purpose.
§ 42-3. Applications.
A. License required. No person shall maintain, operate or possess in any
store, building or other place where the public may enter or in any
building or other place wherein any club or organization meetings are
held within the Borough of Park Ridge any automatic amusement device
without first obtaining a license therefor.
B. Exceptions to license requirement. Any persons who own or lease
automatic amusement games covered by this chapter and who are
nonprofit, charitable or religious organizations are exempted from the
fee and payment requirements of obtaining a license or licenses upon
said amusement games, but such organizations shall remain subject to
all other provisions of this chapter.
C. Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to license, regulate and control
those automatic amusement devices which are available for use by the
public or any segment of the public. [Amended 6-7-1982 by Ord. No.
82-9]
A. All applications for a license under this chapter shall be made and
delivered to the Borough Clerk in duplicate on forms to be supplied for
the purpose and shall be subscribed and sworn to by the applicant.
B. The application for the license shall contain the following:
(1) Name and address of the applicant.
§ 42-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 42-3
1:139
§ 42-4. Location within premises; hours of use.
§ 42-5. Fees.
§ 42-6. Term, transferal and renewal of licenses.
(2) Name under which the place of business is being operated and the
location of the same.
(3) Number and type of alcoholic beverage licenses, where applicable.
(4) Number and type of machines sought to be licensed.
(5) Location where each automatic amusement game is to be located.
(6) Name and address of the person from whom each device is to be
purchased, rented or otherwise obtained.
(7) Description of each automatic amusement game sought to be
licensed, including, for each device, the name of the manufacturer,
model number and serial number.
(8) Terms of agreement governing the acquisition and installation of
said automatic amusement game.
(9) Information indicating whether the distributor, the applicant or any
person connected with the operation of the place of business
wherein the game or device is to be installed has ever been
convicted of any crime or found guilty of the violation of any
ordinance pertaining to gambling or gaming.
(10) Any other information which the Mayor and Council may deem
reasonably necessary and proper for the full protection of the
interest of the public in the application.
C. The Mayor and Council may request of an applicant additional
information supplementing the information given in the application.
A. Each device shall be located so that it does not obstruct or interfere
with the free and unfettered passage of patrons or users of the
premises.
B. An automatic amusement device may only be used or operated during
the hours of operation of the premises in which located.
A. The fee for all application for licenses pursuant to this chapter shall be
$25, in addition to all licensing or transfer fees.
B. The fee for a license to operate an automatic amusement device shall be
$250 for each device. [Amended 11-10-1981 by Ord. No. 81-5]
§ 42-3 PARK RIDGE CODE § 42-6
1:140
§ 42-7. Gambling.
No person shall, in his place of business, permit gambling in connection
with the playing of any mechanical amusement game.
§ 42-8. Investigation of premises.
The Chief of Police or his designee may make an investigation of the
premises and the applicant to determine the truth of the facts set forth
in the application. The Fire Chief may inspect the premises to determine
whether said premises comply with existing fire regulations of the Borough.
The Chief of Police and the Fire Chief may, upon completion of their
inspections, attach to said application their reports therein in writing. Upon
receipt of said application and inspection reports, if any, the Mayor and
Council shall proceed to consider the same and shall either approve or
disapprove the issuance of the license to said applicant. If the application is
approved, the Mayor and Council shall authorize the Borough Clerk to issue
the necessary license upon the receipt of the license fee or fees as herein
provided.
§ 42-9. Revocation of license.
Any time after the granting of said license, the Mayor and Council may, in
the reasonable exercise of its discretion, revoke the same.
§ 42-10. Display of license.
An operator's license granted pursuant to this chapter shall:
A. All licenses issued under this chapter shall be for a term of one year,
commencing on January 1 and expiring on December 31 of the year of
issuance.
B. A license may be transferred from one machine to another by giving
notice to the Borough Clerk to that effect and by giving a description of
the new machine, including the manufacturer, model number and serial
number. A license may be transferred from one place to another by
giving notice to the Borough Clerk to that effect and by supplying the
required information as to the new premises. There shall be a fee for all
transfers from one place to another in the amount of $25 per place or
transfer.
C. A license shall be renewed by the submission to the Borough Clerk no
later than November 1 of an application therefor pursuant to §§ 42-3
and 42-5 of this chapter.
A. Be posted in a conspicuous place at the location for which said license
was granted.
B. State the name and address of the licensee.
§ 42-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 42-10
1:141
§ 42-11. Number of machines.
The maximum number of mechanical amusement games per establishment
shall be four.
§ 42-12. Prohibited locations.
§ 42-13. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $500 or by imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 90 days, or both. Each day that a violation occurs or is
committed shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 43
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 43, Architectural Review, adopted 6-10-1974 by Ord. No.
74-9, was repealed 11-12-1985 by Ord. No. 85-17.]
Chapter 45
BICYCLES AND MOTORCYCLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 86. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 97.
§ 45-1. Definitions. [Amended 5-9-1977 by Ord. No. 77-11]
C. State the manufacturer, model number and serial number for each and
every mechanical amusement game for which said license was issued.
A. No games subject to this chapter may be operated within 200 feet of a
school or house of worship.
B. This prohibition shall not apply to a nonprofit organization, provided
that operation of automatic amusement devices thereby shall not occur
during school hours and shall be under adult supervision when minors
are present and provided that proceeds therefrom are used for
charitable purposes. [Added 6-7-1982 by Ord. No. 82-9]
A. As used in this chapter, unless another meaning is clearly apparent
from the language or context, words and phrases are as defined in
N.J.S.A. 39:1-1.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
§ 42-10 PARK RIDGE CODE § 45-1
1:142
§ 45-2. Bicycle registration card and tag required. [Added 7-8-1974
by Ord. No. 74-16; amended 5-9-1977 by Ord. No. 77-11; 11-23-2010
by Ord. No. 2010-36]
No bicycle owned by a resident of the Borough shall be operated within
the Borough unless the owner thereof first obtains a registration card and
a registration tag, as provided in this chapter, and, in addition thereto,
attaches said registration tag to such bicycle, as provided in this chapter.
The foregoing shall not apply to vehicles otherwise licensed by the state.
§ 45-3. Application for license; term. [Amended 7-8-1974 by Ord.
No. 74-16; 11-23-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-36]
An application for a license under this chapter shall be made to the Police
Department. The application forms, registration cards and registration tags
shall be provided for the Police Department by the Borough Clerk. The
applicant shall furnish proof of ownership of the bicycle upon making the
application. A license shall be issued without fee or charge to the applicant
and shall be issued for as long as the bicycle is owned by the original
applicant.
§ 45-4. Conditions for issuance of registration tag; display; removal.
[Added 7-8-1974 by Ord. No. 74-16; 11-23-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-36]
BICYCLE — Includes all pedal vehicles propelled solely by muscular
power.
DRIVER — The rider or driver of a bicycle or motorcycle or the driver
or operator of a motor vehicle, unless otherwise specified.
HIGHWAY — The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public for purposes of vehicular traffic.
MOTORCYCLE — Includes motorcycles, motorbikes, bicycles with a
motor attached and all motor-operated vehicles of the bicycle or
tricycle type, whether the motor power is a part thereof or attached
thereto, and having a saddle or seat with the driver sitting astride or
upon it or a platform on which the driver stands.
OWNER — A person who holds the legal title of a vehicle or, if a
mortgagor of a vehicle is entitled to possession, then the conditional
vendee, lessee or mortgagor shall be deemed the owner for the purpose
of this chapter.
STREET — The same as "highway."
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which a person or property is
or may be transported upon a highway, except devices moved by human
power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
§ 45-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 45-4
1:143
§ 45-5. Prohibited areas of operation. [Amended 5-9-1977 by Ord.
No. 77-11]
The operation of motorcycles on property owned by the Borough or by the
Board of Education of the Borough of Park Ridge, excluding streets and
highways within the Borough, is prohibited unless prior written permission
is obtained from the Mayor and Council or the Board of Education, as
appropriate.
§ 45-6. (Reserved)41
§ 45-7. Change of ownership; report. [Amended 5-9-1977 by Ord.
No. 77-11; 11-23-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-36]
Every licensee who sells or transfers ownership of a bicycle shall report the
sale or transfer to the Police Department within 72 hours. At the time of
said report, said licensee shall return the registration card and registration
tag issued to him and shall furnish the Police Department with the name
and address of the person to whom the bicycle was sold or transferred.
Registration tags and cards shall not be transferable. The foregoing shall
not apply to vehicles otherwise licensed by the state.
§ 45-8. State laws incorporated.
The provisions of state laws regarding the use and operation of bicycles
are herewith and hereby made part of this chapter without inclusion herein
at length. Any violation thereof is hereby constituted a violation of this
chapter.
§ 45-9. Intent. [Amended 5-9-1977 by Ord. No. 77-11]
The intent of this chapter is not the prosecution of juveniles but the
education and training of juveniles for their own and the community's
welfare.
A. The applicant shall demonstrate to the Police Department that the
bicycle is in safe mechanical condition and that the applicant is capable
of operating the bicycle and is familiar with the traffic laws of the state
relative to the operation of and equipment of the bicycle, as well as such
rules and regulations as the Police Department may promulgate, with
the approval of the Council, concerning the operation, equipment and
maintenance of bicycles.
B. Upon compliance by the applicant with these requirements, the Police
Department shall issue to the applicant a registration tag, which shall
be fastened to the frame of the bicycle in a conspicuous place. Removal
of the tag shall be grounds for a revocation of the license.
41.Editor's Note: Original § 45-6, Safety rules, as amended, was repealed 11-23-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-36.
§ 45-4 PARK RIDGE CODE § 45-10
1:144
§ 45-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-9-1977 by Ord. No.
77-11]
The violation of any provision of this chapter may subject the violator, upon
conviction, to a fine not to exceed $50 or to impoundment of the violator's
vehicle for a period not to exceed 30 days, or both.
Chapter 47
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 47, Building Construction, adopted 6-11-1973 as Ord.
No. 73-9, was superseded by the enactment of the State Uniform
Construction Code Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.) and the
promulgation of the state building subcode pursuant to that Act. For
regulations providing for the enforcement of said Act, see Ch. 50,
Construction Codes, Uniform.]
Chapter 49
CARNIVALS, CIRCUSES AND SHOWS
§ 49-1. License required.
No person shall conduct a traveling carnival, circus or show, or any street
parade in connection therewith, unless he obtains a license from the
Borough Clerk therefor.
§ 49-2. Issuance of license; not transferable.
§ 49-3. Display of license.
Any person to whom a license is granted under this chapter shall exhibit the
license whenever called upon so to do.
§ 49-4. Fee.
The fee for a license issued under this chapter shall be $50 per day, payable
in advance.
§ 49-5. Violations and penalties; revocation.
A. The Borough Clerk is authorized to issue a license upon payment by the
applicant of the proper fee therefor as hereinafter provided, together
with the sum of $0.50 for the cost and expense of issuing the license.
B. Such license shall remain in force and be valid for only the time therein
expressed. It shall apply only to the person to whom granted and shall
not be transferable.
§ 45-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 49-5
1:145
Chapter 50
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Electric service regulations — See Ch. 56.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 60.
Flood hazard control — See Ch. 61.
House numbering — See Ch. 69.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 80.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 84A.
Subdivision and site plan review — See Ch.
87.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 88.
§ 50-1. Enforcing agency established.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $500 or by
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both. [Amended
7-8-1974 by Ord. No. 74-16]
B. In addition to the penalty provided in Subsection A of this section, any
license issued under this chapter may be revoked for violation of any
provision of this chapter.
A. There is hereby established in the Borough of Park Ridge a State
Uniform Construction Code enforcing agency consisting of a
Construction Official, Building Subcode Official, Plumbing Subcode
Official, Electrical Subcode Official, Fire Protection Subcode Official
and such other subcode officials for such additional subcodes as the
Commissioner of the Department of Community Affairs, State of New
Jersey, shall hereafter adopt as part of the State Uniform Construction
Code. The Construction Official shall be the chief administrator of the
enforcing agency.
B. Each official position created in Subsection A hereof shall be filled by a
person qualified for such position pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217, as
amended,42 and N.J.A.C. 5:23, provided that, in lieu of any particular
subcode official, an on-site inspection agency may be retained by
contract pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23. More than one such official position
may be held by the same person, provided that such person is qualified
pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217, and N.J.A.C. 5:23 to hold each such
position.
C. The public shall have the right to do business with the enforcing agency
at one office location except for emergencies and unforeseen or
unavoidable circumstances.
42.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq., the State Uniform Construction Code Act.
§ 49-5 PARK RIDGE CODE § 50-2
1:146
§ 50-2. Fees.
A. General. [Amended 4-18-1977 by Ord. No. 77-7]
(1) The fee for plan review shall be a percentage of the fee for a
construction permit and shall be paid at the time of submission of
an application for a permit. The amount of this fee shall then be
deducted from the amount of the fee due for a construction permit
when the permit is issued. Plan review fees are not refundable.
(2) The fee to be charged for a construction permit will be the sum of
the subcode fees plus all applicable special fees, such as elevator or
sign fees. This fee shall be paid before a permit is issued.
(3) The fee to be charged for a certificate of occupancy shall be paid
before a certificate is issued. This fee shall be in addition to the
construction permit fee.
B. Plan review fees. Fees shall be computed as 20% of the fee for the
construction permit. [Amended 4-18-1977 by Ord. No. 77-7]
C. Construction permit fees. The fee for a construction permit shall be the
sum of all subcode fees, the required certificate fee, and the New Jersey
training fee. A minimum construction permit fee for any one subcode
shall be $75 for residential and $150 for commercial for all subcodes.
[Amended 4-18-1977 by Ord. No. 77-7; 12-27-1979 by Ord. No.
79-19; 2-11-1991 by Ord. No. 91-1; 9-8-1992 by Ord. No. 92-23;
3-8-1994 by Ord. No. 94-2; 9-12-1995 by Ord. No. 95-13;
4-11-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-5; 4-22-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-3;
3-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-1; 7-12-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-11;
7-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-18; 2-24-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04;
8-11-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-18; 4-10-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-006]
(1) Building subcode fees.
(a) New construction and additions.
[1] New construction and additions for Residential Use Group
R5: $0.060 per cubic foot. However, the minimum fee for a
building subcode fee under this section shall be $350.
[2] New construction and additions for all other use groups:
$0.065 per cubic foot. However, the minimum fee for a
commercial permit under this section shall be $1,000.
(b) For alteration work, including but not limited to roofing, siding,
repairs and modifications, to a structure for all R-5 residential
use groups, the fee shall be $25 per $1,000 of estimated
construction costs, with a minimum fee of $75 for the
residential use.
(c) For alteration work, including but not limited to roofing, siding,
repairs and modifications, to a structure for all other use
§ 50-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-2
1:147
groups, there shall be a cost of $30 per $1,000 of construction
costs, with a minimum fee of $150 for all commercial uses.
(d) Removal permit fee, for moving a structure from one location
to another, shall be $25 per $1,000 of all cost incurred in
moving the structure plus the permit fee for the new
foundation based on the volumetric computation in Subsection
C(1)(a).
(e) Demolition permit fee (removal of structure or in-ground pool
from property):
[1] One- and two-family dwellings, Use Group R5: $400.
[2] Removal of accessory structures or miscellaneous
structures, Use Group U: $150.
[3] All other use groups: $750.
(f) Demolition permit fee (removal or abandonment of a tank):
[1] Tank located on Use Group R5 property: $100.
[2] Tank located on all other use groups' property: $150.
(g) Installation of in-ground storage tanks (each), all use groups:
$75.
(h) On all building lots, the applicant for a building permit for a
new single-family house, garden apartment building, or
townhouse building shall be required to post an engineering
escrow of $2,500 for residential and $3,000 for commercial; or,
at the Construction Official's discretion, for an addition to an
existing structure, an escrow of $1,500. This escrow is for plot
plan review, engineering inspections of nonpublic
improvements and a review of the final as-built plan. If,
because of extraordinary land topography, drainage concerns,
retaining walls in excess of five feet in height or other similar
out-of-the-ordinary considerations, the Construction Official
deems that additional Borough Engineer time will be needed to
ensure proper technical installation, he may require the
applicant to post an additional engineering escrow.
(i) Other fees.
[1] Microwave receiving antenna: $75.
[2] Fence permits:
[a] Use R5 without pools on individual lots: N/C.
[b] All other uses: Same as Subsection C(1)(a)[1] and [2]
[3] Lighted signs: $150.
§ 50-2 PARK RIDGE CODE § 50-2
1:148
[4] Swimming pools:
[a] In-ground for Use Group R-5: $500; engineering
escrow of $1,500.
[b] Aboveground for Use Group R5: $100.
[c] In-ground pools, all other use groups: $1,000;
engineering escrow of $2,500.
[5] Asbestos abatement: $150.
[6] Open structural tower: $500.
(j) In Zones B-1, B-2, B-3, CH, ORL, RD1 and RD2, the applicant
for a building permit shall be required to post an engineering
escrow of $2,500 for plot plan review and engineering
inspections of nonpublic improvements and final as-built plan
review. In exceptional circumstances, additional escrows may
be required for engineering review. Any unused escrow shall
be refunded to the applicant.
(k) In-ground swimming pool requirements.
[1] Soil-moving permit must be completely filled out showing
amount of soil to be disturbed, amount of soil to be
removed and amount of soil to be exported.
[2] Cut and fill calculations to agree with soil moving permit.
[3] Drainage calculations.
[4] All seepage pits being installed to have a percolation test.
[5] Site plan showing all topographical contours prepared by a
registered design professional.
[6] Total rear yard coverage for accessory structures and/or
use not to exceed 10%.
[7] Pool to be a minimum of 20 feet from all property lines.
[8] Pool equipment, walkways, decking and pool patios to be a
minimum of 15 feet from all property lines.
[9] Cabanas (under 150 square feet) to be a minimum of five
feet from all property lines.
[10] The Construction Code Official may request an escrow
deposit of $1,500 for engineering review. In exceptional
circumstances, additional escrows may be required for
engineering review.
(2) Plumbing subcode fees, as provided for in this chapter, shall be a
minimum fee of $75 for all residential structures and a minimum
§ 50-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-2
1:149
fee of $150 for all commercial structures. These fees shall be in
addition to the fees, which are set forth in the subsections of this
section, for the specific work proposed.
(a) Fixtures which include water closet, urinal, bathtub, lavatory,
shower, floor drain, sink, dishwasher, drinking fountain, hose
bibb, garbage disposal, bidet, fuel oil piping, and gas piping
(each): $20.
(b) Washing machine: $40.
(c) LP gas tank, water heater (each): $75.
(d) Interceptor/separator, fixture pump, backflow preventer,
water-cooled or A/C refrigeration unit, and active solar system
(each): $75.
(e) Sewer connection, water service connection, stacks (each):
$75.
(f) Grease trap: $75.
(g) Sewer pump: $75.
(h) Steam boiler and hot water boiler (each): $75.
(3) Electric subcode fees, as provided for in this chapter, shall be a
minimum fee of $75 for all residential structures and a minimum
fee of $150 for all commercial structures. These fees shall be in
addition to the fees, which are set forth in the subsections of this
section, for the specific work proposed.
(a) Rough and final wiring (one to 50) outlets including switching,
lighting and receptacle outlets, detectors, light poles,
fractional HP motors, emergency and exit lights,
communication points, alarm devices, $75; each additional 25
outlets, $30.
(b) Range/oven: $40.
(c) Dryer, electric: $40.
(d) Water heater, electric: $75.
(e) Heating, electric, baseboard, space heater, air handler: $40.
(f) Furnace, gas or oil, residential central HVAC, solar heat: $40.
(g) Dishwasher, garbage disposal: $40.
(h) Pools:
[1] Pool with UW lights: $75.
[2] Storable pool/spa/hot tub: $75.
§ 50-2 PARK RIDGE CODE § 50-2
1:150
[3] Pool and patio bonding: $75.
(i) Service panels, entrances, subpanels:
[1] Up to 100 amps: $100.
[2] One hundred fifty amps to 400 amps: $200.
[3] Larger than 400 amps: $300.
(j) Temporary service:
[1] Residential: $150.
[2] Commercial: $300.
(k) Each HVAC unit, air conditioner, motor, generator, power
transformer, compressor, electric sign, transfer switch.
[1] Up to 20 hp or kilowatts: $75.
[2] Over 20 to 40 hp or kilowatts: $100.
[3] Over 40 to 75 hp or kilowatts: $150.
[4] Greater than 75 hp or kilowatts: $200.
(l) Load management device on all new residential and
commercial central air-conditioning unit installations; a load
management device shall be included as part of the
installation. The application/inspection fee for this device shall
be $60.
(m) Solar panels:
[1] Up to 20 panels: $75.
[2] Each additional 10 panels: $40.
[3] Transfer switch: $75.
(4) Fire subcode fees, as provided for in this chapter, shall be a
minimum fee of $75 for residential structures and a minimum fee of
$150 for commercial structures. These fees shall be in addition to
the fees, which are set forth in the subsections of this section, for
the specific work proposed.
(a) Sprinklers:
Number of Heads Fee
Up to 49 $200
Up to 99 $300
100 to 250 Additional $150
Over 250 $550
§ 50-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-2
1:151
(b) Smoke, heat detectors, CO detectors, pulls, water/flow:
Quantity Fee
1 to 10 $200
11 to 50 (each additional 10) $20
Over 50 (each additional 10) $20
Duct smoke detectors (each) $60
(c) Pre-engineered systems which include CO2 suppression, halon
suppression, foam suppression, FM200 suppression, wet
chemical and dry chemical (each): $200.
(d) Miscellaneous:
[1] Stand pipes (each): $200.
[2] Kitchen hood exhaust system (each): $200.
[3] Incinerators (each): $100.
[4] Crematoriums (each): $100.
[5] Gas- and oil-fired appliances (each): $75.
[6] Installation of underground storage tank:
[a] Use Group R5 (each): $75.
[b] All other use groups (each): $150.
[7] Installation of aboveground storage tank:
[a] Up to 5,000 gallons (each): $200.
[b] Over 5,000 gallons (each): $300.
[8] Fireplaces, wood-burning stoves, etc.: $75.
[9] Smoke control systems: $200.
[10] Exit signs and emergency light with battery backup etc.
(per fixture): $20.
[11] Chimney liners: $75 each.
(5) Certificate of occupancy fees:
(a) For a certificate of occupancy (CO) indicating that construction
authorized by a construction permit is completed in
accordance with the approved plans and the Uniform
Construction Code regulations. A certificate of occupancy is
required when there are two or more subcodes and one of the
subcodes is building. Prepayment at the time of issuing the
§ 50-2 PARK RIDGE CODE § 50-2
1:152
construction permit is required: 10% of the total of all subcode
fees; minimum fee: $50.
(b) For a certificate of continued occupancy (CCO) pursuant to a
change of use: $25; fee is not refundable.
(6) Reinstatement of a lapsed construction permit:
(a) Recalculation of the construction permit shall be required
utilizing the most current Building Department fee schedule
applied to all work which is to be performed.
(b) The reinstatement fee shall be 25% of the recalculated value.
(c) Minimum reinstatement fee: $75.
(7) Annual construction permit:
(a) The fee for an annual construction permit shall be paid
annually. This fee shall be first fee based on the number of
maintenance workers who are employed by the facility, and
who are primarily engaged in work that is governed by a
subcode.
(b) Fees shall be as follows:
Number of Workers
Fee
(per worker)
1 to 25 $650
Over 25 $350
Training fee per subcode $150
(8) Application to the Construction Board of Appeals: $100.
(9) Application for a variation: $50.
(10) Exemption from fees. Any religious, charitable, benevolent,
fraternal or nonprofit association, corporation, or organization
shall be exempt from the payment of fees under this chapter. DCA
state fees may be required.
(11) The Construction Official shall, on or before February 10 of each
year, with the advice of the subcode officials and in consultation
with the Municipal Finance Officer, prepare and submit to the
governing body a report recommending a fee schedule based on
the operating expenses of the agency.
(12) In order to provide for the certification and technical support
programs required by Uniform Construction Code, the enforcing
agency shall collect, in addition to the fees specified above, a
surcharge fee computed in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.19. Said
surcharge fees shall be remitted to the Bureau of Housing
§ 50-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-2
1:153
Inspection, Department of Community Affairs, on a quarterly basis
for the fiscal quarter ending September 30, December 31, March
31 and June 30, and no later than one month next succeeding the
end of the quarter for which it is due.
(13) The enforcing agency shall report annually at the end of the each
fiscal year to the Bureau of Housing Inspection, and not later than
July 31, the total amount of the surcharge fee collected in the fiscal
year. In the fiscal year in which the regulations first become
effective, said report shall be for the third and fourth quarters only.
(14) Fees for any other permits not specifically set forth herein shall be
as established by the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs
pursuant to the Uniform Construction Code Act,43 its amendments
and supplements. An additional fee shall be paid by the applicant
when plans of a special design are filed with the Borough of Park
Ridge and the determination of the Construction Code Official is
that said plan shall be forwarded for review to the New Jersey
Department of Community Affairs, Trenton, New Jersey, or a stateapproved
private firm. The fee charged for such review shall be
deducted from any other fees required by this chapter or any other
municipal ordinance.
D. The Construction Official shall, on or before February 10, of each year,
with the advice of the subcode officials and in consultation with the
Municipal Finance Officer, prepare and submit to the governing body a
report recommending a fee schedule based on the operating expenses
of the agency. [Amended 2-11-1991 by Ord. No. 91-1]
E. In order to provide for the certification and technical programs
required by the Uniform Construction Code, the Borough shall collect,
in addition to the fees specified above, a New Jersey state permit
surcharge fee for all construction based on value and volume in
accordance with the latest amendments to the New Jersey Uniform
Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.19). Said fees shall he remitted to
the Bureau of Housing Inspection, Department of Community Affairs,
on a quarterly basis for the fiscal quarter ending September 30,
December 31, March 31, and June 30, and no later than one month next
succeeding the end of the quarter for which it is due. [Amended
2-11-1991 by Ord. No. 91-1; 9-12-1995 by Ord. No. 95-13;
4-28-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-008]
F. The enforcing agency shall report annually at the end of each fiscal year
to the Bureau of Housing Inspection, and not later than July 31, the
total amount of the surcharge fee collected in the fiscal year. In the
fiscal year in which the regulations first become effective, said report
shall be for the third and fourth quarters only.
43.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
§ 50-2 PARK RIDGE CODE § 50-2
1:154
§ 50-3. Special design fee. [Amended 4-18-1977 by Ord. No. 77-7]
An additional fee shall be paid by the applicant when plans of a special
design are filed with the Borough of Park Ridge and the determination
of the Construction Code Official is that said plan shall be forwarded for
review to the BOCA office in Chicago, Illinois, the New Jersey Department
of Community Affairs, Trenton, New Jersey, or a state-approved private firm.
The fee charged for such review shall be deducted from any other fees
required by this chapter or any other municipal ordinance.
§ 50-4. Preparation of plans.
All plans must be prepared by either an architect or engineer licensed
in the State of New Jersey. Each page of the plans must bear his seal
and signature. Owners may prepare plans for their own dwelling or a
secondary structure thereto, e.g., a garage; however, these plans must be
accompanied by an affidavit.
§ 50-5. Adoption of standards by reference. [Added 12-27-1979 by
Ord. No. 79-19]
§ 50-6. Stormwater controls. [Added 7-10-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-18]
Any addition or development to an existing structure which is equal to
or greater than 25% of the existing primary dwelling and structure shall
comply with the following provisions:
G. Fees for any other permits not specifically set forth herein shall be as
established by the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs
pursuant to the Uniform Construction Code Act, its amendments and
supplements.
A. Pursuant to the authority of the State Uniform Construction Code Act
(P.L. 1975, c. 217), the Borough of Park Ridge adopted on December 30,
1976, the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code as constituting the
construction standards and regulations within the Borough of Park
Ridge.
B. Said New Jersey Uniform Construction Code shall be incorporated in
this chapter by reference and made a part hereof as though it had been
set forth herein at length.
C. Copies of said Uniform Construction Code have been placed on file in
the office of the Borough Clerk and in the Construction Code Office and
shall remain on file for use and examination by the public so long as this
chapter shall remain in effect.
A. The owner of the property shall provide the cut and fill calculations for
all soil that is moved.
§ 50-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-6
1:155
Chapter 51
DEVELOPMENT FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use procedures — See Ch. 74.
Subdivision and site plan review — See Ch.
87.
Zoning — See Ch. 101.
§ 51-1. Purpose.
B. A soil moving permit will be required if 50 or more cubic yards is
disturbed by the addition or development. If 300 or more cubic yards is
to be distributed, then a soil moving application must be submitted
which sets forth the amount of soil disturbed, the amount to be moved
on site and the amount to be exported from the site.
C. The owner must provide a site plan showing all topographic features of
the property as they existed before the addition or development.
D. If the property has a slope which is equal to or greater than 10% or a
six-foot grade change, the topographic changes must be shown on a
plan prepared by a licensed professional, and the existing and proposed
contours or grades must be clearly set forth on the plan.
E. All stormwater, based upon a twenty-five-year storm event, must be
retained on the property. The owner must provide drainage calculations
and design for the entire structure, including calculations for existing
drainage and calculations for the proposed drainage, all of which must
be signed by a licensed professional.
F. All roof leaders from existing and proposed roofs shall be directed into
seepage pits, and those pits must be included in the drainage
calculations, including the overflow from those pits.
G. An engineering escrow, in the amount of $1,500, must be posted for
review of the drainage calculations, topographic features, and the
proposed design and inspection of the addition or development by the
Borough Engineer prior to any permit being issued. [Amended
2-24-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04]
H. In exceptional circumstances, the Construction Code Official may
require additional escrows for engineering review based upon the
circumstances of the addition or development.
A. In Holmdel Builder's Association v. Holmdel Township, 121 N.J. 550
(1990), the New Jersey Supreme Court determined that mandatory
development fees are authorized by the Fair Housing Act of 1985 (the
§ 50-6 PARK RIDGE CODE § 51-1
1:156
§ 51-2. COAH approval required.
§ 51-3. Definitions.
The following terms, as used in this chapter, shall have the following
meanings:
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development included in the
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and includes, but is not limited to,
an inclusionary development, a municipal construction project or a 100%
affordable development.
COAH or the COUNCIL — The New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing,
established under the Act, which has primary jurisdiction for the
administration of housing obligations in accordance with sound regional
planning consideration in the state.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any
land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including the
holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
Act), N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq., and the State Constitution, subject to
the Council on Affordable Housing's (COAH's) adoption of rules.
B. Pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46, § 8 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.2) and the
Statewide Non-Residential Development Fee Act (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.1
through 40:55D-8.7), COAH is authorized to adopt and promulgate
regulations necessary for the establishment, implementation, review,
monitoring and enforcement of municipal affordable housing trust
funds and corresponding spending plans. Municipalities that are under
the jurisdiction of the Council or court of competent jurisdiction and
have a COAH-approved spending plan may retain fees collected from
nonresidential development.
C. This chapter establishes standards for the collection, maintenance, and
expenditure of development fees pursuant to COAH's regulations and in
accordance with P.L. 2008, c. 46, §§ 844 and 32 through 38.45 Fees
collected pursuant to this chapter shall be used for the sole purpose of
providing low- and moderate-income housing. This chapter shall be
interpreted within the framework of COAH's rules on development fees,
codified at N.J.A.C. § 5:97-8.
A. This chapter shall not be effective until approved by COAH pursuant to
N.J.A.C. § 5:96-5.1.
B. The Borough of Park Ridge shall not spend development fees until
COAH has approved a plan for spending such fees in conformance with
N.J.A.C. § 5:97-8.10 and N.J.A.C. § 5:96-5.3.
44.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.2.
45.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.1 through 40:55D-8.7.
§ 51-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 51-3
1:157
DEVELOPMENT FEE — Money paid by a developer for the improvement of
property as permitted in N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.3.
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — The assessed value of a property divided
by the current average ratio of assessed to true value for the municipality
in which the property is situated, as determined in accordance with §§ 1, 5,
and 6 of P.L. 1973, c. 123 (N.J.S.A. 54:1-35a through 54:1-35c).
GREEN BUILDING STRATEGIES — Those strategies that minimize the
impact of development on the environment and enhance the health, safety
and well-being of residents by producing durable, low-maintenance,
resource-efficient housing while making optimum use of existing
infrastructure and community services.
§ 51-4. Residential development fees.
A. Imposed fees.
(1) Within all zone districts, residential developers, except for
developers of the types of development specifically exempted
below, shall pay a fee of 1% of the equalized assessed value for
residential development, provided no increased density is
permitted.
(2) When an increase in residential density pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d(5) (known as a "d" variance) has been permitted,
developers may be required to pay a development fee of 6% of the
equalized assessed value for each additional unit that may be
realized. However, if the zoning on a site has changed during the
two-year period preceding the filing of such a variance application,
the base density for the purposes of calculating the bonus
development fee shall be the highest density permitted by right
during the two-year period preceding the filing of the variance
application.
B. Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for residential
development.
(1) Affordable housing developments and developments where the
developer has made a payment in lieu of on-site construction of
affordable units shall be exempt from development fees.
(2) Developments that have received preliminary or final site plan
approval prior to the adoption of a municipal development fee
ordinance shall be exempt from development fees, unless the
developer seeks a substantial change in the approval. Where a site
plan approval does not apply, a zoning and/or building permit shall
be synonymous with preliminary or final site plan approval for this
purpose. The fee percentage shall be vested on the date that the
building permit is issued.
§ 51-3 PARK RIDGE CODE § 51-4
1:158
§ 51-5. Nonresidential development fees.
(3) Developers who expand, enlarge, or improve existing single-family
or two-family residences, unless the expansion, enlargement, or
improvement leads to the creation of additional dwelling units.
(4) An owner-occupied residential structure demolished and replaced
as a result of a fire, flood or natural disaster shall be exempt from
paying a development fee.
A. Imposed fees.
(1) Within all zoning districts, nonresidential developers, except for
developers of the types of development specifically exempted, shall
pay a fee equal to 2 1/2% of the equalized assessed value of the
land and improvements, for all new nonresidential construction on
an unimproved lot or lots.
(2) Nonresidential developers, except for developers of the types of
development specifically exempted, shall also pay a fee equal to
2 1/2% of the increase in equalized assessed value resulting from
any additions to existing structures to be used for nonresidential
purposes.
B. Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for
nonresidential development.
(1) The nonresidential portion of a mixed-use inclusionary or market
rate development shall be subject to the 2 1/2% development fee,
unless otherwise exempted below.
(2) The 2 1/2% fee shall not apply to an increase in equalized assessed
value resulting from alterations, change in use within existing
footprint, reconstruction, renovations and repairs.
(3) The 2 1/2% fee shall not apply to developers of any not-for-profit
use; federal, state and municipal government uses; churches and
other places of worship; and public schools.
(4) Nonresidential developments shall be exempt from the payment of
nonresidential development fees in accordance with the
exemptions required pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46,46 as specified in
the Form N-RDF "State of New Jersey Non-Residential
Development Certification/Exemption" form. Any exemption
claimed by a developer shall be substantiated by that developer.
(5) A developer of a nonresidential development exempted from the
nonresidential development fee pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 4647 shall
be subject to it at such time the basis for the exemption no longer
46.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.1 et seq.
47.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.1 et seq.
§ 51-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 51-5
1:159
§ 51-6. Collection procedures; appeals.
applies and shall make the payment of the nonresidential
development fee, in that event, within three years after that event
or after the issuance of the final certificate of occupancy of the
nonresidential development, whichever is later.
(6) If a property which was exempted from the collection of a
nonresidential development fee thereafter ceases to be exempt
from property taxation, the owner of the property shall remit the
fees required pursuant to this section within 45 days of the
termination of the property tax exemption. Unpaid nonresidential
development fees under these circumstances may be enforceable
by the Borough of Park Ridge as a lien against the real property of
the owner.
A. Upon the granting of a preliminary, final or other applicable approval
for a development, the applicable approving authority shall direct its
staff to notify the Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a
building permit.
B. For nonresidential developments only, the developer shall also be
provided with a copy of Form N-RDF "State of New Jersey Non-
Residential Development Certification/Exemption" to be completed as
per the instructions provided. The Developer of a nonresidential
development shall complete Form N-RDF as per the instructions
provided. The Construction Official shall verify the information
submitted by the nonresidential developer as per the instructions
provided in the Form N-RDF. The Tax Assessor shall verify exemptions
and prepare estimated and final assessments as per the instructions
provided in Form N-RDF.
C. The Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a building
permit shall notify the local Tax Assessor of the issuance of the first
building permit for a development which is subject to a development
fee.
D. Within 90 days of receipt of that notice, the Municipal Tax Assessor,
based on the plans filed, shall provide an estimate of the equalized
assessed value of the development.
E. The Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a final
certificate of occupancy notifies the local Assessor of any and all
requests for the scheduling of a final inspection on property which is
subject to a development fee.
F. Within 10 business days of a request for the scheduling of a final
inspection, the Municipal Assessor shall confirm or modify the
previously estimated equalized assessed value of the improvements of
the development; calculate the development fee; and thereafter notify
the developer of the amount of the fee.
§ 51-5 PARK RIDGE CODE § 51-6
1:160
§ 51-7. Affordable housing trust fund.
G. Should the Borough of Park Ridge fail to determine or notify the
developer of the amount of the development fee within 10 business days
of the request for final inspection, the developer may estimate the
amount due and pay that estimated amount consistent with the dispute
process set forth in Subsection b of § 37 of P.L. 2008, c. 46 (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-8.6).
H. Fifty percent of the development fee shall be collected at the time of
issuance of the building permit. The remaining portion shall be
collected at the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. The developer
shall be responsible for paying the difference between the fee
calculated at the time of issuance of the building permit and that
determined at issuance of the certificate of occupancy.
I. Appeal of development fees.
(1) A developer may challenge residential development fees imposed
by filing a challenge with the County Board of Taxation. Pending a
review and determination by the Board, collected fees shall be
placed in an interest-bearing escrow account by the Borough of
Park Ridge. Appeals from a determination of the Board may be
made to the tax court in accordance with the provisions of the State
Tax Uniform Procedure Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1 et seq., within 90 days
after the date of such determination. Interest earned on amounts
escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing party.
(2) A developer may challenge nonresidential development fees
imposed by filing a challenge with the Director of the Division of
Taxation. Pending a review and determination by the Director,
which shall be made within 45 days of receipt of the challenge,
collected fees shall be placed in an interest-bearing escrow account
by the Borough of Park Ridge. Appeals from a determination of the
Director may be made to the tax court in accordance with the
provisions of the State Tax Uniform Procedure Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1
et seq., within 90 days after the date of such determination.
Interest earned on amounts escrowed shall be credited to the
prevailing party.
A. There is hereby created a separate, interest-bearing housing trust fund
to be maintained by the Chief Financial Officer for the purpose of
depositing development fees collected from residential and
nonresidential developers and proceeds from the sale of units with
extinguished controls.
B. The following additional funds shall be deposited in the affordable
housing trust fund and shall at all times be identifiable by source and
amount:
(1) Payments in lieu of on-site construction of affordable units;
§ 51-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 51-7
1:161
§ 51-8. Use of funds.
(2) Developer-contributed funds to make 10% of the adaptable
entrances in a townhouse or other multistory attached
development accessible;
(3) Rental income from municipally operated units;
(4) Repayments from affordable housing program loans;
(5) Recapture funds;
(6) Proceeds from the sale of affordable units; and
(7) Any other funds collected in connection with the Borough of Park
Ridge's affordable housing program.
C. Within seven days from the opening of the trust fund account, the
Borough of Park Ridge shall provide COAH with written authorization,
in the form of a three-party escrow agreement between the
municipality, the bank, and COAH to permit COAH to direct the
disbursement of the funds as provided for in N.J.A.C. § 5:97-8.13(b).
D. All interest accrued in the housing trust fund shall only be used on
eligible affordable housing activities approved by COAH.
A. The expenditure of all funds shall conform to a spending plan approved
by COAH. Funds deposited in the housing trust fund may be used for
any activity approved by COAH to address the Borough of Park Ridge's
fair share obligation and may be set up as a grant or revolving loan
program. Such activities include, but are not limited to, preservation or
purchase of housing for the purpose of maintaining or implementing
affordability controls, rehabilitation, new construction of affordable
housing units and related costs, accessory apartment, market to
affordable, or regional housing partnership programs, conversion of
existing nonresidential buildings to create new affordable units, green
building strategies designed to be cost-saving and in accordance with
accepted national or state standards, purchase of land for affordable
housing, improvement of land to be used for affordable housing,
extensions or improvements of roads and infrastructure to affordable
housing sites, financial assistance designed to increase affordability,
administration necessary for implementation of the Housing Element
and Fair Share Plan, or any other activity as permitted pursuant to
N.J.A.C. § 5:97-8.7 through 5:97-8.9 and specified in the approved
spending plan.
B. Funds shall not be expended to reimburse the Borough of Park Ridge
for past housing activities.
C. At least 30% of all development fees collected and interest earned shall
be used to provide affordability assistance to low- and moderate-income
households in affordable units included in the municipal Fair Share
§ 51-7 PARK RIDGE CODE § 51-8
1:162
§ 51-9. Monitoring.
The Borough of Park Ridge shall complete and return to COAH all
monitoring forms included in monitoring requirements related to the
collection of development fees from residential and nonresidential
developers, payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site, funds
from the sale of units with extinguished controls, barrier-free escrow funds,
rental income, repayments from affordable housing program loans, and
any other funds collected in connection with the Borough of Park Ridge's
housing program, as well as to the expenditure of revenues and
implementation of the plan certified by COAH. All monitoring reports shall
be completed on forms designed by COAH.
Plan. One-third of the affordability assistance portion of development
fees collected shall be used to provide affordability assistance to those
households earning 30% or less of median income by region.
(1) Affordability assistance programs may include down payment
assistance, security deposit assistance, low-interest loans, rental
assistance, assistance with homeowners association or
condominium fees and special assessments, and assistance with
emergency repairs.
(2) Affordability assistance to households earning 30% or less of
median income may include buying down the cost of low- or
moderate-income units in the municipal Fair Share Plan to make
them affordable to households earning 30% or less of median
income.
(3) Payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site and funds
from the sale of units with extinguished controls shall be exempt
from the affordability assistance requirement.
D. The Borough of Park Ridge may contract with a private or public entity
to administer any part of its Housing Element and Fair Share Plan,
including the requirement for affordability assistance, in accordance
with N.J.A.C. § 5:96-18.
E. No more than 20% of all revenues collected from development fees may
be expended on administration, including, but not limited to, salaries
and benefits for municipal employees or consultant fees necessary to
develop or implement a new construction program, a Housing Element
and Fair Share Plan, and/or an affirmative marketing program. In the
case of a rehabilitation program, no more than 20% of the revenues
collected from development fees shall be expended for such
administrative expenses. Administrative funds may be used for income
qualification of households, monitoring the turnover of sale and rental
units, and compliance with COAH's monitoring requirements. Legal or
other fees related to litigation opposing affordable housing sites or
objecting to the Council's regulations and/or action are not eligible uses
of the affordable housing trust fund.
§ 51-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 51-10
1:163
§ 51-10. Ongoing collection of fees.
The ability for the Borough of Park Ridge to impose, collect and expend
development fees shall expire with its substantive certification unless the
Borough of Park Ridge has filed an adopted Housing Element and Fair
Share Plan with COAH, has petitioned for substantive certification, and
has received COAH's approval of its development fee ordinance. If the
Borough of Park Ridge fails to renew its ability to impose and collect
development fees prior to the expiration of substantive certification, it may
be subject to forfeiture of any or all funds remaining within its municipal
trust fund. Any funds so forfeited shall be deposited into the "New Jersey
Affordable Housing Trust Fund" established pursuant to § 20 of P.L. 1985,
c. 222 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-320). The Borough of Park Ridge shall not impose a
residential development fee on a development that receives preliminary or
final site plan approval after the expiration of its substantive certification or
judgment of compliance, nor shall the Borough of Park Ridge retroactively
impose a development fee on such a development. The Borough of Park
Ridge shall not expend development fees after the expiration of its
substantive certification or judgment of compliance.
Chapter 52
DOGS, CATS AND OTHER ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Health — See Ch. 17.
Police Department — See Ch. 26.
Peace and good order; parental
responsibility — See Ch. 78.
§ 51-10 PARK RIDGE CODE § 51-10
1:164
ARTICLE I
Dogs
[Adopted 12-9-1963]
§ 52-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DOG — Any dog, bitch or spayed bitch.
DOG OF LICENSING AGE — Any dog which has attained the age of seven
months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
KENNEL — Any establishment wherein or whereon the business of
boarding or selling dogs or breeding dogs for sale is carried on, except a pet
shop.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a dog, includes every
person having a right of property in such dog and every person who has
such dog in his keeping.
PET SHOP — Any room or group of rooms, cage or exhibition pen, not part
of a kennel, wherein dogs for sale are kept or displayed.
POUND — An establishment for the confinement of dogs seized either under
the provisions of this article or otherwise.
SHELTER — Any establishment where dogs are received, housed and
distributed without charge.
§ 52-2. License required.
No person shall keep or harbor any dog within the Borough without first
obtaining a license therefor, to be issued by the Borough Clerk upon
application by the owner and payment of the prescribed fee, and no person
shall keep or harbor any dog except in compliance with the provisions of
this article.
§ 52-3. Annual license and registration tag.
Any person who shall own, keep or harbor a dog of licensing age shall, in
the month of January of each year and annually thereafter, apply for and
procure from the Borough Clerk a license and official metal registration tag
for each such dog so owned, kept or harbored, and shall place upon each
such dog a collar or harness with the registration tag securely fastened
thereto.
§ 52-4. Fees; expiration date; Seeing Eye dogs. [Amended
12-12-1966 by Ord. No. 66-16; 12-29-1977 by Ord. No. 77-33;
12-29-1981 by Ord. No. 81-15; 12-27-1983 by Ord. No. 83-32;
12-26-1989 by Ord. No. 89-34; 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-03;
9-27-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-020]
§ 52-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-4
1:165
§ 52-5. License and tag issued in other municipalities.
Only one license and registration tag shall be required in any licensing
year for any dog owned in New Jersey, and such license and tag issued by
any other municipality of this state shall be accepted by the Borough as
evidence of compliance with §§ 52-3 and 52-4.
§ 52-6. Newly acquired dogs and dogs of licensing age.
The owner of any newly acquired dog of licensing age or of any dog which
attains licensing age shall make application for a license and registration
tag for such dog within 10 days after such acquisition or age attainment.
§ 52-7. Contents of application; information to State Department of
Health.
A. The person applying for the license and registration tag shall pay a fee
of $15 for each spayed and/or neutered dog, which includes the sum of
$1 for the registration tag of each dog and a surcharge of the sum of
$0.20 to be remitted to the Pilot Clinic Fund of the State of New Jersey.
The person applying for the license and registration tag shall pay a fee
of $20 for each nonspayed and/or nonneutered dog of reproductive age,
which includes the sum of $1 for the registration tag of each such dog, a
surcharge of the sum of $0.20 to be remitted to the Pilot Clinic Fund of
the State of New Jersey and a surcharge of the sum of $3 to be remitted
to the Animal Population Control Fund of the State of New Jersey. The
same fees shall apply for annual renewals of license and registration
tags, and said licenses, registration tags and renewals thereof shall
expire on the last day of January of each year.
B. Dogs used as guides for blind persons and commonly known as "Seeing
Eye" dogs shall be licensed and registered as other dogs as hereinabove
provided for, except that the owner or keeper of such dog shall not be
required to pay any fee therefor.
C. State law requires that all dogs seven months old and over must be
licensed every year by January 31. If the license has not been purchased
by March 1 of any year, an additional late fee of $15 will be charged per
household owning one or more dogs, in addition to the license fee. An
owner whose dog turns seven months after March 1, or a new resident
who moves into Park Ridge after March 1 of a given year, shall not be
charged a late fee. [Amended 5-23-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-005]
A. The application shall state the breed, sex, age, color and markings of
the dog for which a license and registration are sought, whether it is of
a long- or shorthaired variety and the name, street and post office
address of the owner and the person who shall keep or harbor such dog.
B. The information on said application and the registration number issued
for the dog shall be preserved for a period of three years by the
§ 52-4 PARK RIDGE CODE § 52-7
1:166
§ 52-8. Dogs brought into Borough.
§ 52-9. Removal of tag or attaching tag wrongfully.
No person, except an officer in the performance of his duties, shall remove a
registration tag from the collar of any dog without the consent of the owner,
nor shall any person attach a registration tag to a dog for which it was not
issued.
§ 52-10. License required for dog establishments; individual dog
licenses not required.
Borough Clerk. Registration numbers shall be issued in the order of the
applications.
C. The Borough Clerk shall forward to the State Department of Health
each month, on forms furnished by said Department, an accurate
account of registration numbers issued or otherwise disposed of.
D. The Borough Clerk or other official designated by the governing body of
the Borough to license dogs therein shall not grant any such license and
official metal registration tag for any dog unless the owner thereof
provides evidence that the dog to be licensed and registered has been
inoculated with a rabies vaccine of a type approved by and
administered in accordance with the recommendations of the United
States Department of Agriculture and the United States Department of
Health, Education and Welfare or has been certified exempt as provided
by regulations of the State Department of Health. Such vaccination
shall be repeated at intervals as provided by regulations of the State
Department of Health and shall be administered by a duly licensed
veterinarian or by such other veterinarian permitted by law to do the
same. The State Department of Health shall promulgate regulations
providing for the recognized duration of immunity, interval of
inoculation, certificate of vaccination, certificate of exemption and such
other matters related to this act. [Added 12-29-1977 by Ord. No.
77-33]
A. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the Borough any
dog licensed in another state for the current year and bearing a
registration tag and shall keep the same or permit the same to be kept
within the Borough for a period of more than 90 days shall immediately
apply for a license and registration tag for each such dog, unless a
license for such dog is not required under § 52-10.
B. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the Borough any
unlicensed dog and shall keep the same or permit the same to be kept
within the Borough for a period of more than 10 days shall immediately
apply for a license and registration tag for each such dog, unless a
license for such dog is not required under § 52-10.
§ 52-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-10
1:167
§ 52-11. Application for license to operate dog establishment.
The application shall describe the premises where the establishment for a
kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound is located or is proposed to be located
and the purpose or purposes for which it is to be maintained, and shall be
accompanied by the written approval of the Health Officer of the Borough
Board of Health, showing compliance with the local and state rules and
regulations governing the location of and sanitation at such establishments.
§ 52-12. Revocation of license to operate dog establishment.
All licenses issued for a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall be subject
to revocation by the Council on recommendation of the State Department
of Health or the Borough Board of Health for failure to comply with the
applicable provisions of this article or the rules and regulations of the State
Department of Health governing the same, after the licensee has been
afforded a hearing by either the State Department of Health or the Borough
Board of Health.
§ 52-13. License fees for dog establishments; shelters and pounds
exempted.
The annual license fee for a kennel providing accommodations for 10 or less
dogs shall be $10 and for more than 10 dogs, $25. The annual license fee
for a pet shop shall be $10. No fee shall be charged for a shelter or pound.
§ 52-14. Dogs off premises of establishments.
No dog kept in a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall be permitted off
such premises except on leash or in a crate or under other safe control.
§ 52-15. Disposition of fees collected.
A. Any person who keeps or operates or proposes to establish a kennel, a
pet shop, a shelter or a pound shall apply to the Borough Clerk for a
license entitling him to keep or operate such establishment. All licenses
issued for such establishments shall state the purpose for which the
establishment is maintained, shall expire on the last day of January of
each year and shall not be transferable to another owner or different
premises.
B. Any person holding such license shall not be required to secure
individual licenses for dogs owned by such licensee and kept at such
establishments.
A. License fees and other moneys collected or received under the
provisions of this article, except registration tag fees, shall be
forwarded to the Borough Treasurer within 30 days after collection or
receipt and shall be placed in a special account separate from any of the
other accounts of the Borough. Such moneys shall be used for the
following purposes only: for collecting, keeping and disposing of dogs
§ 52-10 PARK RIDGE CODE § 52-15
1:168
§ 52-16. List of licensed dog establishments forwarded to State
Department of Health.
The Borough Clerk shall forward to the State Department of Health a list
of all kennels, pet shops, shelters and pounds licensed, within 30 days
after the licenses therefor are issued, which list shall include the name and
address of the licensee and the kind of license issued.
§ 52-17. Annual canvass; report.
The Chief of Police or such official, police officer or other person designated
by the said Chief shall annually cause a canvass to be made of all dogs
owned, kept or harbored within the limits of the Borough. He shall report
on or before May 1 of each year to the Borough Clerk, to the Borough Board
of Health and to the State Department of Health the result thereof, setting
forth in separate columns the names and addresses of persons owning,
keeping or harboring such dogs, the number of licensed dogs owned, kept
or harbored by each of said persons, together with the registration numbers
of each of said dogs, and the number of unlicensed dogs owned, kept or
harbored by each of said persons, together with a complete description of
each of said unlicensed dogs.
§ 52-18. Appointment of Dogcatcher.
The Council may appoint, at such times and for such terms as may from
time to time seem expedient, one or more persons, to be known as
"Dogcatchers," whose duty it shall be to take into custody and impound dogs
as provided in § 52-19, under the direction and supervision of the Chief of
Police.
§ 52-19. Seizure and impoundment; notice; disposition of
unclaimed dogs.
liable to seizure under this article; for local prevention and control
of rabies; for providing antirabic treatment under the direction of the
Borough Board of Health for any person known or suspected to have
been exposed to rabies; for all other purposes prescribed by the
statutes of New Jersey governing the subject; and for administering the
provisions of this article. Any unexpended balance remaining in such
special account shall be retained therein until the end of the third fiscal
year following and may be used for any of the purposes set forth in this
subsection. At the end of the said third fiscal year following and at the
end of each fiscal year thereafter, there shall be transferred from such
special account to the general funds of the Borough any amount then
in such account which is in excess of the total amount paid into said
special account during the last two fiscal years next preceding.
B. The registration tag fee of $0.50 for each dog shall be forwarded within
30 days after collection by the Borough Clerk to the State Department
of Health. [Amended 7-8-1974 by Ord. No. 74-16]
§ 52-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-19
1:169
A. The Chief of Police or any official, police officer or other person
designated by the said Chief shall take into custody and impound or
cause to be taken into custody and impounded, and thereafter
destroyed or disposed of as hereinafter provided in this section:
(1) Any dog off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or
harboring said dog which said official or his agent or agents have
reason to believe is a stray dog.
(2) Any dog off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or
harboring said dog without a current registration tag on its collar.
(3) Any female dog in season off the premises of the owner or of the
person keeping or harboring said dog.
(4) Any dog kept in a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound and off such
establishment and not confined or controlled as prescribed by
§ 52-14.
(5) Any dog running at large in violation of § 52-23.
(6) Any vicious dog off the premises of the owner or person keeping or
harboring said dog in violation of § 52-25.
B. If any dog so seized wears a collar or harness having inscribed thereon
or attached thereto the name and address of any person or a
registration tag, or if the owner or the person keeping or harboring said
dog is known, the Chief of Police or anyone authorized by him shall
forthwith serve on the person whose address is given on the collar, or
on the owner or the person keeping or harboring said dog, if known, a
notice in writing stating that the dog has been seized and will be liable
to be disposed of or destroyed if not claimed within seven days after the
service of the notice.
C. A notice under Subsection B of this section may be served either by
delivering it to the person on whom it is to be served or by leaving it at
the person's usual or last known place of abode or at the address given
on the collar, or by forwarding it by mail in a prepaid letter addressed to
that person at his usual or last known place of abode or at the address
given on the collar.
D. When any dog so seized has been detained for seven days after notice,
when notice can be given as above set forth in this section, or has been
detained for seven after seizure, when notice has not been and cannot
be given as above set forth in this section, and if the owner or person
keeping or harboring said dog has not claimed said dog and paid all
expenses incurred by reason of its detention, including maintenance
not exceeding $1 per day, and if the dog is unlicensed at the time of the
seizure and the owner or person keeping or harboring said dog has not
produced a license and registration tag for said dog, the poundmaster
may cause the dog to be destroyed in a manner causing as little pain as
possible.
§ 52-19 PARK RIDGE CODE § 52-20
1:170
§ 52-20. Authorization to enter premises to seize and impound.
[Amended 7-8-1974 by Ord. No. 74-16]
Any officer or agent authorized or empowered to perform any duty under
this article is hereby authorized to go upon any premises to seize for
impounding any dog or dogs which he may lawfully seize and impound when
such officer is in immediate pursuit of such dog or dogs.
§ 52-21. Interference with authorized persons prohibited.
No person shall hinder, molest or interfere with anyone authorized or
empowered to perform any duty under this article.
§ 52-22. Habitual barking or crying. [Amended 9-14-1964 by Ord.
No. 64-8]
No person shall keep, harbor or maintain any dog which habitually barks
or cries or which, by frequent barking, disturbs the peace and quiet of the
neighborhood and creates a nuisance thereby.
§ 52-23. Running at large prohibited. [Amended 8-14-1972 by Ord.
No. 72-12.]
It shall be unlawful for any dog, whether licensed or not, to run at large
within the Borough. A dog shall be deemed to be running at large when
off the premises of its owner or of the person keeping or harboring such
dog and not on a leash, tether, chain, rope or the like, the overall length of
which, including the handgrip, shall not exceed six feet, held by its owner
or other person able to control such dog.
§ 52-24. Injury to property. [Amended 6-12-1972 by Ord. No. 72-11;
9-13-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-15]
A. No person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of any dog shall
cause, suffer or allow such dog to soil, defile, defecate on or commit any
nuisance on any common thoroughfare, sidewalk, passageway, bypath,
play area, park or any place where people congregate or walk, or upon
any public property whatsoever, or upon any private property without
the permission of the owner of said property.
B. Any owner or keeper who requires the use of a disability assistance
animal shall be exempt from the provisions of this section while such
animal is being used for that purpose.
C. The person who so curbs such dog shall immediately remove all feces
deposited by such dog by any sanitary method approved by the local
health authority. The feces removed from the aforementioned
designated area shall be disposed of by the person owning, harboring,
keeping or in charge of any dog curbed in accordance with the
provisions of this article in a sanitary manner approved by the local
health authority. Whenever any dog is present upon any public property
§ 52-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-24
1:171
§ 52-25. Vicious dogs; complaint, hearing; restriction.
§ 52-26. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-8-1974 by Ord. No.
74-16; 9-13-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-15]
Any person or persons found guilty of violating any provision of this article,
shall be subject to, upon conviction thereof, to a fine of up to $1,000 or up
to 90 days imprisonment, or both, as determined in the discretion of the
Municipal Court.
whatsoever, including streets and sidewalks, or upon any private
property without permission of the property owner, the person owning,
harboring, keeping or in charge or control of such dog shall be in
possession of a sanitary bag or other sanitary utensil, the design of
which permits the removal and disposal of dog feces in a sanitary
manner approved by the local heath authority.
D. The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the local Police
Department, Superintendent of Public Works and the Board of Health.
A. Any dog which has attacked or bitten any human being or which
habitually attacks other dogs or domestic animals is hereby defined to
be a vicious dog, for the purposes of this section.
B. It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police, or the person so designated by
him, to receive and cause to be investigated complaints against dogs.
When any dog complained of shall be deemed by the Chief of Police, or
the person so designated by him, to be a vicious dog, he shall cause a
complaint to be filed against the owner or person harboring such dog
and shall cause said complaint and summons to be served upon said
owner or person harboring such dog for a hearing to be held before the
Municipal Judge, at which time said Judge shall inquire into the facts
and give all interested persons an opportunity to be heard under oath
and to be represented by counsel. [Amended 11-11-1974 by Ord. No.
74-25]
C. If the Judge shall decide in accordance with the evidence before him,
that such dog complained of is a vicious dog as defined by this section,
notice of such decision shall be given to the owner or person harboring
such dog. Thereafter, no such dog determined as aforesaid to be a
vicious dog shall be permitted to run at large as provided in § 52-23
hereof, and that, further, the owner or person harboring such dog shall
have it securely muzzled and under leash at all times when out-of-doors.
The owner or person harboring any such vicious dog who shall suffer or
permit such dog to run at large, or be upon any street, public or private
place in the Borough while not securely muzzled and on a leash shall be
guilty of a violation of this article and in particular of this section.
[Amended 11-11-1974 by Ord. No. 74-25]
§ 52-24 PARK RIDGE CODE § 52-27
1:172
§ 52-27. License fee waived for senior citizens. [Added 7-8-1974 by
Ord. No. 74-16; amended 5-11-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-2; 2-2-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-03]
The fee for licensing any dog as required by this article is waived for
senior citizens of the Borough. A "senior citizen" is defined as a permanent
resident of the Borough, 65 years of age or older. Senior citizens shall be
required to pay $5 for the cost of the tag for each dog.
§ 52-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-27
1:173

ARTICLE II
Cats
[Adopted 10-10-1973 by Ord. No. 73-11]
§ 52-28. Short title.
The short title of this article shall be the "Cat Ordinance of the Borough of
Park Ridge."
§ 52-29. Definitions and word usage.
§ 52-30. License and vaccination required; exceptions. [Added
3-12-1991 by Ord. No. 91-648]
A. Definitions. The words hereinafter defined shall have the meaning
herein indicated for the purposes of this article as follows:
CAT — Any cat, male or female, spayed female or neutered male.
CAT OF LICENSING AGE — Any cat which has attained the age of
seven months.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a cat shall mean and
include every person having a right of property in such cat and every
person who has such cat in his keeping.
PERSON — An individual, firm, partnership, corporation or association
of persons.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Park Ridge in the County of Bergen.
GOVERNING BODY — The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Park
Ridge.
B. Word usage.
(1) The words "and" and "or" may be used interchangeably and either
of the two may be applicable, whichever is more conducive towards
the effectuating of this article.
(2) Personal pronouns shall mean either the singular or the plural,
whichever is applicable and more conducive towards the
effectuating of this article.
(3) The masculine, feminine or the neuter gender shall be implied
whenever it is appropriate and conducive for the effectuating of
this article.
A. No person shall own, keep or harbor any cat within the Borough except
in compliance with the provisions of this article, which includes
48.Editor's Note: Former § 52-30, License required; § 52-31, Application, registration
numbers; § 52-32, Procurement of license and registration tag, collar; § 52-33, Cats
brought into Borough, exception; § 52-34, Fees, renewal, expiration date; § 52-35,
Disposition of fees; and § 52-36, Removal of tag prohibited, attaching tag wrongfully; were
repealed 11-13-1984 by Ord. No. 84-12.
§ 52-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-30
1:175
§ 52-31. Time period for acquisition of license and tag. [Added
3-12-1991 by Ord. No. 91-6]
The owner of any newly acquired cat of licensing age shall apply for a
license and registration tag for such cat within 10 days after such
acquisition or age attainment.
§ 52-32. Cats brought into Borough; exceptions. [Added 3-12-1991
by Ord. No. 91-6]
§ 52-33. Exemption from licensing requirements. [Added 3-12-1991
by Ord. No. 91-6]
Only one license and registration tag shall be required in any licensing year
for any cat owned in New Jersey, and such license and tag issued by any
other municipality of the state shall be accepted by the Borough as evidence
of compliance with this article.
§ 52-34. Application for license; registration numbers; information
to State Department [Added 3-12-1991 by Ord. No. 91-6]
obtaining a license and official metal registration tag therefor issued by
the Borough Clerk and the payment of the prescribed fee.
B. No person shall own, keep, harbor or maintain any cat over seven
months of age within the Borough of Park Ridge unless such cat is
vaccinated. All owners of cats shall provide evidence that the cat to be
licensed has been inoculated with a rabies vaccine of a type approved
by and administered in accordance with the recommendation of the
United States Department of Human Services unless the cat is exempt
under this article.
C. The provisions of this section do not apply to cats held in a cattery, or
those held by a state or federal licensed research facility, or a
veterinary establishment where cats are received or kept for
diagnostic, medical, surgical or other treatments or licensed animal
shelters, pounds, kennels or pet shops.
A. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the Borough any
cat licensed in another state for the current year and bearing a
registration tag and who shall keep the same or permit the same to be
kept within the Borough for a period of more than 90 days shall
immediately apply for a license and registration tag for each such cat.
B. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the Borough any
unlicensed cat and who shall keep the same or permit the same to be
kept within the Borough for a period of more than 10 days shall
immediately apply for a license and registration tag for each such cat.
A. The application shall state the breed, sex, age, color and markings of
the cat for which the license and registration are sought and whether it
§ 52-30 PARK RIDGE CODE § 52-34
1:176
§ 52-35. Fees; license expiration. [Added 3-12-1991 by Ord. No.
91-6]
§ 52-36. Disposition of fees. [Added 3-12-1991 by Ord. No. 91-6]
is of a long-haired or shorthaired variety, the name and street and post
office address of the owner and the person who shall keep or harbor
such cat.
B. Registration numbers shall be issued in the order of the application.
C. The information on said application and the registration number issued
for the cat shall be preserved for a period of three years by the Borough
Clerk. In addition, the Clerk shall forward to the State of New Jersey an
accurate account of registration numbers issued or otherwise disposed
of.
A. The person applying for the license and registration tag shall pay to the
Borough Clerk a fee of $10 for the licensing of each cat that has been
spayed or neutered and $13 for each cat that is nonspayed or
nonneutered. Each license and tag shall be renewed annually, and for
each annual renewal, the fee for the license and for the registration tag
shall be the same as for the original license and registration tag. The
licenses, registration tags and renewals thereof shall expire on the last
day of January of each year. [Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-03]
B. Late fees. [Added 3-10-1992 by Ord. No. 92-5]
(1) If the required license has not been purchased by March 1, a late
fee of $10 will be charged in addition to the license fee.
(2) An owner whose cat turns seven months old after March 1, or a
new resident who moves into Park Ridge after March 1 of a given
year, shall not be charged a late fee. [Added 3-10-1992 by Ord.
No. 92-5]
A. License fees and other moneys collected or received under the
provisions of this article, except registration tag fees, shall be
forwarded to the Borough Treasurer within 30 days after collection or
receipt.
B. Such fees and other moneys shall be placed in a separate account from
any of the other accounts of the Borough and shall be used only for
purposes permitted by law.
C. The registration tag fees shall be forwarded by the Borough Clerk,
within 30 days after collection, to the appropriate agency within the
State of New Jersey.
§ 52-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-36.1
1:177
§ 52-36.1. Forms and tags to be furnished by Borough. [Added
3-12-1991 by Ord. No. 91-6]
License forms and uniform official metal registration tags, designed by the
State Department of Health, shall be furnished by the Borough Clerk and
shall be numbered serially and shall state the year of issuance and the name
of the Borough.
§ 52-36.2. Removal and nontransferability. [Added 3-12-1991 by
Ord. No. 91-6]
No person, except an officer in the performance of his duties, shall remove a
registration tag from the collar of any cat without the consent of the owner,
nor shall any person attach a registration tag to a cat for which it is not
issued.
§ 52-36.3. License fee waived for senior citizens. [Added 3-12-1991
by Ord. No. 91-6; amended 11-11-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-11;
2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-03]
The fee for licensing any cat as required by this article is waived for
senior citizens of the Borough. A "senior citizen" is defined as a permanent
resident of the Borough, 65 years of age or older. Senior citizens shall be
required to pay $5 for the cost of the tag for each cat.
§ 52-37. Enforcement.
§ 52-38. Impoundment of stray cats.
The Animal Warden shall take into custody and impound or cause to be
taken into custody and impounded, and thereafter destroyed or disposed of
as provided in this article, any cat off the premises of the owner or of the
person keeping or harboring the cat on complaint of the police or of the
resident of the premises to which the cat has strayed as well as any cat
which the Animal Warden has substantial reason to believe is abandoned,
diseased or injured.
§ 52-39. Notice of seizure; contents; service.
A. The Mayor, with the consent of the Borough Council, shall have the
power to appoint, contract for or retain a warden and/or poundmaster
or person, firm or company performing such services whose duties it
shall be to enforce the provisions of this article.
B. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as limiting the
authority of the Board of Health, its officers, servants or employees or
the Chief of Police or members of the Police Department to enforce the
provisions of this article when, in the interest of health and safety, thee
deem it necessary.
§ 52-36.1 PARK RIDGE CODE § 52-39
1:178
§ 52-40. Pound fee; maintenance charge; disposal of cats.
A. If any cat so seized wears a collar having inscribed thereon or attached
thereto the name and address of any person or a registration tag or if
the cat has identification as herein provided or if the owner or other
person keeping or harboring the cat is otherwise known, the Animal
Warden or any person authorized by him in that behalf may return the
cat to the owner, and if not, he shall immediately notify by telephone or
mail the person whose address is given on the collar, or the person
whose name is registered as the owner. The notice shall state that the
cat has been seized and will be liable to be disposed of or destroyed if
not claimed within seven days after the service of the notice. A notice
under this section may be served by delivering to the person on whom it
is to be served, or by leaving it at the person's usual or last known place
of abode, or by mailing the same to the address given on the collar or
registration.
B. The Animal Warden shall post a notice on the bulletin board attached to
the Municipal Building of the Borough of Park Ridge, which shall state
the description and place where the cat was seized, but the failure to
post this notice shall in no way affect the validity of any proceedings
required or permitted to be taken by him under this article.
C. Additionally, the Animal Warden shall deposit with the Police
Department of the Borough of Park Ridge, on the same day a cat is
seized, a statement, including, where possible, the name and address of
the person given on the collar, the number on the cat's registration tag,
whether it is of a long-or shorthaired variety, its color and markings and
the date and place where the cat was seized. The Police Department
shall assign a number to said statement and shall give a receipt to the
Animal Warden for said statement showing the number given.
A. For every cat impounded there shall be charged a detention expense to
cover the costs of maintenance, payable by the owner to the pound,
payable at a rate to be determined by contract between the governing
body and the pound.
B. (Reserved)49
C. (Reserved)50
D. The Animal Warden shall be required to detain every identifiable
licensed cat for a period of seven days after its seizure and after notice
has been given pursuant to this article and shall detain every
unlicensed cat or every other cat so seized where it cannot be identified
or notice cannot be given as set forth in this article for a period of seven
49.Editor's Note: Original Subsection B, which required proof of licensing and registration or
proof of ownership for the release of impounded cats, was repealed 11-13-1984 by Ord.
No. 84-12.
50.Editor's Note: Original Subsection C, which set forth fees for the release of unlicensed and
unregistered cats, was repealed 11-13-1984 by Ord. No. 84-12.
§ 52-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-40
1:179
§ 52-41. Abandoning cats and hindering officials prohibited.
No person shall abandon any cat no matter what its age may be within the
Borough of Park Ridge. No person shall hinder, molest or interfere with
anyone authorized or empowered to perform any duties under this article.
§ 52-42. Rabies control.
§ 52-43. Annual canvass; form of report.
The Chief of Police of the Borough of Park Ridge, or such other person
designated for the purpose by resolution of the Mayor and Council, shall
cause a canvass to be made of all cats owned, kept or harbored within the
limits of the Borough and shall, on or before May 1 of each year, make
reports to the Borough Clerk and the Board of Health of the Borough setting
forth in separate columns:
days after its seizure. If, after said respective period of detention,
no person has claimed the cat or will not pay the charges required
hereunder, the Animal Warden may cause the cat to be destroyed upon
prior notice to the Borough in a manner and by methods prescribed
as humane by the American Veterinary Medical Association and the
New Jersey Veterinary Medical Association or to be placed with some
responsible person desiring the cat as a household pet; but the Animal
Warden may sooner dispose of any cat, whether or not the owner is
known or whether or not it is licensed, if said cat is so ill or injured as
to justify such disposal, upon prior notice to the owner where the same
can be determined.
A. Any cat which has bitten or abraded the skin of a human being shall be
forthwith quarantined into the care of a licensed veterinarian of the
State of New Jersey for observation and examination. Before such cat is
released from quarantine, the veterinarian shall certify that to the best
of his knowledge such cat is free of rabies; provided, however, that if
any cat has received antirabic treatment under the direction of the
Borough of Park Ridge Board of Health or a licensed veterinarian within
one year prior to the time that he has bitten or abraded the skin of a
human being, such cat may, in the discretion of the Board of Health, be
quarantined into the care of his owner for a period of not less than 10
days from the day of the bite or abrasion.
B. This section shall not be construed as preventing the Animal Warden,
when necessary, from quarantining the animals referred to herein, so
long as prior to such animal's release, an examination is made by a
licensed veterinarian and a written report thereof is transmitted to the
Borough Board of Health.
A. The names and addresses of persons owning, keeping or harboring
such cats.
§ 52-40 PARK RIDGE CODE § 52-43
1:180
§ 52-44. General regulations.
§ 52-45. Cruelty to cats prohibited.
B. The number of licensed cats owned, kept or harbored by each of said
persons, together with the registration numbers of each of said cats.
C. The number of unlicensed cats owned, kept or harbored by each of said
persons, together with the complete description of each of said
unlicensed cats.
A. No person shall keep or harbor any cat in the Borough, except in
compliance with the provisions of this article.
B. No more than three cats of licensing age shall be kept, maintained or
harbored at any one time for any length of time in any residential
housing unit or on its grounds or in any business establishments or on
its grounds. This restriction shall not apply to properly licensed
kennels, pet shops, pounds and shelters. The provisions of this section
shall become effective after passage and publication as prescribed by
law, but shall not apply to those persons keeping, maintaining or
harboring more than three cats as of the date of the passage of this
article, to the extent that said persons may continue to keep, maintain
or harbor more than three cats, but shall not replace lost, strayed or
deceased cats until the number of cats in their possession shall be
reduced to three.
C. No person owning or having the care, custody or control of any cat shall
suffer or permit such cat to:
(1) Soil or defile or do any injury or damage to any lawn, vegetable
garden, shrubbery, trees, flowers, driveway, ground or any property
of any persons other than that of the owner or person having the
care, custody or control of such cat.
(2) Cause any injury to any person.
(3) Cry, whine or otherwise disturb the peace or quiet of the
neighborhood or the sleep of any person for any unreasonable
length of time.
(4) Be or become a public nuisance or to create a condition hazardous
to safety and health.
D. The habitual howling of a cat or cats in the Borough of Park Ridge is
hereby declared to be a disturbing noise within the meaning of N.J.S.A.
40:48-1, Subsection 8, and a nuisance.
A. No person shall be cruel or inhumane to a cat, said cruelty and
inhumanity consisting of beating, torturing, mutilating, cruelly killing
or clearly failing to provide food, drink or shelter for a cat or
§ 52-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-45
1:181
§ 52-46. Vicious cats.
§ 52-47. Powers of governing body.
The governing body shall have the power to:
abandoning any cat of which he has charge, either as owner or
otherwise.
B. No person owning, keeping, harboring or having the care, custody or
control of any cat shall abandon such a maimed, sick, infirmed or
disabled animal or creature to die.
A. Any cat which has attacked, bitten or abraded any human being or
which habitually attacks other cats or domestic animals is hereby
presumed to be a vicious cat for the purposes of this section until
further determination of facts are made as hereinafter provided.
B. It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police of the Borough of Park Ridge or
any person authorized by him or the governing body of the Borough to
receive and investigate complaints against cats, and when any cat
complained against shall be deemed by such Chief of Police to be a
vicious cat as herein defined, the said officer shall file a complaint in the
Municipal Court of the Borough which shall thereupon cause the owner
or person harboring such cat to be notified in writing of the complaint
and to appear before said Municipal Court Judge at a stated time and
place. Pending the disposition of said complaint, the Chief of Police or
other such authorized person may order that the cat be restricted to the
property of the owner or person harboring said cat.
C. The Municipal Court Judge, at the time set for such hearing, shall
inquire into the facts and give all interested persons an opportunity to
be heard, under oath, and to be represented by counsel, and if the
Municipal Court Judge shall decide that such cat complained of is a
vicious cat as defined by this section, notice of such decision shall be
given to the owner or person harboring such cat.
D. No cat which has been so determined to be a vicious cat shall be
permitted to run at large, or be upon any street or public place in the
Borough. And the owner or person harboring such vicious cat, who shall
suffer or permit such cat to be upon any street, public place or property
in the Borough, other than the property of the owner or person
harboring such cat, shall be guilty of a violation of this article.
A. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there
is error in any order requirement, decision or refusal made by the
Animal Warden, Board of Health, Police Department or other
administrative official or agency based on or made in the enforcement
of this article.
B. Hear and decide in accordance with the provisions of this article
requests for special exceptions from the requirements of this article.
§ 52-45 PARK RIDGE CODE § 52-47
1:182
§ 52-48. Miscellaneous regulations.
§ 52-49. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-13-1984 by Ord. No.
84-12]
Any person who violates any section of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, by punished by a fine of not less than $5 nor more than $50 for
each offense, to be recovered by and in the name of the Borough and or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days.
C. No relief may be granted or action taken under the terms of this
section, unless such a relief can be granted without substantial
detriment to the public good, and will not substantially impair the intent
and purpose of this article.
A. No person owning, keeping or harboring any cat shall suffer or permit it
to run at large upon any private property other than that of the owner
or person keeping or harboring said cat.
B. Any cat found running at large, except as permitted by this article, shall
be deemed to be doing so with the permission of the owner, keeper or
harborer and such person shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this
article.
C. No person owning, keeping or harboring any cat shall suffer or permit it
to enter any food establishment which, for the purposes of this article,
shall include any place used for the production, preparation,
manufacture, packing, storage, transportation or handling of foodstuffs
intended for sale or distribution.
D. Any cat found in any place specified in Subsection C of this section shall
be deemed to be in such place by permission or order of the owner,
harborer or keeper of such cat, and any cat committing any of the acts
specified in § 52-44 shall be deemed to have committed them by
permission or order of the owner, harborer or keeper of such cat and
such owner, harborer or keeper shall be guilty of a violation of this
article.
E. The Animal Warden shall be the person or firm so designated by the
governing body and acting as such from time to time.
§ 52-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-49
1:183

ARTICLE III
Other Animals
[Adopted 12-11-1984 by Ord. No. 84-17]
§ 52-50. Purpose.
The Mayor and Council find it to be in the best interests of the Borough
of Park Ridge to regulate and control the keeping of animals within the
Borough and further find as follows:
§ 52-51. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply:
CLASS I — Includes a lion, tiger, bear or any other animal of a large size
belonging to the biological order Carnivora, or any other undomesticated
mammal or reptile of large size, except as provided in the definitions of
"Class II," "Class III" and "Class IV."
CLASS II — Includes a horse, pony or any other species of animal belonging
to the biological order Perissodactyla, or a cow or any other species of
animal belonging to the biological order Artiodactyla, provided that "Class
II" shall include only animals of which the average weight for an adult of the
species, other than ponies, is greater than 600 pounds.
CLASS III — Includes a sheep, goat or other species of animal belonging
to the biological order Artiodactyla or any specie of animal belonging to
the biological order Perissodactyla, provided that "Class III" shall include
animals, other than ponies and Class IV animals, of which the average
weight for an adult of the species is less than 600 pounds.
CLASS IV — Includes a pigeon (family Columbidae), chicken (Gallus
domesticus), duck (family Anatidae), goose (family Anserinae), rabbit
(Oryctolagus cuniculus) or hare (order Lagomorpha).
DOMESTIC CAT — A member of the Felidae family long kept by man as a
pet, but not including members of the Felidae family that usually live in a
wild state.
A. The keeping of animals may attract and foster the breeding of insects
and rodents and the germination of bacteria and other infectious
microbes, all of which may cause diseases in humans and animals.
B. The keeping of animals may create foul and noxious odors, as well as
disturbing noises detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare.
C. The keeping of animals may result in the running at large of animals in
the community.
D. The keeping of animals may otherwise detrimentally affect the public
health, welfare and safety.
§ 52-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-51
1:185
DOMESTIC DOG — A member of the Canidae family long kept by man as a
pet, but not including members of the Canidae family usually living in a wild
state.
§ 52-52. Exceptions.
Domestic cats and domestic dogs are specifically excluded from the
provisions of this article.
§ 52-53. Prohibitions.
The following shall apply:
§ 52-54. Cleanliness and sanitation.
The following rules and regulations shall apply to the keeping or
maintaining of animals of Class II, Class III and Class IV:
A. No animal of Class I shall be kept or maintained in the Borough.
B. No animal of Class II, Class III and Class IV shall be kept or maintained
in the Borough unless the animal has a building for its shelter and a
fully enclosed corral or coop for its containment.
C. No building, stable, outhouse, coop or accessory building used for
housing an animal of Class II, Class III or Class IV shall be located
within 50 feet of the property line of an adjoining property owner.
D. No animal of Class II, Class III or Class IV shall be kept, harbored,
grazed or otherwise maintained within 30 feet of the property line of an
adjoining property owner.
E. The keeping or maintaining of an animal of Class II shall be prohibited
unless the animal is kept on a parcel of land having a minimum square
footage of 40,000 square feet, excluding area devoted to residential
structures. An additional 40,000 square feet or land shall be required
for each additional Class II animal so kept or maintained.
F. The keeping or maintaining of an animal of Class III shall be forbidden
unless the animal is kept on a plot of land of sufficient areas so that
there shall be 40,000 square feet, excluding area devoted to residential
structures, for the first four animals and an additional 40,000 square
feet for each additional two animals.
G. The running at large of any animal is specifically prohibited.
A. All stables, buildings, coops or accessory buildings shall be cleaned
regularly of all manure, feculent matter and waste.
B. All manure, feculent matter and waste shall be removed from the
premises or spread and treated with such chemicals and other
materials as shall be necessary to prevent odor and the attraction of
insects and rodents.
§ 52-51 PARK RIDGE CODE § 52-54
1:186
§ 52-55. Nuisances.
A public nuisance shall be deemed to exist in the following circumstances:
§ 52-56. Administration and examinations.
§ 52-57. Permit required; applications; fee; expiration date;
revocation.
A permit shall be required by any person desiring to keep or maintain one
or more animals of Class II or Class III in the Borough. The following shall
apply:
C. All stables, buildings, coops or accessory buildings shall be fogged or
sprayed regularly with an insecticide designed to kill flies and insects.
D. All premises on which animals are kept shall be maintained in a sanitary
condition.
A. The keeping of animals in a manner that may foster the attraction and/
or breeding of insects and rodents and the germination of bacteria and
other infectious microbes.
B. The keeping of animals in a manner so as to create or allow foul and
noxious odors and/or disturbing noises.
C. Noncompliance with §§ 52-53 and 52-54 shall be evidentiary that a
nuisance exists. A nuisance hereunder shall be subject to abatement at
the expense of the owner.
A. The Board of Health is hereby charged with the responsibility for
administration of this section.
B. Each animal subject to this article shall be free from sickness and
disease. Should the Board of Health have reasonable cause to question
the health of any animal, it shall have the authority to require, after
notice to the owner, an examination by a doctor of veterinary medicine;
which examination shall be at the expense of the owner.
C. Horses and ponies shall have the Coggins test administered annually at
the expense of the owner, and proof thereof shall be required for permit
renewal.
A. Application for a permit shall be made to the Health Officer of the
Borough.
B. The application form shall be provided by the Board of Health and shall
set forth:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) A description of the premises by lot and block number.
§ 52-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-57
1:187
§ 52-58. Interference with authorized persons prohibited.
No person shall hinder, molest or interfere with anyone authorized or
empowered to perform any duty under this article.
§ 52-59. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons violating any provision of this article shall be subject,
upon conviction, to a fine of not more than $500 or imprisonment for a term
of not more than 90 days, or both, at the discretion of the Judge imposing
the same.
(3) The number and type of animals to be kept, owned or harbored at
the premises.
(4) A diagram depicting and including the lands and buildings, the bulk
area of said lands, the boundary lines of the applicant's property
and the position and distance of all other buildings on lands
immediately adjacent on all sides of the land of the applicant.
C. A license fee of $100 shall be required for each permit issued. All
permits shall expire on December 31 of each year, unless sooner
revoked by the Board of Health.
D. Any permit granted hereunder may be revoked by the Board of Health
for any violation of the provisions hereof and for good cause shown
after five days' notice in writing to the person to whom the permit was
granted, or the successor in interest thereof, upon hearing of the
charges presented, and no permit so revoked shall be reissued except
for good and sufficient reason shown.
E. Any person who owns or keeps animals of Class II or Class III as herein
defined shall make application to the Board of Health for a permit
pursuant to and in accordance with the terms and provisions of this
section on or before January 1, 1985; otherwise, any such person shall
be deemed to be in violation hereof.
F. No permit shall be issued unless the applicant is in compliance with the
provisions of this article.
§ 52-57 PARK RIDGE CODE § 52-59
1:188
ARTICLE IV
Puppy and Kitten Mills
[Adopted 7-26-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-017]
§ 52-60. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated:
PET SHOP OPERATOR — A person who owns or operates a pet store, or
both.
PUPPY OR KITTEN MILL — A commercial dog- or cat-breeding facility in
which the health of the dog or cat is disregarded in order to maintain a low
overhead and maximize profits.
§ 52-61. Sale of puppies or kittens.
A. No pet shop operator shall sell, offer for retail sale, barter, auction, or
otherwise, dogs or cats bred in puppy or kitten mills. Every kennel will
comply with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 56:8-95 (or as same may be
amended) requiring the owner or operator offering dogs or cats for sale
to post in a conspicuous location on the cage or enclosure for each dog
or cat the following:
(1) The date and place of birth of each dog or cat, and the actual age,
or approximate age as established by a veterinarian, of the animal;
(2) The sex, color markings, and other identifying information of the
animal, including any tag, tattoo, collar number or microchip
information;
(3) The name and address of the veterinarian attending to the animal
while the animal is in the custody of the kennel, and the date of the
initial examination of the animal;
(4) The first and last name of the breeder of the animal, the full street
address of where the breeder is doing business, an email address, if
available, by which to contact the breeder, the breeder's USDA
license number, and, if the breeder is required to be licensed in the
state in which the breeder is located, the breeder's state license
number;
(5) If the broker is different from the breeder, the first and last name of
the broker of the animal, the full street address of where the broker
is doing business, an email address, if available, by which to
contact the broker, the USDA license number of the broker, and, if
the broker is required to be licensed in the state in which the
broker is located, the broker's state license number; and
(6) The statement "Know Your Rights" in bold type face and no less
than 12 point type, followed by the statement in no less than 10
point type, "State law requires that every shop offering dogs or cats
§ 52-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-61
1:189
for sale post in a conspicuous location on or near each dog's
or cat's cage or enclosure the USDA inspection reports for the
breeder and broker of each dog or cat for the two years prior
to the first day that the dog or cat is offered for sale. If you do
not see a required inspection report, please request the report
from the shop. If you have any concerns, please contact the New
Jersey Division of Consumer Affairs, 124 Halsey St., Newark, NJ
07102, (973) 504-6200. You may also view these and other USDA
inspection reports for the breeder and broker of each dog or cat
on the USDA Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS)
website. You are entitled to receive additional information from
APHIS about the breeder's or broker's history through the federal
Freedom of Information Act."
§ 52-61 PARK RIDGE CODE § 52-61
1:190
Chapter 55
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 55, Dwellings, Appearance of, adopted 12-9-1963, as
amended, was repealed 11-12-1985 by Ord. No. 85-17.]
Chapter 55A
ELECTRIC RATES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Tariff for net metering installations — See Ch.
55B.
Electric service regulations — See Ch. 56.
§ 55A-1. Residential service.
§ 55A-2. Electric heat service.
A. Availability. This service is available to the customers located on the
Borough's distribution lines who desire service for household and other
related uses in a single private dwelling or an individual dwelling unit in
a multiple-dwelling structure and its appurtenant detached buildings.
B. Character of service. The service provided shall be alternating current,
nominal frequency 60 hertz (cycles per second).
(1) Single-phase: 120 volts, two-wire: 120/208 volts three-wire; 120/
240 volts, three-wire; and
(2) Three-phase: 120/240 volts, four-wire or 120/208 volts, four-wire.
C. Rate.
(1) The charges for electrical use are computed and billed on a
bimonthly basis for service used. The monthly rates are:
(a) Customer charge: $6.
(b) Energy charge, all KWH: $0.14115.
(2) The adjustment clause shall be applied to all KWH supplied under
this rate.
D. Minimum monthly charge. The minimum charge shall be an amount
equal to the customer charge but not less than $6.51
51.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection E, Payment terms, and Subsection F, Special provisions,
which immediately and respectively followed this subsection, were repealed 3-11-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014-005A.
§ 52-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55A-2
1:191
§ 55A-3. Senior citizen, lifeline and disability service.
A. Availability. This service is available to all customers located on the
Borough's distribution lines and desiring services for household and
other related uses in a single private dwelling, or an individual dwelling
unit in a multiple-dwelling structure, and its appurtenant detached
buildings.
B. Character of service. The type of service shall be alternating current,
60 cycle.
(1) Single-phase: 120 volts, two-wire; 120/208 volts, three-wire; 120/
240 volts, three-wire; and
(2) Three-phase: 120/240 volts, four-wire or 120/208 volts, four-wire.
C. Billing. All heating customers are billed monthly for electric usage.
D. Rate.
(1) The monthly rate for heat shall be:
(a) Customer charge: $6.
(b) Energy charge, all KWH: $0.14115.
(2) The adjustment clause shall be applied to all KWH supplied under
this rate.
E. Minimum monthly charge. The minimum monthly charge shall be an
amount equal to the customer charge per month but not less than $6.52
A. Applicability.
(1) This rate shall be applicable to the use of service for private
residential purposes when the following criteria and conditions are
met:
(a) Senior citizens: Customer must be at least 65 years of age;
(b) Lifeline: Customer must be listed on the Schedule of Eligible
Customers established by the Commissioner of the Department
of Human Services pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:2-29.16; or
(c) Disability: Customer must present a physician's certificate
verifying customer's permanent and total disability or a copy of
the social security award certificate form No. SS A-30 to
demonstrate disability.
52.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection F, Payment terms, and Subsection G, Special provisions,
which immediately and respectively followed this subsection, were repealed 3-11-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014-005A.
§ 55A-2 PARK RIDGE CODE § 55A-3
1:192
§ 55A-4. General service.
(2) A customer who satisfies the criteria of Subsection A(1)(a), (b) or
(c) above and who meets all of the conditions of this Subsection
A(2) shall be eligible for the appropriate rate.
(a) Customer must have an income not to exceed the State of New
Jersey tax-exemption qualification level from all sources,
taxable and nontaxable, but not including social security; and
(b) Total income of all persons who reside in customer's household
from all sources, taxable and nontaxable, but not including
social security, shall not exceed the New Jersey Pharmaceutical
Assistance to the Aged and Disabled (PAAD) and Lifeline
Allowance per annum.
(3) The Borough Tax Collector shall be the enforcing agent and shall
annually certify those residents eligible for the senior citizens,
lifeline and disability rate.
(4) The rate shall be effective only upon application to and approval by
the Borough Tax Collector in its sole and complete discretion as to
qualification hereunder.
(5) Any of the above limits and qualifications may be modified or
changed by proper resolution of the Board of Public Works on a
showing of good cause.
B. Character of service. The service provided shall be alternating current,
60 cycle, single-phase: 120/208 volts, two-wire; 120/208 volts, threewire;
120/240 volts, three-wire.
C. Billing. Charges are computed and billed bimonthly for services taken.
D. Monthly rate.
(1) The monthly rate shall be:
(a) Customer charge: $3.
(b) Energy charge:
[1] First 500 KWH: $0.08211.
[2] Over 500 KWH: $0.14115.
(2) The adjustment clause shall be applied to all KWH supplied under
this rate.
E. Minimum monthly charge. The minimum monthly charge shall be an
amount equal to the customer charge but not less than $3.53
53.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection F, Payment terms, and Subsection G, Special provisions,
which immediately and respectively followed this subsection, were repealed 3-11-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014-005A.
§ 55A-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55A-4
1:193
§ 55A-5. Large power service.
A. Availability. This service is available to nonresidential customers
located on the Borough's distribution lines desiring electric service for
general lighting and/or power service and whose annual average billing
demand is not more than 100 KW. All such service shall be taken
through one meter.
B. Character of service. The service provided shall be alternating current,
60 cycle.
(1) Single-phase: 120/240 volts, three-wire; and
(2) Three-phase: 120/240 volts, four-wire; 240 volts, three-wire; or
120/208 volts, four-wire, and where existing facilities permit, 277/
480 volts, four-wire, may be supplied.
C. Billing. Charges are computed and billed on a monthly basis with
monthly payments for service taken.
D. Monthly rate.
(1) The customer's monthly bill shall be the sum of the demand and
energy charges.
(a) Customer charges, including first 3 KW demand: $27.
(b) Demand charge, all KW above 3 KW demand: $13.32.
(c) Energy charge, all KWH: $0.11674.
(2) The adjustment clause shall be applied to all KWH supplied under
this rate.
E. Minimum monthly charge. The minimum monthly charge shall be an
amount equal to the customer charge but not less than $27.
F. Determination of demand. The demand will be determined at the option
of the Board of Public Works by estimate or by test at the time of
maximum use or by the demand meter measurement. When measured
by indicating meters, the demand shall be the highest 15 minutes'
demand in kilowatts used during the month.54
A. Availability. This service is available to customers located on the
Borough's distribution lines desiring electric service for general
lighting and/or power service and whose annual average billing demand
is not less than 100 KW.
B. Character of service. The service provided shall be alternating current,
60 cycle.
54.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection G, Payment terms, and Subsection H, Special provisions,
which immediately and respectively followed this subsection, were repealed 3-11-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014-005A.
§ 55A-4 PARK RIDGE CODE § 55A-5
1:194
§ 55A-6. Dusk-to-dawn floodlight service.
(1) Single-phase: 120/240 volts, three-wire; and
(2) Three-phase: 120/240 volts, four-wire; 240 volts, three-wire; or
120/208 volts, four-wire, and where existing facilities permit, 277/
480 volts, four-wire, may be supplied.
C. Billing. Charges are computed and billed on a monthly basis with
monthly payments for service taken.
D. Monthly rate.
(1) The customer's monthly bill shall be the sum of the demand and
energy charges.
(a) Demand charge, all KW: $15.27.
(b) Energy charge, all KWH: $0.11445.
(2) The adjustment clause shall be applied to all KWH supplied under
this rate.
E. Minimum monthly charge. The minimum monthly charge shall be an
amount equal to the demand charge.
F. Determination of demand. The demand shall be determined by
recording or indication meters. When measured by indicating meters
the demand shall be the highest 15 minutes demand in kilowatts used
during the month.55
A. Availability. This rate is available for private, nonmunicipal street,
bridge, parks and outdoor lighting in the entire territory served by the
Borough.
B. Flat monthly rate.
Type Size
Rate
(per month)
HPS* 50 $12.06
HPS 100 $22.45
HPS 150 $24.95
HPS 175 $26.61
HPS 250 $31.60
HPS 360 $42.41
HPS 400 $47.82
55.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection G, Payment terms, and Subsection H, Special provisions,
which immediately and respectively followed this subsection, were repealed 3-11-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014-005A.
§ 55A-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55A-6
1:195
§ 55A-7. Municipal service.
§ 55A-8. Hall lighting service.
Type Size
Rate
(per month)
MV** 100 $17.05
MV 175 $18.71
MV 250 $24.12
MV 400 $43.24
MV 1,000 $80.66
NOTES:
*HPS = high-pressure sodium
**MV = mercury vapor
A. Availability. This service is available to municipally owned buildings and
fixtures, excluding street lights.
B. Character of service. The service provided shall be variable; as
required.
C. Billing. Charges are computed and billed bimonthly for service taken.
D. Monthly rate. The monthly rate shall be:
(1) Energy charge, all KWH: $0.13949.
(2) The adjustment clause shall be applied to all KWH supplied under
this rate.
A. Availability. This service is available to commercial customers
(nonresidential) who request separate, minimal service to common
areas, unoccupied or temporary structures.
B. Character of service. The service provided shall be variable; as
required. Service shall be separately metered and billed.
C. Billing. Changes are computed and billed bimonthly for services taken.
D. Monthly rate.
(1) The monthly rate shall be:
(a) Customer charge: $6.
(b) Energy charge: $0.15612.
(2) The adjustment clause shall be applied to all KWH supplied under
this rate.
§ 55A-6 PARK RIDGE CODE § 55A-8
1:196
§ 55A-9. Adjustment clause.
An adjustment clause shall be applied to each kilowatt-hour (KWH) supplied
under all rate schedules. This adjustment clause, determined to the nearest
$0.00001 in accordance with the formula set forth below, shall be applied to
all kilowatt-hours supplied during the billing period. It shall be determined
on an annual basis but may be revised periodically during the course of the
year by the Board of Public Works upon a showing of good cause.
§ 55A-10. Payment terms. [Added 3-11-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-005A]
Bills are due and payable when rendered. If unpaid at the end of 20 days,
a ten-day grace period will be allowed. Following the 30th day, the grace
period will no longer be applicable and interest shall accrue from the first
day of delinquency, retroactive to Day 21, at a rate of 8% per annum on the
first $1,500 and 18% per annum for any amount over $1,500. Additionally,
the Borough of Park Ridge reserves the right to terminate service following
appropriate written notice.
§ 55A-11. Discontinuation of services. [Added 3-11-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-005A]
All residential and commercial users, both owner and tenant:
§ 55A-12. Security deposits by residential users. [Added 3-11-2014
by Ord. No. 2014-005A]
Owners of record of property within the Borough of Park Ridge shall not be
required to pay a deposit. All tenants within the Borough of Park Ridge shall
be required to pay a deposit based upon estimated bills which would accrue
for two months' services or a minimum of the following:
E. Minimum monthly charge. The minimum monthly charge shall be $6
per month.56
A. Who are delinquent 60 days or more from the billing due date are
subject to discontinuation of services.
B. Whose service is disconnected will be charged a shutoff fee of $50.
There will be no reconnect fee during the Park Ridge Electric
Department's normal business hours of 7:30 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. Monday
through Friday.
C. Will be charged a reconnection fee of $100 during nonbusiness hours,
prior to 7:30 a.m. and after 3:00 p.m. Monday through Friday.
A. Residential: $200.
56.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection F, Payment terms, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 3-11-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-005A.
§ 55A-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55A-12
1:197
§ 55A-13. Security deposits for commercial users. [Added
10-11-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-027; amended 3-11-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-005A]
All new commercial users within the Borough of Park Ridge shall be
required to pay a deposit as follows:
§ 55A-14. Security deposits held on account. [Added 3-11-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014-005A]
Security deposits must be paid in full within three business days when
an account is opened. Failure to pay said security deposit shall result in
discontinuation of service. Such deposit will be held until the premises are
vacated and all final bills are paid in full. Interest on the deposit is applied to
the account when payable. The Board of Public Works shall have the right to
increase the amount of a deposit if in its judgment such action is necessary."
§ 55A-15. Delinquent accounts. [Added 3-11-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-005A]
All residential and commercial users, both owner and tenant, whose account
becomes 30 days or more delinquent shall be subject to the following:
B. Electric heat: $200.
C. Senior citizen, lifeline and disability service: $150.
D. Lehman Gardens: $150.
A. General: $ 1,000.
B. Large power: $10,000.
C. New general power commercial power users that intend to operate a
use similar to that of an existing commercial customer at the same
location may apply to the Board of Public Works for a reduced security
deposit. New general power commercial users seeking a reduced
deposit shall be required to submit an application for reduction with the
new general commercial power user's initial $1,000 deposit. Upon
review of the application, the Board of Public Works shall reduce the
deposit to an amount equal to the one-year average of the prior
commercial power user's prior two years of billing or the amount of
$350, whichever is greater. In the event the Board of Public Works
determines to reduce the security deposit, it shall issue a refund to the
customer with the next utility cycle bill in an amount equal to the
general commercial customer's initial $1,000 deposit less the amount of
the charge for that utility cycle bill and less the amount of the
administratively reduced required security deposit. [Added 9-8-2015
by Ord. No. 2015-013]
§ 55A-12 PARK RIDGE CODE § 55A-15
1:198
Chapter 55B
ELECTRIC DEPARTMENT TARIFF FOR NET METERING
INSTALLATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Electric rates — See Ch. 55A. Electric service regulations — See Ch. 56.
§ 55B-1. Applicability and description; Borough to select and supply
meters; agreement.
§ 55B-2. Size limitations.
A. Owner-occupied residential and existing commercial users shall be
required to pay a deposit as outlined in Sections §§ 55A-12 and 55A-13,
respectively.
B. In addition, all delinquent users shall be subject to an increase in
deposit based upon estimated bills which would accrue for two months'
service calculated using an average of the two highest billings in the 12
months; or if service has not been in effect for 12 months, then the
average would be calculated based upon time occupied.
A. This tariff for net metering installations is for all approved customers
that generate electricity, on the customer's side of the meter, using a
wind or solar photovoltaic system. Net metering, subject to the
conditions and limitations described in this section, is available to
customer-generators that are provided service under the Borough of
Park Ridge Electric Department's ("Borough's") residential, general
commercial or large power tariffs.
B. Net metering of a qualified customer provides for the billing or
crediting, as applicable, of energy usage by measuring the difference
between the amount of electricity delivered by the Borough to the netmetering-
qualified customer in a given billing period and the electricity
delivered by the net-metering-qualified customer into the Borough's
distribution system.
C. The Borough will select and supply the type of meter(s) that will enable
the measurement of the electricity for the billing or crediting of energy
delivered as indicated above.
D. Customers qualified for net metering shall enter into the Borough of
Park Ridge Electric Department Interconnection Application/
Agreement for Net Metering Facilities for Wind-Based and Photovoltaic
(PV) Systems ("Interconnection Agreement") and shall be responsible
for all interconnection costs, which shall be in addition to any service
charges required to meet service requirements.
§ 55A-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55B-2
1:199
§ 55B-3. Installation standards.
§ 55B-4. Application; fee; initiation of service.
A. To qualify for net metering, a customer's wind or solar photovoltaic
system cannot exceed 90% of the customer's current peak electric
needs of their residence or facility, as applicable. Any installations
which are greater than 150 kW are beyond the terms of this tariff and
will require a specific purchased power agreement with the Borough
which will be based upon avoided cost principles.
B. The Borough reserves the right to monitor the aggregate load of all
renewable energy installations connected to the Borough and to
institute aggregate limits.
A. A net-metering-qualified customer shall comply with the requirements
of the Interconnection Agreement.
B. The net-metering-qualified customer shall be responsible for meeting
all applicable safety and power quality standards, including but not
limited to all applicable safety and power quality standards approved by
the National Electric Code, Institute of Electrical and Electronic
Engineers, accredited testing institutions, such as Underwriters
Laboratories, and, specifically, IEEE Standard 929-2000.
A. Prior to interconnecting with the Borough's distribution system, the
net-metering-qualified customer is required to provide the Borough an
Interconnection Application/Agreement accompanied by a fee of $100
to process the application. The application fee shall be waived for all
government or Board of Education applications.
B. After the Borough receives the completed application and conducts the
appropriate review and inspection, it will execute the Interconnection
Agreement and inform the applicant that it is permitted to proceed with
the interconnection; or permission to interconnect will be denied and
the Borough will explain its reasons for denying permission. Reasons
for denying the interconnection may include the need for a more
detailed interconnection study.
C. If a detailed interconnection study is needed, the Borough shall provide
a good faith estimate of the cost of reviewing the plans, conducting
inspections and for the cost of all equipment that may be necessary to
interconnect the self-generating equipment with the Borough's
distribution system. The customer shall pay the Borough the full
amount of this good faith estimate. Any amounts not expended shall be
returned to the customer. Any additional costs reasonably incurred by
the Borough to complete the interconnection with the customer shall be
paid to the Borough prior to interconnection. The customer shall be
responsible for the cost of periodic testing of the interconnection
facilities.
§ 55B-2 PARK RIDGE CODE § 55B-4
1:200
§ 55B-5. Net billing.
§ 55B-6. Billing adjustments.
Whenever a meter measuring energy delivered from a net-meteringqualified
customer to the Borough's distribution system is found to be
registering slow or fast by 2% or more, an adjustment of the energy
delivered shall be made.
Chapter 56
ELECTRIC SERVICE REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 50.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 80.
Shade Tree Committee — See Ch. 81B.
Subdivision and site plan review — See Ch.
87.
§ 56-1. Terms and definitions.
The following are terms and definitions that apply to this chapter:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Park Ridge Electric Department.
CUSTOMER — Any person, business, or corporation being served, or to be
served, from the Borough's electric system.
D. Initiation of service will become effective on the net-metering-qualified
customer's first regularly scheduled meter reading date as agreed to by
the customer and the Borough and after the Interconnection Agreement
has been fully executed by both the customer and the Borough.
A. The annualized period shall be one year from the date of the initiation of
service and shall be repeated each year while the system is online. Once
operational, the Borough shall have the right to adjust the annualized
period for operational and billing purposes.
B. When the amount of electricity delivered by the net-metering-qualified
customer, plus any kilowatt hour credits held over from the previous
billing periods, exceeds the electricity supplied by the Borough, the netmetering-
qualified customer shall be credited for the excess kilowatt
hours until the end of the annualized period.
C. At the end of the annualized period, the net-metering-qualified
customer will be compensated for any remaining credits by the
Borough at the Borough's avoided wholesale power cost for energy.
Transmission, capacity, ancillary services and costs not related to the
Borough's avoided energy cost shall not be included in this
compensation.
§ 55B-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-1
1:201
DEVELOPER/BUILDER — Any person, agent, firm or corporation having a
legal or equitable interest in the property and legally responsible to the
owner.
LOAD MANAGEMENT — A program by which the Borough cycles
residential and commercial appliances for the purpose of reducing kilowatt
demand.
NOMINAL SYSTEM VOLTAGE — The Borough's standard system voltage
with a nominal rating of 120 volts.
OWNER — Any person, agent, firm or corporation having a legal or
equitable interest in the property.
POINT OF DELIVERY — The place where the Borough's responsibility
terminates and the customer's responsibility begins.
RISER POLE — A utility pole which serves primary and/or secondary
voltage to underground facilities.
SECONDARY SYSTEM VOLTAGE — The Borough service to customers with
configurations of voltages less than or equal to 600 volts.
SERVICE CONNECTIONS — The point in which the customer's equipment
comes into electrical contact with the Borough's facilities.
§ 56-2. National Electric Safety Code adoption.
The applicable rules and regulations of the American National Standards
Institute (ANSI) and Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE)
titled "National Electric Safety Code," are hereby adopted by reference as
the electric safety construction rules of the Borough and are applicable to
this chapter or any subparts.
§ 56-3. Standard voltages.
A. The Borough shall make available, where possible (dependent upon the
Borough's electrical distribution system configuration), the following
service voltages:
(1) Primary system:
(a) Resistance-grounded wye, 26,400 volts.
(b) Four-wire wye, 4,160/2,400 volts.
(2) Single-phase system: three-wire, 120/240 volts.
(3) Three-phase system:
(a) Four-wire wye, 120/208 volts.
(b) Four-wire Delta, 120/240 volts.
(c) Four-wire wye, 227/480 volts.
§ 56-1 PARK RIDGE CODE § 56-3
1:202
§ 56-4. Electric meter placement and testing.
B. The Borough shall provide electricity to the customer's point of delivery
and shall seek to provide voltage that does not have a variation
exceeding 5% above or below the Borough's standard nominal voltage
for residential customers and 10% above or below the Borough's
standard nominal voltage for all other customers.
C. While average voltages are maintained as described in § 56-3B above, it
must be recognized that short-term voltage excursions (transients)
from these levels can occur as the result of normal systems operations
(circuit switching, motor startup, etc.). Equipment containing
microprocessors or other sensitive electronic components can be
damaged or otherwise rendered inoperative by such transients. It is the
customer's responsibility to determine the suitability of the supplied
power and to provide any necessary power-conditioning equipment.
D. The Borough will install facilities with sufficient capacity to serve the
customer's normal load requirements. Information regarding loads and
desired voltage will be communicated by the customer to the Borough
when the service is initially requested. It is the customer's
responsibility to advise the Borough of any electrical load or method of
operation change that might affect the Borough's ability to meet the
customer's load requirements.
E. Upon request of the customer, the Borough will monitor the voltage at
the customer's point of delivery with the appropriate and available
monitoring devices for a period of time deemed necessary by the
Borough to determine the nature of the problem. The Borough will
notify the customer and inform him or her of the nature of the problem
and possible solutions if the voltage is not within the above-stated
guidelines.
A. The customer will be required to furnish and install the appropriate
meter base for the type of service unless otherwise specified in these
regulations. A standard UL-rated outdoor meter pan shall be supplied
and installed by the customer. All electric meters shall be installed
outdoors in an accessible area.
B. The Borough shall approve the location of all metering equipment. The
meter will be located where accessible and convenient to read, will not
be unreasonably exposed to damage, will not be in any unduly dirty
location and will not be inconvenient to Borough access for reading,
maintenance, replacement or repair.
C. In cases of new construction or relocation of existing electric meters,
such meters will be located on the face of either side of a structure or in
the front face of such structure. In no case shall new or relocated
meters be placed on the rear side of a residential structure. The meter
shall be located at a height of between four feet and six feet for
§ 56-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-4
1:203
§ 56-5. Overhead line extensions.
§ 56-6. Underground line extensions.
convenience of reading, unless otherwise approved by the Electric
Department.
D. For three-phase services over 200 amps, the applicant shall install an
outdoor current transformer (CT) cabinet and a meter pan that will be
supplied by the Borough. The applicant shall install the CT cabinet and
meter pan in a location approved by the Borough. The applicant shall
install a one-inch EMT conduit between the meter pan and CT cabinet
and shall include a pull string. Once an approved inspection certificate
is received from the Park Ridge Construction Department, the Borough
shall install the appropriate CTs and meter and will turn on the electric
service.
E. The owner of the meter-supporting structure is responsible for its
condition and for maintenance of the proper socket position and
leveling. Excessive tilt or unstable location of a meter socket must be
corrected before the meter is installed.
F. If required by the Electric Department, the developer or builder will
incorporate multiple-bay or multiple-gang metering facilities meeting
all appropriate electric codes.
G. Customers may request an accuracy test of their electric meter. This
test shall be performed upon request at no charge one time per year. If
additional tests are requested, the customer shall be required to pay a
fee determined by the Electric Department for the additional testing. If
the meter test results indicate a defective meter, an appropriate
adjustment will be applied to the customer's account.
A. If electric service to a new facility or subdivision will require the
extension of the Borough's overhead primary and/or secondary
distribution system, the Borough shall provide, at no cost, the least-cost
overhead extension.
B. In the event the applicant requests other than the least-cost alternative,
the applicant shall pay, as the cost, an amount equal to the difference
between the installed cost and least cost for the installation. All
installations shall be approved and installed by the Borough.
A. If electric service to a new facility or subdivision will require the
extension of the underground primary and/or secondary distribution
system, the applicant shall pay for the cost difference between the
installed cost of the least-cost underground extension and the least-cost
equivalent overhead line extension.
B. In the event the applicant requests other than the least-cost
underground alternative, the applicant shall pay, as a cost, an amount
equal to the difference between the installed-cost and the least-cost
§ 56-4 PARK RIDGE CODE § 56-6
1:204
§ 56-7. Securing of easements; specifications.
The applicant may be required to grant adequate easements to the Borough
for the installation, operation and maintenance of all electrical facilities,
including riser poles, cable runs for primaries, secondaries, manholes,
handholds and vaults. Easements must grant the Borough ingress and
egress rights to its facilities at all times for operation, maintenance, repair,
and replacement and must be duly recorded in the proper County Clerk's
office Width of all easements shall be a minimum of 20 feet. No structures,
walls or obstacles are to be so located as to interfere with the Borough's
ability to operate, repair, replace or maintain its facilities. The Borough
reserves the right to provide electric service where the applicant does not
grant an easement in accordance with this section.
§ 56-8. Temporary service.
§ 56-9. Trenching requirements.
In all cases where it is the responsibility of the contractor to provide
trenching for the Borough, the following guidelines must be followed:
underground installation. All installations shall be approved and
installed by the Borough.
A. Temporary service can be made available for construction or other
purposes. The applicant will provide the service support, meter base,
and service cable to the top of the support with additional service cable
extending to the ground so the Electric Department can make the
connection to the service cable on the ground. The Borough will supply
the overhead service cable to the street and install the meter.
B. The applicant shall build the temporary service pole as per the
specifications of the Borough. An electrical permit from the Park Ridge
Building Department shall be obtained for the temporary service. The
Electric Department will not connect power to the service until an
approved inspection notice has been received from the Building
Department.
C. The applicant requesting temporary service will contact the Electric
Department and request a meeting on site to determine the location of
the temporary service installation.
A. The applicant may not start the excavation for the electric utility
installation until the following requirements are met:
(1) All fees are paid.
(2) The curbing for the development has been installed.
(3) The site is graded to plus or minus six inches of the final grade.
(4) All property lines have been surveyed and marked.
§ 56-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-9
1:205
§ 56-10. Underground installation and maintenance in new major
subdivisions.
B. The contractor is required to excavate the trench a minimum of one foot
wide and 24 inches deep in locations approved by the Electric
Department.
C. The contractor shall supply and install a six-inch sand bedding in the
bottom of the trench before the Electric Department provides and
installs the primary conduits (and secondary conduits for new
residential subdivisions).
D. Once the conduits are installed, the contractor shall provide an
additional six inches of sand backfill over the conduit and then fill the
remainder of the trench to grade with clean backfill.
E. The contractor shall be responsible for the installation of all materials
required at the final grade (e.g., grass, asphalt, concrete).
F. A minimum separation of 12 inches must be provided between the
electric conduit and all other communications utilities.
G. Gas and water distribution and services may not be installed in the
same trench as the electric utilities.
H. Any additional requirements for installation and backfill for other
utilities must be coordinated directly by the developer/builder with
those utility companies.
I. It shall be the responsibility of the developer to secure the area and
provide all safety measures for the trenching operation.
J. In certain circumstances, the applicant may be required to provide
concrete to encase the conduit in concrete.
A. As required in Borough Ordinance No. 87-39, the electric distribution
system (both primary and secondary) for all new major subdivisions
must be installed underground.
B. The applicant must pay the cost difference between the underground
distribution system and an equivalent least-cost overhead distribution
system.
C. The Borough may calculate this cost based on the individual
development or may use a calculated flat rate per dwelling. This rate
may be revised from time to time to reflect the increased cost in labor
and equipment.
D. The Electric Department shall design the entire installation, which shall
include a looped primary system.
E. All electric services shall be fed from pad-mounted transformers to
meters located on the side of the dwellings closest to the transformer
§ 56-9 PARK RIDGE CODE § 56-10
1:206
§ 56-11. Overhead service to commercial and industrial customers
from pole-mounted transformers.
feeding that dwelling. Meters shall not be located in the backyard of
any dwelling.
F. The applicant is required to install all meter pans in locations specified
by the Electric Department. The contractor is also required to install
the conduit and a sweep from the bottom of the meter pan to the bottom
of the trench. The conduit must include an expansion joint as required
by the National Electric Code on the riser below the meter pans.
G. The applicant shall be required to perform all of the trenching and
backfill for the installation of the electric system according to the
Electric Department's specifications (see § 56-9, Trenching
requirements).
H. The applicant must coordinate the installation with the General
Supervisor of Electric Distribution. At a minimum, four weeks' written
notice shall be provided to the Electric Department before the
installation may begin.
I. The applicant is required to coordinate the installation of all other
utilities (e.g., telephone, cable, gas, etc.). It is strongly recommended
that the developer schedule a preconstruction meeting with all of the
utility representatives.
J. Once the installation is complete, the Borough shall own and maintain
the entire distribution system, including the primary and secondary
cables and conduit, up to the point of termination on the meter pan. The
owner of the dwelling shall own and maintain the meter pan and the
length of conduit to the bottom of the trench.
A. If the service to a commercial or industrial customer requires a primary
or secondary extension as determined by the Borough, or the facilities
to provide service are not available to serve the customer, the Borough
shall provide the extension as per the line extension requirements listed
above.
B. If the total load requirements for the entire facility (including multiple
customers in one facility) are less than 150 KW and there exists an
overhead distribution system on the public right-of-way bordering the
facility, the Borough shall provide an overhead electric service. The
customer shall build the service entrance equipment at a location on his
or her facility approved by the Electric Department. The electric service
shall be constructed as per the specifications of the National Electric
Code and the Park Ridge Construction Office. The service shall be
inspected prior to the Electric Department's installation of the
overhead service line to the point of termination on the service head.
C. If the length of the overhead service exceeds 200 feet, it may be
necessary to install additional utility poles and secondary service cable
§ 56-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-11
1:207
§ 56-12. Overhead service to commercial and industrial customers
from pad-mounted transformers within 150 feet of pole.
on the customer's property. In these cases, the customer shall pay the
Borough for all material and labor for the installation of the utility poles
and the service cable exceeding 200 feet. The customer shall provide
an appropriate easement to the Borough for the future maintenance on
the extended service and utility poles.
D. For overhead electric services, the Borough will own and maintain the
overhead service line from the pole to the point of termination on the
service head and the electric meter.
E. For services over 200 amps, the meter pan and the CTs (but not
including the CT cabinet) will also be owned and maintained by the
Borough. All other components of the electric service shall be owned
and maintained by the customer.
F. If the customer has a load requirement of less than 150 KW but desires
to install an underground service where there is an existing overhead
system, the customer shall be required to install, own and maintain the
entire service up to the connection at the secondary on the utility's pole.
The customer shall be required to follow the installation specifications
provided by the Borough.
A. All customers whose current or future load may be in excess of 150 KW
(including multiple customers in one facility) shall be required to
receive service from a pad-mounted transformer.
B. Prior to the design of the electric service, the customer shall provide
the present and future load requirements in writing to the Borough.
C. The customer shall furnish and install a transformer pad as per the
Borough's specifications. The Borough may require the installation of
protective bollards, which must be installed by the customer.
D. The Borough shall determine the location of the pad-mounted
transformer which shall be no greater than 150 feet from the utility's
riser pole.
E. In special cases where the transformer must be located at a distance
greater than 150 feet from the riser pole, special conditions for the
installation and maintenance of the primary conductors shall be
required and are detailed below (see § 56-13).
F. The customer shall provide the trenching and backfill from the utility's
riser pole to the transformer pad pursuant to the Borough's
specifications (see § 56-9, Trenching requirements).
G. The Borough shall provide and install the necessary conduit in the
customer's trench from the riser pole to the transformer pad.
§ 56-11 PARK RIDGE CODE § 56-12
1:208
§ 56-13. Underground service from transformer pads more than 150
feet from pole.
H. The Borough will furnish and install all primary conductors, padmounted
transformer, electric meters, and metering conductors and
make all the primary connections in the transformer.
I. The point of delivery for underground electric service will be at the
secondary terminals of the Borough's pad-mount transformer. The
customer will furnish, install and maintain all conduit, conductors and
equipment past the point of delivery, including the secondary
connections in the transformer.
J. The Borough shall determine the location of the electric meters.
K. For multiple customers to be served from a pad-mounted or a polemounted
transformer, the contractor will incorporate multiple-bay or
multiple-gang metering facilities, as determined by the Borough. The
customer shall be responsible for the installation and maintenance of
the gang metering facility.
L. In certain circumstances, the Borough may require customers to
receive service from an underground pad-mounted transformer even if
their load is under 150 KW.
A. For commercial and industrial customers where the transformer for a
facility must be located at a distance greater than 150 feet from the
utility's riser pole, the following special conditions for the installation
and maintenance shall be followed:
(1) A plan must be provided and approved by the Electric Department
prior to installation.
(2) The customer shall install a conduit duct system and manholes so
the primary conductors can be installed and maintained by the
customer.
(3) The Borough shall install and maintain the first length of primary
from the riser pole to the first manhole as per the guidelines above.
(4) The Borough shall also own and maintain the transformer,
excluding the primary and secondary cable and connections in the
transformer which shall be maintained by the customer.
(5) The Borough shall install fault-indicating equipment in the first
manhole so it can determine if a primary fault is past this point of
termination in the future.
(6) The customer shall be responsible for the maintenance of all the
primary cable, and conduit past the first manhole. The customer
shall be responsible for the maintenance of all the manholes,
including the first one.
§ 56-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-13
1:209
§ 56-14. Converting overhead to underground service.
(7) Should a primary failure occur, the Electric Department shall
determine if the fault is before or after the first manhole. The
Borough shall repair any faults occurring in or before the first
manhole. All faults occurring beyond the first manhole must be
repaired by the customer. The customer shall coordinate this repair
with the Electric Department.
B. In extraordinary cases, the Borough may take on the responsibility for
the maintenance of the primary cable and conduit past the first
manhole under the following conditions:
(1) The customer installs a parallel redundant primary service to the
transformer.
(2) The redundant primary supply must be installed according to the
specifications provided by the Borough.
(3) A written contract agreement is executed between the Borough
and the customer which would detail the installation and
maintenance requirements.
A. Residential. When an individual residential customer requests to
convert an existing overhead electric service to underground, the
customer shall install, own, and maintain the underground service from
the meter pan to the utility pole. The following specifications must be
followed for the installation:
(1) The customer must have a utility pole on the right-of-way bordering
his or her property. If there is no utility pole, but there is the
secondary distribution across the street, the Electric Department
may install, upon request, one utility pole in the right-of-way and
run the service overhead across the street. The underground
service could then be run to this pole.
(2) The customer shall install the underground service complete from
the meter pan to the utility pole with enough service cable to run
up to the secondary service wire on the pole.
(3) The service shall be installed in two-and-one-half-inch Schedule 40
PVC conduit.
(4) The conduit riser to the meter pan must include an expansion
coupling.
(5) The owner must install one length of conduit up the utility pole.
(6) The service wire should be appropriately sized according to the
National Electric Code.
§ 56-13 PARK RIDGE CODE § 56-14
1:210
§ 56-15. Streetlighting.
(7) The service shall be inspected and approved by the Park Ridge
Building Department's Electrical Inspector before the Electric
Department will connect the new service.
(8) Once inspected, the Electric Department will remove, at no cost to
the customer, the overhead service wire and connect the new
underground service.
(9) It will be the responsibility of the owner for any future maintenance
and repairs on the underground service up to one length of conduit
up the service pole.
B. Commercial and industrial. When a commercial or industrial customer
wishes to convert an existing overhead electric service to underground,
the following requirements must be followed:
(1) The customer shall install, own, and maintain the entire
underground secondary service and conduit to the utility pole
(including one length of conduit up the utility pole).
(2) If the conversion requires the installation of underground primary,
the Electric Department shall install and maintain the primary
conduit, conductors and transformer, but the customer shall pay for
the installation. The customer shall provide the trenching for the
primary installation and install the transformer pad if necessary
(see § 56-9, Trenching requirements).
(3) The secondary service wire and conduit shall be appropriately
sized according to the National Electric Code.
(4) The secondary connections in the transformer shall be installed
and maintained by the customer.
(5) The service shall be inspected and approved by the Park Ridge
Building Department's Electrical Inspector before the Electric
Department will connect the new service.
(6) Once inspected, the Electric Department will remove, at no cost to
the customer, the overhead service wire and connect the new
underground service.
(7) It will be the responsibility of the owner for any future maintenance
and repairs on the underground secondary service wire and
conduit.
A. The purpose of streetlighting is to illuminate roadways within the
Borough and is not for lighting structures or commercial properties or
for personal security purposes or crime prevention purposes.
B. The Borough will furnish, install and maintain all streetlighting
connected to the Borough electric system on dedicated roadways within
§ 56-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-15
1:211
§ 56-16. Dusk-to-dawn lighting.
§ 56-17. Service interruptions.
the Borough and will provide streetlighting along other sections of
Borough rights-of-way as considered to be in the public interest.
C. The streetlighting pattern will follow the existing overhead/
underground distribution where possible.
A. Dusk-to-dawn lighting service is available to commercial, industrial,
and residential facilities, where existing overhead secondary
distribution facilities of adequate capacity, phase and voltage are
presently available adjacent to the premises to be lighted.
B. This service provides for the outdoor dusk-to-dawn lighting of the
premises by means of a Borough-owned luminary, mounted on an
existing Borough pole with a support bracket, automatically controlled
by a photoelectric relay. The lighting equipment will be supplied,
installed, owned and maintained by the Borough.
C. All necessary repairs and maintenance work, including lamp renewal,
will be performed by the Borough only during the regularly scheduled
working hours, and the Borough shall be allowed 72 hours, following
the notification by the customer, for replacing any burned-out lamps.
D. Lamps are energized each night providing approximately 4,105 hours
of premises lighting per year.
E. In the event a dusk-to-dawn lighting fixture is not operating, the
Borough will make an attempt to repair the existing unit with available
"in stock" repair parts. When these parts are not available or have been
exhausted, the lighting unit will be replaced with available lighting
units. The Electric Department will attempt to contact the customer
before any changes are made to the type of fixture. The type of fixtures
available and the monthly cost are available at the Park Ridge Electric
Department Office.
A. The Borough will use reasonable diligence to provide an uninterrupted
supply of electricity, but it does not undertake to guarantee an
uninterrupted supply. Therefore, should the supply of electricity fail or
become interrupted or become defective through an act of God,
accident, lightning strike, or any other cause beyond the reasonable
control of the Borough, the Borough shall not be liable for such failure,
interruption or defect.
B. The Borough reserves the right to suspend service, without liability on
its part, at such times and for such periods and in a manner as it may
deem advisable:
(1) For the purpose of making necessary adjustments to, changes in, or
repairs to lines, substations, and facilities;
§ 56-15 PARK RIDGE CODE § 56-17
1:212
§ 56-18. Load management: air conditioners.
(2) In cases where the continuance of service to the customer's
premises would endanger persons or property;
(3) If the Borough in good faith believes it is, because of civil disorder,
riot, insurrection, war, weather, fire, or other condition beyond the
reasonable control of the Borough, for the protection of the public
or employees of the Borough; or
(4) If ordered by a duly constituted governmental authority.
C. Whenever the Borough contemplates a scheduled suspension of
service, it will make reasonable effort to coordinate the same with
customers and to give advance notification of the intent to suspend
service and the reason thereof.
D. In the event of a power shortage or an adverse condition or disturbance
on the system of the Borough or any other directly or indirectly
interconnected system, the Borough may, without incurring liability,
take such emergency action as, in the judgment of the Borough, may be
necessary. Such emergency action may include, but not be limited to,
reduction or interruption of the supply of electricity to some customers
or areas in order to compensate for a power supply shortage on the
Borough's system, or to limit the extent or duration of the adverse
condition or disturbance on the Borough's system, or to prevent
damage to the customer's equipment or the Borough's transmission
facilities, or to expedite the restoration of service. The Borough may
also reduce the supply of electricity to compensate for an emergency
condition on an interconnected system.
A. Borough Ordinance No. 95-13 mandates that a load management
device be installed on all new central air-conditioner unit
installations.57 The load management device shall be attached to all
newly installed outside air-conditioner compressors.
B. During periods of peak electric load, the Borough may cycle the
compressor for intervals of 7 1/2 minutes. The fan will continue to
circulate cool air to maintain comfort.
C. Once installed, customers earn a credit of $32 per compressor each
summer.
D. The full cost of equipment installation and maintenance is paid by the
Borough.
E. All installations will be performed by licensed electrical contractors or
qualified Borough employees.
57.Editor's Note: See § 50-2C(3)(l).
§ 56-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-18
1:213
§ 56-19. Tree maintenance.
§ 56-20. Costs of design and construction for large developers.
[Added 6-26-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-011]
All developments, whether residential or commercial in nature, which will
create an anticipated electric service load in excess of 500 KVA as
calculated pursuant to the requirements of Article 220 of the National
Electric Code shall be subject to the provisions of this ordinance.58 All such
new and approved residential or commercial developments with a load or
F. Where a customer has more than one air-conditioning unit, load
management devices shall be installed on all units.
A. The Borough has the right to trim all trees or tree limbs that could
potentially interfere with the Borough's electrical facilities.
B. The Borough shall make every attempt to keep the detrimental impact
to the tree to a minimum using the latest standards and approved
methods, but the safety and reliability of the electric system shall take
precedence.
C. In addition, the Borough has implemented a routine tree trimming
program whereby a contractor is hired to perform routine lineclearance
tree trimming using established, sound principles of tree
care. Although public safety and preservation of Borough property will
be a primary goal, tree health and area aesthetic considerations will
impact the Borough decisions.
D. Trees outside Borough rights-of-way which encroach into or otherwise
interfere with Borough property within that right-of-way (as determined
by the Borough) may be trimmed to the right-of-way boundary when
necessary to enforce the provisions of this regulation.
E. Limbs and foliage on trees in proximity to streetlights shall be trimmed
to allow illumination of the street below.
F. The Borough has the authority to cause the removal of any dead or
diseased tree(s) on public property when such trees constitute a hazard
to life and property, as determined by the Borough.
G. Nondiseased trees on public property may be removed if their removal
is part of a Borough-approved plan for construction, improvement, or
renovation. Any damage occurring to streets, curb and gutter,
sidewalks, water-sewer lines, power lines, or other trees as a result of
privately contracted tree services is the responsibility of the land owner
and/or contractor.
H. Prior to removal or significant altering of trees on public rights-of-way,
a reasonable effort will be made to inform owner/occupant of the work
to be performed. The Borough will not incur a significant work delay as
a result of this informal notification process.
§ 56-18 PARK RIDGE CODE § 56-20
1:214
power requirement in excess of 500 KVA shall be required, as a condition
of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, to pay the full cost of the
engineering design, construction oversight, labor and materials incurred by
the Borough for the installation of the required electric service, including
the extensions required to be built both in the distribution system and on
the site which is the subject of the development.
§ 56-21. Design. [Added 6-26-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-011]
The Borough shall be responsible for the design of the electrical service
for the development, including the installation and distribution system
improvements required to provide power to the development. The design
shall include provisions for secondary redundant service feeds as deemed
necessary by the Borough. In some circumstances and at the sole discretion
of the Borough, the Borough may make or perform changes in construction
to the distribution system or require substation improvements in order to
provide electricity to the development. All costs incurred by the Borough
shall be the responsibility of the developer. Any development subject to this
ordinance59 that has a peak anticipated electric service in excess of 1,500
KVA as calculated pursuant to Article 220 of the National Electric Code will
require the developer to construct a double-ended substation which shall
include redundant station transformers, each of which is of a size sufficient
to provide 100% of the peak power to the development. The substation
shall include all necessary protective equipment and switchgear needed to
supply power to the development. The construction of the substation shall
be in accordance with the appropriate national and state electric codes.
§ 56-22. Supervision and testing. [Added 6-26-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-011]
A. The design of any new substation required pursuant to this ordinance60
shall be approved by the Park Ridge Electric Department and its
consulting engineer prior to the start of any construction. The purchase
and installation of the substation equipment shall be performed by the
developer.
B. The Park Ridge Board of Public Works (or its designee) and its
consulting engineer shall be responsible for the construction
supervision of the substation. The developer shall pay the full cost of
the design and construction supervision. Prior to the commissioning of
a new substation, the developer shall provide all commissioning testing
required by the Board of Public Works and its consulting engineer. If,
after review, the Board deems the substation to be in compliance with
the Borough's requirements, the Borough shall then take ownership of
58.Editor's Note: The phrase "this ordinance" refers to Ord. No. 2018-011, which added
§§ 56-20 through 56-23, all concerning large residential or commercial developments.
59.Editor's Note: The phrase "this ordinance" refers to Ord. No. 2018-011, which added
§§ 56-20 through 56-23, all concerning large residential or commercial developments.
60.Editor's Note: The phrase "this ordinance" refers to Ord. No. 2018-011, which added
§§ 56-20 through 56-23, all concerning large residential or commercial developments.
§ 56-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-22
1:215
§ 56-23. Utility agreement. [Added 6-26-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-011]
In every development subject to this ordinance,61 the Borough of Park Ridge
shall determine the total cost for the engineering design, construction
supervision, labor and materials needed to supply the facility. The total fee,
which shall be agreed to by the Borough through its Board of Public Works
and the developer, will be incorporated into a separate utility agreement
which will be executed by the developer and the Borough. The Borough may
record any agreement at its own expense.
Chapter 57
FEES
the substation and shall thereafter be responsible for the future
operation and maintenance of the substation and its equipment. All
warranties shall be in a form acceptable to the Borough and shall be
transferable to the Borough.
61.Editor's Note: The phrase "this ordinance" refers to Ord. No. 2018-011, which added
§§ 56-20 through 56-23, all concerning large residential or commercial developments.
§ 56-22 PARK RIDGE CODE § 56-23
1:216
ARTICLE I
Credit Card Payments for Municipal Fees
[Adopted 7-11-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-011]
§ 57-1. Authorization.
Effective August 1, 2017, the Borough of Park Ridge shall be authorized to
accept credit card payments for all municipal fees and charges. The credit
card payment program shall be implemented and supervised by the Chief
Financial Officer of the Borough.
§ 57-2. Convenience fee.
The convenience fee for credit card payments shall be 2.95% of the overall
fee.
§ 57-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 57-2
1:217
Chapter 58
FILMING
§ 58-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FILMING — The taking of still or motion pictures, either on film or
videotape or similar recording medium, for commercial or educational
purposes intended for viewing on television, in theaters or for institutional
uses. The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to include the
filming of news stories within the Borough of Park Ridge.
MAJOR MOTION PICTURE —
PUBLIC LANDS — Any and every public street, highway, sidewalk, square,
public park or playground or any other public place within the Borough
which is within the jurisdiction and control of the Borough of Park Ridge.
§ 58-2. Permit required.
Any film which is financed and/or distributed by a major motion-picture
studio, including but not limited to the following:
(1) Universal Pictures;
Warner Brothers, including New Line Cinema, Castle Rock Cinema
and Turner Production Company;
(2)
(3) Paramount;
(4) 20th Century Fox;
(5) Columbia/Tri-Star;
(6) Disney; and
(7) MGM-United Artists; or
A.
B. Any film for which the budget is at least $5,000,000.
A. No person or organization shall film or permit filming within the
Borough of Park Ridge without first having obtained a permit from the
Borough Clerk, which permit shall set forth the approved location and
duration of such filming by specific reference to day or dates. No permit
shall authorize filming for more than three consecutive days in any one
location, and in no event shall filming at one location within the
Borough exceed a total of six days in any one calendar year, regardless
of the number of permits utilized in reaching this six-day maximum.
This six-day limitation may be extended only if the filming requested
constitutes a major motion picture and the Borough Clerk has
considered the factors in § 58-3H before approaching such a request. A
§ 57-2 PARK RIDGE CODE § 58-2
1:218
§ 58-3. Issuance of permits.
denial of this request is appealable to the Mayor and Council in
accordance with the provisions of § 58-3G. The permit or a true copy
must be readily available for inspection by Borough officials at all times
at the site of the filming.
B. All permits shall be applied for from the Borough Clerk during normal
business hours. Applications for such permits shall be in a form
approved by the Borough Clerk accompanied by a permit fee in the
amount set forth hereinbelow.
C. If a permit is issued and, due to inclement weather or other good cause,
filming does not in fact take place on the dates specified, the Borough
Clerk may, at the request of the applicant, issue a new permit for
filming on other dates subject to full compliance with all other
provisions of this chapter. No additional fee shall be paid for this
permit.
A. No permit will be issued by the Borough Clerk unless applied for at
least five days prior to the requested shooting date; provided, however,
that the Borough Clerk may waive the five-day period if, in the Borough
Clerk's judgement, the applicant has obtained all related approvals and
adjacent property owners or tenants do not need to be notified.
B. No permit shall be issued for filming upon public lands unless the
applicant shall provide the Borough with satisfactory proof of the
following:
(1) Certificate of insurance specifically naming the Borough of Park
Ridge as an additional insured, providing general liability, bodily
injury and property damage coverage with minimum limits of
liability not less than $1,000,000 combined single limit. The
certificate shall state that "the issuing company shall mail 30 days'
written notice to the certificate holder named, certified mail return
receipt."
(2) An agreement, in writing, whereby the applicant agrees to
indemnify and save harmless the Borough of Park Ridge from any
all liability, expense, claim or damages resulting from the use of
public lands.
(3) The posting of a cash or surety bond of $550 in favor of the
Borough to insure that the location utilized will be left, after
filming, in a satisfactory condition, free of debris, rubbish and
equipment, and that due observance of all ordinances, laws and
regulations will be followed. Within seven days of the completion of
the filming, the Borough will return the bond if there has been no
damage to public property or public expense caused by the filming.
(4) The hiring of an off-duty Park Ridge police officer for the times
indicated on the permit.
§ 58-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-3
1:219
C. The holder of a permit shall take all reasonable steps to minimize
interference with the passage of pedestrians and traffic over public
lands and shall comply with all lawful directives issued by the Park
Ridge Police Department with respect thereto.
D. The holder of a permit shall conduct filming in such a manner as to
minimize the inconvenience or discomfort to adjoining property owners
attributable to such filming and shall, to the extent practicable, abate
noise and park vehicles associated with such filming off the public
streets. The holder shall avoid any interference with previously
scheduled activities upon public lands and limit, to the extent possible,
any interference with normal public activities on such public lands.
Where the applicant's production activity, by reason of location or
otherwise, will directly involve and/or affect any businesses, merchants
or residents, these parties shall be given written notice of the filming at
least three days prior to the requested shooting date and be informed
that objections may be filed with the Borough Clerk, said objections to
form a part of the applicant's application and be considered in the
review of the same. Proof of service of notification to adjacent owners
shall be submitted to the Borough Clerk within two days of the
requested shooting date.
E. Filming in residential zones shall be permitted Monday through Friday
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., provided that all requests
for night scenes shall be approved in the permit to be granted in
accordance with the provisions of Subsection H hereinbelow. The setup,
production and breakdown required by all filming shall be included in
the hours as set forth herein.
F. The Borough Clerk may refuse to issue a permit whenever the Borough
Clerk determines, on the basis of objective facts and after a review of
the application and a report thereon by the Police Department and by
other Borough agencies involved with the proposed filming site, that
filming at the location and/or the time set forth in the application would
violate any law or ordinance or would unreasonably interfere with the
use and enjoyment of adjoining properties, unreasonably impede the
free flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic or otherwise endanger the
public's health, safety or welfare. Further, the Borough reserves the
right to require one or more on-site patrolmen in situations where the
proposed production may impede the proper flow of traffic, the cost of
said patrolman to be borne by the applicant as a cost of production.
Where existing electrical power lines are to be utilized by the
production, an on-site licensed electrician may be similarly required if
the production company does not have a licensed electrician on staff.
G. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Borough Clerk denying or
revoking a permit or a person requesting relief pursuant to Subsection
F may appeal to the Mayor and Council. A written notice of appeal
setting forth the reasons for the appeal shall be filed with the Borough
Clerk. An appeal from the decision of the Borough Clerk shall be filed
within 10 days of the Borough Clerk's decision. The Mayor and Council
§ 58-3 PARK RIDGE CODE § 58-3
1:220
§ 58-4. Fees.
The schedule of fees for the issuance of permits authorized by this chapter
are as follows:
shall set the matter down for a hearing within 30 days of the day on
which the notice of appeal was filed. The decision of the Mayor and
Council shall be in the form of a resolution supporting or reversing the
decision of the Borough Clerk at the first regularly scheduled public
meeting of the Mayor and Council after the hearing on the appeal,
unless the appellant agrees in writing to a later date for the decision.
H. The Borough Clerk may authorize filming other than during the hours
herein described. In determining whether to allow an extension of time
under this subsection, the Borough Clerk shall consider the following
factors:
(1) Traffic congestion at the location caused by vehicles to be parked
on the public streets;
(2) Applicant's ability to remove film-related vehicles off the public
streets;
(3) When the applicant is requesting restrictions on the use of public
parking during the course of the filming;
(4) Nature of the film shoot itself; e.g., indoors or outdoors, day or
night; and
(5) Prior experience of the film company/applicant with the Borough, if
any.
I. Copies of the approved permit shall be sent to the Police Department
and Fire Department before filming takes place and to the New Jersey
Film Commission. The applicant shall permit the Fire Prevention
Bureau or other Borough inspectors to inspect the site and the
equipment to be used. The applicant shall comply with all safety
instructions issued by the Fire Prevention Bureau or other Borough
inspectors.
J. In addition to any other fees or costs mentioned in this chapter, the
applicant shall reimburse the Borough for any lost revenue that the
Borough was prevented from earning because of filming.
K. Special regulations for major pictures.
(1) When filming is requested with respect to a major motion picture,
the duration of such filming shall not exceed six days in duration.
(2) Any days necessary to be used for setup and preparation for a
major picture filming may, in the discretion of the Borough Clerk,
be counted as a filming day where setup is anticipated to involve
one or more of the factors set forth in Subsection H hereinabove.
§ 58-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-4
1:221
§ 58-5. Violations and penalties.
Where the owner of the premises is not the applicant for a permit by this
chapter, both the owner and the applicant shall each be liable for violations
hereof. Any persons violating this chapter or these rules and regulations,
upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000
per day or by imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding 90
days, or both. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 59
(RESERVED)
[Original Ch. 59, Fireworks, was repealed as follows: Art. I, Hunting
and Firearms, adopted 12-9-1963, as amended, was repealed
12-22-1998 by Ord. No. 98-23; Art. II, Fireworks and Firework
Displays, adopted 12-9-1963, as amended, was repealed 6-22-2010
by Ord. No. 2010-22.]
Chapter 59A
FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 60.
§ 59A-1. Title.
This chapter shall be entitled "Recovery for Municipal Liens."
§ 59A-2. Payment of municipal liens and other charges prior to
payment by insurance company.
A. Basic filming permit: $75. Where an applicant requests a waiver of the
provision of § 58-3A requiring expedited processing of the permit
application, the basic filming permit shall be $125.
B. Daily filming fee payable in addition to the basic filming: $500 per day.
C. Daily filming fee payable for major motion picture: $1,500 per day.
D. Filming permit for nonprofit applicants filming for educational
purposes (no daily rate required): $25.
A. Any insurance company which has provided fire insurance on fire loss
coverage for real property located within the Borough of Park Ridge,
and that property has been damaged by fire in excess of $2,500, shall
make no payment to the real owner of the property, or any other person
§ 58-4 PARK RIDGE CODE § 59A-2
1:222
§ 59A-3. Filing.
A true copy of this chapter shall be filed with the State Commissioner of
Insurance of the State of New Jersey.
Chapter 60
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 14.
Police Department — See Ch. 28.
Alarm systems — See Ch. 41.
Fire insurance claims — See Ch. 59A.
Housing standards — See Ch. 70.
claiming in the interest of the owner of the real property, until either
the following is done:
(1) All anticipated demolition costs and all taxes and assessments and
all other municipal liens or charges due and payable, appearing on
the official certificate of search, shall have been paid; or
(2) All taxes and assessments and all other municipal liens or charges
due and payable, appearing on the official certificate of search,
shall have been paid.
B. Payment shall be made either by the owner of the real property or by
the insurance company, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 17:36-11.
§ 59A-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 59A-3
1:223

ARTICLE I
Enforcement and Administration
§ 60-1. Local enforcement.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq. (the Uniform Fire Safety Act), the
New Jersey Uniform Fire Code shall be locally enforced in the Borough of
Park Ridge.
§ 60-2. Enforcing agency designated.
The local enforcing agency for the provisions of the New Jersey Uniform
Fire Code shall be the Fire Prevention Bureau of the Borough of Park
Ridge. The local enforcing agency for the provisions § 60-16 shall be the
Police Department and/or the Fire Prevention Bureau of the Borough of
Park Ridge.
§ 60-3. Duties of enforcing agency.
The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall enforce the Uniform Fire Safety Act and
the codes and regulations adopted thereunder in all buildings, structures
and premises within the established boundaries of the Borough of Park
Ridge, other than owner-occupied one- and two-family residential dwellings,
and shall faithfully comply with the requirements of the Uniform Fire Safety
Act and the Uniform Fire Code.
§ 60-4. Life-hazard uses.
The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall carry out periodic inspections of lifehazard
uses as required by the Uniform Fire Safety Code on behalf of the
Commissioner of the Department of Community Affairs.
§ 60-5. Fire Official; inspectors and employees.
A. Creation of position of Fire Official. There is hereby created the position
of Fire Official, who shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice
and consent of the Council. The appointment shall be made with regard
to a list of three candidates submitted by the Chief of the Park Ridge
Volunteer Fire Department, the Fire Subcode Official and the Fire
Commissioner.
B. Term of office of Fire Official. The Fire Official shall serve for a term of
three years. Any vacancy shall be filled as soon as possible for the
unexpired term as allowed by law.
C. Creations of the position of Fire Inspector. Fire inspectors as may be
necessary in the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall be appointed by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council and with regard to
the recommendation of the Fire Official.
D. The term of office of Fire Inspector. The Fire Inspector shall serve for a
term of three years. Vacancies may be filled at the recommendation of
§ 60-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60-5
1:225
§ 60-6. Board of Appeals.
Pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:7-2.19 et seq. of the Uniform Fire Safety Code, any
person aggrieved by any order or decision of the Bureau of Fire Prevention
shall have the right of appeal to the Construction Board of Appeals of
Bergen County.
§ 60-7. Additional inspections.
In addition to the inspections set forth for life-hazard uses, all remaining
buildings, structures and premises within the established boundaries of
the Borough of Park Ridge, other than owner-occupied one- and two-family
residential dwellings, shall be inspected annually. Other inspections shall be
made upon receipt of a complaint or other reason to believe a violation of
the Uniform Fire Code exists.
§ 60-8. Fees.
§ 60-8.1. Violations and penalties. [Added 12-23-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-14]
Any person or persons who violate any provision of this chapter or of the
Uniform Fire Safety Act shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine
not exceeding $500 or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days,
or both.
the Fire Official by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the
Council. The number of inspectors shall be determined based on a
recommendation of the Fire Official to the Mayor and Council.
E. Removal from office. The Fire Official, Inspectors and other employees
shall be subject to removal by the Mayor and Council for inefficiency or
misconduct. Each Inspector and employee to be so removed shall be
afforded an opportunity to be heard by the appointing authority or a
designated hearing officer.
A. Fees for inspections are hereby established and shall cover the
operating costs of the Fire Prevention Bureau and shall be paid on an
annual basis by schedule established and announced by the Fire
Prevention Bureau by January 1 of each year. Amounts of the fees
thereof shall be as set and adopted, as required, by resolution of the
Mayor and Council.
B. Permit fees established pursuant to, and in the amounts of, the Uniform
Fire Code [N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.9(c)] shall be adopted by resolution of the
Mayor and Council.
C. The application fee for certification of smoke detector compliance
(CSDC) and carbon monoxide detector compliance (SMDC) shall be as
set and adopted, as required, by resolution of the Mayor and Council.
§ 60-5 PARK RIDGE CODE § 60-8.1
1:226
ARTICLE II
Specific Requirements
§ 60-9. Smoke detectors and carbon monoxide detectors.
§ 60-10. Residential compliance.
In order to ensure compliance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 52:27D-198.2,
no residential structure used by not more than two households shall be sold,
leased or otherwise made subject to a change of occupancy for residential
purposes prior to or until the owner shall obtain a certificate of smoke
detector compliance from the Fire Official.
§ 60-11. Certificate of compliance.
Prior to any change of occupancy as set forth in § 60-10 of this article, the
owner or authorized agent of the owner of the residential premises shall
apply for a certificate of smoke detector compliance to the Fire Official on a
form provided by the Fire Official. The application shall be accompanied by
a fee, in accordance with § 60-8, to cover the cost of administration of the
smoke detector compliance requirements of N.J.S.A. 52:27D-198.2 et seq.
A. Smoke detectors shall be required in all residential buildings and all
buildings of mixed use where residential use is included. The
regulations for the maintenance of rooming and boarding houses
(Rooming and Boarding House Act, N.J.A.C. 5:27 et seq.), hotels and
multiple dwellings (Hotel and Multiple Dwellings Act), Uniform Fire
Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23 et seq.) and the National Fire Protection Association
(NFPA 72) concerning smoke detectors and smoke alarms is hereby
incorporated by reference to determine the type of equipment and
placement requirements. In circumstances where a need for detectors
is not defined in the preceding sentence, the determination of need and
placement of detectors shall be at the discretion of the Fire Official.
B. Carbon monoxide detectors shall be required, installed and maintained
in accordance with the requirements of the Borough of Park Ridge and
related state law. Compliance with the carbon monoxide detector
requirements shall be done in a similar manner as the smoke detector
requirements.
C. Fire extinguishers shall be required in all one- or two-family homes. The
fire extinguishers shall be of the ABC-rated chemical fire extinguisher,
not less then 2 1/2 pounds nor more than 10 pounds. The fire
extinguishers must have been inspected within the past 12 months with
an inspection tag attached. The fire extinguisher must be wall mounted
within 10 feet of the kitchen in the premises. [Added 12-13-2005 by
Ord. No. 2005-29]
§ 60-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60-12
1:227
§ 60-12. Certification in lieu of inspection. [Amended 12-13-2005 by
Ord. No. 2005-29]
The Fire Official may accept in lieu of inspection a certification approved
by the Fire Official that the smoke detector/carbon monoxide detector/fire
extinguishers required herein have been installed and tested in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:70-4.19 or such other regulations that are in effect at the
time of the inspection. The certification shall be upon forms approved by the
Fire Official of the Borough of Park Ridge. This certification must be made
by the owner or duly authorized agent of the owner. The certification may
be rejected in the sole discretion of the Fire Official if, in his opinion, an
inspection is required.
§ 60-13. Issuance of certificate.
The Fire Official shall issue a certificate of smoke detector compliance
upon approval of a certification of compliance or after an inspection of the
premises showing compliance.
§ 60-14. Smoking and/or open flame restrictions.
No person shall smoke or carry a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, match or
open flame in areas prohibited by the Bureau of Fire Prevention. Every
person or his agent having control of premises upon which prohibition is
established by this section shall conspicuously display upon the premises a
sign reading "no smoking."
§ 60-15. Fire zones.
(Reserved)
§ 60-16. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FIRE LANE/ZONE — An area designed by the Fire Official and properly
posted and marked in accordance with this article. The terms "fire zone"
and "fire lane" shall be interchangeable.
FIRE OFFICIAL — The Borough of Park Ridge Fire Official or his or her
designated representative; as defined in N.J.A.C. 5:70, the New Jersey State
Uniform Code.
§ 60-17. Designation of fire lanes; marking; listing; obstructions.
A. Fire zones on public property shall be designated and/or approved by
the Fire Official.
B. Fire lanes/zones on private property.
(1) Designation. The Fire Official may designate, and the Fire Chief
and Police Chief may recommend to the Fire Official, fire lanes on
§ 60-12 PARK RIDGE CODE § 60-17
1:228
§ 60-18. Standards for delineation of fire zones.
All fire zones located within the Borough of Park Ridge shall be striped, and/
or have signs posted, at the discretion of the Fire Official, in the following
manner:
private property to which the public is invited or which is devoted
to public use, if it is necessary to provide safety for the public or to
provide proper access for Fire Department operations in the event
of any emergency.
(2) Fire Zones may also be designated during the planning/zoning site
plan approval process.
(3) Notification. Whenever a determination has been made for the fire
lane designation, pursuant to this chapter, the Fire Official shall
notify the owner of the property, in writing, by registered or
certified mail or by hand delivering such notice, specifically
describing the area designated and the reason for making the
designation.
C. The marking of fire zones shall be the responsibility of and at the
expense of the owner and shall be accomplished within 30 days of
receipt of the notification. Suitable signs and/or markings bearing the
words "No Parking or Standing - Fire Zone" shall be posted and marked
and striped in accordance with standards established by the Fire
Prevention Bureau and shall be properly maintained on said lands by
the owner, occupant, lessee or licensee thereof where this article is
effective and as approved by the Fire Official. Defacing, tampering with
or damaging such signs or allowing them to deteriorate so as to reduce
their effectiveness to notify when posted shall constitute a violation of
the article.
D. A current, detailed listing of the designated fire zones and fire lanes
within the boundaries of this Borough shall be kept on file with the
Borough Clerk and in the Fire Prevention Bureau office.
E. Removal of obstructions. A police officer shall remove or have removed
such obstructions or vehicles as may violate this article at the expense
of the owner of the premises, in the case of obstructions, or at the
expenses of the owner of the vehicle.
A. Signs.
(1) All signs shall be 12 inches wide by 18 inches high in size.
(2) Light-reflective material shall be used for the sign background and
lettering.
(3) All signs, whether wall- or post-mounted, shall be placed not more
than 100 feet center to center. Whenever the fire zone changes
angle or directions more than 60°, a sign shall be visible from
§ 60-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60-18
1:229
§ 60-19. Violations and penalties: general.
Pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:70-2 et seq., violation of the Fire Prevention
Ordinance is punishable by monetary penalties of not more than $5,000 per
day per violation. Penalties must be paid in full within 30 days of receipt
of an order to pay penalty and abate violations. If not paid within 30 days
of receipt of the notice, the Bureau will proceed to collect the penalty and
abate violations. If not paid within 30 days of receipt of the notice, the
Bureau will proceed to collect the penalty in a civil action by summary
hearing under the Penalty Enforcement Law (N.J.S.A. 2A:58-1 et seq.) in the
appropriate municipal, county or state Superior Court.
another sign. Additional signs may be required at the discretion of
the Fire Prevention Bureau, the Municipal Fire Subcode Official or
the Park Police Department.
(4) The sign shall be placed at a height of seven feet as measured from
the ground surface to the bottom of the sign at a forty-five-degree
angle facing the direction of flow. If the traffic flow is bidirectional,
then the sign shall be placed parallel to the traffic flow.
(5) The fire zone sign shall state: "NO PARKING OR STANDING--FIRE
ZONE."
B. Striping.
(1) Paint for all fire zone striping and lettering shall be in yellow paint.
(2) Each individual stripe shall be four inches in width.
(3) All fire zones shall be striped to a width of four feet, or as otherwise
designated by the Fire Official.
(4) All fire lanes shall be striped to a width of 12 feet, or as otherwise
designated by the Fire Official.
(5) The legend "NO PARKING--FIRE ZONE" shall be placed within the
striped outer boundary lines of the zone at a minimum of onehundred-
foot intervals.
(6) The lettering of the legend shall be 1.8 inches in height and shall be
placed within the center of the fire zone.
(7) Paint for all parking space and loading zone delineations shall be in
white paint.
(8) Paint for all handicapped parking space delineations, including the
universal handicapped logo, shall be in blue paint, said logo to be a
minimum of two feet in height.
(9) The color yellow shall be reserved solely for the purpose of marking
fire zones/lanes. Striping, space marking and/or curb marking for
purposes other than fire zones/lanes shall not be the color yellow.
§ 60-18 PARK RIDGE CODE § 60-20
1:230
§ 60-20. Violation and penalties: fire zones. [Amended 6-24-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014-013]
§ 60-21. Key box and key switch requirements. [Amended 4-10-2007
by Ord. No. 2007-8]
When access to or within a structure or an area is unduly difficult because
of secured opening(s) or where immediate access is necessary for lifesaving
or fire-saving purposes, the Fire Chief, the Fire Official or the Fire Subcode
Official, where appropriate, may require a key box and/or a key switch to be
installed at the owner's or tenant's expense in an accessible location. The
key box and/or key switch shall be of a type approved by the Fire Official
or Fire Subcode Official, as appropriate, so that all key access of this type
within the Borough of Park Ridge may be accomplished with the use of one
unified system. The key box shall contain a key(s) to gain necessary access
required by the Fire Department. All key boxes shall be large enough to
contain the required number of keys and must be approved by the Fire
Official and/or Fire Subcode Official. The key switch shall conform to the
current key access system as set forth in this chapter.
§ 60-22. Installation of key boxes and key switches. [Amended
4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-8]
Installation of a key box and a key switch shall be in accordance with the
specifications maintained and approved by the Borough of Park Ridge Fire
Official and Borough of Park Ridge Fire Subcode Official as required. The
A. Except as set forth in Subsection B hereof, it shall be unlawful for any
person to park, stop or stand any motor vehicle or to otherwise place or
store material or obstruct any fire zone.
B. The following vehicles shall be permitted to park, stop or stand in fire
zones:
(1) Any fire or emergency vehicle that is actively engaged in the
performance of official business.
(2) School buses that are loading and unloading passengers. School
buses must park in designated areas when waiting more than 15
minutes for passengers.
C. Any person, company, corporation, proprietorship, partnership
association or other business entity that shall park, stop or stand a
motor vehicle or otherwise obstruct a fire zone shall be subject to a fine,
upon conviction, for a first violation in an amount not to exceed $100
and, upon conviction for a second violation, to a fine in an amount not to
exceed $200 or to be confined to the county jail for a period not
exceeding 30 days, or both.
D. In any instance where a fire zone shall be obstructed by the storage or
placement of material therein, each day in which such obstruction shall
occur shall be considered a separate violation.
§ 60-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60-22
1:231
Borough Fire Official and Borough Fire Subcode Official shall have the
authority to implement a uniform system throughout the Borough so that
access to the designated key boxes and key switches may be accomplished
by the utilization of one uniform key system.
§ 60-23. Enforcement.
The enforcement of the provisions of this article shall be the responsibility
of the Fire Official in accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Code of
the State of New Jersey.
§ 60-24. (Reserved)
§ 60-25. (Reserved)
§ 60-26. (Reserved)
§ 60-27. Severability.
If any section, part of any section, or clause or phase of this chapter is for
any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not
affect the remaining provisions of this chapter. The governing body of the
Borough of Park Ridge declares that it would have passed the chapter and
each section and subsection thereof, irrespective of the fact that may any
one or more of the subsections, sentences, clauses, clauses or phrases may
be declared unconstitutional or invalid.
§ 60-28. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
§ 60-22 PARK RIDGE CODE § 60-28
1:232
Chapter 61
FLOOD HAZARD CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 50.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 74.
Soil removal — See Ch. 84.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 84A.
Subdivision and site plan review — See Ch.
87.
Trailers and camp cars — See Ch. 93.
§ 61-1. Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1., et
seq. delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general
welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the governing body of the Borough of
Park Ridge, of Bergen County, New Jersey does ordain as follows:
§ 61-2. Findings of fact.
§ 61-3. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
A. The flood hazard areas of the Borough of Park Ridge are subject to
periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety and general welfare.
B. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and
velocities and, when inadequately anchored, cause damage in other
areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise
protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
A. Protect human life and health.
B. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects.
C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding
and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public.
D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions.
§ 60-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 61-3
1:233
§ 61-4. Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
§ 61-5. Definitions.
E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and gas
mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, bridges located in
areas of special flood hazard.
F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas.
G. Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard.
H. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
A. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities.
B. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction.
C. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
floodwaters.
D. Controlling filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase flood damage.
E. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
A. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meanings they have in
common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AH ZONE — Areas subject to inundation by 1% annual chance shallow
flooding (usually areas of ponding) where average depths are between
one and three feet. Base flood elevations (BFEs) derived from detailed
hydraulic analyses are shown in this Zone.
§ 61-3 PARK RIDGE CODE § 61-5
1:234
AO ZONE — Areas subject to inundation by 1% annual chance shallow
flooding (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain) where average depths
are between one and three feet.
APPEAL — A request for a review of the Construction Code Official's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a
variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO or AH Zone on
a community's Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM) with a 1%
annual or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three
feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of
flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — Land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given
year. It is shown on the FIRM as Zone V, VE, V1-30, A, AO, A1-A30, AE,
A99, or AH.
BASE FLOOD — A flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION — The flood elevation shown on a published
Flood Insurance Study (FIS) including the Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM). For Zones AE, AH, AO, and A1-30 the elevation represents the
water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a 1% or greater
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support
of the building and is intended through its design and construction to
collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage
to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures,
mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations, or storage of equipment or materials located within the
area of special flood hazard.
DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM) — The official map
on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the
areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to
the community.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building built in the case of
a building in an area of special flood hazard, to have the top of the
elevated floor, elevated above the base flood elevation plus freeboard
by means of piling, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to
the flow of the water, and adequately anchored so as not to impair the
structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude
of the base flood. In an area of special flood hazard "elevated building"
§ 61-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 61-5
1:235
also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation
perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded
movement of floodwaters.
EROSION — The process of gradual wearing away of land masses.
EXISTING MANUFACTRED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are
to be affixed (including, at minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which
the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report in which the
Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as
the Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) and the water surface elevation of the
base flood.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial
or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow
of inland or tidal waters and/or the unusual and rapid accumulation or
runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special
purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance
and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power.
The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination
thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage
prevention and reduction.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water
and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the
base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
more than 0.2 foot.
FREEBOARD — A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a
flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends
to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to
flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood
and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the
hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed.
§ 61-5 PARK RIDGE CODE § 61-5
1:236
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the
ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed or existing
walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE —
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable
solely for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area
other than a basement is not considered a building's "lowest floor,"
provided that such enclosure is not built so to render the structure in
violation of other applicable nonelevation design requirements of 44
CFR Section 60.3.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for
use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the
required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a
"recreational vehicle."
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR MANUFACTURED HOME
SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into
two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain regulation
adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to
such structures.
Any structure that is:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places
(a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National
Register;
(a)
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a
registered historic district or a district preliminarily
determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic
district;
(b)
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states with historic preservation programs which have been
approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(c)
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have
been certified either by an approved state program as
determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or directly by the
Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
(d)
(1)
§ 61-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 61-5
1:237
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufacture homes are
to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring
of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of the
floodplain management regulations adopted by the municipality.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is built on a single
chassis; 400 square feet or less when measured at the longest
horizontal projections; designed to be self-propelled or permanently
towable by a light duty truck; and designed primarily not for use as a
permanent dwelling but as a temporary living quarters for recreational,
camping, travel, or seasonal use.
START OF CONSTRUCTION —
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building or a gas or liquid storage
tank that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before
damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of
the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT —
(For other than new construction or substantial improvements
under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L. 97-348), includes
substantial improvements and means the date the building permit
was issued, provided that the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other
improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual
start means either the first placement of permanent construction
of a structure on a site such as the pouring of a slab or footings,
the installation of pilings, the construction of columns, or any
work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation.
(1)
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such
as clearing, grading and filling nor does it include the installation
of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for
a basement, footings or piers, or foundations or the erection of
temporary forms, nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not
occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For
a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means
the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part
of a building, whether or not that alteration effects the external
dimensions of the building.
(2)
Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other improvement
of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the
(1)
§ 61-5 PARK RIDGE CODE § 61-5
1:238
§ 61-6. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of the Borough of Park Ridge, Bergen County, New Jersey.
§ 61-7. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter
which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be
prohibited by this chapter.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with this chapter. A new or substantially improved
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR
§ 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in
violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
market value of the structure before the "start of construction"
of the improvement. This term includes structures which have
incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local Code
Enforcement Officer and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
(a)
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as an historic structure.
(b)
A. The areas of special flood hazard for the Borough of Park Ridge,
Community No. 340063, are identified and defined on the following
documents prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
(1) A scientific and engineering report "Flood Insurance Study (FIS),
Bergen County, New Jersey (All Jurisdictions)" dated August 28,
2019.
(2) Flood Insurance Rate Map for Bergen County, New Jersey (All
Jurisdictions) as shown on Index and panels 34003C0087J,
34003C0091H, 34003C0092H, 34003C0093H and 34003C0094H,
whose effective date is August 28, 2019.
B. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and maps are on file in the
office of the Borough Clerk, 55 Park Avenue, Park Ridge, New Jersey.
§ 61-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 61-8
1:239
§ 61-8. Penalties for noncompliance.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, relocated to, extended,
converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined
not more than $500 or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both, for
each violation, and, in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in
the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Borough of Park Ridge
from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy
any violation.
§ 61-9. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
and other chapter, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 61-10. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
§ 61-11. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
§ 61-12. Establishment of development permit.
A. Considered as minimum requirements;
B. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
A. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural
causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special
flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from
flooding or flood damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Borough of Park
Ridge, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance
Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
A. A development permit shall be obtained before construction or
development begins, including placement of manufactured homes,
§ 61-8 PARK RIDGE CODE § 61-12
1:240
§ 61-13. Designation of the local administrator.
The Construction Code Officer is hereby appointed to administer and
implement this chapter by granting or denying development permit
applications in accordance with its provisions.
§ 61-14. Duties and responsibilities of Construction Code Officer.
Duties of the Construction Code Officer shall include, but not be limited to:
within any area of special flood hazard established in § 61-7.
Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished
by the Construction Code Office and may include, but not be limited
to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale, showing the nature, location,
dimensions and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed
structures, fill, storage of materials and drainage facilities; and the
location of the foregoing.
B. Specifically, the following information is required:
(1) Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all structures.
(2) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has
been floodproofed.
(3) Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet
the flood proofing criteria in § 61-17B. And,
(4) Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development.
A. Permit review. He shall:
(1) Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
(2) Review all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
(3) Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway. If located in the floodway,
he shall assure that the encroachment provisions of § 61-19A are
met.
B. When base flood elevation and floodway data has not been provided in
accordance with § 61-7, Basis for establishing the areas of special flood
hazard, the Construction Code Officer shall obtain, review and
reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available
from a Federal, State or other source, in order to administer § 61-17A,
§ 61-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 61-14
1:241
specific standards, residential construction, and § 61-17B, specific
standards, nonresidential construction.
C. Information to be obtained and maintained. He shall:
(1) Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure
contains a basement.
(2) For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(a) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level); and
(b) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in
§ 61-12B(3).
(3) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
D. Alteration of watercourses.
(1) Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Bureau of Flood Control and the Land
Use Regulation Program prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the
Federal Insurance Administration.
(2) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying
capacity is not diminished.
E. Substantial damage review.
(1) After an event resulting in building damages, assess the damage to
structures due to flood and nonflood causes.
(2) Record and maintain the flood and nonflood damage of substantial
damage structures and provide a letter of Substantial Damage
Determination to the owner and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Bureau of Flood Control.
(3) Ensure substantial improvements meet the requirements of
§ 61-17A, specific standards, residential construction, § 61-17B,
specific standards, nonresidential construction and § 61-18,
specific standards, manufactured homes.
F. Interpretation of FIRM boundaries. Make interpretations, where
needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special
flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between
a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting
the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to
appeal the interpretation as provided in § 61-15.
§ 61-14 PARK RIDGE CODE § 61-15
1:242
§ 61-15. Variance procedure.
A. Appeal Board.
(1) The Planning Board, as established by the Borough of Park Ridge,
shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter.
(2) The Planning Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged that there is an error in any requirement, decision or
determination made by the Construction Code Officer in the
enforcement or administration of this chapter.
(3) Those aggrieved by the decision of the Planning Board, or any
taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of the
State of New Jersey.
(4) In passing upon such applications, the Planning Board shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter and;
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others.
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage.
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner.
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community.
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable.
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage.
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development.
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan and floodplain management program of that area.
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles.
(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site. And,
§ 61-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 61-15
1:243
(k) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
(5) Upon consideration of the factors of Subsection A(4) and the
purposes of this chapter, the Planning Board may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to
further the purposes of this chapter.
(6) The Construction Code Officer shall maintain the records of all
appeal actions, including technical information, and report any
variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
B. Conditions for variances.
(1) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, providing that
items in Subsection A(4)(a) through (k) have been fully considered.
As the lot size increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical
justification required for issuing the variance increases.
(2) Variances may be issued for the repair of rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair of
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.
(3) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
(4) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
(5) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on
or victimization of the public as identified in Subsection A(4) or
conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
§ 61-15 PARK RIDGE CODE § 61-15
1:244
§ 61-16. General standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards, compliance with the applicable
requirements of the Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23) and the
following standards, whichever is more respective, is required:
(6) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
A. Anchoring.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the
structure.
(2) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use
of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is
in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for
resisting wind forces.
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
C. Utilities.
(1) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
(2) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharge from the systems into floodwaters.
(3) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
And,
(4) For all new construction and substantial improvements the
electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
§ 61-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 61-16
1:245
§ 61-17. Specific standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data have
been provided as set forth in § 61-7, Basis for establishing the areas of
special flood hazard, or in § 61-14B, Use of other base flood data, the
following standards are required:
D. Subdivision proposals.
(1) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
(2) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall have public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize
flood damage;
(3) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage; and
(4) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed new development which contain at
least 50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).
E. Enclosure openings. All new construction and substantial
improvements having fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that
are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in
an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall
be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
(1) A minimum of two openings in at least two exterior walls of each
enclosed area, having a total net area of not less than one square
inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall
be provided.
(2) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above
grade.
(3) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry
and exit of floodwaters.
A. Residential construction.
(1) New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure located in an A or AE Zone shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, together with the attendant utilities (including
all electrical, heating, ventilating, air-conditioning and other
§ 61-16 PARK RIDGE CODE § 61-17
1:246
§ 61-18. Manufactured homes.
service equipment) and sanitary facilities, elevated to or above the
more restrictive base flood elevation plus one foot or as required
by ASCE/SEI 24-24, Table 201;
(2) Require within any AO or AH Zone on the municipality's DFIRM
that all new construction and substantial improvement of any
residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including
basement together with the attendant utilities and sanitary
facilities, elevated above the depth number specified in feet plus
one foot, above the highest adjacent grade (at least three feet if no
depth number is specified). And, require adequate drainage paths
around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away
from proposed structures.
B. Nonresidential construction.
(1) In an area of special flood hazard, all new construction and
substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other
nonresidential structure located in an A or AE Zone shall have the
lowest floor, including basement together with attendant utilities
and sanitary facilities as well as all electrical, heating, ventilating,
air-conditioning and other service equipment: either
(a) Elevated at or above the more restrictive base flood elevation
plus one foot or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1; and
(b) Require within any AO or AH Zone on the municipality's
DFIRM to elevate above the depth number specified in feet
plus one foot, above the highest adjacent grade (at least three
feet if no depth number is specified). And, require adequate
drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures; or
(c) Be floodproofed so that below the more restrictive, base flood
elevation plus one foot or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14,
Table 6-1, the structure is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water;
(d) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and,
(e) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the design and methods of construction are in accordance
with accepted standards of practice for meeting the applicable
provisions of this subsection. Such certification shall be
provided to the official as set forth in § 61-14C(2).
A. Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with section
§ 61-16A(2).
§ 61-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 61-18
1:247
§ 61-19. Floodways.
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in § 61-7 are areas
designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area
due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles
and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
§ 61-20. Severability.
Chapter 62
B. All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved within
an area of special flood hazard shall:
(1) Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage,
(2) Be constructed to minimize flood damage,
(3) Have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage,
(4) Be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the top of the
lowest floor is at or above the more restrictive base flood elevation
plus one foot or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1 and,
(5) The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or
other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are
no less than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
floatation, collapse, and lateral movement.
A. Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development unless a technical evaluation
demonstrates that encroachment shall not result in any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
B. If Subsection A is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements must comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction
provisions of this chapter.
C. In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation data
has been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
accumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with
all other existing and anticipated development shall not increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than 0.2 of a foot at any
point.
A. If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of
this chapter shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such a
decision shall not affect the remaining portions of the chapter, which
shall remain in full force and effect, and for this purpose the provisions
of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable.
§ 61-18 PARK RIDGE CODE § 61-20
1:248
FREE PUBLIC LIBRARY
§ 62-1. Failure to return borrowed books unlawful. [Amended
11-12-1985 by Ord. No. 85-17]
No person shall detain or fail to return any book or materials borrowed
from the Free Public Library of the Borough of Park Ridge, or any other
library honoring the Park Ridge membership card, contrary to the rules
and regulations of said Free Public Library after 30 days have elapsed from
the date of posting by certified mail, return receipt requested, of a notice
demanding return thereof, addressed to said person at the last address
furnished to the library.
§ 62-2. Damaging property. [Amended 11-12-1985 by Ord. No.
85-17]
No person shall willfully or maliciously cut, tear, deface, disfigure, damage
or destroy any book or other material or any part thereof which is owned by
or loaned through the library or is in the custody of such library.
§ 62-3. Furnishing false information. [Amended 11-12-1985 by Ord.
No. 85-17]
No person with intent to defraud shall register or furnish a false name or
address, or use any card other than the one issued to said person, for the
purpose of borrowing any book or material from said library.
§ 62-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-8-1984 by Ord. No.
74-16]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed $500 or by imprisonment
in the county jail for a period not to exceed 90 days, or by both fine and
imprisonment, in the discretion of the court before whom such conviction
shall be had.
Chapter 63
FURNACES, OUTDOOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 60.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 80.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 112.
§ 61-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 63-1
1:249
§ 63-1. Short title.
This chapter may be cited as the "Borough of Park Ridge Outdoor Wood-
Burning Furnace Ordinance."
§ 63-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FIREWOOD — Trunks and branches of trees and bushes, but does not
include leaves, needles, vines or brush smaller than three inches in
diameter.
OUTDOOR FURNACE — Any equipment, device or apparatus, or any part
thereof, which is installed, affixed or situated outdoors for the primary
purpose of combustion of fuel to produce heat or energy, used as a
component of a heating system providing heat for any interior space.
OUTDOOR WOOD-BURNING FURNACE — An accessory structure
designed and intended, through the burning of wood or any solid fuel, for
the purpose of heating the principal structure or any other site, building
or structure on the premises. This does not include fireplaces, fire pits,
barbecues or similar structures not designed to heat a structure.
UNTREATED LUMBER — Dry wood which has been milled and dried but
which has not been treated or combined with any petroleum product,
chemical preservative, glue, adhesive, stain, paint or other substance.
§ 63-3. Construction and operation prohibited.
The construction and operation of outdoor furnaces and outdoor woodburning
furnaces are hereby prohibited within the Borough of Park Ridge.
§ 63-4. Effect on existing outdoor furnaces.
Any outdoor furnaces or outdoor wood-burning furnaces in existence on
the effective date of this chapter shall be permitted to remain, provided
that the owner applies for and receives a permit from the Borough of Park
Ridge Construction Code Office, on the forms provided, within one year
of the effective date of this chapter. Notwithstanding the fact that any
outdoor furnaces or outdoor wood-burning furnaces in existence on the
effective date of this chapter has one year to receive a permit, any existing
outdoor furnaces or outdoor wood-burning furnaces must comply with the
applicable sections of this chapter within 60 days of the effective date of
this chapter. If the owner of an outdoor furnace or outdoor wood-burning
furnace does not receive a permit within one year of the effective date of
this chapter, the outdoor furnace or outdoor wood-burning furnace shall be
removed. "Existing" or "in existence" shall mean that the outdoor furnace or
outdoor wood-burning furnace is in place on the premises.
§ 63-5. Nonconforming uses.
§ 63-1 PARK RIDGE CODE § 63-5
1:250
A. Except as hereinbefore provided, the lawful use of any outdoor furnace
or outdoor wood-burning furnace existing at the time of the effective
date of this chapter may be continued, although such use does not
conform with the provisions of the Borough Code of Park Ridge.
B. For those outdoor furnaces or outdoor wood-burning furnaces that are
in existence prior to the effective date of this chapter, the only fuel
allowed shall be those listed fuels recommended by the manufacturer,
including firewood and untreated lumber. Burning of any and all other
materials in any existing outdoor furnace or outdoor wood-burning
furnace shall be prohibited.
C. Emissions from the outdoor furnace or outdoor wood-burning furnace
shall not exhibit greater than twenty-percent opacity (six-minute
average), except for one continuous six-minute period per hour of not
more than twenty-seven-percent opacity.
D. Malodorous air contaminants from the outdoor furnace or outdoor
wood-burning furnace shall not be detectable outside the property of
the person on whose land the outdoor furnace or outdoor wood-burning
furnace is located.
E. The emissions from the outdoor furnace or outdoor wood-burning
furnace shall not interfere with the reasonable enjoyment of life or
property.
F. The emissions from the outdoor furnace or outdoor wood-burning
furnace shall not cause damage to vegetation or property.
G. The emissions from the outdoor furnace or outdoor wood-burning
furnace shall not be harmful to human or animal health.
H. No outdoor furnace or outdoor wood-burning furnace existing at the
effective date of this chapter shall thereafter be extended or enlarged.
I. No existing outdoor furnace or outdoor wood-burning furnace which
has been damaged by any reason to the extent of more than 50% of its
assessed value for the Borough of Park Ridge tax purposes shall be
repaired or rebuilt.
J. Any outdoor furnace or outdoor wood-burning furnace existing at the
effective date of this chapter which is abandoned or discontinued for a
period of six consecutive months shall not be permitted to be
reestablished as a nonconforming use and must be immediately
removed by the property owner from the subject premises.
(1) If the property owner fails to remove the outdoor furnace or
outdoor wood-burning furnace existing at the effective date of this
chapter by the end of the period of six consecutive months, the
Borough of Park Ridge Zoning Officer shall give written notice, by
certified mail or by personal service, to said owner upon which the
outdoor furnace or outdoor wood-burning furnace is located. Said
§ 63-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 63-5
1:251
§ 63-6. Designation of enforcement agency.
The Construction Code Office shall be and is hereby designated as the
agency to exercise the powers prescribed by this chapter and to enforce the
provisions thereof.
§ 63-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or of the rules and
regulations adopted pursuant thereto shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punished by a fine not exceeding $500 or by imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 10 days, or both. Any subsequent offense shall be punishable by
a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding
30 days, or both. In addition, any permit issued pursuant to this chapter
shall be revoked upon conviction of a second offense, and the subject
outdoor furnace or outdoor wood-burning furnace shall not be eligible for
any future permit. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each
day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. The owners of
the subject premises upon which prohibited acts occur shall be jointly and
severally liable for violations of this chapter. Any fine imposed hereunder
shall constitute a lien upon the real property where the outdoor furnace or
outdoor wood-burning furnace is located until said fines and costs are paid
in full.
§ 63-8. Effect of other regulations.
Nothing contained herein shall authorize or allow burning which is
prohibited by codes, laws, rules or regulations promulgated by the United
States Environmental Protection Agency, New Jersey State Department
notice shall provide that said owner shall remove the existing
outdoor furnace or outdoor wood-burning furnace within 15 days of
the date the notice is either postmarked or personally served upon
said owner.
(2) In the event that the property owner fails to remove the outdoor
furnace or outdoor wood-burning furnace within the aforesaid
specified period of time, the Park Ridge Zoning Officer shall take
any and all reasonable steps to effect its removal.
(3) Any costs incurred by the Borough of Park Ridge to effect said
removal (including any legal and other expenses incurred by the
Borough to effect the removal), plus an amount equal to 50% of said
costs of removal, shall be charged to the owner of said premises.
The aforesaid expenses shall be paid by the owner of the said
premises so affected within 30 days from the date said costs are
presented to said owner. If the aforesaid expenses are not paid
within said thirty-day-period time frame, then said expenses shall
be charged to the said premises so affected by including such
expenses in the next annual Borough tax levy against the subject
premises.
§ 63-5 PARK RIDGE CODE § 63-8
1:252
of Environmental Protection, or other federal, state, county, regional or
local agency. Outdoor furnaces or outdoor wood-burning furnaces, and any
electrical, plumbing or other apparatus or device used in connection with
an outdoor furnace or outdoor wood-burning furnace, shall be installed,
operated and maintained in conformity with the manufacturer's
specifications and any and all local, state, county and federal codes, laws,
rules and regulations. In case of a conflict between any provision of this
chapter and any applicable federal, state, county or local ordinances, codes,
laws, rules or regulations, the more restrictive or stringent provision or
requirement shall prevail.
§ 63-9. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with this chapter are
hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency only.
§ 63-10. Severability.
If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause or provision of this chapter
shall be adjudged invalid, such adjudication shall apply only to the section,
paragraph, subdivision, clause or provision, and the remainder of this
chapter shall be deemed valid and effective.
§ 63-11. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately following final passage, adoption
and publication as provided by law.
Chapter 64
GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND TRASH
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 14.
Board of Health — See Ch. 17.
Dogs, cats and other animals — See Ch. 52.
Housing standards — See Ch. 70.
Dumping — See Ch. 78, Art. II.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 80.
Abandoned or junked vehicles — See Ch. 96.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 112.
§ 63-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 63-11
1:253

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 10-26-1970 by Ord. No. 70-21]
§ 64-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASHES — The residue from the burning of solid fuels and other combustible
materials in homes, stores, institutions and commercial establishments.
COMMERCIAL PURPOSE — Includes, but is not limited to, any endeavor
normally of a profit-seeking nature.[Added 7-9-1979 by Ord. No. 79-8]
GARBAGE — Includes offal and refuse of animal and vegetable matter,
excluding liquids, which has been used or was intended for use as food
for man or beast, including condemned foods, spoiled meat, fish, fowl,
vegetables, fruits, birds, small dead animals and oyster and clam shells, also
excrement and offal of pets if separately and securely wrapped.
GARDEN REFUSE — Includes Christmas trees, small branches of trees
two inches or less in diameter, hedge, bush and vine trimmings, stalks of
vegetable and flower plants, grass in any form, weeds, dirt, small stones and
similar material usually found in residential yards, except leaves in bulk.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Includes bulk quantities of ashes, rubbish and other
solid waste products resulting from industrial processes and manufacturing
operations, including printing plants.
MIXED REFUSE — Includes solid wastes consisting primarily of garbage,
rubbish, ashes and garden refuse and solid commercial wastes, but
excluding industrial wastes and trash.
PERSON — Includes a partnership or a corporation.
RUBBISH — Includes waste products generally found in and about
residences and places of business, such as paper, rags, wooden boxes,
crates, cans, bottles, crockery, metals, stones, plaster, dirt and waste
materials, but excluding appliances, furniture, equipment and fixtures and
other wastes which cannot be fitted readily into the standard ash can or tied
into bundles of three feet maximum dimension.
SOLID COMMERCIAL WASTE — Includes garbage, ashes, rubbish and
other solid waste products generally found around stores and business
establishments.
TRASH — Includes bric-a-brac, household furnishings, fixtures and
appliances, household equipment, doors, screens, bicycles, playground
equipment and apparatus of all kinds and any other rubbish which has
been delivered by local residents from their homes to the Borough
compactor.[Amended 7-9-1979 by Ord. No. 79-8]
§ 64-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-2
1:255
§ 64-2. General regulations.
Every owner, householder, tenant, lessee or occupant of any and every
building in the Borough of Park Ridge shall be required to do the following:
§ 64-2.1. Public litter containers. [Added 3-15-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-05]
No person shall use a litter receptacle placed on the streets and roads by
the Borough of Park Ridge for deposit of household or commercial garbage,
rubbish and trash.
§ 64-3. Borough compactor. [Amended 7-9-1979 by Ord. No. 79-8]
§ 64-4. Special collections. [Amended 7-9-1979 by Ord. No. 79-8]
Special collections, such as cleanup week, may be provided by the Borough
of Park Ridge through its scavenger contract. In addition thereto, certain
articles not required to be removed by the Borough Scavenger may be
removed by the Borough Scavenger upon the payment of certain scheduled
fees in the manner prescribed by the Mayor and Council, who shall approve
A. To provide and at all times hereafter to keep on the premises at least
one receptacle of the size and type prescribed by the Mayor and
Council, which shall not hold over 60 pounds in garbage and trash.
B. To locate containers for pickup at ground level and not within the
confines of any building in order that ready access is provided for the
Borough Scavenger.
C. To maintain all materials ready for pickup in a neat, orderly manner,
properly wrapped, packed and drained.
D. To dispose of materials which are not the responsibility of the Borough
by virtue of the existing scavenger contract or other system in effect for
the removal of garbage and trash.
A. A compactor shall be operated by the Borough of Park Ridge for the
exclusive use of residents of the Borough of Park Ridge. No resident
shall be permitted to dispose of garbage, stone, dirt, newspaper,
magazines or any material in excess of four feet in any dimension.
B. The compactor shall not be used for the disposal of any solid
commercial waste or for any commercial purpose.
C. No vehicle in excess of 7,500 pounds' gross vehicle weight shall be used
to deposit materials in or transport materials to the compactor.
D. The hours and conditions of operation of the compactor shall be
prescribed by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Park Ridge. Use
of the compactor during hours other than the hours set shall be strictly
prohibited and shall subject the violator to the penalty provided in this
article.
§ 64-2 PARK RIDGE CODE § 64-4
1:256
the rates to be charged therefor by the Borough Scavenger. These fees
shall be paid directly to the Borough Scavenger and shall not be considered
revenue by the Borough. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit
any person from arranging with a private scavenger or independent
contractor for the removal of any articles not required to be removed by the
Borough Scavenger, provided that the same does not involve the use of the
Borough compactor.
§ 64-5. Collection regulations.
The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Park Ridge shall provide, by
promulgation of rules and regulations, more detailed limitations or
restrictions on the removal of garbage, trash and similar materials covered
by this chapter and shall, upon the entering of a new contract for scavenger
service, distribute copies of said rules and regulations to all prospective
users of said service.
§ 64-6. Burning and burying prohibited; unlawful accumulation and
deposit.
It shall be unlawful for any person to burn or bury any garbage or rubbish
upon any premises within the Borough of Park Ridge. No person shall
permit or allow garbage or rubbish to accumulate on his premises for a
period of more than four days. It shall also be unlawful for any person to
place any ashes, garbage or rubbish upon any premises or upon any street
or upon a public place within the limits of the Borough of Park Ridge.
§ 64-7. Interpretation.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to affect, alter, change or
modify any rules, regulations or ordinances of the Board of Health,62 with
the exception that the licensing of the Borough Scavenger shall be done by
the Mayor and Council.
§ 64-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-8-1974 by Ord. No.
74-16]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, pay a penalty of not exceeding $500 or be imprisoned for
a period not exceeding 90 days, or both.
62.Editor's Note: For legislation adopted by the Board of Health, consult Part III of this Code.
§ 64-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-8
1:257

ARTICLE II
Recycling
[Adopted 3-8-1988 by Ord. No. 88-1]
§ 64-9. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to comply with the New Jersey Statewide
Mandatory Source Separation and Recycling Act, P.L. 1987, c. 102, and the
New Jersey Recycling Act of 1981, P.L. 1981, c.278.63
§ 64-10. Definitions. [Amended 5-12-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-03]
As used in this article, the following terms have the meanings indicated:
ALUMINUM CANS — Food and beverage containers made entirely of
aluminum.
AUTOMOTIVE WASTE OIL — A petroleum-based or synthetic oil which,
through use, storage or handling, has become unsuitable for its original
purpose due to the presence of impurities or loss of original properties.
Automotive waste oil includes used oil from autos, lawn mowers and
motorcycles.
BATTERIES, HOUSEHOLD — Commercial alkaline, zinc and lithium types
in AAA, AA, C, D, 9-volt and lantern size; nickel cadmium and sealed lead
acid. Also available in common cell sizes AAA, AA, C, D and 9-volt; button
cells; silver oxide, lithium, zinc air and alkaline-manganese.[Amended
12-22-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-25]
BATTERIES, LEAD ACID — Batteries from automobiles, trucks, other
vehicles and machinery and equipment. This does not include consumer
(household) batteries.
BATTERIES, RECHARGEABLE — Nickel cadmium, small sealed lead acid,
lithium ion, nickel metal hydride, silver oxide and lithium button cell.
Rechargeable batteries can be found in cordless power tools, cellular and
cordless phones, laptop computers, digital cameras, two-way radios,
camcorders and remote control toys.[Added 12-22-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-25]
BRUSH/TREE PARTS — Branches and wood chips generated from
residential and institutional sources (e.g., storm damage and pruning
activities).
COMMINGLED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those designated recyclable
materials which may be disposed of together in a common reusable
receptacle. These shall include aluminum cans, glass containers, bimetal
(tin) cans, PET beverage containers and plastic bottles. Glass containers
shall not be broken. All labels must be removed from all commingled
recyclable materials.
63.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.11 et seq.; N.J.S.A. §§ 13:1E-92 through 13:1E-94 were
repealed by L. 2002, c. 128, § 12, effective 12-20-2002; see now also N.J.S.A. § 13:1E-213 et
seq.
§ 64-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-10
1:259
COMPLIANCE OFFICER — The Borough Administrator shall be designated
as the Compliance Officer. The Compliance Officer shall be responsible
for all administrative duties and all required reporting, including filing of
annual tonnage reports with the appropriate federal, state and/or county
agencies.
COMPOSTABLE BAG — A biodegradable, two-ply, wet-strength-treated,
recyclable paper or corn silk bag which can be placed in or added directly
to a compost pile.
CONCRETE/ASPHALT AND MASONRY/PAVING MATERIALS — Asphalt or
asphalt-based roofing shingles, concrete, brick, cinder block, ceramic
materials, stones, other masonry materials and paving materials. Note: This
material must be recycled at a registered, exempted or pending Class B
recycling facility. Contact the Recycling Coordinator for a list of registered
facilities.
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS — Waste building material
and refuse resulting from construction, remodeling and repair operations
on houses, commercial buildings and other structures.
CORRUGATED CARDBOARD — Containers and similar paper items usually
used to transport supplies, equipment parts or other merchandise.
DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those recyclable materials,
including ferrous scrap (white goods), aluminum, glass containers, plastic
containers, corrugated cardboard, newspaper, high-grade paper, mixed
office and computer paper, automotive waste oil, batteries (excluding
household batteries), yard waste, construction and demolition debris, food
waste, PET beverage containers, leaves, grass, tin cans and electronic
waste.[Amended 5-10-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-016]
ELECTRONIC WASTE — Computer CPUs, monitors and televisions (no
wood cabinet).[Added 5-10-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-016]
FERROUS SCRAP — All products made of metal, aluminum, heavy iron,
white goods and light iron.
FOOD WASTE — Food plate wastes and food processing wastes. Food
processing wastes include food processing vegetative waste (material
generated in trimming and reject sorting operations from the processing of
fruits and vegetables in canneries and similar industries, e.g., tomato skins,
pepper cores, bean snips, cranberry hulls), food processing residuals and
animal processing wastes. If the material is transported and processed as
animal feed, it should be identified as such.
GLASS CONTAINERS — All products made from silica or sand, soda ash
and limestone which are transparent or translucent and used for packaging
or bottling of various matter, including food or beverages, and all materials
commonly known as "glass," excluding, however, blue and flat glass
commonly known as "window glass" or "plate glass."
GRASS CLIPPINGS — Grass clippings derived from the mowing of lawns or
other grassy areas.
§ 64-10 PARK RIDGE CODE § 64-10
1:260
HAZARDOUS WASTE — A solid waste (solid waste includes solids, liquids
and compressed gases) that possesses at least one of four characteristics
(ignitibility, corrosivity, reactivity or toxicity) or that appears on federal or
state official lists of hazardous wastes as set forth in: Title 40 of the Code
of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 261; N.J.A.C. 7:26G-5; or pursuant to the
Bergen County Utilities Authority rules and/or regulations.
HEAVY IRON — All ferrous scrap, structural steel or cast-iron components.
HIGH-GRADE OFFICE PAPER — White typing and ledger paper, white
notepad paper, copier paper, carbonless computer printout paper, manila
tab cards and file folders.
LEAVES — Leaves and other yard debris, excluding grass and brush, from
residential, institutional, commercial or industrial sources.
MISCELLANEOUS RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Includes any other
nonhazardous material which would otherwise be classified as solid waste
and is not otherwise defined in this section and documented as being
recycled. Examples include but are not limited to furniture, carpeting and
padding.
MIXED OFFICE AND COMPUTER PAPER — Any and all types of officetype
paper, including but not limited to carbonless computer printout paper,
high-grade white paper, typing paper, copier paper, onionskin, tissue paper,
notepad, envelopes, manila folders and colored paper, or any mix thereof.
NEWSPAPER — All paper marketed as newsprint or newspaper and
containing at least 70% newsprint or newspaper (American Forrest and
Paper Association Grade Nos. 6, 7 and 8 news).
NONFERROUS AND OTHER ALUMINUM SCRAP — All noncontainer
aluminum, stainless steel, copper, zinc, brass and other metals which
generally do not rust.
OTHER GLASS — All noncontainer glass such as plate glass, drinking
glasses and automotive glass.
OTHER PAPER/MAGAZINES/JUNK MAIL — All paper which is not defined
as corrugated, mixed office paper, computer paper or newspaper. Examples
are as follows: magazine stock, telephone directories, wrapping paper,
chipboard, books, papers coated with plastic, film or foil, paper
contaminated with food and grocery bags.
PET BEVERAGE CONTAINERS — Hermetically sealed or airtight containers
with a metal or plastic cap, with a minimum wall thickness of not less than
0.010 inch and composed of thermoplastic synthetic polymeric materials.
PLASTIC CONTAINERS — Containers such as polyethylene terephthalate
(PETE - No. 1) soda bottles, high-density polyethylene (HDPE - No. 2)
milk, water or detergent bottles, low-density polyethylene (LDPE - No. 4)
containers, vinyl (V - No. 3) or polyvinyl chloride (PVC - No. 5) bottles and
rigid and foam polystyrene (PS - No. 6).
§ 64-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-10
1:261
PRIVATE SCAVENGER — A carter which holds a tariff from the New Jersey
Board of Regulatory Commissioners or license from the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection and Energy.
RECYCLING CENTER — The area designated by the Borough as such where
designated recyclable materials may be disposed of in the appropriate
receptacles provided. The recycling center is located in an area at the rear
of the Utility and Road Garages.
RECYCLING COORDINATOR — The Recycling Coordinator is responsible
for overseeing the Recycling Center Operations at Sulak Lane whose duties
shall include, but not be limited to all communication and enforcement
matters at the recycling center; interacting with all residents' concerns;
collecting and gathering any and all statements, reports and payments from
outside vendors; disseminating information to the Compliance Officer, as
necessary. The Recycling Coordinator shall be appointed on an annual basis
at the annual reorganization meeting of the Mayor and Council.
REUSABLE RECEPTACLE — Those receptacles used to place commingled
recyclable materials, grass clippings or yard waste at curbside for disposal.
These receptacles shall be a reusable type (aluminum, plastic or metal) with
a capacity no larger than 40 gallons.
SCRAP AUTOS — Crushed or shredded automobile or truck bodies,
excluding auto shredder residue or fluff.
STEEL CANS — Rigid containers made exclusively or primarily of steel or
tin-plated steel and steel and aluminum cans used to store food, beverages,
paint and a variety of other household and consumer products.
STUMPS — Unfinished wood from commercial land-clearing activities.
Note: This material must be recycled at a registered, exempted or pending
Class B recycling facility. Contact the Recycling Coordinator for a list of
registered facilities.
WHITE GOODS and LIGHT IRON — All appliances such as washers, dryers,
refrigerators, stoves, hot-water heaters, tire rims, springs, bicycles, bimetal
cans (tin cans) or scrap metal, as well as products made from sheet iron,
such as shelving, file cabinets, metal desks, recycled or reconditioned steel
drums and other nonstructural ferrous scrap.
WOOD SCRAPS — Finished or unfinished lumber from construction or
demolition projects. Included in this definition are telephone poles, railroad
ties and wooden pallets. Note: This material must be recycled at a
registered, exempted or pending Class B recycling facility. Contact the
Recycling Coordinator for a list of registered facilities.
YARD WASTE — Brush, branches, twigs and thatch.
§ 64-11. Recycling Coordinator/Compliance Officer.
A. The position of Recycling Coordinator/Compliance Officer is hereby
established within the Borough of Park Ridge. The Recycling
§ 64-10 PARK RIDGE CODE § 64-11
1:262
§ 64-12. Separation and collection of recyclables for one- to fourfamily
homes. [Amended 8-9-1988 by Ord. No. 88-10; 10-9-1990 by
Ord. No. 90-21; 5-12-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-03]
Coordinator/Compliance Officer shall report to the Municipal
Administrator.
B. The Recycling Coordinator/Compliance Officer shall be appointed by
the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council of the Borough of
Park Ridge for a term of one year expiring December 31 of each year.
The Recycling Coordinator/Compliance Officer may have additional
duties at the direction of the Mayor and Council.
C. The Recycling Coordinator/Compliance Officer shall establish and
promulgate reasonable rules and regulations as approved by the Mayor
and Council of the Borough of Park Ridge. The rules and regulations
shall provide for the manner, days and times for the collection, storage,
transportation, sale and/or marketing of the recyclable materials and
for obtaining and maintaining compliance with the provisions of this
article.
D. The Recycling Coordinator/Compliance Officer shall annually submit a
recycling tonnage report to the New Jersey Office of Recycling and
other such reports required by the Bergen County Utilities Authority.
A. Effective March 1, 2009, it shall be mandatory for all persons, lessees
and occupants of one- to four-family residential properties to separate
newspaper, glass containers, aluminum cans, plastic containers, ferrous
scrap, leaves, white goods, tin cans, grass, automotive waste oil, yard
waste and batteries (lead acid and household) waste from all other solid
waste produced by such residences for collection/deposit and the
ultimate recycling of said material.
B. Designation of recyclable materials. [Amended 12-22-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009-25]
(1) Mandatory. The following are identified as mandatory recyclable
materials:
(a) Aluminum cans.
(b) Glass containers.
(c) Leaves.
(d) Grass.
(e) Newspapers/magazines.
(f) Ferrous scrap.
(g) White goods.
(h) Plastic containers.
§ 64-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-12
1:263
(i) PET beverage containers.
(j) Bimetal (tin) cans.
(k) Lead acid batteries.
(l) Automotive waste oil.
(m) Yard waste.
(n) Rechargeable batteries.
(o) Electronic waste. [Added 5-10-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-016]
C. Placement of materials. Separation, collection and disposal methods of
designated recyclable materials.
(1) Commingled recyclable materials, including aluminum cans, glass,
bimetal (or tin) cans, PET beverage containers and plastic bottles,
shall be separated from other household waste and trash and
placed in a common reusable container for curbside collection not
to exceed 50 pounds in weight. The reusable container shall be
placed at curbside for collection as scheduled by the Recycling
Coordinator, to be collected by the Borough Scavenger.
Commingled recyclable materials may also be disposed of in
receptacles provided at the Municipal Recycling Center during
posted hours of operation. Glass containers shall not be broken.
(2) Automotive waste oil shall be separated and disposed of in
receptacles provided at the Municipal Recycling Center or
authorized service station.
(3) Ferrous scraps and white goods shall be separated at curbside for
collection after special arrangements have first been made with the
Department of Public Works. Disposal may also be made in the
receptacles provided at the Municipal Recycling Center.
(4) Grass or yard waste shall be placed in a reusable receptacle or a
compostable bag, of a specific type designated by the Municipal
Recycling Coordinator and placed at curbside the evening before
the scheduled pickup each week, during the months designated by
the Municipal Recycling Coordinator.
(5) Leaves (mandatory) shall be placed at curbside during the months
of October through December, as provided by the collection
schedule prepared by the Board of Public Works. During the
months of January through September, residents are required to
compost or mulch leaves on their private property, engage the
services of a private landscaper for the removal of the same or
bring leaves to a facility or site so designated by the Borough. In no
event shall leaves be placed within 10 feet of any storm drain.
§ 64-12 PARK RIDGE CODE § 64-12
1:264
(6) Newspapers/magazines shall be secured and tied in bundles or
placed in compostable bags, not to exceed 15 inches in height and
50 pounds in weight. Such bundles shall not be contained in plastic
bags. These bundles shall be placed at curbside for collection on
the designated days as scheduled by the Recycling Coordinator, to
be collected by the Borough Scavenger. Bundles of newspaper/
magazines may also be disposed of in receptacles provided at the
Municipal Recycling Center.
(7) Yard waste shall be placed in a reusable receptacle or in
compostable bags of a specific type designated by the Municipal
Recycling Coordinator and placed at curbside the evening before
the scheduled pickup each week, during the months designated by
the Municipal Recycling Coordinator.
(8) Townhouse and apartment residents shall place mandatory
recyclable items described in § 64-13 in designated areas within
the respective complex for collection purposes. Newspapers/
magazines must be bundled as described in Subsection C(6) above.
Townhouses and apartment residents may also dispose of
recyclable materials in receptacles provided at the Municipal
Recycling Center during posted hours of operation.
(9) Rechargeable batteries shall be separated and individually
packaged or taped at the terminal ends. They shall be separated
and disposed of in the receptacle provided at the Municipal
Recycling Center or at participating retail locations including
Radio Shack, Best Buy, Staples, Target, Lowes, Home Depot, Sears,
Walmart and Verizon Wireless. To find a retail collection site, use
the collection site locator at www.call2recycle.org or call the
consumer helpline, 1-877-2-RECYCLE. [Amended 12-22-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-25]
(10) Electronic waste shall be separated and disposed of in the
receptacle provided at the Municipal Recycling Center or at
participating retail locations. [Added 5-10-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-016]
D. Set-out time. For collection pursuant to a schedule announced by the
Borough of Park Ridge, all approved containers must be placed at the
curbline where easily accessible. No containers shall be set out prior to
5:00 p.m. on the day prior to collection, and all containers shall be
removed by 8:00 p.m. on the collection day. When a regular collection
day falls on a legal holiday, containers shall not be set out until the next
regularly scheduled collection unless special announcement of
collection is made by the Borough.
E. Solid waste wrapped in newspaper is permissible. Anything herein to
the contrary notwithstanding, any person who is an owner, lessee or
occupant may wrap solid waste in used newspapers and discard the
same with regular solid waste.
§ 64-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-12
1:265
§ 64-13. Separation and collection of recyclables for garden
apartments, condominiums and townhouse complexes.
Effective April 1, 1988, it shall be mandatory for all owners, lessees and
occupants of garden apartment, condominium and townhouse residential
properties to comply with all the requirements contained in § 64-12 above.
It shall be the obligation of the owner of the apartment complex or the
condominium/townhouse association to provide an on-site storage and
collection point for the recyclable materials. The Recycling Coordinator,
solid waste contractor and the owner/association representative shall
determine a schedule and method for the collection of said materials.
F. Procedure upon refusal to collect. Any solid waste placed for collection
by a residential user not in accordance with this section will be refused
by the Borough Scavenger, and it shall be the responsibility of the
residential user to remove said solid waste from the curbline by 8:00
p.m. on the day of collection and have it properly containerized,
packaged or secured for purposes of collection on the next schedule
date.
G. Washing aluminum, glass and plastic containers. All aluminum, glass,
bimetal and plastic food containers must be washed, rinsed and have
labels removed to be free of food residue before placing at curbside.
H. Recycling placard required for use of Municipal Recycling Center. Park
Ridge residents may use the Municipal Recycling Center during posted
hours of operation provided they are in possession of a current and
valid recycling placard issued by the Park Ridge Borough Clerk.
[Added 3-8-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-005]
(1) The Mayor and Borough Council shall, by periodic adoption of a
resolution, establish the number of placards and the distribution
method of the recycling placards to each residential property,
including any cost thereof for said recycling placards (either the
original recycling placard issued or duplicate).
(2) When required, proof of residency must be presented when
applying for said placard and/or use of the Municipal Recycling
Center.
(3) Any person who violates any provision of this section or of the rules
and regulations adopted pursuant thereto shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $500. Any subsequent
offense shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 10 days, or both. In
addition, any recycling placards issued pursuant to this section
shall be revoked upon conviction of a second offense and the
subject residential property owner shall not be eligible for any
future recycling placards. Any fine imposed hereunder shall
constitute a lien upon the residential property owner until said
fines and costs are paid in full.
§ 64-12 PARK RIDGE CODE § 64-14
1:266
§ 64-14. Rules for commercial and industrial users. [Amended
6-14-1994 by Ord. No. 94-7; 5-12-2009 by Ord. No. 03-2009]
A. Effective May 1, 2009, it shall be mandatory for all owners, lessees and
occupants of any business, commercial and/or industrial properties and
for all private, public and governmental institutions and buildings to
separate the following materials from their solid waste stream and to
cause said materials to be disposed of as recycled materials:
(1) All clean, mixed paper, including newspaper, magazines, office
paper and high-grade paper.
(2) Cardboard and corrugated cardboard materials.
(3) Glass containers, aluminum cans and ferrous and nonferrous scrap,
including white goods.
(4) Construction/demolition debris.
B. Separation, collection and disposal of designated materials.
(1) All materials itemized in Subsection A above, with the exception of
construction/demolition debris, shall be separated and either
disposed of by private scavenger, disposed of in receptacles
provided at the Municipal Recycling Center with prior
authorization by the Municipal Recycling Coordinator, or sold
through a third-party recycler pursuant to Subsections D and E of
this section.
(2) Construction/demolition debris shall be separated and disposed of
by private scavenger or sold through a third-party recycler
pursuant to Subsections D and E of this section.
C. Registration requirements. It shall be the responsibility of all owners,
lessees and occupants of business and/or commercial properties to
register annually with the Municipal Recycling Coordinator on forms
provided by the Borough. The annual registration must be filed with the
Recycling Coordinator on or before January 10 of each year. New
businesses and/or commercial properties must file within 45 days of the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
D. Reporting requirements. It shall be the responsibility of all owners,
lessees and occupants of business and/or commercial properties to
report semiannually to the Recycling Coordinator, on or before March 1
for the preceding six-month period of July 1 through December 31 and
on or before September 1 for the preceding six-month period of January
1 through June 30, the quantities of materials recycled on forms
prescribed and provided by the Recycling Coordinator.
E. For those users who sell their recyclable materials through a thirdparty
recycler, an exemption from the recycling program shall be
requested by any owner, lessee or occupant of business and/or
commercial properties by filing with the Recycling Coordinator the
§ 64-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-14
1:267
§ 64-15. Private disposal of recyclables.
Nothing in this article shall be deemed to prohibit any owner, lessee or
occupant of residential property from disposing of recyclable materials
privately through a sale or gift, provided that in no event shall such
recyclable materials be disposed of as part of the solid waste pickup by the
Borough of Park Ridge.
§ 64-16. Ownership after placement at curb.
From the time recyclable materials are placed at the curb by the owners,
lessees or occupants for collection by the Borough of Park Ridge, such
recyclable materials shall become the property of the Borough.
§ 64-17. Unauthorized collection prohibited; penalties.
§ 64-18. Notification of public.
form entitled "Request for Exemption from Mandatory Municipal
Recycling Program." The reporting requirements of Subsection D above
shall remain in effect.
A. It shall be a violation of this article for any person unauthorized to
collect or pick up or cause to be collected or picked up or to receive any
such recyclable materials without authorization, for any purpose
whatsoever, once they have been placed at the curb. Each and any
collection or receipt in violation of this article from one or more
premises shall constitute a separate and distinct offense, punishable as
hereinafter provided.
B. The penalties for violation of this provision shall be as follows:
(1) First offense: a fine of $50.
(2) Second offense: a fine of $100.
(3) Third and subsequent offenses: a fine of $500, 90 days in jail or
both.
A. The Recycling Coordinator, upon adoption of this article, shall notify all
persons owning, leasing or occupying property within the Borough of
Park Ridge of the Borough's recycling responsibilities and the sourceseparation
requirements of this article. This notice shall be by a mailing
to all postal patrons within the Borough and by posting a notice in
public places where public notices are customarily posted by the
Borough.
B. After initial notification, the Recycling Coordinator may periodically
notify all persons owning, leasing or occupying residential, commercial
and institutional premises within the Borough of Park Ridge of local
recycling opportunities and the source-separation requirements of this
article. Said notification shall be done in a mailing to all postal patrons
§ 64-14 PARK RIDGE CODE § 64-18
1:268
§ 64-19. Referrals to Planning Board.
This article shall be referred to the Planning Board of the Borough of
Park Ridge for a revision of the Master Plan in accordance with N.J.S.A.
13:1E-99.16c, specifically with regard to the collection, disposition and
recycling of designated recyclable materials within any development
proposal for the construction of 50 or more units of single-family residential
housing or 25 or more units of multifamily residential housing and any
commercial or industrial development proposal for the utilization of 1,000
square feet of land. The Planning Board shall also make recommendations
to the Mayor and Council for amendments to the Borough's Zoning
Ordinance and the Subdivision and Site Plan Ordinance in accordance with
this section.64
§ 64-20. Enforcement.
The enforcement of the provisions of this article shall be the responsibility
of the Recycling Coordinator and/or Zoning Officer of the Borough of Park
Ridge. The responsibility of monitoring the program for the adequacy of the
collection and all other terms of the established rules and regulations is that
of the Recycling Coordinator.
§ 64-21. Violations and penalties; use of fines.
within the Borough and by posting a notice in public places where
public notices are customarily posted by the Borough. The quarterly
Park Ridge Newsletter may be used for this notification.
A. Except for the penalties provided in § 64-17 above, any person, firm or
corporation who, after receipt of reasonable notice of noncompliance,
continues to violate or fails to comply with the provisions of this article
or any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to it shall be subject to
the following violations and penalties:
(1) First offense: discontinuance of collection service until compliance
is met.
(2) Second offense: fine of $25.
(3) Third offense: fine of $50.
(4) Fourth offense and thereafter: fine of $100, up to 30 days in jail or,
as an alternative penalty, ordered to perform community service in
a recycling program for a period of time not to exceed 240 hours of
community service.
B. Fines levied and recovered for noncompliance with any and all
provisions of this article shall be transmitted monthly by the Court
Clerk to the Borough Treasurer and placed in the current fund and
64.Editor's Note: See Ch. 101, Zoning, and Ch. 87, Subdivision and Site Plan Review,
respectively.
§ 64-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-21
1:269
recorded as a dedication by rider to be utilized for the purposes of
the Borough's recycling program, to include but not be limited to
education, awareness and improvements in services, in accordance
with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:4-39.
§ 64-21 PARK RIDGE CODE § 64-21
1:270
ARTICLE III
Littering
[Adopted 2-11-1991 by Ord. No. 91-2]
§ 64-22. Purpose.
It is the purpose of Article III of this chapter to comply with the
requirements of the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection,
Division of Solid Waste Management, Clean Communities Program, to
establish and enforce laws against littering.
§ 64-23. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LITTER — Any used or unconsumed substance or waste material which has
been discarded, whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic, rubber, paper
or other natural or synthetic material or any combination thereof, including
but not limited to any bottle, jar or can or any top, cap or detachable
tab of any bottle, jar or can; any unlighted cigarette, cigar, match or any
flaming or glowing material; or any garbage, trash, refuse, debris, rubbish,
grass clippings or other lawn or garden waste, newspaper, magazines,
glass, metal, plastic or paper containers or other packaging or construction
material.
§ 64-24. Prohibited acts.
It is unlawful for any person to throw, drop, discard or otherwise place litter
of any nature upon any public or private property other than in a litter
receptacle.
§ 64-25. Dumping.
It is unlawful for any person to discard or dump along any street or road, on
or off any right-of-way, any household or commercial solid waste, rubbish,
refuse, junk, vehicle or vehicle parts, rubber tires, appliances, furniture or
private property, except by written consent of the owner of said property, in
any place not specifically designated for the purpose of solid waste storage
or disposal.
§ 64-26. Containerization of sweepings.
A. Unless otherwise permitted by the Borough, no person will be
permitted to sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street, catch basin or
other public place any accumulation of litter from any public or private
sidewalk or driveway. Every person who owns or occupies property
must keep the sidewalk in front of his or her premises free of litter. All
litter sweepings must be collected and properly containerized for
disposal.
§ 64-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-26
1:271
§ 64-27. Uncovered vehicles.
It is unlawful for any vehicle to be driven, moved, stopped or parked on any
public roadway unless such a vehicle is constructed, covered or loaded to
B. No yard waste shall be placed at the curb or along the street at any time
or manner except as provided herein. If such placement of yard waste
occurs, the party responsible for placement of the yard waste must
remove the yard waste from the street or said party shall be deemed in
violation of this article; "yard waste" meaning but not limited to leaves
and grass clippings; "containerized" meaning the placement of yard
waste in a trash can, bucket, bag or other vessel, such as to prevent the
yard waste from spilling or blowing out into the street and coming into
contact with stormwater. [Added 9-13-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-12]
(1) All yard waste that is not in a container may be placed at the curb
or along the street seven days prior to a scheduled and announced
collection.
(2) No yard waste shall be placed closer than 10 feet from any storm
drain inlet.
C. No person shall spill, dump or dispose of materials other than
stormwater to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by
the Borough of Park Ridge. The spilling, dumping or disposal of
materials other than stormwater in such a manner as to cause the
discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system is
also prohibited. These items are including but not limited to: [Added
9-13-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-12]
(1) Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas;
(2) Any water or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or
gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with
other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment
process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals or create a
public nuisance, including but not limited to cyanides in excess of
two milligrams per liter as CN in the wastes as discharged to the
public sewer;
(3) Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any
other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works; and
(4) Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with
the proper operation of the sewage works, such as but not limited
to ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood,
paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups,
milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
§ 64-26 PARK RIDGE CODE § 64-27
1:272
prevent any of its load from dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping
therefrom. Any person operating a vehicle from which any materials which
constitute litter have fallen or escaped, which could cause an obstruction,
damage a vehicle or otherwise endanger travelers or public property, must
immediately cause the public property to be cleaned of all such materials
and must pay the costs therefor.
§ 64-28. Construction sites.
It is unlawful for any owner, agent or contractor in charge of a construction
or demolition site to permit the accumulation of litter before, during or
immediately following completion of any construction or demolition project.
It is the duty of the owner, agent or contractor in charge of a construction
site to furnish containers adequate to accommodate flyable or nonflyable
debris or trash at areas convenient to construction areas and to maintain
and empty the receptacles in such a manner and with such a frequency as
to prevent spillage of refuse.
§ 64-29. Commercial establishments and multifamily residences;
duty of owners or lessees.
It is the duty of the owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or person in charge of
any structure to keep and cause to be kept the sidewalk and curb abutting
the building or structure free from obstruction or nuisances of every kind
and to keep sidewalks, areaways, backyards, courts and alleys free of litter.
§ 64-30. Enforcement.
The enforcement of the provisions of this article shall be the responsibility
of the Recycling Coordinator and/or the Recycling Compliance Officer and
the Police Department of the Borough of Park Ridge.
§ 64-31. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-13-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-12]
Any person, firm or corporation who, after receipt of reasonable notice of
noncompliance, continues to violate or fails to comply with the provisions
of this article or any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to it shall be
subject to the following violations and penalties: for a first offense, a fine of
$100; for a second offense, a fine of $200; for a third offense, a fine of $500;
and for a fourth offense and thereafter, a fine of $1,000 and/or up to 90 days
imprisonment in the discretion of the Municipal Court.
§ 64-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-31
1:273

ARTICLE IV
Refuse Containers and Dumpsters
[Adopted 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-07]
§ 64-32. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to require dumpsters and other refuse
containers that are outdoors or exposed to stormwater to be covered at all
times to prohibit the spilling, dumping, leaking, or otherwise discharging
of liquids, semiliquids or solids from the containers into the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Borough of Park Ridge and/
or the waters of the state and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply
so as to protect public health, safety and welfare.
§ 64-33. Definitions; word usage.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough of Park Ridge or other
public body and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater. [Note: In municipalities with combined sewer systems, add the
following: "MS4s do not include combined sewer systems, which are sewer
systems that are designed to carry sanitary sewage at all times and to
collect and transport stormwater from streets and other sources."]
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
REFUSE CONTAINER — Any waste container that a person controls,
whether owned, leased, or operated, including dumpsters, trash cans,
garbage pails, and plastic trash bags.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow-removal equipment.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams
and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural or artificial,
within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
§ 64-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-34
1:275
§ 64-34. Use regulations.
§ 64-35. Exceptions to use regulations.
Exceptions are:
§ 64-36. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Zoning Officer or his/her designee of
the Borough of Park Ridge.
§ 64-37. Violations and penalties.
For violation of this article there shall be a fine not to exceed $500 for the
first offense; not to exceed $750 for the second offense; and not to exceed
$1,000 for each subsequent offense. Every day a violation of this article
occurs shall be a separate and distinct offense.
A. Any person who controls, whether owned, leased, or operated, a refuse
container or dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster is
covered at all times and shall prevent refuse from spilling out or
overflowing.
B. Any person who owns, leases or otherwise uses a refuse container or
dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster does not leak or
otherwise discharge liquids, semiliquids or solids into the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Borough of Park Ridge.
A. Permitted temporary demolition containers.
B. Litter receptacles (other than dumpsters or other bulk containers).
C. Individual homeowner trash and recycling containers.
D. Refuse containers at facilities authorized to discharge stormwater
under a valid New Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(NJPDES) permit.
E. Large bulky items (e.g., furniture, bound carpet and padding, and white
goods placed curbside for pickup).
§ 64-34 PARK RIDGE CODE § 64-37
1:276
Chapter 67
PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 86.
§ 64-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-37
1:277

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 67-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to prevent fraud, crime and unethical and
dishonest business practices. All application fees are not charged as
revenue but for the purpose of covering the expenses or investigation. All
license and permit fees are to cover the regulation and control of licenses
and permits.
§ 67-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CANVASSER or SOLICITOR — Any person traveling from house to house
or from street to street taking or attempting to take orders for the sale
of goods, wares or merchandise, subscriptions or personal property of
any nature whatsoever for future delivery or for services to be furnished
or performed in the future, whether or not the individual has, carries or
exposes for sale a sample of such or whether he is collecting advance
payment on such sales or not; any person engaged in soliciting information
and going from house to house or from street to street for the purpose of
conducting a poll, survey or similar activity for any purpose; any person
conducting a solicitation, as defined herein, or requesting contributions of
any kind and going from house to house or from street to street on the
public streets.
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATIONS — Any person which is or holds itself out
to be organized or operated for any charitable purpose.
PEDDLER — Any person traveling f om house to house or from street to
street carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares and merchandise,
offering and exposing the same for sale or making sales of food by traveling
from house to house or who shall sell or offer the same for sale from a
wagon, automotive vehicle, motor truck, railroad car or other vehicle or
conveyance, and further provided that one who solicits orders and, as a
separate transaction, makes deliveries to purchasers a part of his scheme or
design to evade the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a "peddler,"
subject to the provisions of this chapter. The word "peddler" shall often
include the words "hawker" and "huckster."
PERSON — Any individual, organization, trust, foundation, association,
partnership, corporation, society or other group or combination acting as a
unit.
SOLICIT and SOLICITATION — The request, directly or indirectly, for the
donation of money, property, anything of value or financial assistance of
any kind, and shall include the selling or offering for sale of any property,
real or personal, tangible or intangible, whether of value or not, including
but not limited to goods, books, tags, service emblems, tickets, publications
or subscriptions to publications or brochures, and conducted from house
§ 67-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-2
1:279
to house or on the public streets. A "solicitation" is complete when the
solicitation is communicated to any individual then located within the
corporate limits of the Borough.
§ 67-2 PARK RIDGE CODE § 67-2
1:280
ARTICLE II
Peddlers and Solicitors
§ 67-3. Unlawful solicitation.
It shall be unlawful for any person, directly or through an agent or
employee, or for a peddler, solicitor or canvasser to ply or conduct his
trade or solicitation within the Borough of Park Ridge without having first
obtained a certificate of registration from the Borough Clerk, as hereinafter
provided.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, individually or as the agent or
employee of a person, or for any peddler, solicitor or canvasser to ply or
conduct his trade or solicitation within the Borough unless his principal
or employer has received a certificate of registration, as hereinafter
provided.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person or for any peddler, solicitor or
canvasser to ply or conduct his trade or solicitation within the Borough
without visibly displaying an identification card issued to that person by
the Borough Clerk, as hereinafter provided.
C. It shall be unlawful for any peddler, solicitor or canvasser to ply or
conduct his trade or to solicit one hour after sunset until 9:00 a.m. on
any day.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person, directly or through an agent or
employee, or for any peddler, solicitor or canvasser to ply or conduct his
trade or to solicit within the Borough of Park Ridge after expiration of
any certificate of registration.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in solicitation or for any
peddler, solicitor or canvasser to knock at the door or ring the doorbell
of any home, apartment or any other dwelling unit in the Borough upon
which is clearly displayed at the entrance a notice which reads "No
Solicitors" or which otherwise clearly purports to prohibit solicitation
on the premises, unless such person is or has been invited upon the
premises by the occupant thereof.
F. At any time when the owner or occupant of the applicable residence has
annually registered the residence with the Borough Clerk as a
residence at which such solicitation is prohibited.
§ 67-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-3
1:281

ARTICLE III
Permits and Fees
§ 67-4. Registration required.
All persons, except as otherwise provided in this chapter or by law, desiring
to solicit for charitable or other purposes or to peddle, solicit or canvas
within the Borough shall file with the Police Department prior to any such
solicitation a solicitation application on forms provided by the Police
Department containing the following information:
A. The name of the person registering and desiring to solicit or to peddle,
solicit or otherwise canvass.
B. Whether the person registering is a natural person, partnership, or
corporation and:
(1) If a natural person, the business and residence address and
telephone number must be given.
(2) If a partnership, the names of all partners and the principal
business address and telephone number of each partner must be
given.
(3) If a corporation, the person registering must state whether it is
organized under the laws of New Jersey or is a foreign corporation
and must state the mailing address, the business location, the
telephone number, the name of the individual in charge of the local
office of such corporation.
C. The name, address, date of birth, social security number, personal
photograph(s) and complete driver's license information of the person
or persons who shall be conducting the solicitation or otherwise
peddling, soliciting or canvassing.
D. A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be
sold or services to be performed for which funds are to be solicited and
an explanation of the intended use of the funds toward that purpose.
E. The time period within which the solicitation or the peddling, soliciting
or canvassing is to be conducted, giving the date of the commencement
and termination of the effort.
F. If a vehicle or vehicles are to be used in the solicitation, a description of
the same, including year, make and model, together with a license plate
number, registration certificate information and liability insurance
information or other satisfactory means of identification.
G. The names of any other municipalities in which the person registering
has solicited or otherwise peddled, solicited or canvassed within the
previous 12 months.
§ 67-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-5
1:283
§ 67-5. Procedure upon filing solicitation application.
The Department of Police shall review the registration statement to
determine its compliance with the terms of this chapter within 48 hours
after receipt of the same. Thereafter, upon payment of the prescribed fee
or in the event of an applicant who is not required to pay a fee, the
Borough Clerk shall either issue a certificate of registration within 48 hours
or notify the person registering that the registration statement does not
comply with the requirements of this chapter and to specifically point out
the information that has not been furnished and that is required before a
solicitation permit can be issued.
§ 67-6. Denial of permit.
§ 67-7. Expiration.
Every certificate of registration and identification card issued by the
Borough Clerk shall be issued on a calendar-year basis and shall terminate
on December 31 in the year in which it was issued. The fees shall not be
prorated over the calendar year.
§ 67-8. Fees.
The license fee to defray the cost to the Borough of processing, verifying
and supervising the application information shall be $50 per calendar year.
A. The Chief of Police may, upon review of the application, refuse to issue a
permit to the applicant for any of the following reasons:
(1) The location and time of the activities described in the application
would endanger the safety and welfare of the applicant or its
customers;
(2) An investigation reveals that the applicant falsified information on
the application;
(3) The applicant has been convicted of a felony, misdemeanor or
ordinance violation involving a sex offense, trafficking in controlled
substances, or any violent acts against persons or property; or
(4) The applicant is a person against whom a judgment based upon, or
conviction for, fraud, deceit or misrepresentation has been entered
within the five years immediately preceding the date of application.
B. The Chief of Police's disapproval and the reasons for disapproval shall
be noted on the application, and the applicant shall be notified that his
application is disapproved and that no permit will be issued. Notice
shall be mailed to the applicant at the address shown on the application
form, or at the applicant's last known address within five business days
receipt of a complete application.
§ 67-5 PARK RIDGE CODE § 67-8
1:284
ARTICLE IV
Exemptions
§ 67-9. Exemptions.
The following persons are expressly exempted from the payment of any
license fees:
A. Non-profit-making vendor.
B. Any person honorably discharged from the military service of the
United States, possessing a peddler's license issued in conformity with
N.J.S.A. 45:24-9 and 10.
C. Any person who is an exempt fireman, as defined by N.J.S.A. 45:24-9
and 10, possessing a license in conformity with said law.
D. Any other person holding a license or permit issued under any
legislation of the United States government or by a state agency
pursuant to statute.
E. Any person claiming an exemption: under Subsection D of this section
shall indicate the status claimed upon the application or as an exempt
fireman or veteran pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:24-9 and 10 shall exhibit to
the Chief of Police or officer in charge of police headquarters a copy of
the license issued by the Clerk of the county pursuant to N.J.S.A.
45:24-10.
§ 67-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-9
1:285

ARTICLE V
No-Knock Registration
§ 67-10. Annual no-knock registration required for residents.
The annual registration of a particular residence as a residence at which
such solicitations are prohibited shall apply to the residence from the date
of registration until December 31 of the registration year. Thereafter, the
residence must be re-registered on or after January I of the subsequent
year. The Borough Clerk shall adopt residential registration processes and
a registration form in electronic and/or written format consistent with this
chapter and shall make publicly available an updated list of addresses with
the respective date of registration to which the prohibition contained in
paragraph (F)65 shall apply throughout the year.
65.Editor's Note: So in original.
§ 67-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-10
1:287

ARTICLE VI
Violations
§ 67-11. Violations.
Any violation of this chapter shall subject the violator to a fine of a minimum
of $100 to a maximum of $250.
§ 67-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-11
1:289
Chapter 68
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 14.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 60.
Garbage, rubbish and trash — See Ch. 64.
§ 67-11 PARK RIDGE CODE § 67-11
1:290
ARTICLE I
Reimbursement of Expendable Items
[Adopted 10-13-1998 by Ord. No. 98-18]
§ 68-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EXPENDABLE ITEMS — Any items used to extinguish any fire or stop or
contain any leak or spill involving any hazardous material which cannot
be reused or cannot be replenished without cost after that particular fire,
leak or spill. These include but are not restricted to firefighting foam,
chemical extinguishing agents, absorbent material, sand, recovery drums
and specialized protective equipment to include but not restricted to acid
suits, acid gloves, goggles and protective clothing.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — Any material solid, liquid or gas, listed as such
under the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Guide of Hazardous
Materials or the Department of Transportation guidebook.
VEHICLE — Any motorized equipment, registered or unregistered,
including but not limited to passenger cars, motorcycles, trucks, tractortrailers,
construction equipment and farm machinery.
VESSEL — Any container, drum, box, cylinder or tank used to hold or
contain or carry or store any hazardous material.
§ 68-2. Purpose.
§ 68-3. Parties responsible for reimbursement.
Reimbursement to the Borough of any expendable items used shall be made
by the following parties:
A. This article provides for the reimbursement for or the replacement of
the specialized and sometimes nonreusable equipment required by
state and federal regulations to be made available in the Borough in
case of fire, leakage or spillage involving any hazardous material.
B. This article entitles the Borough of Park Ridge to reimbursement for
any expendable items used by the Borough or any of its agencies in
extinguishing any fire, stopping or containing any leak or controlling
any spill of hazardous materials.
A. The owner or operator of any vehicle responsible for any fire, leak or
spill of hazardous material.
B. The owner or person responsible for any vessel containing hazardous
material involved in any fire, leak or spill on public or private property,
whether stationary or in transit, whether accidental or through
negligence.
§ 68-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 68-3
1:291
§ 68-4. Reimbursement for services of recovery company, towing
company or technical assistance.
Any person or company responsible for any fire, leak or spill involving
a hazardous material must provide reimbursement in accordance with
Schedule A attached hereto for services rendered by any recovery company,
towing company or other technical assistance called for by the Fire
Department to handle such incident.66
§ 68-5. Period for payment.
Any person, owner or company responsible for any fire, leak or spill of
hazardous materials shall reimburse the Borough of Park Ridge Fire
Department for the full price of any expendable items used to extinguish
such a fire, stop or contain such a leak or control such a spill within a period
of 45 days after receipt of a bill for such items from the Borough of Park
Ridge Fire Department.
§ 68-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person, owner or company responsible for any fire, leak or spill of
hazardous material who fails to reimburse the Borough of Park Ridge Fire
Department within the time set forth in this advance shall be subject to a
fine of not less than $50 nor more than $500 per day or by imprisonment for
a period of not more than six months, or both.
C. The owner or person responsible for any property from which any leak
or spill of hazardous material emanates, whether accidental or through
negligence.
D. Any person responsible for any fire, leak or spill of hazardous material
on public or private property, whether accidental or through
negligence.
66.Editor's Note: Schedule A is on file at the Municipal Building.
§ 68-3 PARK RIDGE CODE § 68-6
1:292
Chapter 68A
HOTEL RENTS TAX
§ 68A-1. Imposition of tax.
There shall be a one-percent tax imposed on all charges of rent for
occupancy for every hotel room in the Borough of Park Ridge on or after
July 1, 2003, up and until July 1, 2004. Thereafter, a tax in the amount of 3%
shall be charged on all rent for each occupancy on every hotel room in the
Borough of Park Ridge. This tax shall be in addition to any other tax and/
or fee imposed pursuant to statute, ordinance or resolution by any other
governmental entity upon the occupancy of the hotel room.
§ 68A-2. Chapter to be transmitted to State Treasurer.
A copy of this chapter, upon adoption, shall be transmitted to the State
Treasurer.
§ 68A-3. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect on the first full day of the first full month 30
days after it is transmitted to the State Treasurer in the year 2003.
§ 68A-4. Payment of tax.
All taxes imposed by this chapter shall be paid by the purchaser.
§ 68A-5. Collection of tax.
A. A vendor should not assume and/or absorb any tax imposed by this
chapter.
B. A vendor shall not in any manner advertise or hold out to any person or
to the public in general in any manner, directly and/or indirectly, that
the tax will be assumed or absorbed by the vendor; that the tax will not
be separately charged is to be stated to the customer or that the tax will
be refunded to the customer.
C. Each assumption or absorption by the vendor of the tax shall be deemed
a separate offense and each representation or advertisement by a
vendor for each day the representation or advertisement continues
shall be deemed a separate offense.
D. Penalties shall be fixed as allowed by law.
A. The tax imposed by this chapter shall be collected on behalf of the
municipality by the person collecting the rent from the hotel customer.
B. Every person or each person required to collected the tax imposed by
this chapter shall be personally liable for the tax imposed, collect or
required to be collected hereunder. Any such person shall have the
§ 68-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 68A-5
1:293
§ 68A-6. Tax returns; liability; amended returns.
The person required to collect the tax pursuant to this chapter will forward
to the Director of the Division of Taxation in the Department of Treasury
the tax collected in the preceding month and make and file a return for the
preceding month with the Director of the Division of Taxation on any form
containing any information as the Director may prescribe is necessary to
determine a liability for the tax in the preceding month during which the
person was required to collect the tax.
§ 68A-7. Tax to be governed by statute.
The tax imposed by this chapter shall be governed by the State Uniform Tax
Procedure Law.67
Chapter 69
HOUSE NUMBERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Board — See Ch. 24.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 50.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 74.
Subdivision and site plan review — See Ch.
87.
Zoning — See Ch. 101.
§ 69-1. Definitions. [Amended 3-12-1991 by Ord. No. 91-3]
As used in the chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings as
follows:
same right in respect to collecting the tax for a customer as if the tax
were part of the rent and payable at the same time; providing, however,
that the Chief Fiscal Officer of the municipality shall be joined as a
party in any action or proceeding brought to collect the tax.
A. The Director of the Division of Taxation may permit or require returns
to be made covering other periods and upon the dates as the Director
may specify. In addition the Director may require payments of tax
liability at any intervals based upon any classifications as the Director
may designate. In prescribing any other periods to be covered by the
return or intervals or classification for tax liability, the Director may
take into account the dollar volume of tax involved as well as a need for
ensuring the prompt orderly collection of the tax imposed.
B. The Director may require amended returns to be filed within 20 days
after notice and containing the information specified in the notice.
67.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 54:48-1 et seq.
§ 68A-5 PARK RIDGE CODE § 69-1
1:294
BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS — The board, or its designee, which oversees
the municipal utility systems of the Board of Public Works.
EMERGENCY SERVICES — Any agency or organization providing
emergency services to the residents of Park Ridge, including but not limited
to the Fire and Police Departments and the Tri-Borough Ambulance Corps.
HOUSE — Any structure of any type or lot of land which has been assigned
a specific number for purposes of identifying or locating one structure from
another.
ZONING OFFICER — The municipal official designated to enforce and
administer the provisions of this chapter.
§ 69-2. Lot and building numbering system; duty of property owner.
[Amended 3-12-1991 by Ord. No. 91-3]
All buildings and lots of land along the streets of the Borough shall be given
a number by the Board of Public Works. Once given a number, it shall be
the property owner's responsibility to display said street number on the
building as provided in this chapter.
§ 69-3. Owner to obtain and affix proper number. [Amended
7-8-1974 by Ord. No. 74-16; 3-12-1991 by Ord. No. 91-3]
Once a street number has been assigned, the owner or owners shall place
the house number at or near the entrance of the house. Such number shall
be at least three inches in height. The lettering of numbers, as well as the
use of Arabic numerals, is permitted.
§ 69-4. Failure to comply; numbering affixed by Borough; cost as
lien; collection. [Amended 3-12-1991 by Ord. No. 91-3]
In cases where the property owner shall have failed to ascertain and affix
upon any building the number or numbers applicable to said building as
provided in §§ 69-2 and 69-3, the Zoning Officer shall serve a notice upon
the owner, by personal service or by registered or certified mail addressed
to his last known address, to affix the required number within three days
after receipt of said notice. In cases where the owner shall have failed or
refused to affix said required number within the time provided in the notice,
the Zoning Officer shall cause to be affixed to said building the number or
numbers applicable to the same. The Zoning Officer shall certify the cost
thereof to the Council. Upon receipt of the certificate, the Council shall
examine the same and, if found correct, shall cause such cost to be charged
to the owner or owners of the land upon which said building is situated. The
amount so charged shall thereupon become a lien and tax upon such lands
and shall be added to and become part of the taxes next to be levied and
assessed upon such lands. Said amount shall bear interest at the same rate
and shall be collected and enforced by the same officers and in the same
manner as taxes.
§ 69-5. Violations and penalties.
§ 69-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 69-5
1:295
Chapter 70
HOUSING STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 14.
Board of Health — See Ch. 17.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 50.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 60.
Garbage, rubbish and trash — See Ch. 64.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 80.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 112.
§ 70-1. Short title.
This chapter may be cited as the "Housing Code of the Borough of Park
Ridge."
§ 70-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOARD OF HEALTH — The Board of Health of the Borough of Park Ridge.
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Park Ridge.
NEW JERSEY STATE HOUSING CODE — That certain code approved by
the State Department of Conservation and Economic Development and the
State Department of Health and filed in the office of the Secretary of State
on January 31, 1962, prescribing the standards to guide a municipality
authorized, by the ordinance adopting the said code, to enforce the same,
in determining the fitness of a building for human habitation, use or
occupancy.
§ 70-3. Adoption of state housing standards.
A. Any person who violates the provisions of §§ 69-2 and 69-3 shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $500 or by
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues. [Amended 7-8-1974 by Ord. No.
74-16]
B. The imposition and collection of the penalty or penalties imposed by
Subsection A of this section shall not bar the right of the Borough to
collect the costs described in § 69-4 hereof.
A. Pursuant to the provisions of the Laws of 1946, Chapter 21, as amended
by the Laws of 1948, Chapter 276 (N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.1 et seq.), the New
Jersey State Housing Code is hereby adopted and established as
§ 69-5 PARK RIDGE CODE § 70-3
1:296
§ 70-4. Compliance required.
No person shall occupy as owner or occupant or rent to another for
occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein
which does not conform to the applicable provisions of the New Jersey State
Housing Code.
§ 70-5. Designation of enforcement agency.
The Board of Health shall be and is hereby designated as the agency to
exercise the powers prescribed by this chapter and to enforce the provisions
thereof. The Board shall serve in such capacity without any additional
salary.
§ 70-6. Authority to promulgate rules and regulations.
The Board of Health is hereby authorized and empowered to make, adopt
and enforce such written rules and regulations as it may deem necessary for
the proper enforcement of the provisions of this chapter; provided, however,
that such rules and regulations shall not be in conflict with the provisions of
this chapter nor in anywise alter, amend or supersede any of the provisions
thereof. The Board of Health shall file a certified copy of all rules and
regulations which it may adopt in its office and in the office of the Borough
Clerk.
§ 70-7. Inspection; right of entry.
constituting the standards to be used in determining whether dwellings
in the Borough are safe and sanitary and fit for human habitation, use,
rental or occupancy.
B. The said New Jersey State Housing Code is hereby incorporated in this
chapter by reference and made a part hereof as though it had been set
forth herein at length, a printed copy thereof having been annexed to
the ordinance passed November 12, 1962, adopting said State Housing
Code.
C. Three copies of said New Jersey State Housing Code have been placed
on file in the office of the Borough Clerk and in the office of the Board of
Health and shall there remain on file for use and examination by the
public so long as this chapter shall remain in effect.
A. The Board of Health is hereby authorized and directed to make
inspections to determine the condition of dwellings, dwelling units,
rooming units and premises located within the Borough in order that it
may perform its duty of safeguarding the health and safety of the
occupants of dwellings and of the general public.
B. For the purpose of making the inspections referred to in Subsection A of
this section, the Board of Health is hereby authorized to enter, examine
§ 70-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-7
1:297
§ 70-8. Owner's right of access; duty of occupant to give access.
Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall give the owner thereof or
his agent or employee access to any part of such dwelling or dwelling unit or
its premises at all reasonable times for the purpose of making such repairs
or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of
this chapter or with any lawful rule or regulation adopted or any lawful
order issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 70-9. Notice of violation; contents and service.
and survey at all reasonable times all dwellings, dwelling units,
rooming units and premises.
C. The owner or occupant of every dwelling, dwelling unit and rooming
unit, or the person in charge thereof, shall give the Board of Health free
access to such dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit and its premises
at all reasonable times for the purpose of such inspection, examination
and survey.
A. Whenever the Board of Health determines that there are reasonable
grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of
this chapter or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, it
shall give notice of such alleged violation to the person or persons
responsible therefor, as provided in Subsections B and C of this section.
Any notice served pursuant to this section shall automatically be
deemed and become an order unless a written petition for a hearing is
filed in the office of the Board of Health within 10 days after such
service of notice, as provided in § 70-10A.
B. Notice of violations given pursuant to Subsection A hereof shall:
(1) Be in writing.
(2) Contain a statement of the alleged violation or violations.
(3) Specify a reasonable time within which the violation or violations
shall be abated, corrected or eliminated.
At the option of the Board of Health, the notice of violation or
violations may contain an outline of remedial action which, if
taken, will abate, correct or eliminate the violation or violations
alleged in the notice.
C. A copy of the notice of violation given pursuant to Subsections A and B
of this section shall be served upon the owner or his agent or the
occupant, as the case may require, personally or by registered or
certified mail addressed to him at his last known address, or by posting
said copy in a conspicuous place in or about the dwelling affected by
such notice, or by any other method authorized or required by the laws
of this state.
§ 70-7 PARK RIDGE CODE § 70-10
1:298
§ 70-10. Hearing; procedure and effect thereof.
§ 70-11. Emergency order for corrective action.
A. Any person given notice pursuant to § 70-9 of a violation of this chapter
or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto shall be entitled to a
hearing upon the matter before the Board of Health if a written petition,
briefly setting forth the grounds for a hearing, is filed in the office of the
Board of Health within 10 days of the service of the notice. Upon receipt
of the petition, the Board of Health shall fix a time and place for the
hearing, but not later than 10 days after the filing of the petition, and
shall give the petitioner written notice thereof by registered or certified
mail.
B. The hearing shall be commenced before the Board of Health within 10
days after the filing of the petition unless, on application of the
petitioner and a showing of good cause, the Board of Health grants a
postponement thereof to a fixed date which it deems reasonable under
the circumstances.
C. At the hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard
and to show why such notice should be modified or withdrawn.
D. The Board of Health, after the hearing, shall sustain, modify or
withdraw the notice in accordance with its findings as to whether the
provisions of this chapter and of the rules and regulations adopted
pursuant thereto have been complied with. If the Board of Health
sustains or modifies such notice, it shall be deemed to be and have the
effect of an order.
E. The proceedings at such hearing, including the findings and decision of
the Board of Health, shall be summarized and reduced to writing and
entered as a matter of public record in the office of the Board of Health.
Such record shall also include a copy of every notice or order issued in
connection with the matter.
A. Whenever the Board of Health finds that, in any dwelling, dwelling unit,
rooming and premises located within the Borough, a condition exists in
violation of this chapter or the rules and regulations adopted pursuant
thereto which presents such immediate and serious threat to the health
and safety of the occupants and thereof or of the general public as to
require emergency action for their protection, it shall, without notice or
hearing, issue and cause to be served an order in the mode specified in
§ 70-9 of this chapter, reciting the existence of the conditions creating
the emergency and requiring that such corrective action be taken as it
deems necessary to meet the emergency and as specified in the order.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary,
such order shall be effective immediately upon service.
B. The person to whom the order referred to in Subsection A of this
section is directed shall comply therewith forthwith unless within 48
§ 70-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-11
1:299
§ 70-12. Violations add penalties. [Amended 7-8-1974 by Ord. No.
74-16]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or of the rules and
regulations adopted pursuant thereto shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punished by a fine not exceeding $500 or by imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 90 days, or both. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 70-13. Applicability. [Added 3-13-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-6]
For purposes of enforcement of the housing standards as set forth in
Chapter 70, Chapter 70 shall apply not only to multifamily residences but
all one- and two-family premises non-owner-occupied which are rented or
sublet to another for occupancy.
Chapter 74
LAND USE PROCEDURES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision and site plan review — See Ch.
87.
Zoning — See Ch. 101.
hours of the service of the order he petitions in writing the Board of
Health to afford him a hearing as soon as possible for the purpose
of reviewing such order. At the conclusion of such hearing, the Board
of Health, depending upon its findings, shall continue the order in
effect, or modify it, including, but not by way of limitation, the time for
compliance therewith, or rescind it. A record of the proceedings of such
hearing shall be taken and entered as provided in § 70-10 hereof.
§ 70-11 PARK RIDGE CODE § 70-13
1:300
ARTICLE I
Planning Board
§ 74-1. Establishment; composition.
There is hereby established, pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 291,68 a Planning
Board of nine members consisting of the following four classes:
A. Class I: the Mayor.
B. Class II: one of the officials of the municipality, other than a member of
the governing body, to be appointed by the Mayor, provided that if there
is an Environmental Commission, the member of the Environmental
Commission who is also a member of the Planning Board as required by
N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 shall be deemed to be the Class II Planning Board
member, if there are both a member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment
and a member of the Board of Education among the Class IV or
alternate members. [Amended 8-12-1980 by Ord. No. 80-9]
C. Class III: a member of the governing body to be appointed by it.
D. Class IV: six other citizens of the municipality to be appointed by the
Mayor. The members of Class IV shall hold no other municipal office,
except that one member may be a member of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment and one may be a member of the Board of Education. A
member of the Environmental Commission who is also a member of the
Planning Board as required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 shall be a Class IV
Planning Board member unless there are among the Class IV members
of the Planning Board both a member of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment and a member of the Board of Education, in which case the
member of the Environmental Commission shall be deemed to be the
Class II member of the Planning Board.
E. Alternate members.69 [Added 2-11-1986 by Ord. No. 86-2]
(1) Two alternate members may be appointed by the Mayor and shall
meet the qualifications of Class IV members. Alternate members
shall be designated at the time of appointment by the Mayor as
"Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2." The terms of the alternate
members shall be for two years, except that the terms of the
alternate members shall be such that the term of not more than one
alternate member shall expire in any one year; provided, however,
that in no instance shall the terms of the alternate members first
appointed exceed two years. A vacancy occurring otherwise than
by expiration of term shall be filled by the Mayor for the unexpired
term only.
68.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23 et seq.
69.Editor's Note: Former Subsection E, which pertained to alternate members, as added
8-12-1980 by Ord. No. 80-9, was repealed 4-28-1981 by Ord. No. 81-2.
§ 74-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-1
1:301
§ 74-2. Terms.
§ 74-3. Vacancies.
If a vacancy in any class shall occur otherwise than by expiration of the
Planning Board term, it shall be filled by appointment, as above provided,
for the unexpired term.
§ 74-4. Removal.
Any member other than a Class I member, after a public hearing if he
requests one, may be removed by the governing body for cause.
(2) No alternate member shall be permitted to act on any matter in
which he has either directly or indirectly any personal or financial
interest. An alternate member may, after public hearing if he
requests one, be removed by the Mayor and Council for cause.
(3) Alternate members may participate in discussions of the
proceedings but may not vote except in the absence or
disqualification of a regular member of any class. A vote shall not
be delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead of an
alternate member. In the event that a choice must be made as to
which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote.
A. The term of the member composing Class I shall correspond with his
official tenure. The terms of the members composing Class II and Class
III shall be for one year or terminate at the completion of their
respective terms of office, whichever occurs first, except for a Class II
member who is also a member of the Environmental Commission. The
term of a Class II or a Class IV member who is also a member of the
Environmental Commission shall be for three years or terminate at the
completion of his term of office as a member of the Environmental
Commission, whichever comes first.
B. The term of a Class IV member who is also a member of the Board of
Adjustment or the Board of Education shall terminate whenever he is no
longer a member of such body or at the completion of his Class IV term,
whichever occurs first.
C. The terms of all Class IV members first appointed pursuant to this
chapter shall be so determined that to the greatest practicable extent,
the expiration of such terms shall be evenly distributed over the first
four years after their appointment, as determined by resolution of the
governing body; provided, however, that no term of any member shall
exceed four years, and further provided that nothing herein shall affect
the terms of any present members of the Planning Board, all of whom
shall continue in office until the completion of the terms for which they
were appointed. Thereafter, all Class IV members shall be appointed for
terms of four years, except as otherwise herein provided. All terms shall
run from January 1 of the year in which the appointment was made.
§ 74-1 PARK RIDGE CODE § 74-5
1:302
§ 74-5. Organization.
The Planning Board shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from the
members of Class IV and select a Secretary, who may be either a member
of the Planning Board or a municipal employee designated by it. It may
employ or contract for and fix the compensation of legal counsel, other than
the Borough Attorney, and experts and other staff and services as it may
deem necessary, not exceeding, exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount
appropriated by the governing body for its use.
§ 74-6. Powers and duties.
The Board shall adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary to
carry into effect the provisions and purposes of this chapter. It shall also
have the following powers and duties:
A. To make and adopt and from time to time amend a Master Plan for the
physical development of the municipality, including any areas outside
its boundaries, which in the Board's judgment bear essential relation to
the planning of a municipality, in accordance with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28.
B. To administer the provisions of Chapter 87, Subdivision and Site Plan
Review, of the municipality in accordance with the provisions of said
ordinance and the Municipal Land Use Law, P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.).
C. To approve conditional use applications in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 101, Zoning, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67.
D. To participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans
required by state or federal law or regulations.
E. To assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuous planning
process.
F. To annually prepare a program of municipal capital improvement
projects projected over a term of six years, and amendments thereto,
and recommend same to the governing body.
G. To consider and make report to the governing body within 35 days after
referral as to any proposed development regulation submitted to it,
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23a and also pass upon
other matters specifically referred to the Planning Board by the
governing body, pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26b.
H. When reviewing applications for approval of subdivision plats, site
plans or conditional uses, to grant to the same extent and subject to the
same restrictions as the Board of Adjustment. [Amended 8-12-1980
by Ord. No. 80-9]
(1) Variances pursuant to Section 57c of P.L. 1975, c. 291.70
§ 74-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-6
1:303
§ 74-6.1. Expiration of variance. [Added 7-11-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-8]
Any variance from the terms of this chapter hereafter granted by the
Planning Board, permitting the erection or alteration of any structure or
structures or permitting a specified use of any premises, shall expire by
limitation unless such construction or alteration shall have actually
commenced on each and every structure permitted by said variance or
unless such permitted use has actually been commenced within one year
from the dated publication of the notice of the judgment or determination
of the Planning Board; except, however, that the running of the period of
limitation herein provided shall be tolled from the date of filing an appeal
from the decision of the Planning Board to the governing body or to a
court of competent jurisdiction until the termination in any manner of such
appeal or proceeding. In the case of variances granted in connection with
subdivisions, the time limits governing said subdivisions shall govern rather
than the aforesaid.
(2) Direction pursuant to Section 25 of P.L. 1975, c. 291,71 for issuance
of a permit for a building or structure in the bed of a mapped street
or public drainageway, flood control basin or public area reserved
pursuant to Section 23 of said law.72
(3) Direction pursuant to Section 27 of P.L. 1975, c. 291,73 for issuance
of a permit for a building or structure not related to a street.
Whenever relief is requested pursuant to this section, notice of the
hearing on the application for development shall include reference
to the request for a variance or direction for issuance of a permit,
as the case may be.
I. To perform such other advisory duties as are assigned to it by ordinance
or resolution of the governing body for the aid and assistance of the
governing body or other agencies or officers.
70.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c.
71.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34.
72.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32.
73.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36.
§ 74-6 PARK RIDGE CODE § 74-6.1
1:304
ARTICLE II
Zoning Board of Adjustment
§ 74-7. Establishment; composition; vacancies.
A. A Zoning Board of Adjustment is hereby established pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-69 et seq. consisting of seven residents of the Borough of Park
Ridge, appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the
Council for terms of four years running from January 1 of the year of
their appointment. The terms of the members first appointed pursuant
to this chapter shall be so determined that to the greatest practicable
extent the expiration of such terms shall be distributed evenly over the
first four years after their appointment, provided that the initial term of
no member shall exceed four years. Thereafter, the term of each
member shall be for four years. Nothing herein contained, however,
shall be construed to affect the terms of any present members of the
Zoning Board of Adjustment, all of whom shall continue in office until
the completion of the terms for which they were appointed.
B. No member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment may hold any elective
office or position under the municipality.
C. A member may, after public hearing if he requests it, be removed by the
governing body for cause.
D. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled
for the unexpired term only.
E. Alternate members. [Added 11-13-1978 by Ord. No. 78-19]
(1) In addition to the members appointed pursuant to Subsection A of
this section, who shall be known as the regular members of the
Board, there shall be appointed two alternate members.
(2) Alternate members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice
and consent of the Council for terms of two years each; provided,
however, that if the alternate members shall be appointed prior to
January 1, 1979, the terms of both alternate members first
appointed hereunder shall expire on December 31, 1978.
Thereafter, the term of one alternate member appointed in 1979
shall be one year from January 1, 1979, and the term of the other
alternate member appointed in 1979 shall be two years from
January 1, 1979. Thereafter, the term of every alternate member
shall be two years, running from January 1 of the year of his
appointment.
(3) Alternate members shall be designated at the time of their
appointment as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2."
(4) Alternate members shall serve in rotation during the absence or
disqualification of any regular member.
§ 74-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-7
1:305
§ 74-8. Officers.
§ 74-9. Rules and regulations.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall adopt such rules and regulations as
may be necessary to carry into effect the provisions and purposes of this
chapter.
§ 74-10. Powers.
(5) Alternate members may participate in discussions of the
proceedings but may not vote except in the absence or
disqualification of a regular member. A vote shall not be delayed in
order that a regular member may vote instead of an alternate
member. In the event that a choice must be made as to which
alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote.
(6) The provision of Subsections B, C and D of this section shall be
applicable to alternate members.
A. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall elect a Chairman and Vice
Chairman from its members and shall also select a Secretary, who may
or may not be a Board member or another municipal employee.
B. The Zoning Board of Adjustment may employ or contract for and fix the
compensation of legal counsel, other than the Borough Attorney, and
experts and other staff and services as it shall deem necessary, not
exceeding, exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by the
governing body for its use.
A. The powers of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69 et seq. and amendments and supplements
thereto, which shall include the following:
(1) To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that
there is error in any order, requirement, decision or refusal made
by an administrative official or agency based on or made in the
enforcement of Chapter 101, Zoning.
(2) To hear and decide requests for interpretation of the Zoning Map or
Zoning Ordinance, or for decisions upon other special questions
upon which such Board is authorized by the Zoning Ordinance to
pass.
(3) Where by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape
of a specific piece of property or by reason of exceptional
topographic conditions or by reason of other extraordinary and
exceptional situation or condition of such piece of property the
strict application of any regulation pursuant to Article 8 of this
Act74 would result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties
to or exceptional and undue hardship upon the developer of such
property, grant, upon an application or an appeal relating to such
§ 74-7 PARK RIDGE CODE § 74-10
1:306
§ 74-11. Additional powers.
property, a variance from such strict application of such regulation
so as to relieve such difficulties or hardship, including a variance
for a conditional use; provided, however, that no variance shall
be granted under this subsection to allow a structure or use in
a district restricted against such structure or use, and provided
further that the proposed development does not require approval
by the Planning Board of a subdivision, site plan or conditional
use in conjunction with which the Planning Board shall review a
request for a variance pursuant to Section 47a of P.L. 1975, c.
291.75 [Amended 8-12-1980 by Ord. No. 80-9]
(4) In particular cases and for special reasons, grant a variance to
allow departure from regulations pursuant to Article 8 of P.L. 1975,
c. 291, including but not limited to allowing a structure or use in a
district restricted against such structure or use, but only by
affirmative vote of at least five members in the case of a municipal
board, or 2/3 of the full authorized membership in the case of a
regional board pursuant to Article 10 of this Act.76 [Amended
8-12-1980 by Ord. No. 80-9]
B. No variance or other relief may be granted under the provisions of this
section unless such variance or other relief can be granted without
substantial detriment to the public good and will not substantially
impair the intent and purpose of the zone plan and Chapter 101,
Zoning. Any application under any subsection of this section may be
referred to any appropriate person or agency, including the Planning
Board, for its report, provided that such reference shall not extend the
period of time within which the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act.
A. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall, in addition to the powers
specified in § 74-16 of this article, have the power given by law to:
(1) Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 for a
building or structure in the bed of a mapped street or public
drainageway, flood control basin or public area reserved on the
Official Map.
(2) Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36 for a
building or structure not related to a street.
B. The Board of Adjustment shall have the power to grant to the same
extent and subject to the same restrictions as the Planning Board
subdivision or site plan approval pursuant to Article 6 of P.L. 1975, c.
291, or conditional use approval pursuant to Section 54 of P.L. 1975, c.
74.Editor's Note: "This Act" refers to the Municipal Land Use Law. (See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et
seq.)
75.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60a.
76.Editor's Note: "This Act" refers to the Municipal Land Use Law. (See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et
seq.)
§ 74-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-11
1:307
§ 74-12. Appeals and applications.
291,77 whenever the proposed development requires approval by the
Board of Adjustment of a variance pursuant to Subsection d of Section
57 of P.L. 1975, c. 291.78 The developer may elect to submit a separate
application requesting approval of the variance and a subsequent
application for any required approval of a subdivision, site plan or
conditional use. The separate approval of the variance shall be
conditioned upon the granting of all required subsequent approvals by
the Board of Adjustment. No such subsequent approval shall be granted
unless such approval can be granted without substantial detriment to
the public good and without substantial impairment of the intent and
purpose of the zone plan and Chapter 101, Zoning. The number of votes
of Board members required to grant any such subsequent approval
shall be as otherwise provided in this Act79 for the approval in question,
and the special vote pursuant to the aforesaid Subsection d of Section
57 shall not be required. [Amended 8-12-1980 by Ord. No. 80-9]
A. Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any interested
party affected by any decision of an Administrative Officer of the
municipality based on or made in the enforcement of Chapter 101,
Zoning, or Official Map. Such appeal shall be taken within 20 days by
filing the original and three copies of the notice of appeal with the
officer from whom the appeal is taken specifying the grounds of such
appeal. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall immediately
transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the record upon which
the action appealed from was taken. [Amended 8-12-1980 by Ord.
No. 80-9]
B. Applications addressed to the original jurisdiction of the Board of
Adjustment without any prior application to an administrative official
shall be filed with the Administrative Officer. Three copies of the
application shall be filed. At the time of filing the appeal or application,
but in no event less than 10 days prior to the date set for the hearing,
the applicant shall also file all plot plans, maps, or other papers
required by virtue of any provision of this chapter or any rule of the
Board of Adjustment. The applicant shall obtain all necessary forms
from the Administrative Officer. The Administrative Officer shall inform
the applicant of the steps to be taken to initiate proceedings and of the
regular meeting dates of the Board.
C. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action in respect
of which the decision appealed from was made, unless the official from
whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board of Adjustment, after the
notice of appeal shall have been filed with him, that by reason of facts
stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent
77.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67.
78.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70.
79.Editor's Note: "This Act" refers to the Municipal Land Use Law, P.L. 1975, c. 291.
§ 74-11 PARK RIDGE CODE § 74-12
1:308
§ 74-13. Power to reverse or modify decisions.
In exercising the above-mentioned powers, the Board of Adjustment may, in
conformity with the provisions of P.L. 1975, c. 291, or amendments thereto
or subsequent statutes applying, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may
modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from
and make such other requirement, decision or determination as ought to be
made, and to that end have all the powers of the administrative official from
whom the appeal was taken.
§ 74-14. Expiration of variance.
Any variance from the terms of this chapter hereafter granted by the
Board of Adjustment, permitting the erection or alteration of any structure
or structures or permitting a specified use of any premises, shall expire
by limitation unless such construction or alteration shall have actually
commenced on each and every structure permitted by said variance or
unless such permitted use has actually been commenced within one year
from the date of publication of the notice of the judgment or determination
of the Board of Adjustment; except, however, that the running of the period
of limitation herein provided shall be tolled from the date of filing an appeal
from the decision of the Board of Adjustment to the governing body or to
a court of competent jurisdiction, until the termination in any manner of
such appeal or proceeding. In the case of variances granted in connection
with subdivisions, the time limits governing said subdivisions shall govern,
rather than the aforesaid.
§ 74-15. Time limit for decision.
peril to life or property. In such cases, proceedings shall not be stayed
otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the
Board of Adjustment or by the Superior Court of New Jersey an
application or notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and
on due cause shown.
A. The Board of Adjustment shall render its decision no later than 120
days after the date an appeal is taken from the decision of an
administrative official or no later than 120 days after the date of the
submission of a complete application for development to the Board
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70b.
B. Failure of the Board to render a decision within such one-hundredtwenty-
day period or within such further time as may be consented to
by the applicant shall constitute a decision favorable to the applicant.
C. Whenever an application for development requests relief pursuant to
Subsection B of this section, the Board of Adjustment shall grant or
deny approval of the application within 120 days after submission by a
developer of a complete application to the Administrative Officer or
within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant. In the
event that the developer elects to submit separate consecutive
§ 74-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-15
1:309
§ 74-16. (Reserved)80
applications, the aforesaid provision shall apply to the application for
approval of the variance. The period for granting or denying any
subsequent approval shall be as otherwise provided by law. Failure
of the Board of Adjustment to act within the period prescribed shall
constitute approval of the application, and a certificate of the
Administrative Officer as to the failure of the Board of Adjustment to
act shall be issued on request of the applicant, and it shall be sufficient
in lieu of the written endorsement or other evidence of approval herein
required and shall be so accepted by the county recording officer for
the purposes of filing subdivision plats. [Added 8-12-1980 by Ord.
No. 80-9]
80.Editor's Note: Original § 74-16, Appeal of final decision of Board, was repealed 6-8-1999
by Ord. No. 99-6.
§ 74-15 PARK RIDGE CODE § 74-16
1:310
ARTICLE III
Provisions Applicable to Both Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Adjustment
§ 74-17. Conflicts of interest.
No member of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act
on any matter in which he has either directly or indirectly any personal or
financial interest. Whenever any such member shall disqualify himself from
acting on a particular matter, he shall not continue to sit with the Board
on the hearing of such matter nor participate in any discussion or decision
relating thereto.
§ 74-18. Meetings. [Amended 8-12-1980 by Ord. No. 80-9]
§ 74-19. Minutes.
Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept and shall include
the names of the persons appearing and addressing the Board and of the
persons appearing by attorney, the action taken by the Board, the findings,
A. Meetings. Both the Planning Board and the Board of Adjustment shall
by their rules fix the time and place for holding their regular meetings
for business authorized to be conducted by such agency. Regular
meetings shall be scheduled not less than once a month and shall be
held as scheduled unless canceled for lack of applications for
development to process.
B. Special meetings. At the call of the Chairman or on the request of any
two of its members, special meetings may be held on notice to members
and the public in accordance with municipal regulations.
C. No action shall be taken at any meeting without a quorum being
present.
D. All actions shall be taken by a majority vote of the members present at
the meeting except as otherwise required by Chapter 291 of the Laws of
1975, as amended and supplemented.
E. All regular meetings and all special meetings shall be open to the
public. Notice of all such meetings shall be given in accordance with the
requirements of the Open Public Meetings Law, P.L. 1975, c. 231.81
F. A member of the Board who was absent for one or more of the meetings
at which a hearing was held shall be eligible to vote on the matter upon
which the hearing was conducted, notwithstanding his absence from
one or more of the meetings; provided, however, that such Board
member has available to him the transcript or recording of all of the
hearing from which he was absent and certifies in writing to the Board
that he has read such transcript or listened to such recording.
81.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
§ 74-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-19
1:311
if any, made by it and the reasons therefor. The minutes shall thereafter
be made available for public inspection during normal business hours at
the office of the Administrative Officer. Any interested party shall have the
right to compel production of the minutes for use as evidence in any legal
proceeding concerning the subject matter of such minutes. Such interested
party may be charged a fee for reproduction of the minutes for his use as
provided for by statute, ordinance or rule of the Board.
§ 74-20. Fees. [Amended 2-11-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-002]
A. Fees for applications or for the rendering of any service by the Planning
Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment or any member of their
administrative staffs, which are not otherwise provided by ordinance or
in Chapter 87, § 87-6, may be provided for and adopted as part of the
rules of the Board, and copies of said rules or of the separate fee
schedule shall be available to the public.
B. Planning services. Fees for the services of the planner for the Planning
Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment in connection with a request
for rezoning, Master Plan revision or for the informal review of a
prospective development application shall be as follows:
(1) Hourly rate fee: as established by resolution of the Mayor and
Council in accordance with the planner's contract with a minimum
fee based on four hours.
(2) Escrow deposit: six times the hourly rate, except as otherwise
provided in Subsection G below.
C. Engineering services. Fees for the services of the engineer for the
Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment in connection with a
request for rezoning, Master Plan revision or for the informal review of
a prospective development application shall be as follows:
(1) Hourly rate fee: as established by resolution of the Mayor and
Council in accordance with the Engineer's contract with a
minimum fee based on four hours.
(2) Escrow deposit: six times the hourly rate, except as otherwise
provided in Subsection G below.
D. Legal services. Fees for the services of the attorney for the Planning
Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment or the Borough Attorney in
connection with a request for rezoning, Master Plan revision or for the
informal review of a prospective development application shall be as
follows:
(1) Hourly rate fee: as established by resolution of the Mayor and
Council in accordance with the attorney's contract with a minimum
fee based on four hours.
§ 74-19 PARK RIDGE CODE § 74-20
1:312
§ 74-21. Hearings.
§ 74-22. Notice requirements for hearings. [Amended 8-12-1980 by
Ord. No. 80-9]
Whenever a hearing is required on an application for development pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. or pursuant to the determination of the
(2) Escrow deposit: six times the hourly rate, except as otherwise
provided in Subsection G below.
E. Informal review of a prospective development application by the
planner, engineer or attorney shall not be binding on either Board and
may be modified as a result of a formal submission of a development
application.
F. In connection with a request for rezoning, Master Plan revision or for
the informal review of a prospective development application there
shall be an administrative fee payable to the Borough in the sum of
$100.
G. Notwithstanding the escrow deposits set forth above, in the event that
the Board's professional estimates that a larger escrow deposit is
required due to the complexity and time requirements of the particular
matter, the Board may, by resolution, require a larger escrow deposit.
A. Rules. The Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment shall make
rules governing the conduct of hearings before such bodies, which rules
shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
or of this chapter.
B. Oaths. The officer presiding at the hearing or such person as he may
designate shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to
compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant
evidence, including witnesses and documents presented by the parties.
C. Testimony. The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application for
development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the presiding
officer, and the right of cross-examination shall be permitted to all
interested parties through their attorneys, if represented, or directly, if
not represented subject to the discretion of the presiding officer and to
reasonable limitations as to time and number of witnesses.
D. Evidence. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the
hearing, but the Board may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly
repetitious evidence.
E. Records. Each Board shall provide for the verbatim recording of the
proceedings by either stenographer or mechanical or electronic means.
The Board shall furnish a transcript, or duplicate recording in lieu
thereof, on request to any interested party at his expense.
§ 74-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-22
1:313
municipal agency in question, the applicant or the Administrative Officer, as
the case may be, shall give notice thereof as follows:
A. Public notice shall be given by the Administrative Officer by publication
in the official newspaper of the municipality at least 10 days prior to the
date of the hearing.
B. Notice of a hearing requiring public notice pursuant to Subsection A of
this section shall be given to the owners of all real property as shown on
the current tax duplicate, located in the state and within 200 feet in all
directions of the property which is the subject of such hearing, provided
that this requirement shall be deemed satisfied by notice to the
condominium association, in the case of any unit owner whose unit has
a unit above it or below it, or horizontal property regime, in the case of
any co-owner whose apartment has an apartment above it or below it.
Notice shall be given by serving a copy thereof on the property owner
as shown on said current tax duplicate or his agent in charge of the
property or by mailing a copy thereof by certified mail to the property
owner at his address as shown on said current tax duplicate. Notice to a
partnership owner may be made by service upon any partner. Notice to
a corporate owner may be made by service upon its president, a vice
president, secretary or other person authorized by appointment or by
law to accept service on behalf of the corporation. Notice to a
condominium association, horizontal property regime, community trust
or homeowners' association, because of its ownership of common
elements or areas located within 200 feet of the property which is the
subject of the hearing, may be made in the same manner as to a
corporation without further notice to unit owners, co-owners or
homeowners on account of such common elements or areas.
C. Notice of hearings on applications for development involving property
located within 200 feet of an adjoining municipality shall be given by
personal service or certified mail to the Clerk of such municipality.
D. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the County
Planning Board of a hearing on an application for development of
property adjacent to an existing county road or proposed road shown on
the Official County Map or on the County Master Plan, adjoining other
county land or situate within 200 feet of a municipal boundary.
E. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Commissioner of Transportation of a hearing on an application for
development of property adjacent to a state highway.
F. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Director of the Division of State and Regional Planning in the
Department of Community Affairs of a hearing on an application for
development of property which exceeds 150 acres or 500 dwelling
units. Such notice shall include a copy of any maps or documents
required to be on file with the Municipal Clerk pursuant to Section 6b of
P.L. 1975, c. 291.82
§ 74-22 PARK RIDGE CODE § 74-22
1:314
§ 74-23. List of property owners furnished. [Amended 8-12-1980 by
Ord. No. 80-9]
Upon the written request of an applicant, the Administrative Officer shall,
within seven days, make and certify a list from said current tax duplicates
of the names and addresses of the owners to whom the applicant is required
to give notice. The applicant shall be entitled to rely upon the information
contained in such list, and failure to give notice to any owner not on the list
shall not invalidate any hearing or proceeding. A sum not to exceed $0.25
per name or $10, whichever is greater, shall be charged for such list.
§ 74-24. Decisions. [Amended 8-12-1980 by Ord. No. 80-9]
G. All notices hereinabove specified in this section shall be given at least
10 days prior to the date fixed for the hearing, and the applicant shall
file an affidavit of proof of service with the Administrative Officer by no
less than 48 hours of the commencement of the public hearing.
H. Any notice made by certified mail as hereinabove required shall be
deemed to be complete upon mailing in accordance with the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-14.
I. Notice pursuant to Subsections D, E, F and G of this section shall be
deemed to be required unless public notice pursuant to Subsection A
and notice pursuant to Subsection B of this section are required.
A. Each decision on any application for development shall be reduced to
writing as a resolution of the Board and shall include findings of facts
and conclusions based thereon.
B. Failure of a motion to approve an application for development to receive
the number of votes required for approval shall be deemed on action
denying the application.
C. The Board may provide such written decision and findings and
conclusions either on the date of the meeting at which it takes action to
grant or deny approval or, if the meeting at which action is taken occurs
within the final 45 days of the applicable time period for rendering a
decision on the application for development, within 45 days of such
meeting by the adoption of a resolution of memorialization setting forth
the decision and the findings and conclusions of the Board thereon. An
action resulting from the failure of a motion to approve an application
shall be memorialized by a resolution as provided above,
notwithstanding the time at which such action occurs within the
applicable time period for rendering a decision on the application.
D. The adoption of a resolution of memorialization pursuant to this section
shall not be construed to alter the applicable time period for rendering
a decision on the application for development. Such resolution shall be
82.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10b.
§ 74-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-24
1:315
§ 74-25. Publication of decisions.
A brief notice of every final decision shall be published in the official
newspaper of the municipality. Such publication shall be arranged by the
Administrative Officer without separate charge to the applicant. Said notice
shall be sent to the official newspaper for publication within 10 days of the
date of any such decision.
§ 74-26. Payment of taxes.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-39 and 40:55D-65, every
application far development submitted to the Planning Board or to the
Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be accompanied by proof that no taxes or
assessments for local improvements are due or delinquent on the property
which is the subject of such application; or, if it is shown that taxes or
assessments are delinquent on said property, any approvals or other relief
granted by either Board shall be conditioned upon either the prompt
payment of such taxes or assessments or the making of adequate provision
for the payment thereof in such manner that the municipality will be
adequately protected.
adopted by a vote of a majority of the members of the Board who
voted for the action previously taken, and no other member shall vote
thereon. The vote on such resolution shall be deemed to be a
memorialization of an action of the Board and not to be an action
of the Board, except that failure to adopt such resolution within the
forty-five-day period shall result in the approval of the application for
development, notwithstanding any prior action taken thereon.
E. Whenever a resolution of memorialization is adopted in accordance
with this section, the date of such adoption shall constitute the date of
the decision for purposes of the mailings, filings and publications
required by §§ 74-24F and 74-25.
F. A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the Board within 10 days of the
date of the decision to the applicant or, if represented, then to his
attorney, without separate charge. A copy of the decision shall also be
mailed to all persons who have requested it and who have paid the fee
prescribed by the Board for such service. A copy of the decision shall
also be filed with the Administrative Officer, who shall make a copy of
such filed decision available to any interested party upon payment of a
fee calculated in the same manner as those established for copies of
other public documents in the municipality.
§ 74-24 PARK RIDGE CODE § 74-26
1:316
ARTICLE IV
Administrative Officer
§ 74-27. Establishment; term, removal.
There is hereby established in the Borough of Park Ridge the position
of Administrative Officer-Zoning and Planning who shall be a resident of
the Borough and shall hold office during the pleasure of the Council. The
said Administrative Officer-Zoning and Planning shall be appointed by the
Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Council, and shall hold office
for one year and until his successor shall have qualified, unless sooner
removed. The Administrative Officer-Zoning and Planning shall not be
removed without being offered an opportunity to be heard.
§ 74-28. Duties.
The Administrative Officer-Zoning and Planning shall perform all duties
required pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.,
or any ordinance of the Borough of Park Ridge and other services as may be
assigned from time to time by the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment.
§ 74-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-28
1:317

ARTICLE V
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 74-29. Definitions.
Whenever a term is used in this chapter which is defined in c. 291, P.L.
1975,83 such term is intended to have the meaning set forth in the definition
of such term found in said statute, unless a contrary intention is clearly
expressed from the context of this chapter.
§ 74-30. Repealer.
Chapter 24, entitled "Planning Board," and §§ 101-78 through 101-83 of
Chapter 101, entitled "Zoning," of the Code of the Borough of Park Ridge
are expressly repealed as of the effective date of this chapter. All other
ordinances which contain provisions contrary to the provisions of this
chapter are repealed as of the effective date of this chapter to the extent of
any inconsistency.
§ 74-31. Provisions continued.
Pursuant to the provisions of c. 291, P.L. 1975, Section 81, the substantive
provisions of Chapter 101, Zoning, of the Code of the Borough of Park Ridge
shall continue in full force and effect and shall be read in pari materia with
this chapter.
§ 74-32. Pending applications.
All perfected applications for development filed prior to the effective date
of this chapter may be continued, but any appeals arising out of decisions
made on any such application shall be governed by the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 74-33. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Land Use Procedures
Ordinance of the Borough of Park Ridge."
§ 74-34. Filing of copies.
Immediately upon adoption of this chapter, the Municipal Clerk shall file a
copy of this chapter with the County Planning Board as required by law.
The Clerk shall also file with said County Planning Board copies of all other
ordinances of the municipality relating to land use, such as the Subdivision,
Zoning and Site Plan Review Ordinances.
83.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 74-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-34
1:319
Chapter 75
LICENSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Health — See Ch. 17.
Police Department — See Ch. 26.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 40.
Automatic amusement devices — See Ch. 42.
Carnivals, circuses and shows — See Ch. 49.
Dogs, cats and other animals — See Ch. 52.
Hawkers, peddlers and solicitors — See Ch.
67.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 88.
Zoning — See Ch. 101.
§ 74-34 PARK RIDGE CODE § 74-34
1:320
ARTICLE I
Retail Food Establishments
§ 75-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENT — A seating establishment, as defined herein,
where food is or is intended to be sold for consumption by patrons while
seated in automobiles parked at the premises of the establishment.
FUND-RAISING ACTIVITY — A retail food establishment, as defined herein,
wherein retail sales of food are made by or on behalf of nonprofit
corporations or associations for either on-premises or off-premises
consumption, the net proceeds of which sales are or are intended to be
solely for the benefit of the nonprofit corporation or association. No caterer
or other profit-making business hired by or associated with such nonprofit
corporation or association shall be considered part of any fund-raising
activity.
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — A retail food establishment, as defined
herein, operated by a person, firm or corporation not primarily in the
business of retail food sales, which establishment is and shall continue
to be operated on a nonprofit basis solely for the use and benefit of the
employees of such person, firm or corporation during the hours in which
such employees are actually engaged in the business of such person, firm
or corporation.
MOBILE ESTABLISHMENT — A seating establishment or nonseating
establishment, as defined herein, where food is sold from mobile facilities.
NONSEATING ESTABLISHMENT — A retail food establishment, as defined
herein, including mobile establishments, as defined herein, where food is or
is intended to be sold in an unprepared or merely partly prepared condition
for further preparation and consumption at a time and place different
from the time and place of sale. The fact that a nonseating establishment
sells food capable of being consumed at the time and place of sale shall
not render the same a seating establishment, as defined herein, if the
substantial portion of sales made and intended to be made are of the type
hereinbefore described as those made by a nonseating establishment.
OUTDOOR CAFE — Any eating establishment where food and other
refreshments are served or consumed upon the public right-of-way, namely
the sidewalks immediately in front of a restaurant, café, cafeteria or place of
business where food and/or other refreshments are served or consumed, in
rear, side or front yards where permitted pursuant to Chapter 101, Zoning,
of the Park Ridge Code.[Added 7-11-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-09]
RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — A single enclosure or a single place
in, at or from which food or drink for human consumption is sold or
served, including but not limited to any fixed or mobile restaurant; coffee
shop; cafeteria; short-order cafe, luncheonette; grill; tearoom; sandwich
§ 75-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-1
1:321
shop; soda fountain; tavern; bar; cocktail lounge; nightclub; roadside stand;
industrial feeding establishment; private, public or nonprofit organization
or institution routinely serving food; catering kitchen; commissary; boxlunch
establishment; retail bakery; meat market; delicatessen; grocery
store; public food market; and similar places. For purposes of the licensing
provision of this article, each such retail food establishment, whether or
not more than one such establishment is located upon a single premises
and whether or not more than one such retail food establishment is owned,
operated or conducted by a single person, firm or corporation, shall be
licensed separately.
SEATING ESTABLISHMENT — A retail food establishment, as defined
herein, including mobile establishments, as defined herein, at which food
is or is intended to be sold for consumption at the time and place of sale,
whether or not seats for the use of patrons are actually supplied.
§ 75-2. License or permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to conduct a retail
food establishment in the Borough of Park Ridge without first having
procured either a license or permit to do so, as the case may be, or without
complying with the provisions of the Retail Food Establishment Code of New
Jersey (1965). Each day upon which such person, firm or corporation shall
do any act which is herein prohibited or omit to do any act which is herein
required shall constitute a new violation.
§ 75-3. License for each establishment; exception.
Each retail food establishment, except establishments conducting fundraising
activities, now or hereafter conducted or operated in the Borough
of Park Ridge, shall be licensed in accordance with the provisions of this
article.
§ 75-4. Permit for fund-raising activity.
Each nonprofit corporation or association shall, before the tenth day prior
to conducting any fund-raising activity, apply for a permit to do so. Such
permit shall issue by the Secretary of the Board of Health without fee as
of course, unless and until the executive officer of the Board of Health
shall have determined that the fund-raising activity is not or will not be
conducted in accordance with the provisions of the Retail Food
Establishment Code of New Jersey (1965). Not more than four such permits
shall issue to a single such nonprofit corporation or association in any
twelve-month period following the 30th day of each June.
§ 75-5. Application for license. [Amended 12-10-1979 by Ord. No.
79-17]
Any person, firm or corporation herein required to be licensed, now or
hereafter seeking to operate or conduct a retail food establishment, shall,
not earlier than the first day of December and not later than the 31st day
§ 75-1 PARK RIDGE CODE § 75-5
1:322
of December of each year, apply in writing to the Secretary of the Board of
Health of the Borough of Park Ridge for a license to do so, provided that any
such person, firm or corporation seeking to commence business may apply
for a license at times other than those hereinbefore set forth, which said
license shall expire on the 31st day of December next ensuing.
§ 75-6. Fee; exemptions. [Amended 12-10-1979 by Ord. No. 79-17]
§ 75-7. Issuance of licenses.
The Board of Health of the Borough of Park Ridge shall receive each
application for a retail food establishment license and, upon such receipt,
shall cause an inspection of the establishment to be made. The executive
officer shall annually conduct lectures and classes upon the subject of
food handling, which lectures or classes shall be attended by at least one
permanent supervisory employee or operator of each applicant for a license.
The said classes or lectures shall be conducted in a manner, place and
time selected by the executive officer, who shall give notice in writing,
delivered by United States mail, of such place and time to each applicant.
If the executive officer determines that the retail food establishment to be
licensed meets the criteria of the Retail Food Establishment Code (1965),
and if the foregoing requirements as to food handling classes are met, the
executive officer shall direct the Secretary to issue the license, but not
otherwise.
§ 75-8. License expiration. [Amended 12-10-1979 by Ord. No. 79-17]
Each license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall expire
on the 31st day of December and shall be renewed annually in accordance
with § 75-5.
§ 75-9. Suspension or revocation; hearing.
A. The fee schedule for establishments covered under the provisions of
this chapter shall be as adopted pursuant to Chapter 109 of the Board
of Health of the Borough of Park Ridge.
B. Charitable, religious, civic, educational and nonprofit corporations,
associations and institutions shall be exempt from the payment of fees;
provided, however, that said organizations shall be inspected and meet
all the sanitary requirements set by the Board of Health and/or the
Retail Food Establishment Code of New Jersey (1965).
A. Any license issued under the terms and provisions of this article may be
suspended or revoked by the Board of Health of this municipality for the
violation by the licensee of any provision of this article or of the Retail
Food Establishment Code of New Jersey (1965), or whenever it shall
appear that the business, trade, calling, profession or occupation of the
person, firm or corporation to whom such license was issued is
conducted in a disorderly or improper manner or in violation of any law
of the United States, the State of New Jersey or any ordinance of this
§ 75-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-9
1:323
§ 75-10. Nonapplicability of provisions.
No provision of this article shall be applied so as to impose any unlawful
burden on either interstate commerce or any activity of the state or federal
government.
§ 75-11. Jurisdiction.
Jurisdiction to hear complaints of a violation of this article and to impose
the penalties hereinafter prescribed shall be vested in the Municipal Court
of the Borough of Park Ridge.
§ 75-12. Enforcement.
Upon notice to him that any person, firm or corporation shall have violated
the provisions of §§ 75-2 and 75-3 of this article, the executive officer of
the Board of Health may, by complaint filed in the Municipal Court of the
Borough of Park Ridge, institute proceedings in the name of the Board of
Health of the Borough of Park Ridge for the enforcement and imposition of
penalties hereinafter prescribed.
municipality, or that the person or persons conducting the retail food
establishment is of an unfit character to conduct the same, or that
the purpose for which the license was issued is being abused to the
detriment of the public or such license is being used for a purpose
foreign to that for which the license was issued.
B. A license issued under the terms and provisions of this article shall not
be revoked, canceled or suspended until a hearing thereon shall have
been had by the Board of Health. Written notice of the time and place of
such hearing shall be served upon the licensee at least three days prior
to the date set for such hearing. Such notice shall also contain a brief
statement of the grounds to be relied upon for revoking, canceling or
suspending such license. Notice may be given either by personal
delivery thereof to the person to be notified or by depositing it in the
United States post office in a sealed envelope; postage prepaid,
addressed to such person to be notified at the business address
appearing upon said license. At the hearing before the Board of Health,
the person aggrieved shall have an opportunity to answer and may
thereafter be heard, and upon due consideration and deliberation by
the Board of Health, the complaint may be dismissed, or if the Board of
Health concludes that the charges have been sustained and
substantiated, it may revoke, cancel or suspend the license held by the
licensee.
C. If any such license shall have been revoked, neither the holder thereof
nor any person acting for him, directly or indirectly, shall be entitled to
another license to carry on the same business within the Borough
unless the application for such license shall be approved by the Board
of Health.
§ 75-9 PARK RIDGE CODE § 75-13
1:324
§ 75-13. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation having been found guilty of a violation
of the provisions of this article, upon complaint made pursuant to the
provisions of the foregoing section, shall, for each violation, be penalized by
a fine of not more than $500 or by imprisonment in the county jail for a term
not exceeding 90 days, or both, per day of violation.
§ 75-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-13
1:325

ARTICLE II
Coin-Operated Dry-Cleaning Establishments
§ 75-14. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, whether as principal or agent, clerk or
employee, either for himself or any other person, or for any body corporate,
or as an officer of any corporation or otherwise, to engage in the operation
of an establishment where one or more machines or devices are offered
for public use, which machines, upon insertion of a coin, coins or token
or by other means, provide self-service dry-cleaning facilities, without first
having applied to and procured a permit from the Board of Health of
this municipality so to do, or without complying with any and all of the
provisions of the Coin-Operated Dry Cleaning Establishment Code of New
Jersey (1962), as adopted or amended by said Board.
§ 75-15. Fee; permit expiration.
§ 75-16. Application for permit; issuance; transferability.
Application for and issuance of the permit referred to in § 75-14 above
shall be made in conformity with the provisions of the Coin-Operated Dry
Cleaning Establishment Code of New Jersey (1962), as adopted or amended
by the Board of Health of this municipality. Such permits are not
transferable.
§ 75-17. Suspension, revocation, reinstatement.
Permits issued under authority of this article may be suspended, revoked or
reinstated by the Board of Health of this municipality.
§ 75-18. Nonapplicability of provisions.
No provision of this article shall be applied so as to impose any unlawful
burden on either interstate commerce or any activity of the state or federal
government.
§ 75-19. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not to exceed
$500 or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not to exceed 90
days, or by both such fine and imprisonment; and each violation of any of
A. The fee for permits as required by § 75-14 above, for the purpose of
raising revenue, for regulation and control, to be paid annually to this
municipality, is hereby fixed at $10 per year.
B. All permits issued under authority of this article shall expire on the 31st
day of December of each year.
C. Permit fees shall be paid to the Board of Health.
§ 75-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-19
1:327
the provisions of this article, and each day the same is violated, shall be
deemed and taken to be a separate and distinct offense.
§ 75-19 PARK RIDGE CODE § 75-19
1:328
ARTICLE III
Outdoor Cafes
[Added 7-11-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-9]
§ 75-20. Application information; fee.
A. The application for license required hereunder shall be made to the
Construction Code Official and shall be signed by the applicant. The
application shall contain the following information:
(1) The name, residence address and telephone number of each
individual, owner or partner; or, if a domestic corporation, the
names, addresses and telephone numbers of the directors and
officers owning a ten-percent or greater interest in the corporation;
and if a nondomestic corporation, the name, address and telephone
number of the managing officer for service of process within the
State of New Jersey and a copy of the qualification of said
nondomestic corporation to conduct business in the State of New
Jersey.
(2) A copy of the trade, corporation, business or fictitious name upon
which the applicant intends to do business pursuant to this article.
(3) The address and description of each place where the applicant
intends to establish or operate an outdoor café.
(4) The name and address of the person owning the premises, if other
than the applicant, and the consent of the owner of the premises to
the application, in writing.
(5) Three sets of proposed layout plans containing scaled drawings
clearly illustrating the number, types of materials, color and
location of all tables, chairs, or other furnishings or fixtures
intended to be located in the outdoor café and the present location
of tables within the restaurant. The perimeter of the outdoor café
shall be defined and may be set off by a portable-type enclosure,
which may include live planting. The enclosure shall define the
perimeter of the area to be used as an outdoor café, and it shall be
separate from pedestrians traversing the adjacent sidewalk. The
enclosure shall not contain doors or windows nor air conditioning
or heating equipment and shall be open at all times to the air. The
scaled drawings shall also illustrate the following:
(a) The location of any doors leading from the eating
establishment to the outdoor café. No such doors may be
obstructed in any matter.
(b) The width, expressed in feet, and location of unobstructed
passageways permitting free passage or flow of pedestrian
traffic around or through each outdoor café must be provided.
§ 75-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-20
1:329
§ 75-21. Review of application.
The Construction Code Official will review the application for completeness
and compliance with the terms of this chapter. If the application is
complete, the Construction Code Official will act upon the same within 10
business days of the submittal of the application or within 10 business
days after the application is complete unless the application is referred
to a reviewing agency pursuant to § 75-22 of this article. Such a referral
shall toll the time limits the Construction Code Official has to act until a
final determination is made by the reviewing agency. If the application is
not complete, the Construction Code Official will also notify the applicant
within 10 business days of the submissions and specifically detail the areas
in which the application lacks compliance with the requirements of this
article.
§ 75-22. License issuance.
(c) The location of the place where any food or drink is intended to
be prepared.
(d) An illustration of the enclosure or protective barrier separating
the eating and serving area of each outdoor café from
pedestrian traffic.
(e) The location of all fire hydrants, parking meters, utility poles,
benches, handicap ramps, street furniture, trees and any other
fixtures permanently located on the sidewalk in front of the
eating establishment or within 10 feet thereof on either or any
side.
(f) The type and location of any proposed outdoor lighting and
fixtures.
B. The fee for this license shall be $200 payable with the license
application.
A. If the application complies with this article, the Construction Code
Official shall issue a license strictly subject to the terms and conditions
of this article. If the Construction Code Official determines that the
application does not comply with the regulations set forth in Chapter 87
and Chapter 101, the Construction Code Official shall refer the
application to the Planning Board for site plan review. The Planning
Board shall review all such applications, unless variances are required
or requested pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d, in which case the
application shall be referred to the Zoning Board of Adjustment for
review and decision.
B. All other provisions of Chapter 75 not amended by this article shall
remain in full force and effect and, where applicable, apply to the
licenses for outdoor cafés.
§ 75-20 PARK RIDGE CODE § 75-23
1:330
§ 75-23. Revocation or suspension of license.
§ 75-24. Vending machines prohibited.
No vending machines of any kind are permitted on the exterior of any
building operating an outdoor café.
§ 75-25. Impeding pedestrian traffic; emergencies.
In addition to the power of suspension or revocation as set forth above, the
Borough reserves the right to modify, suspend, or revoke any license on
10 days' written notice if the Borough determines that pedestrian traffic is,
in fact, impeded or made unsafe because of the operation of the outdoor
café or because of any other safety issue which the Borough determines
adversely affects the Borough because of such operation. The license may
also be suspended or revoked on 10 days' written notice, in the event
the Borough determines that it is necessary to utilize the area or any
part thereof for the maintenance or installation of underground utilities. In
the event of an emergency, which emergency is certified by the Borough
Administrator, the license may be suspended or revoked without notice.
§ 75-26. Alcoholic beverage control license.
If the applicant is the holder of an alcoholic beverage control license
pursuant to the laws of the State of New Jersey, it shall be the applicant's
responsibility to cause the alcoholic beverage control license to be amended
to include the premises utilized for outdoor café purposes in order to serve
alcoholic beverages therein.
§ 75-27. Days of operation.
Outdoor cafes shall be permitted to operate from April 1 to October 31 in
any calendar year. The license, when issued, shall be valid for one season.
§ 75-28. Equipment.
No tables, chairs, benches or other equipment used in the outdoor café shall
be attached, chained or in any matter affixed to any tree, post, sign, curb
A. Any license issued hereunder is issued solely as a revocable license,
which shall be subject to revocation or suspension by the Mayor and
Council for failure of any licensee to comply with this article or for any
violation of any other applicable federal, state, county or municipal law,
regulation or article. Any license issued hereunder is issued upon the
express understanding that the licensee obtains no property right
thereunder, nor any interest in the continuation of said license.
B. Suspension or termination of license. It shall be unlawful for any person
to operate an outdoor café after the suspension or termination of the
applicable license.
§ 75-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-28
1:331
or sidewalk or property of the Borough of Park Ridge within or near the
licensed area.
§ 75-29. Vacation of sidewalk space; removal of property by
Borough.
The licensee agrees at the end of the license period, or in the event that
the license is temporarily or permanently suspended or revoked, that the
licensee will at his own cost and expense vacate the sidewalk space and
promptly remove any property placed thereon. Failure to do so on five days'
written notice shall grant to the Borough the right to remove any property
on the sidewalk, and the licensee agrees to reimburse the Borough for the
cost of removing and storing the same.
§ 75-30. Noise.
The licensee shall not direct or permit to be directed to or from the area
occupied by the outdoor café any bell, chime, siren, whistle, loudspeaker,
public address system, radio, sound amplifier or similar device.
§ 75-31. Hours of operation.
No outdoor café shall be open for business prior to 7:00 a.m. nor remain
open for business after 11:00 p.m. All persons occupying the outdoor café
shall vacate the same no later than 11:30 p.m.
§ 75-28 PARK RIDGE CODE § 75-31
1:332
ARTICLE IV
Temporary Storage Containers
[Added 7-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-14]
§ 75-32. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
TEMPORARY STORAGE CONTAINER — A container designed for the
outdoor storage of personal property for temporary use, delivered and
removed by vehicle, and specifically excludes cargo containers.
§ 75-33. Requirements for container permit.
A storage container permit is required for the placement of a temporary
storage container at any site in Park Ridge for the length of time as provided
herein:
§ 75-34. Violations and penalties.
A. The owner or occupant of the site where the container is to be located
must apply to the Construction Code Official or his designee and pay a
required fee of $100 for a container permit.
B. The original term of the permit shall be for 30 days and may upon the
request of the owner or occupant of the site renew, at no charge, for up
to two additional thirty-day periods. In no event shall a container be
placed on any site in Park Ridge for more than 90 days.
C. No container permit shall be issued to any user who is in violation of
any ordinance of the Borough of Park Ridge.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to allow, keep and/or maintain a
temporary storage container on a site which the person owns, rents,
occupies or controls without obtaining a container permit.
B. A person who violates this order shall be subject to the same penalties
as provided in § 75-13 of this chapter.
§ 75-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-34
1:333

ARTICLE V
Donation Clothing Bins
[Added 3-24-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-09]
§ 75-35. General provisions; zoning permit required; violations and
penalties.
Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary, no person shall place,
use or employ a donation clothing bin for solicitation purposes, unless all of
the following requirements are met:
A. The donation clothing bin is owned by a charitable organization
registered with the Attorney General of the State of New Jersey
pursuant to P.L. 1994, c. 16,84 or any person;
B. The donation clothing bin is limited to an area at the Borough Recycling
Center as determined by the Construction Code Official or the
Department of Public Works Road Supervisor; and
C. The registered charitable organization or the person has obtained a
zoning permit, valid for a period of one year, from the Construction
Code Official or the Department of Public Works Road Supervisor in
accordance with the following:
(1) In applying for such a zoning permit, the registered charitable
organization or person shall include:
(a) The manner in which the charitable organization or person
anticipates any clothing or other donations collected via the
bin would be used, sold or dispersed, and the method by which
the proceeds of collected donations would be allocated or
spent;
(b) The name and telephone number of the bona fide office of the
applicant and of any entity which may share or profit from any
clothing or other donations collected via the bin; and
(c) The schedule of pickups removing the articles from the bins,
which can be no less often than once per week, and the name
and telephone number of the person to be notified if the bin is
overflowing prior to the scheduled date of pickup.
(2) The Construction Code Official or the Department or Public Works
Road Supervisor shall not grant an application for a zoning permit
to place, use or employ a donation clothing bin if it determines that
the placement of the bin could constitute a safety hazard. Such
hazards shall include, but are not limited to, the placement of a
donation clothing bin in any area that interferes with pedestrian or
vehicular traffic, or any place which stores large amounts of, or
sells, fuel or other flammable liquids or gases.
84.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 45:17A-18 et seq.
§ 75-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-35
1:335
(3) The fee for such application for the zoning permit shall be $25.
[Amended 6-23-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-15]
(4) An expiring zoning permit for a donation clothing bin may be
renewed by a charitable organization or person upon payment of
the twenty-five-dollar renewal fee and by application that shall
include the following information:
(a) The manner in which the person has used, sold or dispersed
any clothing or other donations collected via the bin, the
method by which the proceeds of collected donations have
been allocated or spent, and any changes the person
anticipates it may make in these processes during the period
covered by the renewal;
(b) The name and telephone number of the bona fide office of the
applicant and any entity which shared or profited from any
clothing or other donations collected via the bin, and of any
entities which may do so during the period covered by the
renewal; and
(c) The schedule of pickups removing the articles from the bins,
which can be no less often than once per week, and the name
and telephone number of the person to be notified if the bin is
overflowing prior to the date of pickup.
(5) The following information shall be clearly and conspicuously
written in either paint or permanent marker on the exterior of the
donation clothing bin:
(a) The name and address of the registered charitable
organization or person that owns the bin, and of any other
entity which may share or profit from any clothing or other
donations collected via the bin;
(b) The telephone number of the organization's bona fide office
and, if applicable, the telephone number of the bona fide office
of any other entity which may share or profit from any clothing
or other donations collected via the bin. The telephone number
of an answering machine or service unrelated to the charitable
organization does not satisfy this requirement;
(c) The charitable organization's registration number, permit
number and its date of expiration;
(d) In cases when any entity other than the person who owns the
bin may share or profit from any clothing or other donations
collected via the bin, a notice, written in a clear and easily
understandable manner, indicating that clothing or other
donations collected via the bin, their proceeds, or both, may be
shared, or given entirely to, an entity other than the person
§ 75-35 PARK RIDGE CODE § 75-35
1:336
who owns the bin, and identifying all such entities which may
share or profit from such donations; and
(e) A statement, indicating the manner in which the charitable
organization or person anticipates any clothing or other
donations collected via the bin would be used, sold or
dispersed, and the method by which the proceeds of collected
donations would be allocated or spent.
D. The Zoning Officer shall receive and investigate, within 45 days, any
complaints from the public about the bin.
(1) Whenever it appears to the Borough that an organization or a
person has engaged in or is engaging in any act or practice in
violation of this section, the organization or person who placed the
bin shall be issued a warning, stating that if the violation is not
rectified or an appeal taken within 15 days, then the bin, any
clothing or other donations collected via the bin will be sold at
public auction. In addition to any other means used to notify the
person who placed the bin, a warning shall be affixed to the
exterior of the bin itself.
(2) In the event that the person who placed the bin does not rectify the
violation or request a hearing within 15 days of the posting of the
warning, the Borough may seize the bin, remove it or have it
removed, at the expense of the person who placed the bin, and sell
it at public auction or otherwise dispose of any clothing or other
donations collected via the bin. Any proceeds from the sale of the
donations collected via the bin shall be paid to the Borough.
(3) In addition to any other penalties or remedies under this section,
any person who violates any provision which results in the seizure
of the donation clothing bin shall, for each violation, be penalized
by a fine of not more than $500 per day of violation or by
imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding 90 days.
§ 75-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-35
1:337

ARTICLE VI
Tattoo and Body Piercing Establishments
[Added 3-13-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-001]
§ 75-36. Definitions.
All terms referenced in this article shall be defined in accordance with the
definitions set forth in N.J.A.C. 8:27-1.3.
§ 75-37. Prohibitions.
All persons who own or operate a tattoo and/or body art procedure
establishment within the Borough of Park Ridge shall do so only in complete
compliance with the provisions of N.J.A.C. 8:27-1.1 through 8:27-11.5.
§ 75-38. Certificate of inspection.
No person shall own or operate a tattoo or body art establishment within
the Borough unless such person has registered such establishment with
the Park Ridge Board of Health and has received a certificate of inspection
from the Board. No certificate of inspection shall be issued unless the
establishment has been inspected by the Board of Health and found to
be in compliance with the requirements of this article and all applicable
provisions of the New Jersey Administrative Code. The Board of Health shall
inspect each tattoo or body art establishment annually to insure that said
establishment complies with all applicable provisions of the New Jersey
Administrative Code.
§ 75-39. License to operate, fee.
§ 75-40. Revocation or suspension of license to operate; penalties.
The Board of Health shall have the authority, as established by N.J.A.C.
8:27-11.1 through 8:27-11.4 to suspend or revoke any license to operate
issued to any owner/operator of a tattoo or body art establishment in
the event of any material violation of the provisions of this article or the
A. No person shall own or operate a tattoo or body art establishment
without first obtaining a license from the Board of Health to engage in
such business.
B. An application for a license to operate a tattoo or body art
establishment shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount of $500. Any
change in ownership of a tattoo or body art establishment shall require
a new application and license, requiring payment of an additional
license fee.
C. All licenses shall expire on the 31st day of December annually. In the
event of any renovations and/or alteration to a tattoo or body art
establishment, plans must be submitted to the Board of Health detailing
the nature and extent of any renovations and/or alterations.
§ 75-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-40
1:339
provisions of the New Jersey Administrative Code. In the event the Health
Officer of the Borough finds that an owner/operator of an establishment has
violated the provisions of this article or the Administrative Code, the Board
of Health may suspend or revoke any license to operate the establishment
or impose any applicable penalties as authorized by the New Jersey
Administrative Code.
§ 75-40 PARK RIDGE CODE § 75-40
1:340
Chapter 75A
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 78. Public health nuisances — See Ch. 112.
§ 75A-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DEVICE — Any mechanism which is intended to produce or which actually
produces noise when operated or handled.
EMERGENCY VEHICLE — A motor vehicle used in response to a public
calamity or to protect persons or property from imminent danger.
EMERGENCY WORK — Work made necessary to restore property to a safe
condition following a public calamity, work to restore public utilities or
work required to protect persons or property from an imminent exposure to
danger.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicles which are propelled or drawn by
mechanical equipment, such as, but not limited to, passenger cars, trucks,
truck-trailers, semi-trailers, campers, motorcycles, minibikes, mopeds, go
carts or racing vehicles.
MUFFLER — Any apparatus consisting of baffles, chambers or acoustical
absorbing materials whose primary purpose is to transmit liquids or gases
while causing a reduction in sound emission at one end.
NOISE — Any sound which is unwanted or which causes or tends to cause
an adverse psychological effect on human beings.
NOISE DISTURBANCE — Any sound which annoys, disturbs or perturbs
reasonable persons with normal sensitivities; or any sound which injures
or endangers the comfort, repose, health, hearing, peace or safety of other
persons.
PERSON — Any individual, association, partnership or corporation, and
includes any officer, employee, department, agency or instrumentality of the
United States, a state or any political subdivision of that state.
POWERED MODEL VEHICLES — Any powered vehicles, either airborne,
waterborne or landborne, which are designed not to carry persons or
property, such as, but not limited to, model airplanes, boats, cars and
rockets, and which can be propelled by mechanical means.
PROPERTY BOUNDARY — An imaginary line at the ground surface which
separates the real property owned by one person from that owned by
another person, and its vertical extension.
§ 75-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75A-1
1:341
SOUND — A temporal and spatial oscillation in pressure, or other physical
quantity, in a medium with internal forces that causes compression and
rarefaction of that medium and which propagates at finite speed to distant
points.
WEEKDAY — Any Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday or Friday which
is not a legal holiday.
§ 75A-2. Prohibited noise.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made
or continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which
either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health,
peace or safety of others or to create any unreasonably loud, disturbing and
unnecessary noise of such character, intensity or duration as is detrimental
to the life or health of any individual or persons within the limits of the
Borough of Park Ridge.
§ 75A-3. Specific prohibitions.
The following acts are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary
noises in violation of this chapter, but such enumeration shall not be
construed to be a limitation or be deemed to be exclusive:
A. The use of a sound truck with sound amplification in operation.
B. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any vehicle, except as a
danger warning, or the sounding of any horn or signaling device for any
unnecessary and unreasonable period of time in times of traffic holdups
or the use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine
exhaust.
C. The playing or operating of any radio, phonograph, television, musical
instrument or other machine or device for the production or
reproduction of sound in such a manner or volume as to cause a noise
disturbance to others in the vicinity.
D. Playing or operating any of the aforementioned devices between the
hours of 11:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. the following day in such a manner as
to be plainly audible across real property boundaries or through
partitions common to two parties within a building or plainly audible at
50 feet from such device when operated within a motor vehicle parked
on a public right-of-way or on a public space.
E. The use, or permission to use, on the public streets of the Borough any
loudspeaker, amplifier, radio, phonograph or other machine or device
for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of
the public, nor shall a loudspeaker or mechanical device in a fixed or
movable position, exterior to any building, or mounted upon any motor
vehicle such that the sound therefrom is plainly audible at or beyond
the property boundary of the source be permitted or used.
§ 75A-1 PARK RIDGE CODE § 75A-3
1:342
F. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing in the public streets,
particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. the
following day, so as to annoy and disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of
persons in any office, dwelling, hotel or other type of residence or of any
persons in the vicinity.
G. The blowing of any locomotive whistle or whistle attached to any
stationary boiler, except to give notice of the time to begin or to stop
work or as a warning of distress, fire or danger or upon request of
proper Borough authorities.
H. The discharge into open air of the exhaust of any steam engine,
stationary internal combustion engine, motor vehicle engine, except
through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or
explosive noises therefrom.
I. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out of repair, so
loaded or in such a manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating,
grinding, rattling or other noise.
J. The creation of a noise disturbance in connection with loading or
unloading any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes,
crates and containers.
K. The erection (including excavation), demolition, alteration or repair of
any building, other than between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
on weekdays, except in the case of urgent necessity in the interest of
public health and safety; provided, however, that a permit therefor has
been obtained from the Construction Code Official. Such permit may be
granted while the emergency continues for a period not to exceed three
days and may be renewed for periods of three days or less.
L. The creation of any excessive or disturbing noise on any street adjacent
to any school, institution of learning, church or court, provided that
conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets indicating the proximity
of such institutions.
M. The shouting or crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors which
disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood.
N. The operation between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. the
following day of any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer,
derrick, steam or electric hoist or other appliances, the use of which is
attended by loud or unusual noise.
O. The operation of any blower, fan or internal combustion engine
resulting in noise from the exploding of operating gases or fluids, unless
such blower, fan or engine is equipped with a sound-deadening muffler.
P. Operating or causing to be operated any equipment used in commercial
construction, repair, alteration or demolition work on buildings,
structures, streets, alleys or appurtenances thereto, in residential or
§ 75A-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75A-3
1:343
§ 75A-4. Exception for emergencies.
Noise caused in the performance of emergency work for the immediate
safety, health or welfare of the community or to restore property to a safe
condition following a public calamity shall not be subject to the provisions
of this chapter. Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit law
enforcement, ambulance, fire or other emergency personnel to make
excessive noise in the performance of their duties when such noise is clearly
unnecessary. The use of stationary emergency signaling devices shall be for
emergency use only.
§ 75A-5. Other exceptions.
The prohibitions contained in this chapter shall not apply to persons who
are engaged in:
commercial land use categories, between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and
8:00 a.m. the following day on weekdays, and between 6:00 p.m.
Saturday night and 8:00 a.m. Monday morning and on legal holidays.
Q. Repairing, rebuilding, modifying or testing any motor vehicle or offroad
vehicle in or near a residential district in such a manner as to
cause a noise disturbance.
R. Owning, keeping, possessing or harboring any animal or animals or bird
or birds which, by frequent or habitual howling, barking, meowing,
squawking or other noise-making, cause a noise disturbance.
S. Operating or permitting the operation of powered model vehicles
between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. the following morning.
T. Operating or permitting the operation of the motor of any motor vehicle
whose manufacturer's gross weight is in excess of 10,000 pounds or any
attached auxiliary equipment for a period longer than three minutes in
any hour while such vehicle is stationary on a public right-of-way in a
residential district or in any designated quiet zone, or is on private
property in a residential or commercial zone and is not within a
completely enclosed structure.
U. The sounding or permitting the sounding of any exterior burglar alarm
on any building or motor vehicle unless such burglar alarm shall
terminate its operation within 15 minutes of its being activated.
V. Operating, or permitting to be operated, any powered saw, sander, drill,
grinder, garden equipment or tools of like nature, used primarily for
domestic purposes, outdoors in residential districts between the hours
of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. the following day.
A. Political activity by means of a sound truck or other amplifying device,
within 14 days prior to a general, primary or special election.
§ 75A-3 PARK RIDGE CODE § 75A-5
1:344
§ 75A-6. Permits.
§ 75A-7. Enforcement.
B. Any activity specifically permitted or required by an ordinance,
resolution, statute or governmental regulation.
C. Any recreational activity organized or recognized by the Borough of
Park Ridge, in a location designated by the Borough of Park Ridge for
such activity.
D. The sounding of church bells for religious purposes.
A. The Borough Council may cause the Borough Clerk to issue permits by
resolution for the use of loudspeakers and amplifiers in connection with
nonprofit, charitable, educational, civic, religious or recreational
activities if the Council shall find that the activities will not unduly or
unnecessarily annoy, disturb, injure or endanger the comfort, repose,
health, peace or safety of others, that the activities will not violate any
other ordinance or law to create a public nuisance and that the public
health and safety will not be endangered thereby. Permits issued
hereunder shall specify the dates and hours of the permitted activities,
which shall not be allowed between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m. unless the issuing officer shall determine that it is in the best
interest of the community that the activities take place wholly or
partially during such hours. The permits shall not be issued for a period
in excess of three days.
B. The Borough Clerk is authorized to adopt and use such forms of
applications and permits as may be required. Each application for a
permit shall be accompanied by a fee of $10 which shall be in cash or
check made payable to the Borough of Park Ridge.
A. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the Police Department of the
Borough of Park Ridge to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
B. Violation of this chapter shall be cause for summons and complaint to
be issued forthwith; provided, however, that if the noise source is not a
motor vehicle moving on a public right-of-way, in lieu of a summons and
complaint, enforcement personnel may issue a twenty-four-hour notice,
in writing, which may be served personally or by certified mail to the
last known address of the person or persons in charge of or in control of
the device, building or premises to abate said violation of this chapter.
Failure to comply with the order so issued and served shall constitute a
violation of this chapter.
C. Proof of a violation of any provision or provisions of §§ 75A-2 or 75A-3
hereof shall not require proof of the decibel level of the noise which is
alleged to constitute such violation.
§ 75A-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75A-8
1:345
§ 75A-8. Inspections and records.
In order to implement the purposes of this section, the Mayor and Council
and/or Police Department of the Borough of Park Ridge shall have the power
to:
§ 75A-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person, as defined in this chapter, who shall be found guilty of violating
any provision of this chapter shall, for each offense, be fined a sum of not
more than $500 or be imprisoned for a period not exceeding 90 days, or
both, in the discretion of the court hearing the complaint. Each day of such
violation's continuance shall be considered a separate offense and shall be
separately punishable.
§ 75A-10. Other remedies.
Chapter 75B
A. Conduct, or cause to be conducted, studies, research and monitoring
related to noise.
B. Conduct programs of public education regarding the causes and effects
of noise and to encourage the participation of public interest groups in
related public information efforts.
C. For reasonable cause and upon presentation of proper credentials,
enter any building, property, premises or place and inspect any noise
source for the purpose of ascertaining the compliance or
noncompliance with any provision of this section or have access to, and
require the production of, books and papers pertinent to any matter
under investigation.
D. Require the owner or operator of any noise source to establish and
maintain records and make such reports as the Police Department may
reasonably prescribe.
E. Require the owner or operator of any noise source to measure the noise
emissions thereof in accordance with such methods and procedures and
at such locations and times as the Police Department may reasonably
prescribe.
A. The operation or maintenance of any noise source in violation of any
provision of this chapter shall be deemed and is declared to be a public
nuisance and may be subject to abatement summarily by a restraining
order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction or in any
other manner available for the abatement of public nuisances.
B. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to impair any cause of action,
or legal remedy therefor, of any person for injury or damage arising
from any violation of this chapter.
§ 75A-8 PARK RIDGE CODE § 75A-10
1:346
OBSCENE MATERIALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 78.
§ 75B-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the retail display of obscene
material, as provided by N.J.S.A. 2C:34-3.2.
§ 75B-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OBSCENE MATERIAL — Any description, narrative account, display or
depiction of sexual activity or anatomical area contained in, or consisting
of, a picture or other representation, publication, sound recording, live
performance or a film which, by means of posing, composition, format or
animated sensual details:
PERSON — Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership or any other type
of form of business which may be conducted in this state.
RETAILER — Any person who operates a store, newsstand, booth,
concession or similar business with unimpeded access for persons under 18
years of age, who is in the business of making sales of periodicals or other
publications at retail containing pictures, drawings or photographs. Retailer
shall also include any person who operates a store, newsstand, booth,
concession or similar business for the sale or rental of sound recordings,
films and/or videotapes to the public.
§ 75B-3. Display of obscene materials.
Depicts or describes in a patently offensive way, ultimate sexual acts,
normal or perverted, actual or simulated, masturbation, excretory
functions or lewd exhibition of the genitals;
A.
Lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value, when taken
as a whole; and
B.
Is a part of a work which, to the average person applying contemporary
community standards, has a dominant theme, taken as a whole, which
appeals to the prurient interest.
C.
A. It shall be unlawful and a petty disorderly persons offense for any
retailer to display or permit to be displayed at the retailer's business
premises any obscene material, as defined herein or in N.J.S.A. 2C:34-3,
at a height of less than five feet or without a binder or other covering
placed or printed on the front of the material displayed.
§ 75A-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75B-3
1:347
§ 75B-4. Presumptive evidence.
The public display in and of itself of obscene material shall constitute
presumptive evidence that the retailer knowingly made or permitted the
display.
§ 75B-5. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 75C
MASSAGE AND SOMATIC THERAPY BUSINESSES
§ 75C-1. Declaration of policy.
It is hereby declared that the business of operating a massage and/or
somatic therapies business, as defined in this chapter, is a business affecting
the public health, safety and general welfare of consumers of massage
within the Borough of Park Ridge.
§ 75C-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
B. It shall not be a violation of this section for a retailer engaged in the
business of sale or rental of films and/or videotapes to the public to
display films and/or videotapes containing adult material within said
retailer's place of business, provided that the following conditions are
met:
(1) The films and/or videotapes are located in a separate room within
the business establishment.
(2) Access to the room in which the films and/or videotapes are
displayed shall be limited to persons 18 years of age or older and
shall be controlled by an employee of the business at all times;
(3) The identification of all persons desiring entrance to the separate
room shall be checked by an employee of the business; and
(4) All employees of the business establishment shall be 18 years of
age or older.
A. Any violation of this chapter shall subject the violator to a fine of up to
$1,000 and/or imprisonment of up to 90 days and/or a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days.
B. Every day, or portion of a day, that the provisions of this chapter are
violated by any person, as defined herein, shall be a separate and
distinct violation.
§ 75B-3 PARK RIDGE CODE § 75C-2
1:348
AGENT — Any and all persons, other than the massage practitioner(s) and
employee(s), who are authorized to act for or in place of the licensee,
business(es), practitioner(s) and/or employee(s).
CERTIFICATE or CERTIFICANT — Shall be used as that term is used in
N.J.A.C. 13:37-16.1 et seq.
EMPLOYEES — Any and all persons, other than the practitioner(s), who
work for a business licensed pursuant to this chapter, who receive
compensation directly from the licensee and who have no physical contact
with the patrons.
LICENSEE — The operator of a massage business and/or a massage
practitioner, who will receive money or any other consideration therefor and
who has a license issued pursuant to this chapter.
LICENSE or LICENSED — Shall be used as that term is used in N.J.S.A.
45:11-53 et seq.
MASSAGE — Massage, bodywork, pressure and somatic therapy. Those
terms shall be used herein as those terms are used in N.J.S.A. 45:11-55 et
seq., and this chapter.
MASSAGE, BODYWORK, PRESSURE, SOMATIC THERAPIES — Systems of
activity of structured touch which include, but are not limited to, holding,
applying pressure, positioning and mobilizing soft tissue of the body by
manual techniques and use of visual, kinesthetic, auditory and palpating
skills to assess the body for purposes of applying therapeutic massage,
bodywork, pressure or somatic principles. Such application may include,
but is not limited to, the use of therapies such as heliotherapy, or
hydrotherapy, the use of moist hot and cold external application of herbal
or topical preparations not classified as prescribed drugs, explaining and
describing myofascial movement, self-care and stress management as it
relates to massage, bodywork and somatic therapies. Massage, bodywork
and somatic therapy practices are designed to affect the energetic system
of the body for purposes of promoting and maintaining the health and wellbeing
of the client. Massage, bodywork, pressure and somatic therapies
do not include the practice of medicine, surgery, dentistry, osteopathy,
chiropractic, physical therapy or other medical or surgical practices as
defined in Title 45, Chapter 9, of New Jersey Statutes Annotated, or to
licensed nurses acting under the direct prescription and direction of said
practitioners. Massage, bodywork, pressure and somatic therapies do not
include massage of the scalp, hands or feet by a hair or nail salon or
chair massage of arms, neck and shoulders in an open room or area where
other business is conducted, or certificated therapeutic methods that are
employed when the patron is fully clothed.
MASSAGE BUSINESS(ES) — Any establishment located in a fixed place of
business on a nonresidential property owned, leased, operated or controlled
by any person, firm, association or corporation which engages in or carries
on, or permits to be engaged in or carried on, any of the massage activities
defined in this chapter. This includes any establishment engaged in or
§ 75C-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75C-2
1:349
carrying on or permitting any combination of a massage, bodywork,
pressure and/or somatic therapy.
MASSAGE PRACTITIONER(S) — Any person who holds a certificate as
defined by this chapter who, for any consideration whatsoever, engages
in the practice of massage, bodywork, pressure and/or somatic therapy as
herein defined, including but not limited to subcontractors, subtenants or
temporary employees certified by the State of New Jersey.
MASSAGE WORK AREA — Any room, floor or section of a massage business
where massage, bodywork, pressure and/or somatic therapies as herein
defined are carried out.
PATRON — Any person who receives a massage, bodywork, pressure and/or
somatic therapies under such circumstances that it is reasonably expected
that he or she will pay money or give any other consideration therefor.
PERSON — An individual person, partnership, corporation, limited-liability
company or any other enterprise or entity capable of conducting a massage
business and/or massage services. Persons shall specifically include and
apply to individual owners of massage businesses, as well as the entity(ies).
§ 75C-3. License and/or permit required. [Amended 12-28-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-40]
A. Massage business. No persons shall operate a business engaged in the
provision of massage, bodywork, pressure or somatic therapy services
unless such person has first obtained a valid license for such business
from the Borough of Park Ridge in accordance with the terms and
provisions of this chapter. Each applicant shall contact the Park Ridge
Police Department so that a thorough background check can be
completed. In the event of a partnership, all partners, and in the event
of a corporation, the president, vice president, secretary and treasurer,
shall be required to submit whatever fingerprints are required by the
Park Ridge Police Department for the purpose of completing a thorough
background check. The required fingerprints will be taken and
processed by one of the approved MorphoTrak fingerprint processing
locations in the area.
B. Massage practitioner. No person shall engage in providing massage
services unless such person has first obtained a valid massage
practitioner permit issued by the Borough of Park Ridge pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter and is certified by the State of New Jersey
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:11-53 et seq., and N.J.A.C. 13:37-16.1 et seq.
(1) The provision of massage services shall be limited to licensed
medical centers, hotels, or the duly licensed office of a physician,
osteopath, chiropractor, physical therapist or the office of a duly
licensed massage business, as defined herein.
(2) No person other than a licensed and state-certified massage
practitioner shall have any physical contact with patients or
§ 75C-2 PARK RIDGE CODE § 75C-3
1:350
§ 75C-4. License fees. [Amended 12-28-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-40]
Every applicant for a massage practitioner permit and/or a massage
business license pursuant to this chapter shall file annually a complete
application with the Borough of Park Ridge as set forth in this chapter and
pay an annual filing fee as follows:
§ 75C-5. Application/renewal for practitioner permit and/or
business license. [Amended 12-28-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-40]
persons within the office of said physician, osteopath, chiropractor,
physical therapist or massage business.
(3) The Borough of Park Ridge shall issue a permit to practice upon
satisfaction by the applicant that he or she has met all the
requirements of N.J.S.A. 45:11-53 et seq., and N.J.A.C. 13:37-16.1 et
seq.
A. For a massage business license pursuant to this chapter, the fee shall be
$250 per year.
B. For each additional massage practitioner working for a licensed
massage establishment and/or business, the permit fee shall be $100
per year.
C. All fees are nonrefundable. Fees are annual and not prorated.
D. The license and/or permit fee shall be due on the first day of July in each
year.
E. Any changes in ownership shall require a new application and license
with the payment of the fees therefor.
F. If, at any time after the initial license is granted, additional
practitioners begin providing services at any massage business, all of
the information required herein must be submitted to the Borough of
Park Ridge prior to the massage practitioner providing services, and
the additional fee must be paid.
G. In addition to the above, each massage practitioner and massage
business applicant must contact the Park Ridge Police Department to
fill out the proper paperwork and pay the required fee to obtain a
criminal background check.
A. Each massage business and each massage practitioner must be
licensed. There shall be a separate massage business license and a
separate massage practitioner permit.
B. Each application for either a license or permit, or renewal thereof,
either to operate a massage business or premises or to engage in the
business of massage or to be employed as a massage practitioner, shall
be approved by the governing body before any license is issued. Firsttime
applicants for any licensure must complete a background check
§ 75C-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75C-5
1:351
conducted by the Park Ridge Police Department in accordance with the
terms and provisions of this chapter and the procedures established
by the Borough of Park Ridge Police Department. The governing body
shall not approve such application if, on the basis of the criminal record
of the applicant or of the principles thereof or on the basis thereof of
other evidence of bad character or morals, it shall determine that the
granting or renewal of such license or permit would tend to encourage
or permit criminal or immoral activities within the Borough of Park
Ridge.
C. Any applicant for a massage practitioner license or massage business
permit shall file a written application with the Borough of Park Ridge on
a form to be furnished by the Borough of Park Ridge. The applicant shall
accompany the application with a tender of an application fee as set
forth in this chapter above and shall, in addition, furnish the following:
(1) The applicant's name, complete address, residence and cell phone
number.
(2) All previous addresses within the last five years prior to the present
address of the applicant.
(3) Written proof of age.
(4) Height, weight, sex and color of hair and eyes.
(5) Previous employment and business history, including whether or
not the applicant has previously operated in this or another
municipality or state under a license or permit and whether or not
any such license or permit was denied, revoked or suspended and
the reason therefor and the business activities or occupations
subsequent to such action or denial, suspension or revocation.
(6) All criminal convictions other than misdemeanor traffic violations,
fully disclosing the jurisdiction in which convicted and the offense
for which convicted and the circumstances thereof.
(7) Upon initial application, a written waiver and consent to allow a
fingerprint and criminal background check as determined by the
Borough of Park Ridge Police Department. For this, a fee shall be
paid by the applicant.
(8) The names and addresses of two adult residents of this state who
will serve as character references. These references must be
persons other than relatives and business associates.
(9) A written declaration by the applicant under penalty of perjury that
the foregoing information contained in the application is true and
correct.
§ 75C-5 PARK RIDGE CODE § 75C-6
1:352
§ 75C-6. Building requirements; inspections.
No massage business shall be issued a license to operate or establish in the
Borough of Park Ridge unless a walk-through inspection is conducted and
an inspection by the appropriate departments produces the following:
§ 75C-7. Referral of applications. [Amended 12-28-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-40]
The Borough of Park Ridge, upon receiving an application for a massage
business license, shall refer the application to the Borough of Park Ridge
Construction Code Official, the Borough of Park Ridge Fire Prevention
Bureau and the Borough of Park Ridge Police Department, which
departments shall inspect the premises proposed to be operated as a
massage business and shall make written recommendation to the Borough
A. A written report by the Borough of Park Ridge Construction Code
Official that construction of rooms used for toilets, tubs, steam baths
and showers is waterproof with approved waterproof materials and
installed in accordance with the New Jersey Uniform Construction
Code85 and that the premises comply with all other appropriate building
requirements.
B. A written report by the Borough of Park Ridge that: [Amended
12-28-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-40]
(1) All massage tables have surfaces which may be readily disinfected.
(2) The premises have adequate equipment for sanitizing
nondisposable instruments and materials used in administering
massages. Such nondisposable instruments and materials must be
disinfected after use on each patron.
(3) Closed cabinets are provided and used for the storage of clean
linen, towels and other materials used in connection with
administering massages. All soiled linens, towels and other
materials are kept in properly covered containers or cabinets,
which containers or cabinets are kept separate from the clean
storage area.
(4) Toilet facilities are provided in convenient locations.
(5) Lavatories or washbasins providing both hot and cold running
water are installed in either the toilet room or a vestibule
immediately adjacent thereto. Lavatories or washbasins are
provided with soap and a dispenser and with sanitary towels.
C. A written report by the Borough of Park Ridge Fire Prevention Bureau
Department that the premises meet the Fire Code of the Borough of
Park Ridge.
85.Editor's Note: See N.J.A.C. 5:23-1.1 et seq.
§ 75C-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75C-7
1:353
of Park Ridge concerning the laws and codes that they administer, as herein
provided.
§ 75C-8. Issuance or refusal of practitioner permit and/or business
license. [Amended 12-28-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-40]
The Borough of Park Ridge may issue a massage practitioner permit and/or
massage business license within 30 days following receipt of a completed
application and the certifications set forth in this chapter if all requirements
described in this chapter are met, unless the Borough finds that:
§ 75C-9. Operating requirements.
A. The correct permit and/or license fee has not been tendered to the
Borough of Park Ridge and, in the case of a check or bank draft,
honored with payment upon presentation.
B. In the case of a massage business application, the operation as
proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would not comply with all
applicable laws, including but not limited to the Borough of Park Ridge
building, zoning, fire and health codes and regulations.86
C. The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent
statement of fact in the license application or in any document required
by the Borough of Park Ridge in conjunction therewith.
D. The applicant has had a massage business, massage practitioner or
other similar permit or license denied, revoked or suspended by the
Borough of Park Ridge or any other state or local agency, which finding
may be waived by the Borough Council in its discretion.
E. The applicant, if an individual, any of the officers and directors or
managing director, if the applicant is a corporation, any of the members
or managing member, if the applicant is a limited-liability company, any
of the partners, including limited partners, or managing partner, if the
applicant is a partnership, or the manager or other person principally in
charge of the operation of the business is not over the age of 18 years.
F. The applicant(s), if an individual, any of the officers and directors or
managing director, if the applicant is a corporation, any of the members
or managing member, if the applicant is a limited-liability company, any
of the partners, including limited partners, or managing partner, if the
applicant is a partnership, or the manager or other person principally in
charge of the operation of the business has been convicted of an offense
involving sexual misconduct with children, prostitution, soliciting for
purpose of offenses opposed to decency and morality, or any crime of
moral turpitude.
86.Editor's Note: See Ch. 50, Uniform Construction Codes, Ch. 101, Zoning, Ch. 60, Fire
Prevention, and Ch. 103, Board of Health General Provisions, Art. I, Adoption of Code by
Board of Health, respectively.
§ 75C-7 PARK RIDGE CODE § 75C-9
1:354
A. Price rates for all services shall be prominently posted in the reception
area in a location available to all prospective customers or given to the
patron in the manner he or she can read.
B. Massage practitioners and employees shall be clean and wear clean,
nontransparent outer garments.
C. The sexual, genital and rectal areas of patrons must be covered by
towels, cloths or undergarments when in the presence of massage
practitioners or employees.
D. While administering massage, as defined in this chapter, it shall be
unlawful for any person to knowingly place his or her hand upon or to
touch, fondle or massage in any manner a sexual, genital and/or rectal
area of himself or herself or any other person.
E. No massage practitioner, employee or licensee shall perform, or offer to
perform, any act which would require the touching of a patron's sexual,
genital or rectal area.
F. All massage practitioners and employees shall refrain, under all
circumstances, from initiating or engaging in any sexual conduct,
sexual activities or sexualizing behavior involving a patron, even if a
patron attempts to sexualize the relationship.
G. All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms and all
other physical facilities shall be in good repair and maintained in a
clean and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor
rooms or steam or vapor cabinets and shower compartments and toilet
rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned each day that the business is in
operation. Bathtubs and showers shall be thoroughly cleaned after each
use. When carpeting is used on the floors, it shall be kept dry.
(1) Oils, creams, lotions, stones and other preparations used in
administering massage shall be kept in clean, closed containers or
cabinets.
(2) Eating in a massage business shall not be permitted except in a
designated cafeteria/kitchen. Animals, except for Seeing Eye dogs,
shall not be permitted in a massage business.
(3) Each massage practitioner shall wash his or her hands in hot
running water, using a proper soap or disinfectant, before
administering a massage to each patron.
(4) All massage businesses shall maintain appropriate liability
insurance coverage with a reputable company licensed by the State
of New Jersey in an amount of not less than $1,000,000 per
occurrence and in the aggregate for all claims caused by personal
injury. A certificate of insurance, in acceptable form to the Borough
Attorney, shall be provided to the Borough Clerk's Office within 10
days of the issuance of the license. In the event that the certificate
§ 75C-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75C-9
1:355
§ 75C-10. Prohibited activities.
A licensee and/or employee shall not perform:
§ 75C-11. Revocation or suspension of license or permit. [Amended
12-28-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-40]
Any license or permit issued for a massage practitioner and/or massage
business may be revoked or suspended by the Borough of Park Ridge after a
hearing, for good cause, or in any case where any licensee and/or employee
violates any of the provisions of this chapter or where any licensee and/
or employee violates any of the state or local laws or ordinances. Any
massage business license may be revoked or suspended if any licensee,
massage practitioner or employee refuses to permit any duly authorized
health inspector, police officer, building department inspector or fire
inspector to inspect the premises or the operations therein. Any massage
business license may also be revoked or suspended by the Borough of
Park Ridge if such business is being managed, conducted or maintained
without regard for the public health or health of patrons or without due
regard for proper sanitation and hygiene. A hearing may be requested by
a licensee concerning a suspension or a revocation order within 10 days of
its issuance. The Borough Council shall be the hearing officer and the sole
authority to revoke said license pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:52-1.2.
of insurance is not provided to the Borough Clerk's Office within
the time prescribed, the license will be revoked. Proof of
appropriate liability insurance must be conspicuously posted.
H. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to eliminate other
requirements of statute or chapters concerning the maintenance of
premises or to preclude authorized inspection thereof.
A. Colonic irrigations;
B. Prostate massages;
C. Vaginal or penile massages;
D. Rectal massages;
E. Animal therapies prohibited by the Veterinary Medical Act, N.J.S.A.
45:16-1 et seq.;
F. Any application of electrical current to the body (Transcutaneous
Electronic Nerve Stimulation, TENS machine);
G. Ultrasound therapy; and
H. Diagnosis of illness, disease, impairment or disability.
§ 75C-9 PARK RIDGE CODE § 75C-12
1:356
§ 75C-12. Maintenance of register required.
All massage business licensees must maintain a register of all persons
employed as massage practitioners and their license numbers and all other
employees and agents. Such register shall include the name, address, date
of birth and social security number of all massage practitioners, employees
and agents and shall be available for inspection at all times during regular
business hours.
§ 75C-13. Responsibilities of licensee.
The licensee shall be responsible for all actions which occur on the premises
of a massage business, whether by massage practitioners, employees,
subcontractors or other agents, where the licensee has actual or
constructive knowledge of such actions.
§ 75C-14. Posting of business license required.
All massage businesses shall post their massage business licenses in
conspicuous locations at all times.
§ 75C-15. Inspections. [Amended 12-28-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-40]
The Borough of Park Ridge, Borough of Park Ridge Police Department,
Borough of Park Ridge Construction Code Department and Borough of
Park Ridge Fire Prevention Bureau shall, from time to time, announced or
unannounced, make an inspection of each massage business for the purpose
of determining whether the provisions of this chapter are complied with.
Such inspections shall be made at reasonable times and in a reasonable
manner and in compliance with this chapter. It shall be unlawful and
grounds for a suspension and/or revocation of the license for any licensee to
fail to allow such inspection officer access to the premises or to hinder such
officer in any manner.
§ 75C-16. Minors prohibited; exception.
No person shall permit any person under the age of 18 years to receive
a massage without advance written permission from his or her parent,
caregiver or guardian or unless a parent, caregiver or guardian is present
in the room during the time of the massage.
§ 75C-17. Alcoholic beverages prohibited.
No person shall sell, give, dispense, provide or keep or permit the sale or
consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises of a massage business.
§ 75C-18. Unlawful acts.
A. Any violation of this chapter shall be deemed grounds for suspension
and/or revocation of the license granted hereunder.
§ 75C-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75C-18
1:357
§ 75C-19. Operation and conduct limited to license specifications.
No person granted a license pursuant to this chapter shall operate under
any name or conduct his or her business under any designation for any
location not specified in his or her license.
§ 75C-20. License transferability.
Massage business licenses are not transferable, separate or divisible, and
such authority as a massage business license confers shall be conferred
only on the licensee named therein for the location of the massage business
specified therein only. Massage practitioner licenses are not transferable,
separate or divisible.
§ 75C-21. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter do not apply to massage, bodywork, pressure,
somatic therapy or physical therapy treatments given:
§ 75C-22. Existing establishments and practitioners. [Amended
12-28-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-40]
All persons who presently operate a massage business and hold a license
issued by the Borough of Park Ridge must comply with the provisions of
this chapter within 30 days of the effective date of this chapter. All persons
who are presently practicing as massage practitioners pursuant to a permit
issued by the Borough of Park Ridge must become certified by the State of
New Jersey pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:11-53 et seq., and N.J.A.C. 13:37-16.1 et
seq. and must present the certification by the State of New Jersey to the
Borough of Park Ridge within one year of the effective date of this chapter.
Applications for renewal of licenses or permits must be filed not more than
three months nor less than two months prior to termination of an existing
license or permit.
B. Any massage practitioner and/or massage business operating without a
license from the Borough of Park Ridge shall be guilty of a violation of
this chapter.
A. In the office of a licensed physician, osteopath, chiropractor or physical
therapist.
B. In a regularly established medical center, hospital or sanatorium having
a staff which includes licensed physicians, osteopaths, chiropractors
and/or physical therapists.
C. By any licensed physician, osteopath, chiropractor or physical therapist
in the residence of his or her patient.
D. In any licensed health and/or athletic club.
E. In any hotel with a minimum of 100 rooms.
§ 75C-18 PARK RIDGE CODE § 75C-23
1:358
§ 75C-23. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is specifically provided elsewhere in the Borough of
Park Ridge or the laws of the State of New Jersey, any person who violates
any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction in Municipal Court, be
punished by imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding 90
days or by a fine not exceeding $1,000, or both, in the discretion of the
Court.
Chapter 76
PARKING LOTS, MUNICIPAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parking on posted land — See Ch. 77. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 97.
§ 75C-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75C-23
1:359

ARTICLE I
Commuter Parking Lots
[Adopted 6-8-1970 by Ord. No. 70-1187]
§ 76-1. Location; hours of use. [Amended 9-13-1982 by Ord. No.
82-19; 12-23-1986 by Ord. No. 86-36; 3-10-1987 by Ord. No. 87-3]
A. The parking of vehicles in the municipal parking lot located on
Hawthorne Avenue between Madison Avenue and Market Street is
hereby regulated and limited as follows:
(1) Between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on all days except
Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays, no person shall cause a
vehicle to occupy any of the parking spaces, unless said vehicle
shall bear a current identification sticker, as herein defined, affixed
in accordance with such regulation as the Chief of Police may
hereafter promulgate. [Amended 10-11-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-028]
(2) Each person using the municipal parking lot shall cause the vehicle
to be parked entirely within the designated parking area.
B. In conjunction with an agreement between the Borough of Park Ridge
and New Jersey Transit, a ten-foot-wide by approximately five-hundredsixty-
foot parcel owned by New Jersey Transit running along the
easterly side of the railroad and along Broadway beginning
approximately 100 feet south of Park Avenue and continuing south to
approximately opposite Roland Street with Broadway shall be
designated as a daily park-and-ride area for commuters. Said area shall
function between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 2:00 am, on weekdays,
except legal holidays. No overnight parking within the designated parkand-
ride area shall be permitted. The daily fee to park in a designated
space shall be $2. [Amended 10-10-1989 by Ord. No. 89-10;
7-27-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-27; 12-19-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-026]
C. The parking of vehicles in the municipal parking lot located on
Perryland Street is hereby regulated and limited as follows: [Added
3-11-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-03; amended 12-23-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-18]
(1) Between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on all days except
Saturday, Sunday and legal holiday(s), no person shall cause a
vehicle to occupy any of the parking spaces, unless the vehicle
bears a current identification sticker as defined herein and affixed
in accordance with such regulations as promulgated by the Park
Ridge Chief of Police.
87.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 87-15, adopted 7-14-1987, provided that all references to the
South Maple Avenue Lot be deleted from this article, which was originally titled
"Hawthorne Street and South Maple Avenue Lots."
§ 76-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 76-1
1:361
§ 76-2. Designation of spaces; erection of signs. [Amended
10-10-1989 by Ord. No. 89-10]
The Chief of Police of the Borough of Park Ridge is hereby authorized to
cause to be prepared a parking plan for the municipal parking lot and the
daily park-and-ride area, designating the spaces within which vehicles shall
be parked. He shall also cause to be prepared such symbols and signs which
shall, in his judgment and discretion, facilitate the use of the municipal
parking lot and the park-and-ride area in accordance with the provisions
of this article. The Department of Public Works is hereby authorized to
perform the painting work and erection of signs approved by the Chief of
Police.
§ 76-3. Identification stickers: application, issuance and fee.
[Amended 9-13-1982 by Ord. No. 82-19; 12-26-1984 by Ord. No.
84-18; 10-10-1989 by Ord. No. 89-10; 12-14-1993 by Ord. No. 93-21]
The Borough Clerk is hereby authorized to issue municipal commuter lot
identification decals for each vehicle owned by a bona fide resident of the
Borough of Park Ridge and for any vehicle owned by a nonresident who is
regularly engaged in business in the Borough of Park Ridge, as proprietor,
employee, tenant or otherwise; provided, however, that preference being
first given to residents of the Borough of Park Ridge and then to persons
regularly engaged in business in the Borough of Park Ridge. The decals
shall be issued and valid for and during the calendar year in which they are
issued and not thereafter. The following regulations shall apply:
(2) Each person using the municipal parking lot shall cause the vehicle
to be parked entirely within the designated parking area.
(3) The spaces that are available in this parking lot for commuter
parking are identified.
(4) Six spaces in this parking lot shall be marked "Reserved for Station
Plaza." These spaces are reserved for residents of Station Plaza. No
person other than residents of Station Plaza shall park or occupy
these spaces.
(5) All other provisions of Chapter 76 shall continue.
A. For residents:
(1) Proof of residency must be presented when applying for a decal.
(2) The decal must be affixed to the left side rear window.
(3) The annual cost for a decal shall be $130; provided, however, that a
decal purchased after October 1 shall be $65. [Amended
3-13-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-4; 3-8-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-004; 3-11-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-007]
§ 76-1 PARK RIDGE CODE § 76-3
1:362
§ 76-4. Rental of spaces to nonresidents. [Added 4-12-1971 by Ord.
No. 71-3; amended 9-13-1982 by Ord. No. 82-19; 12-26-1984 by Ord.
No. 84-18; 12-23-1986 by Ord. No. 86-36]
The governing body may designate on-street, metered commuter parking
spaces in conjunction with the provisions of Chapter 97 of the Borough
(4) Duplicate decal; replacement decal. [Amended 3-13-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-4; 3-8-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-004]
(a) One duplicate decal of the original decal shall be provided
upon request for a fee of $40. The resident must identify the
license plate of the vehicle for which a duplicate is being
issued. [Amended 3-11-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-007]
(b) The Borough will issue a replacement decal at no cost when
the decal holder provides proof that the original decal was
destroyed and/or has become unusable.
(5) A resident who obtained a decal, and who purchases another car,
may obtain a replacement decal at no charge, provided that said
resident returns the original decal.
B. For business owners:
(1) Request for commuter lot decals for employees shall be made in
writing on a letterhead of that business. The request shall include
the make, model, year and license plate number of each vehicle for
which a decal is requested.
(2) The provisions of Subsection A(2), (3) and (4) above shall apply.
(3) An employee who purchases another car may obtain a replacement
decal at no charge, provided that said employee returns the
original decal.
(4) Should an employee leave the firm, a replacement decal shall only
be issued upon the return of the original decal by the business
employee. Failure to return the original decal shall mean an
original decal must be purchased at the appropriate fee for the new
employee hired.
C. General regulations:
(1) There shall be no parking in the commuter lot by any person on any
day between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., without notifying
the Police Department and providing said Department with the
license plate number of the vehicle to be parked and the reason for
such a request.
(2) On Saturdays and Sundays, the commuter lot may be used without
decals between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m.
§ 76-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 76-4
1:363
Code. The governing body shall establish by resolution a daily fee for the
use of the on-street commuter spaces.
§ 76-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-13-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-15]
Every person who is found to violate any of the provisions of this article
shall, upon the conviction of such violation, be liable to a penalty or fine not
to exceed $500 for each separate offense or violation or imprisonment in
the county jail for a term not to exceed 30 days, or both, at the discretion of
the court.
§ 76-6. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department of the Borough of
Park Ridge.
§ 76-4 PARK RIDGE CODE § 76-6
1:364
ARTICLE II
Park Avenue/Municipal Hall Lot
[Adopted 7-14-1987 by Ord. No. 87-1588]
§ 76-7. Use restrictions.
The parking of vehicles in the municipal parking lot located at Municipal
Hall, Park Avenue, is hereby regulated and limited as follows:
§ 76-8. Regulations and signs.
The Chiefs of the Police and Fire Departments are hereby authorized to
cause to be prepared such regulations and the installation of such signs as
reasonably may be required from time to time to carry out the intent and
purpose of this article.
§ 76-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-13-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-15]
Every person who is found to violate any of the provisions of this article
shall, upon the conviction of such violation, be liable to a penalty or fine not
to exceed $500 for each separate offense or violation or imprisonment in
the county jail for a term not to exceed 30 days, or both, at the discretion of
the court.
A. Parking shall be for the conduct of business with the Borough of Park
Ridge, the utilization of the Park Ridge Free Public Library and the
utilization of Memorial Field only. Parking for any other purpose is
hereby prohibited. Overnight parking is prohibited.
B. Parking in areas and/or spaces marked as reserved for the Fire
Department by other than members of the Fire Department, Police
Department or Borough officials is hereby prohibited.
C. Parking in areas and/or spaces marked as reserved for the Police
Department by other than members of the Police Department is hereby
prohibited.
88.Editor's Note: Original Art. II, Park Avenue and South Maple Avenue, adopted 10-15-1974
as Ord. No. 74-22, was repealed 9-13-1982 by Ord. No. 82-19. Ordinance No. 87-15 also
provided that all references to the South Maple Avenue Lot be deleted from Art. I,
originally titled "Hawthorne Street and South Maple Avenue Lots."
§ 76-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 76-9
1:365

ARTICLE III
Colony Avenue Lot
[Adopted 8-9-1983 by Ord. No. 83-18]
§ 76-10. Location; hours of use; promulgation of regulations.
The parking of vehicles in the municipal parking lot located on Colony
Avenue adjacent to the Municipal Swimming Pool is hereby regulated and
limited as follows:
A. No person shall cause a motor vehicle to occupy any of the parking
spaces between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless said
vehicle shall bear a current identification sticker, as herein defined,
affixed in accordance with such regulations as the Chief of Police may
hereafter promulgate.
§ 76-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 76-10
1:367
Chapter 77
PARKING ON POSTED LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal parking lots — See Ch. 76. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 97.
§ 76-10 PARK RIDGE CODE § 76-10
1:368
ARTICLE I
Posting of Signs
§ 77-1. Parking on posted lands prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any vehicle
on lands of another, whether publicly or privately owned, in the Borough
of Park Ridge, after notice has been posted as hereinafter provided by
the owner, occupant, lessee or licensee prohibiting such parking. Nothing
herein contained shall apply to any lands lying within the bounds of any
public street or highway.
§ 77-2. Required signs; tampering prohibited.
Suitable signs not less than 18 inches by 24 inches, bearing the words
"NO PARKING," together with any qualifications or restrictions of such
parking, if any, and conspicuously displayed shall be posted on said lands
by the owner, occupant, lessee or licensee thereof where this article is
effective. Defacing, tampering with or damaging such signs, when posted,
shall constitute a violation of this article.
§ 77-3. Violation and penalties. [Amended 7-8-1974 by Ord. No.
74-16]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to
a fine not exceeding $500 or imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90
days, or both, in the discretion of the Judge before whom such person shall
be convicted.
§ 77-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 77-3
1:369

ARTICLE II
Reserved Parking for Handicapped Persons
[Added 11-9-1983 by Ord. No. 83-28; amended 9-11-1990 by Ord.
No. 90-15]
§ 77-4. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
HANDICAPPED PERSON — Includes any person who has lost the use of
one or more limbs as a consequence of paralysis, amputation or other
permanent disability or who is permanently disabled as to be unable to
ambulate without the aid of an assisting device or whose mobility is
otherwise limited as certified by a physician with a plenary license to
practice medicine and surgery in this state or a bordering state.
TEMPORARILY HANDICAPPED PERSON — Includes any person who
temporarily has lost the use of one or more limbs or who is temporarily
disabled or whose mobility is otherwise temporarily limited as certified by
a physician with a plenary license to practice medicine and surgery in this
state or a bordering state.
§ 77-5. Establishment of parking spaces.
The Chief of Police of the Borough of Park Ridge or his designee shall
establish, from time to time, motor vehicle parking spaces on lands, both
public and private, within the Borough of Park Ridge, pursuant to the
rules and regulations promulgated by the Director of the Division of Motor
Vehicles of the State of New Jersey in accordance with N.J.S.A. 39:4-204 et
seq.
§ 77-6. Placement of signs.
The motor vehicle parking spaces established for handicapped persons shall
be designated as such by the placement thereat of the national wheelchair
symbol and/or suitable signs indicating the reservation of said motor vehicle
parking places for the exclusive use of handicapped persons. Any sign
erected after the effective date of this revision to notify the public that
parking in a space is reserved for the handicapped shall also state the
penalties set forth. Signs which were erected prior to the effective date shall
be modified within 12 months after the effective date to include the penalty
information.
§ 77-7. Special placard or license plates.
No person shall cause to be parked within a parking space designated for
use by handicapped persons any motor vehicle unless said motor vehicle
has displayed thereon a placard or wheelchair-symbol license plates issued
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-204 et seq. and the rules and
regulations promulgated thereunder.
§ 77-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 77-8
1:371
§ 77-8. Issuance of temporary placard.
The Chief of Police of the Borough of Park Ridge shall issue to any person
who has temporarily lost the use of one or more limbs or is temporarily
disabled as to be unable to ambulate without the aid of an assisting device
or whose mobility is otherwise temporarily limited, as certified by a
physician with a plenary license to practice medicine and surgery in this
state or a bordering state, a temporary placard of not more than six months'
duration. The placard shall be displayed on the motor vehicle used by the
temporarily handicapped person when the vehicle is parked overtime or in
special parking places established for use by handicapped persons.
§ 77-9. Parking overtime.
No penalty shall be imposed for the parking overtime of any motor vehicle
which has displayed thereon a placard or wheelchair symbol license plates
issued pursuant to the provisions of this article or N.J.S.A. 39:4-204 et seq.
and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder unless such vehicle
shall have been parked in one location for more than 24 hours.
§ 77-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-11-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-10]
Every person convicted of violating a provision of this article or any
amendment thereto shall be liable for a fine of $250 for a first offense, and
for subsequent offenses, the penalty must be a fine of at least $250 and up
to 90 days community service on terms and in such form as the Court shall
deem appropriate or any combination thereof. A person who possesses a
valid permit but fails to display it may be fined $25 to $50 for a first offense,
and for subsequent offenses from $50 to $100.
§ 77-8 PARK RIDGE CODE § 77-10
1:372
Chapter 77A
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 40.
Bicycles and motorcycles — See Ch. 45.
Firearms, fireworks and hunting — See Ch.
59.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 78.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 97.
Public swimming pools — See Ch. 121.
§ 77-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 77-10
1:373

ARTICLE I
General Regulations
§ 77A-1. Purpose; scope.
The following rules and regulations are hereby adopted for the protection,
regulation and control of public property designated as Borough fields,
including but not limited to Davies Field, Mill Pond, Huff Park/Sulak Fields,
Atkins Glen, Board of Education School Fields and the Colony Avenue fields,
pool and parking lot.
§ 77A-2. Alcoholic beverages, drugs or narcotics; special permit for
social affairs. [Amended 5-26-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-13]
No person who appears to be under the influence of drugs or narcotics shall
be permitted within a Borough park or recreation area. No person shall
possess or consume alcoholic beverages in any Borough park or recreation
area. Nonprofit organizations may obtain an application for a special permit
for social affairs permit, authorized and approved by the Mayor and Council,
from the Borough Clerk.
§ 77A-3. Group use; meetings; use of loudspeakers.
A. Except for the pool and pool parking lot, which shall require separate
approval from the Municipal Pool Commission, no group shall use a
Borough park or recreation area without first submitting an application
for request of use of facilities with the Borough Clerk not later than 15
days before the proposed date of use. The filing of the required
application does not guarantee approval of the requested group use.
Upon review and approval of the application, the Field Coordinator
shall issue the required permit and schedule the use of the Borough
park or recreation area subject to availability. Priority of group use shall
be as follows: Borough-sanctioned recreation events; PRAA youth
sports; school athletics; club sports for adults and youths; and any
group consisting of at least 50% of Borough residents. For annual group
use requests, all required applications shall be submitted by January 15
and field schedules shall be determined on or about February 28 of each
year. Group use shall be limited to designated areas. Adult supervision
of children's groups is required at all times.
B. No person shall call or hold any public meeting or give any concert or
public entertainment of any kind within a Borough park or recreation
area without first having obtained written permission from the Borough
Administrator in advance and no later than 15 days before the proposed
date of use.
C. No person shall use loudspeakers, public address systems or amplifiers
within a Borough park or recreation area without first having obtained
permission in advance from the Borough Administrator no later than
seven days before the proposed date of use.
§ 77A-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 77A-3
1:375
§ 77A-4. Littering; pollution.
§ 77A-5. Property damage.
No person shall cut, break, dig up or in any way mutilate or injure any tree,
shrub, plant, grass, turf, railing, seat, fence, structure or any other object
within a Borough park or recreation area.
§ 77A-6. Fires and fireworks.
§ 77A-7. Firearms and hunting.
D. Each group that applies to use a Borough park or recreation area must
provide the Borough Clerk with a certificate of insurance and sign a
hold harmless form provided by the Borough. The certificate of
insurance must show evidence of at least $1,000,000 general liability
coverage naming the Borough as an additional insured. The Borough
Clerk may require additional insurance coverage limits, in his
discretion, depending on the type of proposed use.
E. Fees. The Mayor and Council shall adopt a resolution on an annual basis
establishing the fees for both resident and nonresident teams which
have received the required permit to use any Borough fields for that
calendar year. A nonresident team shall be defined as any team in which
Borough residents comprise less than 50% of the team's roster.
A. No person shall leave bottles, broken glass, ashes, wastepaper or other
rubbish within a Borough park or recreation area except in a properly
provided receptacle designated for that purpose.
B. No person shall throw or place any dirt, stone, rock, debris, foreign or
waste substance into or upon any Borough park or recreation area.
C. No person shall throw, cast, lay or drop, discharge into or allow to
remain in the water of a Borough park or recreation area, or any
tributary, brook, stream or storm sewer or drain flowing into said
waters, any substance or matter which may result in the pollution of
said waters.
A. No person shall build, light or maintain a fire within a Borough park or
recreation area maintained or designated for such purpose unless a
permit for same has been obtained from the Borough Fire Prevention
Bureau.
B. No person shall discharge or set off within any Borough park or
recreation area any firecrackers, torpedoes, rockets or other fireworks
unless a permit for same has been obtained from the Borough Fire
Prevention Bureau.
A. No person shall discharge any weapon or firearms within or into a
Borough park or recreation area. Firearms shall not be carried nor had
§ 77A-3 PARK RIDGE CODE § 77A-7
1:376
§ 77A-8. Prohibitions.
§ 77A-9. Vehicular restrictions.
in possession of any person. Shooting with a bow and arrow is
prohibited.
B. No person shall knowingly molest, trap, capture, hold, remove, injure or
kill any animal or disturb its habitat within a Borough park or
recreation area.
A. No person shall swim or bathe in any pond or stream within a Borough
park or recreation area.
B. No person shall use motorized boats, other than model boats, of any
kind on any pond or stream within a Borough park or recreation area.
C. No person or group shall engage in any commercial enterprise,
including but not limited to the offering of services, soliciting, selling or
peddling of any liquids or edibles for human consumption, or distribute
circulars or hawk, or peddle or vend any goods, wares or merchandise
within a Borough park or recreation area without meeting the
requirements of Chapter 67 of the Code of the Borough of Park Ridge
entitled "Hawkers, Peddlers and Solicitors."
D. No person shall cut, carve, point, mark, paste or fasten on any tree,
fence, wall, building, monument or other object within a Borough park
or recreation area any bill, advertisement or inscription, nor shall any
person distribute, cast, throw or place any handbill, pamphlet, circular,
advertisement or notice of any kind within a Borough park or recreation
area.
E. For purposes of this section, the activation of the Park Ridge lightning
detection system constitutes a duly proclaimed emergency. Upon such
activation, all public parks, playgrounds, recreation areas and open
spaces of the Borough of Park Ridge are immediately closed and remain
closed through the entire duration of the system's activation. All groups
and individuals using these areas must immediately stop their activities
and exit the areas for the purpose of seeking shelter. Any violation of
this section shall be punishable pursuant to the penalties established in
§ 77A-11 of the Borough Code. [Added 9-10-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-011]
A. No person shall use any portion of a Borough park or recreation area
for the purpose of a roadway, except drives, parking areas, roadways,
paths, walks and trails established for such purpose by the Mayor and
Council. Footpaths or walks established for pedestrian travel shall not
be used for vehicular travel. The use of mopeds, snowmobiles or
motorized bikes within a Borough park or recreation area shall not be
permitted. (See Chapter 45 of the Code of the Borough of Park Ridge.)
§ 77A-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 77A-9
1:377
§ 77A-10. Hours of operation.
No person shall, without permission, enter into or remain within a Borough
park or recreation area except during the hours that the park or recreation
area is open to the general public, generally daylight to 11:00 p.m. at Sulak
Field and Davies Field and daylight to 1/2 hour after sunset for all other
parks and recreation area.
§ 77A-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this article shall
be subject, upon conviction thereof, to a fine of not more than $500 or to
imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both,
for a first offense. The fine shall be doubled for each and every subsequent
offense. Any person or group convicted of a second offense shall be placed
on probation for a period of six months. Any person or group convicted of
violating this article while on probation shall be prohibited from obtaining a
use permit for a period of two years.
B. No person shall drive or propel, or cause to be driven or propelled,
along or over any road within a Borough park or recreation area any
vehicle at a rate of speed greater than 10 miles per hour.
§ 77A-9 PARK RIDGE CODE § 77A-11
1:378
ARTICLE II
Davies Field
§ 77A-12. Application.
This article shall apply to the recreational field with the artificial surface
in Davies Field in Park Ridge and all grounds which are part of the Davies
Field complex, including bleachers, benches, parking areas, fences and
lights and any other auxiliary structures.
§ 77A-13. Permit required.
The recreational field, which is part of Davies Field, shall be used only by
the issuance of a permit from the Borough of Park Ridge. The Borough
Clerk should create a permit application packet to be completed by each
user. The application packet shall include the following information: the
name and address of the user, including zip code, e-mail address, telephone
number and responsible person from the user, a description of the use, the
date or dates of use of the field and all such information deemed by the
Borough Clerk to be necessary for the proper administration of this article.
Application packets shall be made available at Borough Hall and on the
Borough's website.
§ 77A-14. Prohibited uses or activities.
The following uses and/or activities are prohibited on the recreational field
in Davies Field:
A. The use of metal spikes on the artificial surface.
B. Littering.
C. The consumption or possession of any soft drinks, bottled or canned
drinks, alcoholic beverages or sports drinks.
D. The eating of food of any type.
E. Chewing gum or smoking.
F. The erection of any tents or stands on the artificial surface, including
the installation of stakes.
G. There should be no use of any marking paint, marking lime or any other
liquid or powder to mark or identify any area on the artificial surface
unless prior written approval has been obtained from the Administrator.
H. No animals are allowed on the artificial surface at any time.
I. No fires are allowed on the artificial surface.
J. No remote control planes, cars or any other models powered by any
electrical or mechanical device are be allowed on the artificial surface
at all times.
§ 77A-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 77A-14
1:379
§ 77A-15. Loss of privileges.
Any user who violates these rules and regulations shall lose his or her use
of the field and can be subject to the fines and penalties as provided herein.
§ 77A-16. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates this article or any provision herein may be held
liable for a fine not to exceed $500 or to imprisonment in the county jail for
a term of not exceeding 90 days, or both, for a first offense. The fine shall
be doubled for each and every subsequent offense. Any person or group
convicted of a second offense shall be placed on probation for a period of
six months. Any person or group convicted of violating this article while on
probation shall be prohibited from obtaining a use permit for a period of
two years.
K. No skateboards, bikes, rollerblades, scooters, all-terrain vehicles or any
other similar devices should be allowed on the artificial surface.
L. If the field is snow covered, it is closed; no one is authorized to shovel or
remove snow from the artificial surface.
§ 77A-14 PARK RIDGE CODE § 77A-16
1:380
ARTICLE III
Smoking
§ 77A-17. Prohibition. [Amended 5-23-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-006]
No person shall smoke any type of tobacco products, including cigarettes,
cigars, pipes or electronic smoking devices, including electronic or other
powered devices that can be used to deliver nicotine or other substances
to the person inhaling from the device, electronic cigarettes, electronic
cigars, electronic cigarillos, electronic pipes and any other vaping devices
or systems, in or on any Borough recreation area or parks, including the
Park Ridge pool, at any time.
§ 77A-18. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating this article shall be subject to violations and penalties
set forth in § 77A-11.
§ 77A-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 77A-18
1:381

ARTICLE IV
Certification of Coaches
§ 77A-19. Completion of certification course required.
All coaches and managers participating in programs sponsored and
supervised by the PRAA, as well as programs administered by privately
organized athletic associations wherein the Borough provides insurance
coverage, shall enroll in and complete an authorized certification course
through the Rutgers S.A.F.E.T.Y. clinic or any other approved comparable
course.
§ 77A-20. Course to be recognized program; Borough Administrator
approval required.
Such certification course shall be a recognized program and shall have
the prior approval of the Borough Administrator who shall promulgate
rules and regulations for administration of the certification process and the
requirement for periodic renewals.
§ 77A-21. Time limits.
All persons covered by the terms of this article shall complete the required
course within the time limits set by the Borough Administrator.
§ 77A-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 77A-21
1:383

ARTICLE V
Summer Day Camp Program
§ 77A-22. Availability; cancellation and reimbursement; hours of
operation; fees.
A. Participation in the Summer Day Camp shall be made available to the
children of Park Ridge residents or any child attending any public or
private school within the Borough and entering kindergarten through
grade 7 in September of the upcoming school year. If any child is in the
care of a guardian residing within the Borough, that child shall be
eligible to participate in the day camp program. Day camp shall start on
the first Monday following the end of the public school term and shall
continue for five consecutive weeks. In the event of any inclement
weather resulting in the cancellation of day camp, said cancellation
shall be posted on the Borough's website and on the Summer Day Camp
Program's dedicated voice mail. There shall be no reimbursement of
any fees resulting from the cancellation of day camp resulting from
inclement weather, any expulsion or for any dates not attended.
B. The Mayor and Council shall adopt a resolution on an annual basis
establishing the hours of operation and participation fees for the
Summer Day Camp Program.
§ 77A-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 77A-22
1:385
Chapter 78
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER; PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 26.
Automatic amusement devices — See Ch. 42.
Bicycles and motorcycles — See Ch. 45.
Carnivals, circuses and shows — See Ch. 49.
Dogs, cats and other animals — See Ch. 52.
Hawkers, peddlers and solicitors — See Ch.
67.
§ 77A-22 PARK RIDGE CODE § 77A-22
1:386
ARTICLE I
Disorderly Conduct
§ 78-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DISORDERLY ASSEMBLAGE — Two or more persons gathered together and
acting in a boisterous, offensive or threatening manner toward each other
or others, or committing an act or acts which are a breach of the peace or
which tend to create a breach of the peace.89
VAGRANT — A person without visible means of support, who is idle and,
though able to work for his maintenance, refuses to do so, and lives without
labor or on the charity of others.
§ 78-2. (Reserved)90
§ 78-3. Indecent language; breach of peace.
No person shall utter any loud, profane, indecent, lewd, abusive, offensive,
threatening or obscene language in a public place or commit any act which
tends to endanger the public peace.
§ 78-4. Disturbing places of assembly.
No person shall, by noise or disorderly conduct, disturb or interfere with
the quiet or good order of any place of assembly, public or private, including
schools, churches, libraries and reading rooms.
§ 78-5. Disorderly assemblages.
No person shall take any part in or aid, abet or assist a disorderly
assemblage.
§ 78-6. Fighting prohibited.
No person shall engage in a fight or personal encounter nor use or attempt
to use physical violence toward another.
§ 78-7. Solicitation prohibited.
No person shall solicit from house to house or in any public street, park or
public place, a gift of money, clothing or other things for his own use.
89.Editor's Note: The original definitions of "disorderly house" and "house of ill fame," which
immediately followed, were repealed 6-22-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-23.
90.Editor's Note: Original § 78-2, Keeping disorderly house; immoral acts; indecent exposure
or exhibitions, was repealed 6-22-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-23.
§ 78-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 78-8
1:387
§ 78-8. Animal fights, prizefights or boxing contests.
No person shall take part in or aid or abet a cockfight, dogfight or any
unlawful prizefight or boxing contest.
§ 78-9. Interference with fire alarm system; false alarm.
No person shall interfere with, deface or mutilate any fire alarm box or fire
alarm system or any part thereof or of any apparatus connected therewith,
nor knowingly give, send or cause to be given or sent a false fire alarm.
§ 78-10. Expectoration prohibited.
No person shall expectorate in a public street or place, upon any sidewalk
or on the sidewall, floor or platform of any building or of a vehicle used for
public transportation.
§ 78-11. Loitering, obstructing passageways prohibited.
No person shall loiter, lounge or sleep in or upon any street or public place
or in any public building, or obstruct the access to any public building or any
part thereof, or obstruct passage through or upon any public street, park or
public place.
§ 78-12. (Reserved)91
§ 78-13. Offensive remarks.
No person shall indulge in or utter loud or offensive or indecent language
nor audibly make offensive remarks to or comments upon any person in or
upon any street, park, public place or public conveyance.
§ 78-14. Obstructing persons.
No person shall obstruct or interfere with any person lawfully upon any
public place or public conveyance.
§ 78-15. Disturbing or endangering public peace.
No person shall, in any house, building or grounds belonging thereto, or
in or upon any street or public place or public conveyance, disturb or
endanger the public peace or health by any offensive or disorderly act or
language.
§ 78-16. Unauthorized operation of elevators.
No person, other than the person in charge of the operation of an elevator,
shall handle, operate or manipulate any rope, shifting rod lever or other
91.Editor's Note: Original § 78-12, Loitering by intoxicated persons, was repealed 5-26-2009
by Ord. No. 2009-14.
§ 78-8 PARK RIDGE CODE § 78-16
1:388
apparatus or thing attached to or used to start or stop an elevator, unless
requested to do so by the person in charge thereof.
§ 78-17. Interference with policemen, firemen and Borough officers.
No person shall interfere by force with a member of the Police or Fire
Department or an officer of the Borough in the performance of his duties,
nor prevent or attempt to prevent such member or officer from performing
his duty.
§ 78-18. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $500 or by imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 90 days, or both.
§ 78-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 78-18
1:389

ARTICLE II
Dumping
§ 78-19. Prohibited acts. [Amended 6-10-1968 by Ord. No. 68-5]
No person shall deposit, dump, burn or bury, or cause to be deposited,
dumped, burned or buried, upon any public or private street or other
place or property, public or private, within the Borough, any household
waste, sewage, garbage, decaying fruit, vegetables, fish, meat, bones, waste
containers, newspapers, trash or any other offensive material or substance.
§ 78-20. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-10-1967 by Ord. No.
67-2]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine not exceeding $500 or
imprisonment in the county jail for a term of not more than 90 days, or
both, in the discretion of the Judge before whom such conviction may be
had; provided, however, that this article shall not be applicable to any
department or board of the Borough of Park Ridge or its authorized agents.
§ 78-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 78-20
1:391

ARTICLE III
Idling or Loitering; Curfew for Minors
§ 78-21. Idling or loitering prohibited; duty of policemen.
[Amended 10-13-1971]
§ 78-22. Responsibility of parent or guardian.
It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or other adult person having
the care or custody of any minor under the age of 18 years to knowingly
permit such minor to remain idle or loiter in violation of § 78-21 of this
article.
§ 78-23. Notification of apprehension of minors.
Whenever any minor under the age of 18 years is arrested for violating
§ 78-21 of this article, the Chief of Police shall notify the parent, guardian
or other person having custody of such minor of such arrest.
§ 78-24. Minors idling or loitering at nighttime: presumption.
If it be established that any minor under the age of 18 years remained idle
or loitered in violation of § 78-21 of this article between the hours of 9:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day, then it shall be presumed, in the
absence of proof to the contrary, that the parent, guardian or other adult
person having the care or custody of such minor knowingly permitted such
minor to do so.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, loaf, wander, stand or
remain idle, either alone or in consort with others, in a public place in
such a manner as to:
(1) Obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or other
public place or building by hindering or impeding or tend to hinder
or impede the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles, traffic or
pedestrians.
(2) Commit in or upon any public street, public sidewalk or other
public place or building any act or thing which is an obstruction to
or interference with the free and uninterrupted use of property or
with any business lawfully conducted by anyone in or upon or
facing or fronting on any such public street, public highway, public
sidewalk or other public place or building, all of which prevents the
free and uninterrupted ingress, egress and regress therein,
thereon and thereto.
B. When any person causes or commits any of the conditions enumerated
in Subsection A herein, a police officer or any law enforcement officer
shall order that person to stop causing or committing such conditions
and to move on or disperse. Any person who fails or refuses to obey
such orders shall be guilty of a violation of this section.
§ 78-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 78-25
1:393
§ 78-25. Minor's subsequent violations: presumption.
If it be established that the parent, guardian or other adult person having
the care or custody of any minor under the age of 18 years was duly notified
pursuant to § 78-23 of this article that such minor had been arrested for
a violation of § 78-21 of this article, then it shall be presumed, in the
absence of proof to the contrary, that such parent, guardian or adult person
knowingly permitted each subsequent violation.
§ 78-26. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-13-1971]
Any person who violates any provisions of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $500 or by imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 90 days, or both. Any such violation shall constitute a
separate offense on each successive day continued.
§ 78-25 PARK RIDGE CODE § 78-26
1:394
ARTICLE IV
Parental Responsibility
[Added 7-9-1973 by Ord. No. 73-10]
§ 78-27. Offenses enumerated.
Offenses against the public peace, safety, health and morals include
trespassing; defacing the property of another (graffiti); destroying any
property of another; mugging, assaults; assaults and battery; destruction
or defacing of public property owned by the governments of the Borough,
county or state; destruction of playground equipment and public parks;
the consumption of alcoholic beverages on a public street; drunkenness;
begging; throwing, casting or placing any garbage, waste, papers, ashes,
sewage, refuse, junk, rubbish, circulars, glasses, bottles, cans, dead animals
or any other type of waste matter on any property, public or private, except
in such areas as may be officially designated and licensed for dumping
by the Borough of Park Ridge; throwing or depositing litter in or upon
any private property or upon any street, sidewalk, park or other public
place or property within the Borough, except in public receptacles or any
authorized private receptacles for collection or in official Borough dumps,
and litter shall include but not be limited to such items as paper, wrapping,
cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, leaves, wood, glass, crockery, bottles and
similar materials; indecent exposure; loitering in a public place as set forth
in Article III of this chapter, and lack of supervision by a parent, legal
guardian or other person having the care or custody of a minor child under
the age of 18 years.
§ 78-28. Definition.
A person is defined to include parents, guardians or persons having custody
or control of minor children.
§ 78-29. Supervision of minors after violation.
It shall be unlawful for any person to offend against the public peace, safety
and morals as defined herein, or fail to supervise any minor under the age
of 18 years after said minor has appeared before a court of competent
jurisdiction for any violation of any statute or municipal ordinance.
§ 78-30. Encouragement of delinquency prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any parent, legal guardian or other person having
the care or custody of a minor child under 18 years of age who shall by
any act or by any work, or by the failure to act, or by lack of supervision
and control over said minor child, encourage, contribute toward, cause or
tend to cause said minor child to become neglected or delinquent by reason
of the activities of said minor child within the Borough of Park Ridge so
as to come or tend to come under the jurisdiction of the Juvenile Division
of the Bergen County Juvenile and Domestic Relations Court knowing that
said minor had offended the public peace, safety and morals, including any
§ 78-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 78-30
1:395
criminal statute of the State of New Jersey or ordinance of the Borough of
Park Ridge.
§ 78-31. Permitting violations prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any parent, legal guardian or other person having
custody and care of any minor child under the age of 18 years to assist,
aid, abet, allow, permit or encourage said minor to violate the provisions of
this chapter or any other ordinance of the Borough of Park Ridge as defined
herein, either by overt act, by failing to act or by lack of supervision and
control over said minor child.
§ 78-32. Appearance of minor before Court; arresting of parent;
subsequent supervision of minor.
Any minor who is under the age of 18 years apprehended for the violation
of this chapter, any laws of the State of New Jersey, ordinance of this
municipality or any federal statute, shall be brought forthwith before a
Judge of the Juvenile Division of the Bergen County Juvenile and Domestic
Relations Court, and the parent, legal guardian or other person having care
and custody of said minor shall be summoned or arrested and brought
before a Judge of the Municipal Court of the Borough of Park Ridge, when
said minor child is apprehended. The said minor child shall be held in the
children's shelter or the county jail according to the direction and orders
of the Judge of the Juvenile Division of the Juvenile and Domestic Relations
Court, and the parent, legal guardian or person having the custody of said
minor child, as aforesaid, who shall fail to provide supervision of said minor
as aforesaid, after the first offense by said minor, shall be subject to the
penalties herein provided.
§ 78-33. Violations and penalties.
Any parent, legal guardian or person having custody of a minor who violates
any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punishable by a fine
not exceeding $500 or imprisonment for 90 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment.
§ 78-30 PARK RIDGE CODE § 78-33
1:396
Chapter 79
PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS
§ 79-1. Findings; purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the trade in secondhand or preowned
precious metals, gems and jewelry to prevent or reduce trafficking
in stolen goods and to improve the ability to recover such items when they
have been stolen or otherwise removed from the rightful owner without
permission.
§ 79-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the indicated
meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
BUYER — Any person or entity who through any means buys any of the
items defined in this chapter.
DEALER — Any individual who engages in the regulated business, as
defined herein.
JEWELRY — Objects composed of precious metals, gemstones, or both,
including but not limited to rings, bracelets, necklaces, pins, flatware,
tableware, chalices or goblets.
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 years.
PRECIOUS METALS — Materials commonly used in the fabrication of
jewelry, including but not limited to gold, silver and platinum.
PRECIOUS OR SEMIPRECIOUS GEMS — Those precious or semiprecious
stones commonly referred to as "jewels," including but not limited to
diamonds, rubies, pearls, sapphires, opals, emeralds and similar items.
REGULATED BUSINESS — The selling, buying or other trading in of
jewelry, as defined herein, i.e., used, secondhand or pre-owned.
§ 79-3. Applicability.
This chapter shall not affect persons and entities selling items covered
by this chapter which have been purchased from dealers, manufacturers
or wholesalers who are normally in the business of manufacturing and/
or selling said items. This chapter does cover those persons or entities
purchasing the aforesaid items from the general public for resale or use.
§ 79-4. License required.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, partnership or
other business entity to engage in the regulated business in the
Borough of Park Ridge without first having procured a license to do so
and complying with the regulations herein. Each day upon which such
person, firm, corporation, partnership or other business entity shall not
§ 78-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 79-4
1:397
§ 79-5. License fees.
A fee of $250 shall be paid to obtain a license for a location where the
regulated business is conducted; and a fee of $50 shall be paid to obtain
a license for each individual engaging in the regulated business. Such a
license shall be required for each and every individual engaging in the
regulated business at a licensed location.
§ 79-6. License expiration; renewal.
Each license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall expire
on the 31st day of December and shall be renewed annually in accordance
with this chapter.
§ 79-7. Application for license.
Any individual desiring a license for a location or an individual to conduct
the regulated business shall file, on a form supplied by the Borough Clerk,
an application with the Borough Clerk which shall be in duplicate and sworn
to by the applicant.
§ 79-8. Contents of application.
Every application required under this chapter shall contain the following
information:
do any act which is herein provided or failed to perform any act which
is herein required shall constitute a new violation.
B. Each location in the Borough of Park Ridge in which the regulated
business is conducted and each individual engaging in such business
shall be licensed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
A. The name under which the business is to be conducted.
B. The name and address of the applicant, if a corporation, the names and
addresses of the President and Secretary of the corporation. If a
partnership, the names and addresses of each of the partners.
C. The nature of the business and the address where it is to be conducted.
D. The number of motor vehicles used. The identification number for each
vehicle including the license plate number and registration shall be
provided.
E. The residence of any individual applicant during the past five years.
F. A statement that the applicant has never had a license to conduct a
regulated business denied or revoked, except as noted.
G. A statement that none of the individual applicants has ever been
convicted of crimes, except as may be noted.
§ 79-4 PARK RIDGE CODE § 79-8
1:398
§ 79-9. Investigation; fingerprinting; approval or rejection;
nontransferability.
Upon the filing of an application accompanied by the required fees, if it
appears that the applicant has properly identified himself and all necessary
parties as required by this chapter, including such confirmation of the
statements made which may result from investigation by the Chief of Police,
the license shall be issued. No license shall be issued or renewed to any
applicant who has willfully violated this chapter. If it is determined that an
applicant has been convicted of a crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit,
misrepresentation or moral turpitude, no license shall issue. Licenses shall
not be transferable or assignable to any other person.
§ 79-10. Rules and regulations.
H. The social security number of each and every individual applicant.
I. A statement providing:
(1) The undersigned applicant authorizes the appropriate local
municipal officials to make inspections of the licensed premises
during the times when the business is open and in operation.
(2) The undersigned have completed the answers to this application in
order to induce the municipality to issue the license. Furthermore,
the undersigned agree to comply with all local relevant ordinances,
rules and regulations.
A. Every licensee shall have his license in his possession while engaged in
the business licensed. The license for the location shall be prominently
displayed at all times. The licensee shall produce his license at the
request of any person solicited, any Borough police officer or any
official of the Borough.
B. Recordkeeping. Each licensee shall maintain sequentially numbered
records for not less than one year containing the following information:
(1) The name and address of the person or persons from whom any
jewelry, precious stones or precious metals are purchased from or
sold to.
(2) The date of the transaction.
(3) A description of the objects purchased or sold.
(4) The fineness of the precious metals purchased or sold.
(5) The carat weight of the precious stones purchased or sold.
(6) A detailed description of the objects involved in the transaction.
(7) The price paid for the object.
§ 79-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 79-10
1:399
§ 79-11. Waiting period before resale.
No licensee shall destroy, melt down, sell, transfer or otherwise dispose of
any object subject to this chapter until seven days have elapsed from the
date the item came into the possession of the licensee.
§ 79-12. Violations and penalties.
Anyone who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, before the Municipal Court of the Borough, be subject to
a fine not exceeding $1,000 or imprisonment in a county jail for a term not
exceeding 90 days, or both, in the discretion of a Municipal Judge before
whom such defendant shall be convicted. A separate offense may be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 80
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 14.
Board of Health — See Ch. 17.
Police Department — See Ch. 26.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 50.
Garbage, rubbish and trash — See Ch. 64.
Housing standards — See Ch. 70.
Sight distances at intersections — See Ch. 82.
(8) The signature of the person from whom the object is obtained or to
whom it is sold.
(9) The driver's license number and social security number of the
persons identified in Subsection B(8) above.
C. No licensee shall purchase any objects subject to this chapter from any
minor unless such minor is accompanied by a parent or guardian and
said guardian specifically consents, in writing, to the transaction and
complies with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 79-10 PARK RIDGE CODE § 79-12
1:400
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 80-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Property Maintenance Code of the
Borough of Park Ridge" and may be referred to in this chapter in the short
form as "this code."
§ 80-2. Findings and declaration of policy. [Amended 5-14-1979 by
Ord. No. 79-4]
It is hereby found and declared that there exist in the Borough of Park
Ridge structures used for residential and nonresidential purposes which
are or may become in the future substandard with respect to structure,
equipment or maintenance, and further that such conditions, including
but not limited to structural deterioration, inadequate maintenance and
inadequate provisions for essential utilities or facilities, constitute a menace
to the safety and welfare of the residents of the Borough of Park Ridge
and persons having access to the premises. It is further found and declared
that the existence of such conditions has the further effect of creating
blight and substandard neighborhoods and that, by the enactment of timely
regulations and restrictions, as herein contained, the development of blight
may be prevented and neighborhood and property values maintained and
the public safety and welfare protected and fostered.
§ 80-3. Purpose. [Amended 5-14-1979 by Ord. No. 79-4]
A. This chapter is intended to establish minimum standards relative to the
exterior of premises, including the grounds. The public officer
responsible for the enforcement of this chapter shall also be concerned
with ensuring the structural soundness of the inside and the outside of
premises in order that the safety and welfare of the occupants is
ensured.
B. Conditions in premises which constitute hazards to public health,
including but not limited to infestation, inadequate provisions for light,
heat and air and unsanitary conditions, or conditions which in any way
constitute unhealthy living conditions for the occupants of the premises
shall be immediately referred and investigated under Chapter 70 of
Code of the Borough of Park Ridge entitled "Housing Standards."
§ 80-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-3
1:401

ARTICLE II
Applicability
§ 80-4. Buildings affected.
Each and every building and the premises on which it is situated in the
Borough, used or intended to be used or designed to be used in whole or in
part for commercial, business, industrial, apartment, multifamily, farm, gas
station or in certain instances single-family residential occupancy (whether
nonconforming or permitted by variance), shall comply with the provisions
of this code, whether or not any such building shall have been constructed,
altered or repaired before or after the enactment of this code, irrespective
of any permits or licenses which shall have been issued for the use or
occupancy of any such building or premises or for the construction,
alteration or repair of any such building or for the installation or repair of
equipment or facilities therein or thereon prior to the effective date of this
code. This code establishes minimum standards for the initial and continued
occupancy and use of all such buildings and premises and does not replace,
modify or lessen standards otherwise established for the construction,
repair, alteration or use of such buildings and premises, equipment or
facilities contained therein or thereon, except as provided in § 80-5 hereof.
§ 80-5. Conflict with other laws.
In any case where the provisions of this code impose a higher standard than
that set forth in any other ordinance of the Borough or laws of the State of
New Jersey applicable thereto, then the standards as set forth herein shall
prevail; but if the provisions of this code impose a lesser standard than such
other ordinance of the Borough or law of the State of New Jersey, then the
higher standard contained in such other ordinance or law shall prevail.
§ 80-6. Permits and licenses pursuant to other ordinances.
After the date of enactments hereof, all licenses and permits relating to
such buildings and premises which may be issued or renewed pursuant to
any other ordinance of the Borough may be issued or renewed only upon
compliance with this code as well as compliance with the ordinances under
which such licenses and permits may be granted or renewed.
§ 80-7. Enforcement and compliance.
Compliance with this code shall not constitute a defense against violation
of any provision of any other ordinance of the Borough applicable to any
building or premises, nor shall compliance with any provision of this code
relieve any owner, operator or occupant from complying with any such other
provision nor relieve any official of the Borough from enforcing any such
other provision.
§ 80-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-7
1:403

ARTICLE III
Responsibilities of Owners, Operators and Occupants
§ 80-8. Owners and operators.
Owners and operators shall have all the duties and responsibilities
prescribed in §§ 80-13 through 80-17 of Article IV hereof and regulations
promulgated pursuant thereto; and no owner or operator shall be relieved
from such duties or responsibilities nor be entitled to defend against any
charge of violation thereof by reason of the fact that the other of them or
the occupant is also responsible therefor and in violation thereof.
§ 80-9. Occupants.
Occupants shall have all the duties and responsibilities as prescribed in
§§ 80-16D and F and 80-18 of Article IV hereof and all regulations
promulgated pursuant thereto; and the occupant shall not be relieved of any
such duties or responsibilities nor be entitled to defend against any charge
of violation thereof by reason of the fact that the owner or operator, or both,
is or are also responsible therefor and in violation thereof.
§ 80-10. Contract not to alter responsibilities.
Unless expressly provided to the contrary in this code, the respective duties
and responsibilities imposed hereunder on the owner, operator and
occupant shall not be altered or affected by any agreement or contract to
which one or more of them is or are a party or parties.
§ 80-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-10
1:405

ARTICLE IV
Standards
§ 80-11. Scope of article.
The provisions of this article shall constitute the standards to guide the
Public Officer and his agents in determining the fitness of premises for
human habitation, use and occupancy and in determining whether premises
are being maintained in such condition as to not constitute a blighting
effect upon neighboring properties nor an element leading to a progressive
deterioration and downgrading of neighboring properties with an
accompanying diminution of property values.
§ 80-12. Definitions and word usage.
A. Definitions. As used in this code, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from
the context:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A building or use that is on the same lot
as and subordinate to the main building, and which is under the same
ownership or control as and used for a purpose customarily incident to
the use of the main building.
BATHROOM — Any enclosed space which contains one or more of
the following: bathtub, shower, water closet, lavatory, water closet
compartment, washbowl, sink or fixtures serving similar purposes.
BUILDING — Any building or structure or part thereof, whether used
for human habitation or otherwise, and includes any outbuildings and
appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith.
DETERIORATION — The condition or appearance of a building or a
part thereof, characterized by holes, breaks, rot, crumbling, crackling,
peeling, rusting or other evidence of physical decay or neglect, lack of
maintenance or excessive use or wear.
EXPOSED TO PUBLIC VIEW — Any premises or part thereof which
may be lawfully viewed by the public or any member thereof from
a sidewalk, street, alleyway, parking lot or from any adjoining or
neighboring premises.
EXTERIOR OF THE PREMISES — Any part of the premises not
occupied by any building thereon; any open space on the outside of any
building; or any part of any building which is exposed to the elements.
EXTERMINATION — The control and elimination of insects, rodents
and vermin by eliminating their harborage places or by removing or
making inaccessible material that may serve as their food, or by
poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping or any other approved means
of pest elimination.
§ 80-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-12
1:407
GARBAGE — The animal and vegetable and other organic waste
resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of
food or other products.
INFESTATION — The presence on or within a premises of any insects,
rodents or other pests.
MIXED OCCUPANCY — Any building, such as an apartment,
multifamily dwelling or other such building, containing one or more
dwelling units, rooming units or hotel or motel accommodations and
also, for a portion thereof, devoted to nonresidential uses.
NUISANCE —
OCCUPANCY UNIT — Any apartment, multifamily dwelling unit or any
room or group of rooms or part thereof forming a single usable unit
and located within a building used or intended to be used or designed
to be used in whole or in part for commercial, business, industrial,
multifamily or other residential or nonresidential occupancy.
OCCUPANT — Any person or persons, including the owner, in actual
possession of and using an entire building or an occupancy unit in the
building.
OPERATOR — Any person who has charge, care or control of the
premises or part thereof, whether with or without the knowledge and
consent of the owner.
OWNER — Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others,
shall have legal or equitable title to any premises with or without
accompanying actual possession thereof, or shall have charge, care
or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit as owner or agent of the
owner or as fiduciary, including but not limited to executor, executrix,
administrator, administratrix, trustee, receiver or guardian of the estate
or as a mortgagee in possession, regardless of how much possession
was obtained. Any person who is a lessee subletting or reassigning any
Any public nuisance known in public law or in law or in equity
jurisprudence or as provided by the statutes of the State of New
Jersey or by the ordinances of the Borough of Park Ridge.
(1)
Any inadequately protected well, shaft, basement, excavation,
abandoned motor vehicle, icebox, refrigerator, structurally
unsound fence or building, lumber, trash, debris or vegetation such
as but not limited to poison ivy, oak or sumac or other condition
which is or may be detrimental to the safety or health of persons.
(2)
Physical conditions dangerous to human life or detrimental to
health of persons on or near the premises where the conditions
exist.
(3)
Whatever renders air, food or drink unwholesome or detrimental to
the health of human beings.
(4)
(5) Fire hazards.
§ 80-12 PARK RIDGE CODE § 80-12
1:408
part or all of any dwelling or dwelling unit shall be deemed to be a
co-owner with the lessor and shall have joint responsibility over the
portion of the premises sublet or assigned by said lessee.
PARTIES IN INTEREST — All individuals, associations and corporations
who have interests of record in a building and any who are in actual
possession thereof.
PERSON — The same meaning as defined in New Jersey Statutes
Annotated 1:1-2.
PREMISES — Any lot, plot or parcel of land and any buildings located
thereon.
PUBLIC OFFICER — The Construction Code Official and/or the Zoning
Officer who are authorized by this chapter to exercise the powers
prescribed by this code.[Amended 7-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-19]
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except
body wastes), including but not limited to garbage, rubbish, ashes,
street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles and solid
market and industrial wastes, brush, weeds, broken glass, stumps,
trash, building materials and debris of any description.
RUBBISH — All combustible and noncombustible waste material,
except garbage.
STRUCTURE — An assembly of materials forming a construction,
including but not limited to buildings, stadiums, gospel and circus
tents, reviewing stands, platforms, stagings, observation towers, radio
towers, water tanks, trestles, open sheds, bins, shelters, fences and
display racks and signs, built or constructed and permanently affixed
on or under the ground or upon another structure or building.
TRANSLUCENT — That property of admitting the passage of light but
diffusing it so that objects beyond it cannot be clearly distinguished.
WATER CLOSET COMPARTMENT — An enclosure containing a single
water closet.
WEATHERING — Deterioration, decay or damage caused by exposure
to the elements.
WINDOW — An opening in the wall or roof of a building for the
admission of light, which opening may be closed to the elements by
casements or sashes containing glass or other transparent material.
WINDOW DISPLAY AREA — That area of a building in proximity to the
inner surface of a window which is designed or used for the viewing
of the interior and the display of items representative of any goods or
services pertaining to the business therein.
B. Word usage. Whenever, in describing or referring to any person, party,
matter or thing, any word importing the singular number or masculine
gender is used, the same shall be understood to include and to apply to
several persons or parties as well as to one person, and to females as
§ 80-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-12
1:409
§ 80-13. Maintenance of exterior of premises.
well as males and to bodies corporate as well as individuals, and to
several matters and things as well as one matter or thing. The word
"shall" shall be applied retroactively as well as prospectively.
A. The exterior of the premises shall be kept free of litter (including,
without limiting the generality of the foregoing, discarded, windblown,
deposited, dropped or strewn paper, wrappings, cardboard, bottles,
cans, boxes and broken glass) and of all nuisances and hazards to the
safety of tenants, occupants, pedestrians and other persons having
access to the premises, and free of unsanitary conditions; and any of the
foregoing shall be promptly removed and abated. The word "hazards"
shall include but is not limited to the following:
(1) Refuse.
(2) Dead and dying trees and other natural growth which, by reason of
rotting or deteriorating conditions or storm damage, are or may be
dangerous to persons in the vicinity thereof. Trees kept pruned and
trimmed to prevent such conditions.
(3) Loose overhanging and projecting objects and accumulations of ice
and snow, which, by reason of location above ground level,
constitute dangers to persons in the vicinity thereof.
(4) Holes, mounds, excavations, breaks, projections, obstructions and
excretions of pets and other animals on paths, sidewalks, walks,
driveways, parking lots and parking areas and other parts of the
exterior of the premises which are accessible to and used by
persons having access to such premises.
(5) Accumulations of stormwater. Adequate runoff drains shall be
provided and maintained in accordance with the Standard Building
Code of New Jersey or with any other building code adopted by the
Borough of Park Ridge, to eliminate recurrent accumulations of
stormwater.
(6) Sources of infestation.
(7) Structurally unsound, defective or damaged foundation walls.
Foundation walls shall be kept structurally sound, free from defects
and damage and capable of bearing imposed loads safely.
(8) Structurally unsound or defective chimneys. Chimneys and flue and
vent attachments thereto shall be maintained structurally sound,
free from defects and so maintained as to capably perform at all
times the functions for which they were designed and constructed.
Chimneys, flues, gas vents and other draft-producing equipment
shall provide sufficient draft to develop the rated output of the
connected equipment and shall be structurally safe, durable,
smoketight and capable of withstanding the action of flue gases.
§ 80-12 PARK RIDGE CODE § 80-13
1:410
§ 80-14. Appearance of exterior of premises.
The exterior of the premises shall be maintained so that the appearance
thereof shall reflect a level of maintenance in keeping with the standards
of the neighborhood or such higher standards as may be adopted by the
Borough of Park Ridge and such that the appearance thereof shall not
constitute a blighting effect upon neighboring properties nor an element
leading to a progressive deterioration and downgrading of neighboring
(9) Defective or deteriorating porches, stairs and fire escapes. Exterior
porches, landings, balconies, stairs and fire escapes shall be
provided with banisters or railings properly designed and
maintained structurally sound, in good repair, well painted or
otherwise provided with a protective treatment to prevent
deterioration and free from defects.
(10) Accumulations of dirt, stones and debris in streets and gutters.
Dirt, stones and debris shall be prevented from accumulating in
streets and gutters and should be removed by abutting property
owner.
B. Where it shall be necessary and expedient for the preservation of the
public health, safety and general welfare or to eliminate a fire hazard,
to remove from lands within the Borough of Park Ridge, or to destroy
brush, weeds, including ragweed, dead and dying trees, stumps, roots
and obnoxious growths, filth, garbage, trash and debris, the Public
Officer may order the owner or occupant of said lands to remove or
destroy said items. In the event that said order is not complied with
within a period of 10 days after served, the Public Officer may provide
for the removal or destruction of the same.
(1) In all cases where brush, weeds, including ragweed, dead and
dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious growth, filth, garbage, trash
and debris are destroyed or removed from any lands under the
provisions of this chapter by or under the direction of the Public
Officer, such officer shall certify the cost thereof to the governing
body, which shall examine the certificate and, if found correct, shall
cause the cost as shown thereon to be charged against said land;
the amount so charged shall forthwith become and form part of the
taxes next to be assessed and levied upon such land, the same to
bear interest at the same rate as taxes, and shall be collected and
enforced by the same officers and in the same manner as taxes.
C. Stormwater runoff from any individual property must be maintained
and controlled on that property and not adversely impact any adjacent
property. Under no circumstances shall stormwater and/or leaders be
directed to any adjacent properties. [Added 7-10-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-19]
D. Any person who shall violate this section shall be subject to penalties as
set forth in Article VII of this code.
§ 80-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-14
1:411
properties with an accompanying diminution of property values, including
the following:
A. The landscaping of premises shall be maintained in an orderly state,
with lawns and bushes trimmed and free from becoming overgrown,
littered and unsightly where such would constitute a blighting effect,
depreciating nearby and adjoining property. Open areas shall be graded
evenly to eliminate holes, depressions, gullies, mounds, accumulations
of debris or other unsightly or unsafe conditions. [Amended
11-14-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-032]
B. Repair and painting of exterior of buildings. All store fronts and the
exteriors of all buildings shall be kept in good repair, painted when
required or otherwise provided with protective treatment sufficient to
prevent deterioration and to not constitute a safety hazard or nuisance.
In the event repairs to a store front become necessary, such repairs
shall be made in harmony with the original design or with such other
design as may be approved by an architectural review board or such
other, board, agency, commission or committee as designated by the
Mayor and Council. In no event shall any work or repair be done
without first submitting the plan to said architectural review board or
such board, agency, commission or committee as may be designated by
the Mayor and Council as above stated.
C. Signs. All signs, including the structural and supporting components
thereof, and all light stanchions and poles shall be maintained in good
repair.
D. Awnings and marquees. Any awning or marquee and its accompanying
structural members which extend over any street, sidewalk or other
portion of the premises shall be maintained in good repair and shall be
so maintained as to not constitute a nuisance or a safety hazard. In the
event any such awning or marquee is not properly maintained in
accordance with the foregoing, it shall, together with its supporting
members, be removed forthwith. In the event any such awning or
marquee is made of cloth, plastic or of similar materials, said materials,
where exposed to public view, shall be maintained in good condition and
shall not show evidence of excessive weathering, discoloration, ripping,
tearing or other deterioration. Nothing herein shall be construed to
authorize any encroachment of an awning, marquee or its
accompanying structural members on streets, sidewalks or other parts
of the public domain.
E. Scaffolding. No temporary painting scaffold or other temporary
equipment used for construction, repair or maintenance shall be
permitted to remain in place beyond the period of six months after
erection or placement thereof, without permission of the Public Officer.
§ 80-14 PARK RIDGE CODE § 80-15
1:412
§ 80-15. Structural soundness and general maintenance of building
exteriors.
The exterior of every building shall be maintained in good repair, and
all exterior surfaces thereof shall be kept painted or otherwise provided
with a protective treatment where necessary for purposes of preservation
and appearance. All exterior surfaces thereof shall be maintained free
from broken glass, loose shingles or siding, crumpling masonry, excessively
peeling paint or other condition reflective of deterioration or inadequate
maintenance, to the end that the building itself may be preserved, safety
and fire hazards eliminated and adjoining properties and the neighborhood
protected from blighting influence.
§ 80-16. General sanitation and safety.
A. Floors shall be maintained in a structurally sound condition, capable of
safely bearing imposed loads and shall be maintained at all times in a
condition so as to be free of hazards.
B. Bathroom and water closet compartment floors shall be surfaced with
water-resistant material and shall be kept in a dry, clean and sanitary
condition at all times.
C. Supporting structural members shall be kept structurally sound, free
from deterioration and capable of safely bearing imposed loads.
D. In buildings containing not more than four occupancy units, it shall be
the responsibility of each of the occupants, and in buildings containing
more than four occupancy units, it shall be the responsibility of the
owner and operator, to furnish such receptacles as are needed for the
proper storage of garbage and rubbish until removal thereof, and to
provide for the periodic removal of all garbage and rubbish from the
premises, in accordance with the regulations and ordinances of the
Borough of Park Ridge.92
E. Storage bins, rooms and areas shall not be used for the storage of
accumulated garbage and rubbish unless:
(1) Such garbage is stored in watertight receptacles of metal or other
material approved by the Public Officer and provided with tightfitting
covers.
(2) Such rubbish is stored in nonleaking receptacles of metal or other
material approved by the Public Officer.
(3) Such storage bins, rooms and areas are of smooth, easily cleanable
construction and are kept in a sanitary condition.
(4) Such areas, if located outside of a building and visible from any
public walk, street or public parking area, are shielded by a method
92.Editor's Note: See Ch. 64, Garbage, Rubbish and Trash.
§ 80-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-16
1:413
§ 80-17. Utilities and facilities.
approved by the Public Officer and constructed in compliance with
the applicable provisions of the Standard Building Code of New
Jersey or of any building code subsequently adopted by the
Borough of Park Ridge.93
F. Rubbish and garbage shall be placed or kept on the property within the
building located thereon or not nearer to the street line than the
building line or nearer to the street line than the face of the building,
whichever distance from the street line is greater, except during any
cleanup week proclaimed by the Borough Council.
G. Flammable or combustible liquids or other materials shall not be stored
on the premises unless they are of a type approved for storage by
regulation of the Fire Department and then only in such quantities and
in such fireproof storage containers as may be prescribed by applicable
Fire Department regulations.
H. Every occupant of a single occupancy unit in a building comprising a
single occupancy unit shall be responsible for the extermination of any
insects, rodents or other pests therein or on the premises; and each
occupant of an occupancy unit in any building which has more than one
occupancy unit shall be responsible for the extermination whenever his
occupancy unit is the only one infested. Notwithstanding the foregoing
provisions of this subsection, whenever infestation is caused by failure
of the owner or operator to maintain any such building in a reasonably
pestproof condition, extermination shall be the responsibility of the
owner or operator. Whenever infestation exists in two or more of the
occupancy units in any building or in the common parts of any building
containing two or more occupancy units, extermination thereof shall be
the responsibility of the owner or operator.
A. Every building shall be provided with electric service, where required,
in accordance with the standards set up by the Department of Public
Utilities of the Borough of Park Ridge, the Construction Code Official of
the Borough of Park Ridge and any codes or ordinances adopted
heretofore or hereinafter by the Borough Council of the Borough of
Park Ridge. [Amended 5-14-1979 by Ord. No. 79-4]
B. Every bathroom and water closet compartment shall be provided with
permanently installed and operating artificial lighting fixtures with
switches and wall plates so located and maintained that there is no
danger of electrical shock from a simultaneous contact with a water
supply fixture.
C. Maximum fuse sizes, as specified by those persons or entities
enumerated in Subsection A above, shall be posted conspicuously on
the inside cover of all fuse boxes, and no fuse shall be installed therein
93.Editor's Note: See Ch. 50, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 80-16 PARK RIDGE CODE § 80-17
1:414
§ 80-18. Duties and responsibilities of occupants.
in excess of the stated maximum. Owners and operators shall not be
held responsible for violations in fuse sizes where the correct maximum
size is stated and the fuse box is located within any part of the building
which is the exclusive possession of an occupant or occupants other
than the owner.
A. Upon discovery of an occupant of any condition on the premises which
constitutes a violation of this code, the occupant shall report the same
to the Public Officer responsible for the enforcement of this code.
B. All parts of the premises under the control of an occupant shall be kept
in a clean, sanitary and safe condition by the occupant, and the
occupant shall refrain from performing any acts which would render
other parts of the premises unclean, unsanitary or unsafe or which
would prevent the owner or operator from performing any duty
required hereunder.
§ 80-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-18
1:415

ARTICLE V
Provisions Applicable to All Buildings
§ 80-19. Residential and nonresidential buildings to comply.
[Amended 11-14-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-032]
Every residential and nonresidential building which is situated in the
Borough of Park Ridge, previously or presently used or intended to be used
for dwelling, commercial, business or industrial occupancy, shall comply
with the provisions of this code, whether or not such building shall have
been constructed, altered or repaired before or after the enactment of this
code and irrespective of any permits or licenses which shall have been
issued for the use or occupancy of the building or for the installation or
repair of equipment or facilities prior to the effective date of this code.
This code establishes minimum standards for the initial and continued
occupancy and use of all such buildings. It does not modify or replace
standards otherwise established for the construction, repair, alteration or
use of the building or facilities contained therein, except as provided in
§ 80-5.
§ 80-20. (Reserved)94
94.Editor’s Note: Original § 80-20, Nonapplicability, was repealed 11-14-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-032.
§ 80-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-20
1:417

ARTICLE VI
Administrative Provisions
§ 80-21. Enforcing officers. [Amended 5-14-1979 by Ord. No. 79-4;
11-12-1985 by Ord. No. 85-17]
The Construction Code Official and the Zoning Officer are hereby
designated as the public officers to exercise the powers prescribed by this
chapter. They may designate such other public officials or employees of the
Borough of Park Ridge to perform such of their functions and powers under
this chapter as they reasonably deem necessary for enforcement thereof,
including the making of inspections and conduct of hearings.
§ 80-22. Inspection of premises.
All premises within the Borough covered by this code shall be subject to
inspection from time to time by the Public Officer to determine the condition
thereof in order that he may perform his duties of safeguarding the health
and safety of the persons occupying the same and of the general public.
For the purpose of making such inspections, the Public Officer is hereby
authorized to enter, examine and survey at all reasonable times all such
premises; provided, however, that such entries are made in such manner
as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession.
The owner, operator and persons occupying the same shall give the Public
Officer free access to the same at all reasonable times for the purpose
of such inspection. Every person occupying such premises shall give the
owner and operator thereof access at all reasonable times to that portion
of the premises occupied by or in the possession of such person for the
purpose of making such repairs, alterations or corrections as are necessary
to effect compliance with the provisions of this code or with any lawful rule
or regulation adopted or any lawful order issued pursuant to the provisions
of this code.
§ 80-23. Determination of unfitness for use or occupancy. [Amended
5-14-1979 by Ord. No. 79-4]
A. For the purposes of this chapter, the Public Officer may determine that
a building is unfit for human habitation, use or occupancy if he finds
that conditions exist in such building which are dangerous or injurious
to the safety of persons occupying or using the same or neighboring
buildings or other residents of the Borough. Such conditions may
include the following without limiting the generality of the foregoing:
defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accident or other
calamities; structural defects; or failure to comply with the standards
established by Article IV of this chapter.
B. Conditions such as the lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitation
facilities, uncleanliness or any other conditions of a health nature shall
be immediately referred to the Board of Health to be investigated under
Chapter 70 of the Borough Code.
§ 80-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-24
1:419
§ 80-24. Charges and hearing.
Whenever a petition is filed with the Public Officer by a public authority, as
defined in N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.4, or by at least five residents of the Borough,
charging that any building is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or
use, or whenever it appears to the Public Officer, on his own motion, that
any building is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use, the Public
Officer shall, after a preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such
charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner of and parties in
interest in such building a complaint stating the charges in that respect and
containing a notice that a hearing will be held before the Public Officer (or
his designated agent) at a place therein fixed not less than 10 days nor more
than 30 days after the serving of said complaint, and that the owner and
parties in interest shall be given the right to file an answer to the complaint
and to appear in person or otherwise and give testimony at the place and
time fixed in the complaint, and that the rules of evidence prevailing in the
courts of the State of New Jersey shall not be controlling in hearings before
the Public Officer.
§ 80-25. Findings of fact and order.
If, after the notice and hearing provided for in § 80-24, the Public Officer
determines that the building under consideration is unfit for human
habitation or occupancy or use, he shall state in writing his findings of fact
in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served
upon the owner thereof and parties in interest an order requiring:
§ 80-26. Failure of owner to comply with order to repair or vacate.
If the owner fails to comply with an order requiring him to repair, alter
or improve, or, at his option, to vacate and close the building, the Public
Officer may cause such building to be repaired, altered or improved or to
be vacated and closed, and may cause to be posted on the main entrance
of any building so closed a placard with the following words: "This building
is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use; the use or occupation of
this building is prohibited and unlawful."
A. The repair, alteration or improvement of the said building to be made by
the owner within a reasonable time, which time shall be set forth in the
order, or, at the option of the owner, to vacate or to have said building
vacated and closed within the time set forth in the order; and
B. If the building is in such a condition as to make it dangerous to the
health and safety of persons on or near the premises and the owner fails
to repair, alter or improve the said building within the time specified in
the order, that the owner remove or demolish the building within a
reasonable time as specified in the said order of removal.
§ 80-24 PARK RIDGE CODE § 80-27
1:420
§ 80-27. Failure of owner to comply with order to remove or
demolish.
If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the
building, the Public Officer may cause such building to be removed or
demolished or may contract for the removal or demolition thereof after
advertisement for and receipt of bids therefor.
§ 80-28. Lien of municipality.
§ 80-29. Certificate of necessity.
A. The amount of:
(1) The cost of legal and engineering fees, expert witness' fees,
searches and advertising charges incurred in the course of any
proceedings taken under this code and determined in favor of the
Borough; and
(2) The cost of any such repairs, alterations or improvements, or
vacating and closing, or removal or demolition, if any, undertaken
pursuant to §§ 80-26 and 80-27 hereof, or the amount of the
balance thereof remaining after deduction of the sum realized from
the sale of materials derived from such building or from any
contract for removal or demolition thereof, shall be a municipal lien
against the real property upon which such cost was incurred.
B. If the building is removed or demolished by the Public Officer, he shall
sell the materials of such building. There shall be credited against the
cost of the removal or demolition thereof the proceeds of any sale of
such materials or any sum derived from any contract for the removal or
demolition of the building. If there are no such credits or if the sum
total of such costs exceeds the total of such credits, a detailed
statement (herein called the "municipal lien certificate") of the
aforesaid costs and the amount so due shall be filed by the Public
Officer with the Municipal Tax Assessor of the Borough and a copy
thereof shall be forthwith forwarded by the Public Officer to the owner
by registered or certified mail. If the total of the credits exceeds such
costs, the balance remaining shall be deposited with the Clerk of the
Superior Court by the Public Officer, shall be secured in such manner as
may be directed by such Court and shall be disbursed according to the
order or judgment of the Court to the persons found to be entitled
thereto by final order or judgment of such Court; provided, however,
that nothing contained in this code shall be construed to limit or impair
in any way the power of the Borough to define and declare nuisances
and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or
otherwise. Any owner or party in interest may, within 60 days of the
filing of the municipal lien certificate, proceed in a summary manner in
the Superior Court to contest the reasonableness of the amount or the
accuracy of the costs set forth in the municipal lien certificate.
§ 80-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-29
1:421
A. Application for certificate. Where any owner, operator or occupant is
required to make repairs or otherwise improve his property and is
unable to comply with this code without having a right of access to the
premises through or across adjoining premises not owned by him or
under his control, and where right of access has been refused such
owner, operator or occupant required to make such repair, or where the
owner or person empowered to grant such access cannot be found or
located, then upon the filing of an affidavit by such owner, operator or
occupant with the Public Officer, setting forth the facts and applying for
a certificate of necessity, the Public Officer shall serve written notice of
a hearing on said application upon the applicant for such certificate and
upon the owner or person empowered to grant such access. Said notice
of hearing shall state the matters to be considered at said hearing and
shall be served in the manner prescribed for the service of complaints
and orders by New Jersey Statutes Annotated 40:48-2.7, except that the
Public Officer shall not be required to record or lodge a copy of such
notice with the county recording officer of the County of Bergen. At
least 10 days' notice of such hearing shall be given where the address of
the owner or person empowered to grant such access is known. If such
address is unknown or cannot be ascertained by the Public Officer in
the exercise of reasonable diligence, at least 30 days' notice thereof
shall be given, calculated from the date of the first newspaper
publication thereof.
B. Hearing. On the day fixed for hearing, the Public Officer shall provide
opportunity for the owner or person empowered to grant such access to
state why such access should not be granted.
C. Issuance of certificate; contents. If the Public Officer determines that
such access is necessary to accomplish or complete repairs or
improvements necessary for compliance with this code, then the Public
Officer shall grant a certificate of necessity, granting and ordering
access and setting forth therein the person or persons to whom the
certificate shall apply, such conditions as shall be necessary to protect
adjoining property, reasonable time limits during which such certificate
shall operate, precautions to be taken to avoid damage and, where the
Public Officer deems proper, that a bond be procured at the expense of
the person seeking such access, to secure such adjoining property
owner against damage to persons or property arising out of such right
of access. The amount set for the bond shall take into consideration the
extent, nature and duration of the repairs and improvements, the
proximity thereof to the premises over which access has been sought
and the potential risk of damage thereto. Said bond, if required, shall be
filed with the Public Officer.
D. Refusal to comply with certificate. Any refusal to comply with a
certificate issued hereunder, or any interference with the purpose for
which a certificate is issued, shall be a violation of this code, and, in
addition to the penalties provided hereunder, the Public Officer may,
upon affidavit setting forth the facts, apply to the Judge of the Borough
§ 80-29 PARK RIDGE CODE § 80-29
1:422
§ 80-30. Notice of alleged violation.
Whenever the Public Officer determines that there are reasonable grounds
to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of this chapter,
he shall give notice of such alleged violation to the person or persons
responsible therefor as hereinafter provided.
§ 80-31. Hearing upon alleged violation.
If a hearing is requested pursuant to § 80-30 hereof, it shall be commenced
not later than 10 days after request therefor is made, provided that for good
cause, the Public Officer may postpone such hearing for a reasonable time.
If, after hearing, the Public Officer finds that no violation exists, he shall
withdraw the notice. If he finds that a violation does exist, he shall enter
and issue an order requiring the abatement of same within a prescribed
reasonable time. The proceedings at such hearings, including the findings
and decisions of the Public Officer, shall be summarized, reduced to writing
and entered as a matter of public record in the office of the Public Officer.
§ 80-32. Special procedure in emergency conditions.
Whenever the Public Officer finds that an emergency exists which requires
immediate attention to protect the public health or safety, he may, without
notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such an
for a warrant authorizing access, and if the Judge is satisfied as to the
matters set forth in said affidavit, he shall authorize the issuance of a
warrant permitting access.
A. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing.
(2) Include a statement of the reasons why it is being issued.
(3) Be served upon the owner or occupant of the premises or the agent
of either of them, provided that such notice shall be deemed to be
properly served if a copy thereof is served upon such person
personally or sent by certified or registered mail to his last known
address or posted in a conspicuous place in or about the premises
affected by the notice.
B. Such notice shall also state that unless within 10 days from service of
this notice a written request is made for a hearing before the Public
Officer, said notice shall, at the expiration of such ten-day period, be
deemed an order to cease and desist from and to abate the described
violation, and such notice shall prescribe a reasonable time within
which such persons shall be required to cease and desist from and
abate such violation.
C. The notice may also contain an outline of remedial action which, if
taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of this code.
§ 80-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-32
1:423
emergency and requiring that such action be taken as he deems necessary
to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this code,
such orders shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom such order
is directed shall comply therewith immediately, but upon petition to the
Public Officer, shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible. After such
hearing, the Public Officer shall continue such order in effect, or modify or
withdraw it.
§ 80-33. Notice and hearing not required in all cases.
Notwithstanding the provisions of § 80-30 hereof, the Public Officer may, at
his election, prosecute violations of any section of this code involving public
health or public safety, without notice, by the filing of a complaint with the
Clerk of the Municipal Court of the Borough of Park Ridge.
§ 80-34. Service of orders; powers of Public Officer.
§ 80-35. Annual review and report.
The Public Officer shall, in the month of December of each year, review with
the Fire Chief, Health Officer, Borough Engineer and Borough Council the
A. Complaints, orders and certificates of necessity issued by the Public
Officer pursuant to this code shall be served and recorded or lodged for
record in the manner prescribed by New Jersey Statutes Annotated
40:48-2.7.
B. At any hearing held by the Public Officer pursuant to the provisions of
this code, the Public Officer shall be vested with all the powers provided
by law to issue subpoenas, to compel the attendance of witnesses and
parties in interest and to require the production of books, records and
other documents which may be pertinent to matters to be determined
by the Public Officer.
C. The Public Officer is hereby authorized and empowered to exercise
such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out the
purposes and provisions of this code, including but not limited to the
following, in addition to others herein granted:
(1) To administer oaths, affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence.
(2) To make and adopt such written rules and regulations as he may
deem necessary and the Borough Council approves by resolution,
for the proper enforcement of the provisions of this code; provided,
however, that such rules and regulations shall not be in conflict
with the provisions of this code nor in any way alter, amend, add to
or supersede any of the provisions hereof. The Public Officer shall
file a certified copy of all such rules and regulations in his office and
in the office of the Borough Clerk.
§ 80-32 PARK RIDGE CODE § 80-35
1:424
procedure and operation of this code, and report to the Borough Council on
or before January 1:
A. Any recommended amendments, additions or modifications of the
provisions of this code consonant with the field experience of the
personnel charged with enforcement.
B. A summary of the enforcement experience, indicating number of
violations abated, number of cases processed in the Municipal Court,
number of inspections made and such other and pertinent information
as will provide the Borough Council with an annual account of the
maintenance of the standards required by this code.
C. Any further recommendations as to how this code and procedures and
operations thereunder may be improved.
§ 80-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-35
1:425

ARTICLE VII
Penalties
§ 80-36. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-8-1974 by Ord. No.
74-16]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this code or any order
promulgated hereunder shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not
to exceed $500 or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to
exceed 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment; and each violation
of any of the provisions of this chapter, and each day that such violation
shall continue, shall be deemed to be a separate and distinct offense.
§ 80-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-36
1:427

ARTICLE VIII
Foreclosure Properties
[Added 11-25-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-025]
§ 80-37. Creditor maintenance obligations.
A. Any creditor, individual or entity filing a summons and complaint in an
action to foreclose on any real property within the Borough of Park
Ridge shall be responsible for the care, maintenance, security and
upkeep of the exterior of the property, if vacant and/or abandoned. If
said creditor, individual or entity is located outside of the State of New
Jersey, said creditor, individual or entity shall be required to appoint an
agent or representative within the State of New Jersey to act on behalf
of the creditor, individual or entity, providing the Borough of Park Ridge
with the full name and contact information of the agent or
representative within the State of New Jersey at the time the creditor,
individual or entity provides the notice to the Borough required by
N.J.S.A. 46:10(B)-51.
B. Either the Zoning Officer or the Construction Code Official of the
Borough of Park Ridge shall be authorized to issue a notice to the
creditor, individual or entity filing a foreclosure action if it is
determined that the creditor, individual or entity has failed to provide
for the care, maintenance, security and upkeep of the exterior of any
vacant and abandoned property. Said notice shall require the creditor,
individual or entity to correct any violation within 30 days of receipt of
the notice, or within 10 days of receipt of the notice if the violation
presents an imminent threat to public health and safety. The issuance of
a notice pursuant to this subsection shall constitute proof that a
property is vacant and abandoned for the purposes of N.J.S.A. 2A:50-73.
C. An out-of-state creditor found by the municipal court entrusted with the
responsibility of adjudicating violations of the within Ordinance or any
other court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the
requirement to appoint an in-state representative or agent pursuant to
this article shall be subject to a fine of $2,500 for each day of any
violation of this article. Any fines imposed on a creditor for failure to
appoint an in-State representative or agent shall commence on the day
after the ten-day period set forth in Paragraph (l) of Subsection a. of
Section 17 of P.L. 2008, chapter 127 [N.J.S.A. 46:10(B)-51)] for
providing notice to the Borough Clerk that a summons and complaint in
an action to foreclose on a mortgage has been served.
D. A creditor, individual or agent found by the municipal court having the
responsibility of adjudicating violations of this article to have violated
the requirement to correct, care for, maintain, secure or upkeep
property which is subject to this article shall be subject to a fine of
$1,500 for each day of the violation. Any fines imposed pursuant to this
paragraph shall commence 31 days following receipt of the notice
except if the violation presents an imminent risk to public health and
§ 80-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-37
1:429
safety, in which case any fines shall commence 11 days following
receipt of the notice.
E. For purposes of this article, failure to maintain, care for or secure
vacant or abandoned property shall include the following:
(1) Overgrown or neglected vegetation;
(2) The accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers, mail or other
paper on the property;
(3) Disconnected gas, electric or water utility services to the property;
(4) The accumulation of hazardous, noxious or unhealthy substances
or materials on the property;
(5) The absence of window treatments such as blinds, curtains or
shutters;
(6) Windows or entrances to the property that are boarded up, closed
off, damaged, broken and/or unrepaired.
(7) Doors that are broken, unhinged or continuously unlocked;
(8) Any violation of a any applicable building, housing or similar Code;
(9) Any condition evidencing a risk to the health, safety or welfare of
any adjoining property due to acts of vandalism, loitering, criminal
conduct;
(10) Any physical destruction or deterioration of the exterior of the
structure.
§ 80-37 PARK RIDGE CODE § 80-37
1:430
ARTICLE IX
Tree Removal
[Added 3-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-004]
§ 80-38. Definitions.
The words and phrases used in this article will have the following meanings:
CLEAR-CUTTING — The removal in any calendar year of more than four
trees or 25% of the trees on any lot in the Borough as depicted on the
Borough's tax map or on or in any approved subdivision plat or deed,
whichever lot is smaller in size, not on any Borough right-of-way.
PERSON — Any individual, sole proprietor, corporation, partnership,
limited-liability company, or any other business.
TREE — Any living woody perennial plant with a trunk having a diameter of
at least eight inches when measured at a point that is four feet six inches
above the level of the existing grade, or, for a multiple-trunked tree, with
the trunk with the largest diameter that, when multiplied by 1.5, is at least
eight inches.
§ 80-39. Clear-cutting prohibited.
No person may clear-cut any lot in the Borough without obtaining a permit
from the Borough.
§ 80-40. Application for clear-cutting permit.
Applications for permission to clear-cut a lot are to be filed with the Zoning
Office and will state the information requested on the application, including:
§ 80-41. Review of applications.
The Zoning Officer will grant or deny any application filed under this
article within 30 days of the receipt of the application and fee, unless the
applicant consents to an extension. If no action is taken by the Zoning
Officer within this time period, then the application will be deemed denied.
Any application for clear cutting will be reviewed by the Zoning Officer and
A. The applicant's name, address, and telephone number.
B. The address, block and lot number, and location of the property.
C. A site plan or survey of the property showing the location of the trees
proposed to be cut.
D. The applicant also will use visible weatherproof markings on the trees
proposed to be cut, provided that no paint or chemicals that are harmful
to the trees are used.
E. An application fee in the amount of $25 to be paid upon the filing of an
application under this article.
§ 80-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-41
1:431
will be granted or denied on written notice sent to the applicant at the
address stated in the application. The Zoning Officer may request comment
on the application from the other Borough employees, Construction Official,
Green Team, Shade Tree Committee, Borough Planner, and/or Borough
Engineer.
§ 80-42. Enforcement and penalties.
The Borough's Zoning Officer will enforce this article. For violation of this
article, there shall be a fine of $250. Each tree that is cut in violation of
this article shall be a considered a separate violation. In addition to fines,
the Zoning Officer may require implementation of any remedial measures
recommended by the Borough Engineer and/or Borough Planner to correct
the violations of this article.
§ 80-41 PARK RIDGE CODE § 80-42
1:432
Chapter 81
RENTAL UNIT REGISTRATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing Task Force — See Ch. 18. Property maintenance — See Ch. 80.
§ 81-1. Definitions.
Unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning, the following
words or phrases when used in this chapter shall have the following
meanings:
AGENT — The individual or individuals designated by the owner as the
persons authorized by the owner to perform any duty imposed upon the
owner by this chapter. The term does not necessarily mean a licensed
real estate broker or salesman of the State of New Jersey as those terms
are defined by N.J.S.A. 45:15-1 et seq. However, such term may include a
licensed real estate broker or salesman of the State of New Jersey if such
person designated by the owner as his agent is so licensed.
DWELLING UNIT — A single-family residence rented and not occupied by
the owner, or a two-family residence where one of the units is not occupied
by the owner, or a two-family residence where neither unit is occupied by
the owner, or any multifamily residence including apartments in and above
commercial buildings. Condominiums, townhouses, and garden apartment
complexes are excluded. However, nothing in this chapter shall exclude any
unit subject to the Uniformed Fire Code to be inspected by the Borough's
Fire Prevention Offices in accordance with the Uniformed Fire
Code.[Amended 10-26-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-34]
LICENSE — The license issued by the Borough Clerk or designee attesting
that the rental unit has been properly registered in accordance with this
chapter.
LICENSEE — The person to whom the license is issued pursuant to this
chapter. The term "licensee" includes within its definition the term "agent"
where applicable.
OWNER — Any person or group of persons, firm, corporation, or officer
thereof, partnership association, or trust, who owns, operates, exercises
control over or are in charge of a rental facility.
PERSON — An individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association, trust
or other legal entity, or any combination thereof.
RENTAL FACILITY — Every building, group of buildings or a portion thereof
which is kept, used, maintained, advertised or held out to be a place where
living accommodations are supplied, whether furnished or unfurnished, for
pay or other consideration, to one or more individuals and is meant to
include apartments and apartment complexes.
§ 80-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-1
1:433
RENTAL UNIT — A dwelling unit as defined in § 81-1 of this chapter.
§ 81-2. Annual registration required.
All residential dwelling units shall hereafter be registered with the Borough
Clerk or designee of the Borough of Park Ridge or such other person
as designated by the Borough Council on forms which shall be provided
for that purpose and which shall be obtained from the Borough Clerk or
designee. Such registration shall occur on an annual basis as provided
herein.
§ 81-3. Registration and licensing term; initial registration.
§ 81-4. Filing and contents of registration forms.
Without in any way intending to infringe upon the requirements of
N.J.S.A.46:8-28, all dwelling units shall be registered and licensed as
provided herein. Every owner shall file with the Borough Clerk or designee
of the Borough of Park Ridge or such other person as designated by the
Borough Council a registration form for each unit contained within a
building or structure, which shall include the following information:
A. Each dwelling unit shall be registered with the Borough on each change
in occupancy. The license term shall commence on January 1 and shall
be valid until December 31 of the following calendar year, at which time
it shall expire and a new registration and license shall be required.
B. The initial registration shall occur within 45 days following the adoption
of this chapter. Any lease which has been executed prior to the adoption
of this chapter shall not be affected, but the rental unit must
nevertheless be registered, inspected and licensed in accordance with
this chapter.
C. No dwelling unit shall hereafter be rented unless the rental unit is
registered and licensed in accordance with this chapter. However, only
one registration for the unit is required each year.
A. The name and address of the record owner or owners of the premises
and the record owner or owners of the rental business if not the same
persons. In the case of a partnership, the names and addresses of all
general partners shall be provided, together with the telephone
numbers for each such individuals indicating where such individuals
may be reached both during the day and evening hours. If the record
owner is a corporation, the name and address of the registered agent
and corporate officers of said corporation shall be provided, together
with the telephone numbers for each of such individuals indicating
where such individuals may be reached both during the day and
evening hours;
B. If the address of any record owner is not located in Park Ridge or in
Bergen County, the name and address of a person who is authorized to
§ 81-1 PARK RIDGE CODE § 81-4
1:434
§ 81-5. Filing and indexing of registration forms.
The Borough Clerk or designee shall index and file the registration forms.
In doing so, the Borough Clerk or designee shall follow the mandates of
N.J.S.A. 46:8-28.1, as amended and supplemented, so that the filing of the
registration form will simultaneously satisfy the registration requirements
of N.J.S.A. 46:8-28 to the extent that it applies to the property being
registered and will also satisfy the registration requirements of this chapter.
§ 81-6. Amendments to registration forms.
Every person required to file a registration form pursuant to this chapter,
shall file an amended registration form within 20 days after any change in
the information required to be included thereon. No fee shall be required
accept notices from a tenant, to issue receipts therefor and to accept
service of process on behalf of the record owner;
C. The name and address of the agent of the premises, if any;
D. The name and address, including the dwelling unit number of the
superintendent, janitor, custodian or other individual employed by the
owner or agent to provide regular maintenance service, if any;
E. The name, address and telephone number of an individual
representative of the owner or agent who may be reached or contacted
at any time in the event of an emergency affecting the premises or any
unit of dwelling space therein, including such emergencies as the
future of any essential service or system, and who has the authority to
make emergency decisions concerning the building and any repair
thereto or expenditure in connection therewith;
F. The name and address of every holder of a recorded mortgage on the
premises;
G. If fuel oil is used to heat the building and the landlord furnishes the heat
in the building, the name and address of the fuel oil dealer servicing the
building and the grade of fuel oil used;
H. As to each dwelling unit, the exact number of sleeping rooms contained
in the dwelling unit and the number of occupants. In order to satisfy the
requirement of this provision, an owner shall submit a floor plan which
shall become part of the application and which shall be attached to the
registration form when filed. The floor plan shall show the space
allocation for sleeping accommodations as required by this chapter.
(Floor plan approximate dimensions can be sketched sealed drawing 1/
4 inch equals one foot.) The floor plan shall be drawn on a scale of 1/4
inch equals one foot to represent the information herein. It does not
need to be created by a licensed professional.
I. Any other information as may be prescribed by the Borough.
§ 81-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-6
1:435
for the filing of an amendment except where the ownership of the premises
is changed.
§ 81-7. Periodic inspections. [Amended 10-6-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-34; 4-10-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-007]
Inspections shall be made at least once every twenty-four-month period
at the discretion of the Housing Task Force and/or Housing Inspector.
Additional inspections may be performed as recommended by any member
of the Housing Task Force or by request of the property owner or tenant.
§ 81-8. Access to units for inspections and repairs; complaints.
§ 81-9. Prohibitions on occupancy.
No person shall hereafter occupy any dwelling unit nor shall the owner
permit occupancy of any dwelling unit within the Borough of Park Ridge
which is not registered and licensed in accordance with this chapter.
§ 81-10. Issuance of license.
Upon the filing of a completed registration form, and payment of the
prescribed fee, and a satisfactory inspection, the owner shall be entitled to
the issuance of a license commencing on the date of issuance and expiring
on the same date of the next calendar year. A registration form shall be
required for each rental unit, and a license shall issue to the owner for each
rental unit, even if more than one dwelling unit is contained in the property.
A. The inspection officers are hereby authorized to make inspections to
determine the condition of the dwelling unit in order that they may
promote the purposes of this chapter to safeguard the health, safety,
welfare of the occupants of rental facilities and rental units of the
general public. For the purposes of making such inspections, the
inspecting officers are hereby authorized to enter, examine and survey
rental facilities and rental units at all reasonable times and in
accordance with law. The owner or occupant of every dwelling unit shall
give the inspecting officer free access to the dwelling unit at all
reasonable times for the purpose of such inspections, examinations and
surveys.
B. Every occupant shall give the owner of the dwelling unit access to any
part of such dwelling unit at all reasonable times for the purpose of
making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter or any lawful order
issued pursuant thereto.
C. Complaints. Within 10 business days of receipt of a complaint alleging a
reported violation of this chapter, an inspecting officer shall conduct an
inspection as hereinbefore provided.
§ 81-6 PARK RIDGE CODE § 81-11
1:436
§ 81-11. Fees. [Amended 10-26-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-34;
4-10-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-007]
At the time of the filing of the registration form, and prior to the issuance
of a license, the owner or agent of the owner must pay a fee in accordance
with the following:
§ 81-12. Providing registration form to occupants and tenants.
Every owner shall provide each occupant or tenant occupying a dwelling
unit with a copy of the registration form required by this chapter. This
particular provision shall not apply to any hotel, motel, or guest house
registered with the State of New Jersey pursuant to the Hotel and Multiple
Dwelling Act as defined in N.J.S.A. 55:13A-3. This provision may be complied
with by posting a copy of the registration certificate in a conspicuous place
within the rental units.
§ 81-13. Posting maximum number of occupants.
The maximum number of occupants shall be posted in each dwelling unit.
It shall be unlawful for any person, including the owner, agent, tenant or
registered tenant to allow a greater number of persons than the posted
maximum number of occupants to sleep in or occupy overnight the dwelling
unit for any period. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to
the penalty provisions of this chapter.
§ 81-14. Payment of taxes and charges as precondition for
registration and license.
No dwelling unit may be registered and no license shall be issued for
any property containing a dwelling unit unless all municipal taxes, water,
electric and any other charges are paid on a current basis.
§ 81-15. Property maintenance standards.
All dwelling units shall be maintained in accordance with Chapter 80,
Property Maintenance.
§ 81-16. Nuisance prohibited.
No dwelling unit shall be operated or used in a manner which shall result in
any unreasonable disturbance or disruption to the surrounding properties
and property owners or of the public in general, such that it shall constitute
A. An annual registration and license fee of $100 per year per dwelling
unit.
B. A re-inspection fee of $50 per unit when any reinspection is required.
C. If any fee is not paid within 30 days of its due date, a late fee surcharge
in the amount equal to twice the registration fee or reinspection fee
shall be charged.
§ 81-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-16
1:437
a nuisance as defined in the ordinances of the Borough of Park Ridge or the
laws of the State of New Jersey.
§ 81-17. Grounds and procedure for revocation of license; defenses.
A. Compliance with other laws. The maintenance of all dwelling units and
the conduct engaged in upon the premises by occupants and their
guests shall at all times be in full compliance with all applicable
ordinances and regulations of the Borough of Park Ridge and with all
applicable state and federal laws.
B. Penalties. Any landlord, tenant or other person violating the provisions
of this section shall be subject to the penalty provisions of this chapter.
A. Grounds. In addition to any other penalty prescribed herein, an owner
may be subject to the revocation or suspension of the license issued
hereunder upon the happening of one or more of the following:
(1) Conviction of a violation of this chapter in the Municipal Court or
any other court of competent jurisdiction.
(2) Determination of a violation of this chapter at a hearing held
pursuant to § 81-17B herein.
(3) Continuously renting the dwelling unit or units to a tenant or
tenants who are convicted of a violation of Chapter 65A, Noise, of
the Borough.
(4) Continuously permitting the dwelling unit to be occupied by more
than the maximum number of occupants as defined in this chapter.
(5) Maintaining the dwelling unit or units or the property in which the
rental unit is a part in a dangerous condition likely to result in
injury to person or property.
B. Procedure; written complaint; notice and hearing:
(1) A complaint seeking the revocation or suspension of a license may
be filed by any one or more of the following: Chief of Police,
Construction Code Official, Fire Inspector, the Zoning Officer or
any other person or office authorized to file such complaint,
including the Housing Task Force or its designee. Such complaint
shall be in writing and filed with the Borough Clerk or designee.
The complaint shall be specific and shall be sufficient to apprise the
licensee of the charges so as to permit the licensee to present a
defense. The individual(s) filing the complaint may do so on the
basis of information and belief and need not rely on personal
information.
(2) Upon the filing of such written complaint, the Borough Clerk or
designee shall immediately inform the Borough Council and a date
for a hearing shall be scheduled which shall not be sooner than 10
or more than 30 days thereafter. The Borough Clerk or designee
§ 81-16 PARK RIDGE CODE § 81-17
1:438
§ 81-18. Minimum requirements for occupancy.
No person shall allow any dwelling unit to be occupied which does not
comply with the following requirements:
shall forward a copy of the complaint and a notice as to the date
of the hearing to the licensee and the agent, if any, at the address
indicated on the registration form. Service upon the agent shall be
sufficient.
(3) The hearing required by this section shall be held before the
Borough Council unless, in its discretion, the Borough Council
determines that the matter should be heard by a hearing officer
who shall be appointed by the Borough Council. If the matter is
referred to a hearing officer, such officer shall transmit his findings
of fact and conclusions of law to the Borough Council within 30
days of the conclusion of the hearing. The Borough Council shall
then review the matter and may accept, reject, or modify the
recommendations of the hearing officer based on the record before
such hearing officer. In the event that the matter is not referred to a
hearing officer, and is heard by the Borough Council, then the
Borough Council shall render a decision within 30 days of the
conclusion of the hearing. Following the hearing, a decision shall
be rendered dismissing the complaint, revoking or suspending the
license, or determining that the license shall not be renewed or
reissued for one or more subsequent license years.
(4) A stenographic transcript shall be made of the hearing. All
witnesses shall be sworn prior to testifying. The strict rules of
evidence shall not apply, and the evidential rules and burden of
proof shall be that which generally control administrative hearings.
C. Defenses. It shall be a defense to any proceeding for the revocation,
suspension or other disciplinary action involving a rental license to
demonstrate that the owner has taken appropriate action and has made
a good-faith effort to abate the conditions or circumstances giving rise
to the revocation proceeding, including, but not limited to the
institution of legal action against the tenants, occupants or quests for
recovery of the premises; eviction of the tenants or otherwise.
A. Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink in good working
condition and properly connected to a water and sewer system
approved by the Borough.
B. Every dwelling unit shall contain a room which affords privacy to a
person within said room, and which is equipped with a flush water
closet and a lavatory, basin and a bathtub or shower in good working
condition and properly connected to a water and sewer system
approved by the Borough.
§ 81-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-18
1:439
§ 81-19. Light, ventilation and heat.
No person shall allow any dwelling unit to be occupied which does not
comply with the following requirements:
C. Every kitchen sink, lavatory, basin and bathtub or shower required
under the provisions of Subsections A and B of this section shall be
properly connected with both hot- and cold-water lines.
D. Every dwelling unit shall be supplied with adequate rubbish and
garbage storage facilities and adequate disposal facilities. Garbage or
other organic waste shall be stored in watertight receptacles of metal
or other approved material. Such receptacles shall be provided with
tight-fitting covers. At least one approved-type garbage receptacle shall
be provided for each dwelling unit.
E. Every water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower for each dwelling
unit shall be accessible from within the building without passing
through any part of any other dwelling unit.
F. Every dwelling shall have supplied water-heating facilities which are
properly installed.
G. Every dwelling unit shall have safe unobstructed means of egress.
A. Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight facing
directly to the outdoors.
B. Every habitable room shall have sufficient separate wall-type electric
convenience outlets.
C. Every portion of each staircase, hall, cellar, basement, landing, furnace
room, utility room, and all similar nonhabitable space located in a
dwelling shall have either natural or artificial light available at all
times. Every portion of any interior or exterior passageway or stairway
common to two or more families in a dwelling shall be illuminated. In
dwellings comprising two dwelling units, such illumination shall not be
required at all times if separate switches, convenient and readily
accessible to each dwelling unit, are provided for the control of such
artificial light by the occupants thereof.
D. Every basement or cellar window used or intended to be used for
ventilation, and every other opening to a basement which might provide
an entry for rodents, shall be supplied with a screen or such other
device as will effectively prevent their entrance.
E. Every space heater, except electrical, shall be properly vented to a
chimney or duct leading to the outdoors. Unvented portable space
heaters are prohibited unless they are UL rated.
§ 81-18 PARK RIDGE CODE § 81-20
1:440
§ 81-20. Space and location.
No person shall allow a dwelling unit to be occupied which does not comply
with the following requirements:
§ 81-21. Safety and sanitary maintenance.
No person shall allow a dwelling unit to be occupied, which does not comply
with the following requirements:
A. Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 150 square feet of floor space
for each occupant thereof up to a maximum of two occupants, and at
least 100 additional square feet of floor space for every additional
occupant thereof, the floor space to be calculated on the basis of total
habitable area.
B. In every dwelling unit of two or more rooms, at least one room occupied
for sleeping purposes by two occupants shall contain at least 70 square
feet of floor space; and any other room occupied for sleeping purposes
shall contain at least 70 square feet of floor space for one occupant and
at least 50 additional square feet of floor space for each additional
occupant thereof.
C. No dwelling or dwelling unit containing two or more sleeping rooms
shall have such room arrangements that access to a bathroom or water
closet compartment intended for use by occupants of more than one
sleeping room can be had only by going through another sleeping room;
nor shall room arrangements be such that access to a sleeping room
can be had only by going through another sleeping room or a bathroom
or water closet compartment.
D. At least one-half of the floor area of every habitable room shall have a
ceiling height of at least seven feet. The floor area of that part of any
room where the ceiling is less than five feet shall not be considered as
part of the floor area in computing the total floor area of the room for
the purpose of determining the maximum permissible occupancy
thereof.
E. No basement area shall be used as a sleeping room unless that area
fully complies with all the requirements of this chapter.
A. Every foundation, floor, wall, ceiling and roof shall be reasonably
weathertight, watertight and rodentproof, capable of affording privacy,
and shall be kept in good repair.
B. Every window, exterior door and basement hatchway shall be
reasonably weathertight, watertight and rodentproof and shall be kept
in sound working condition and good repair.
C. Every inside and outside stair, porch and appurtenance thereto shall be
so constructed as to be safe to use and capable of supporting the load
§ 81-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-21
1:441
§ 81-22. Responsibilities of owner.
Responsibilities of the owner are:
that normal use may cause to be placed thereon and shall be kept in
sound condition and good repair.
D. Every plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall be properly
installed and maintained in good sanitary working condition, free from
defects, leaks and obstructions.
E. Every water closet compartment floor surface and bathroom floor
surface shall be constructed and maintained so as to be reasonably
impervious to water and so as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a
clean and sanitary condition.
F. Every supplied facility, piece of equipment or utility which is required
under this chapter shall be so constructed or installed that it will
function safely and effectively and shall be maintained in satisfactory
working condition.
G. No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service, facility,
equipment or utility which is required under this chapter to be removed
from or shut off from, or discontinued for, any occupied dwelling let or
occupied by him, except for such temporary interruptions as may be
necessary while actual repairs or alterations are in process or during
temporary emergencies when discontinuance of service is approved by
the public officer.
H. No owner shall occupy or let to any other occupant any vacant dwelling
unit unless it is clean, sanitary and fit for human occupancy.
I. Every porch, balcony, roof and/or similar place higher than 40 inches
above the ground used for egress or for use by occupants shall be
provided with adequate railings or parapets. Such protective railings or
parapets shall be properly balustraded and shall be not less than three
feet in height.
J. Every building, dwelling and dwelling unit and all other areas of the
premises shall be clean and free from garbage or rubbish or other
hazards to safety. Lawns, hedges and bushes shall be kept trimmed and
shall not be permitted to become overgrown and unsightly. Brush,
weeds, uncut grass and/or obnoxious growths shall not exceed six
inches in height.
K. Fences shall be kept in good repair.
A. To keep every dwelling unit and every part thereof, including the roof,
walls, floors, provided fixtures and equipment for heating water,
including chimneys and smoke pipes, doors, windows, foundations and
rubbish containers, in a state of sound repair and in a clean and
sanitary condition.
§ 81-21 PARK RIDGE CODE § 81-22
1:442
B. To maintain such dwelling so there will not be excessive heat loss
caused by lack of or improper maintenance of the doors, windows,
walls, roofs or other parts of the building.
C. To refrain from shutting off or causing to have discontinued or
disconnected provided utilities for any occupied dwelling, except where
such interruption of utility service is necessary while in the actual
process of making repairs or during temporary emergencies for which
repairs are being arranged.
D. To keep the basement or cellar dry and ventilated. The floors of such
basement or cellar shall be paved with brick, cement, tile, or some
other impervious material. The side walls and ceilings of every
basement and cellar shall be kept free from dampness. The basement or
other cellar shall be kept clean and free from an accumulation of filth,
ashes, garbage, rubbish, refuse, junk, soil matter, wood, paper and
other material of a combustible or putrefactive nature. The use of any
cellar for sleeping purposes is prohibited.
E. To keep side walls and ceilings of such dwelling, dwelling unit and every
habitable room, hall, closet and compartment clean and well and
sufficiently plastered, painted or papered, so that the same may have
clean, smooth and washable surfaces.
F. To keep the flooring of the halls, stairs and landing clean and free from
filth, ashes, garbage, rubbish, refuse, junk, soil, water, drainage water,
slop, wood, paper and other material of a putrefactive or combustible
nature and free from fire and accident hazards.
G. To keep the exterior of the premises and all structures thereon free of
any nuisances or any hazards to the safety of occupants, pedestrians or
other persons utilizing the premises or free of unsanitary conditions,
and any of the foregoing shall be promptly removed and abated by the
owner or operator. It shall be the duty of the owner or operator to keep
the premises free of nuisances or free of unsightly conditions or free of
unsanitary conditions or free of hazard or any combination of the
foregoing, which include but are not limited to the following:
(1) Refuse: brush, weeds, broken glass, stumps, roots, obnoxious
growths, filth, garbage, trash, refuse and debris.
(2) Natural growth: dead and dying trees and limbs or other natural
growth which, by reason of rotting or deteriorating conditions or
storm damage, constitutes a hazard to persons in the vicinity
thereof. Trees shall be kept pruned and trimmed to prevent such
conditions.
H. To maintain and keep chimneys, smokestacks, smokepipes, flues and
provided heating equipment of such dwelling free from defect and in
such condition as to prevent coal or illuminating gas, soot, smoke or
noxious fumes or odors from entering such dwelling, dwelling unit or
habitable rooms, or any dwelling or dwelling unit adjacent thereto.
§ 81-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-22
1:443
I. To keep the roof, gutters, leaders, side walls, windows and window
frames of such dwelling, and every part thereof, structurally sound and
free from leakage of rainwater. All drainage therefrom shall be
conveyed so as to prevent the dripping of such water upon the ground
or onto property adjacent thereto.
J. To make and maintain the dwelling reasonably verminproof and
rodentproof and to exterminate same.
K. To keep and maintain structurally sound and free from any defects the
exterior of the dwelling and the masonry walls, clapboards, sheathing,
shingles, exterior studs, main cornices, foundation wall, wood sills,
corner posts, wood plates, supporting rafters, roofing boards and
coverings; the stoops and porches, flooring, railing and stair treads; the
risers, posts, handrails, balustrades and newels; window sash frames,
sills, stools and apron; the doors and door frames; the fire escape,
flooring, railings, ladders, passageways, weights, chains, basket and
stairs; and the joists and crossbeams of any dwellings and parts thereof
of frame construction and parts subject to erosion and deterioration.
Foundation walls shall be kept structurally sound and free from any
defects.
L. Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 150 square feet of floor space
for each occupant thereof up to a maximum of two occupants and at
least 100 additional square feet of floor space for every additional
occupant thereof, the floor space to be calculated on the basis of total
habitable area.
M. To provide in every room in every dwelling a window or skylight,
opening directly to the outer air. Every dwelling, habitable room and
hall shall be equipped with a safe artificial light service, and all
electrical wiring, outlets and fixtures thereof shall be installed and
maintained.
N. To keep the exterior of the premises, the exterior or dwelling structures
and the condition of accessory structures maintained so that the
appearance of the premises and all buildings thereon shall reflect a
level of maintenance in keeping with the residential standards of the
neighborhood, or such other standards as may be adopted by the
Borough and such that the appearance of the premises and structures
shall not constitute a blighting factor for adjoining property owners nor
an element leading to the progressive deterioration and downgrading of
the neighborhood, with the accompanying diminution of property
values, including the following:
(1) Storage of commercial and industrial material. There shall not be
stored or used at a location visible from the sidewalk, street or
other public areas equipment and materials relating to commercial
or industrial uses unless permitted under Chapter 101, Zoning.
(2) Landscaping. Premises shall be kept landscaped, and lawn, hedges
and bushes shall be kept neatly trimmed and from becoming
§ 81-22 PARK RIDGE CODE § 81-22
1:444
§ 81-23. Responsibilities of occupant.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the occupant:
overgrown and unsightly so as not to constitute a blighting factor
depreciating adjoining property or impairing the good character of
the neighborhood.
O. To keep any front yard area of premises occupied by a dwelling free
from the parking, stopping of standing of any motor vehicle, except on
driveways and parking area constructed and installed in compliance
with applicable Borough ordinance and not less than three feet from the
interior front sidewalk line adjacent to said premises.
P. To provide and maintain adequate runoff drains in accordance with
existing applicable codes.
Q. To prevent, repair and eliminate ground surface hazards or unsanitary
conditions, holes, excavations, breaks, projections, obstructions, icy
conditions, uncleared snow and the excretion of pets and other animals
on paths, walks, driveways, parking lots and parking areas and other
parts of the premises which are accessible to and used by persons on
the premises. All such holes and excavations shall be filled and
repaired, walks and steps replaced and other conditions removed
where necessary to eliminate hazards or unsanitary conditions with
reasonable dispatch upon their discovery.
A. To keep the dwelling unit, and the portion of the dwelling and premises
over which he has exclusive control, in a clean and sanitary condition.
B. To place all garbage and refuse in proper legal containers supplied by
himself or provided by the owner for such purposes.
C. To refrain from willfully or maliciously damaging or permitting any
member of his family to damage any part or portion of the dwelling.
D. To refrain from using any fuel which, by its combustion, may cause
smoke and the rapid discoloration of side walls and ceilings of the
dwelling.
E. To refrain from chopping wood or other material in any dwelling.
F. To maintain in a clean and sanitary condition plumbing fixtures used by
himself or his family. No occupant shall knowingly, willfully or
maliciously deposit or permit any member of his household to deposit
any material in any fixture which would result in stoppage of or damage
to the fixture.
G. To refrain from using for sleeping purposes for one occupant any room
containing less than 70 square feet of floor space and every room
occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one occupant if it contains
less than 50 square feet of floor space for each occupant thereof.
§ 81-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-24
1:445
§ 81-24. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
in the Municipal Court of the Borough of Park Ridge or such other court
having jurisdiction, be liable to a fine. For the first offense, a minimum fine
of no less than $250 or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days,
or both. The fine for the second offense shall be a minimum of $500 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days, or both. The fine for a third
and subsequent offenses shall be a minimum of $750 or imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 30 days, or both. Each day that a violation occurs
shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation subject to the penalty
provisions of this chapter.
Chapter 81A
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Street openings and excavations — See Ch.
85.
Subdivision and site plan review — See Ch.
87.
Water — See Ch. 98.
Zoning — See Ch. 101.
§ 81A-1. Definitions and word usage.
A. Word usage. For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms,
phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given
herein unless the content specifically indicates otherwise. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense shall
include the future, words in the plural number shall include the
singular, words in the singular number shall include the plural and
words in the masculine gender shall include the feminine. The words
"shall," as used herein, is mandatory, and the word "may" is permissive.
B. Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
AUTHORITY — The Bergen County Sewer Authority that maintains
the district sewer system with which the Borough sewer system shall
connect.
BOARD OF HEALTH — The Board of Health of the Borough of Park
Ridge or any officer, employee or agent designated by the Board of
Health to act in a matter on behalf of the Board.
§ 81-24 PARK RIDGE CODE § 81A-1
1:446
BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS — The Board created by Ordinance No.
89-6,95 which oversees the Borough's Department of Public Works and
Public Utilities.
BOD (DENOTING "BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND") — The
quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic
matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20° C.
expressed in parts per million by weight.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Park Ridge or any officer, employee or
agent designated by the Borough Council to act in a matter on behalf of
the Borough.
BUILDING CONNECTION — That part of the sewer system which
begins five feet outside the inner face of the building wall and which
receives sewage from the building drain and conveys it to the building
sewer lateral.
BUILDING SEWER LATERAL — That part of the public sewer which
runs from the sewer main to the curb or property line.
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking or dispensing
of food and from the handling, storage or sale of produce.
GREASE INTERCEPTOR — A device installed in the drain line of dishwashing
equipment and sinks, which mechanically skims grease
particles from the wastewater so as to keep them from entering the
sewer system.
GREASE TRAP — A device installed in the drain line of dish-washing
equipment and sinks to entrap particles of grease to prevent them from
entering the sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — The liquid waste from industrial processes, as
distinct from domestic sewage.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a stream, watercourse, pond,
ditch, lake or other body of ground-, storm- or surface water.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, corporation,
partnership, society or group, or any combination thereof.
pH — The logarithm to the base 10 of the reciprocal of the weight of
hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.
PLUMBING — The practice of installing, maintaining, extending,
repairing and altering plumbing systems. It shall also mean the
plumbing system, as herein defined.
PLUMBING SUBCODE OFFICER — A person licensed and authorized
to inspect plumbing pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1975, c. 217, as
amended,96 and N.J.A.C. 5:23, and who is in the employ of the Borough.
95.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 89-6 is on file in the Borough offices.
96.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
§ 81A-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81A-1
1:447
§ 81A-2. Connection to sanitary sewers.
PLUMBING SYSTEM — The system or network of facilities within or
adjacent to any building, structure or conveyance (including piping
materials, controls and fixtures, together with their venting systems
and other appurtenances) up to the point of connection of such system
to a public or private sewer, a public or private water supply for potable
or nonpotable purposes, a natural outlet or any other point of discharge
or supply.
RESTAURANT — As defined by Ordinance No. 92-20 of Chapter 101,
Zoning, an establishment where food and drink are prepared, served
and consumed primarily within the principal building, and including
serving prepared food which is also intended for consumption off the
premises, such as pizza parlors, bakeries and similar establishments;
provided, however, that the term "restaurant" shall not be deemed to
include what is commonly known as a "supermarket," "grocery store"
or "delicatessen."
SEWAGE — Any liquid waste containing animal, chemical or vegetable
matter in suspension or solution.
SEWAGE, DOMESTIC — Ordinary nonindustrial sewage (but not
including stormwater, groundwater and surface water), for example,
sewage discharging from toilets, washbowls, bathtubs and like sanitary
conveniences installed in dwellings, apartment houses and hotels,
office and commercial buildings and factories and institutions.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT — Any arrangement of devices and
structures used for treating sewage.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit used for carrying sewage.
SEWERAGE WORKS — All facilities for the collection, pumping and
disposing of sewage.
SEWER, SANITARY — A sewer that has been designed to carry sewage
and not stormwater, surface water and groundwater.
STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN — A sewer, gutter, culvert, catch
basin or like facility that has been designed to carry stormwater,
surface water and groundwater and not domestic sewage or industrial
wastes.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids that either float on the surface of or are
in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids and that are removable
by laboratory filtering.
A. Authorized persons to make connections. No person, other than a
person authorized by the Borough, shall uncover, make any connection
with or opening into, use, repair, alter or disturb any public sewer
lateral and the appurtenances thereof.
B. Barricades and protective devices. Each person performing work on
public property of the Borough for the purpose of installing or making
§ 81A-1 PARK RIDGE CODE § 81A-2
1:448
§ 81A-3. Use of sanitary and storm sewers.
connections to building sewer laterals shall cause the work to be
adequately guarded with barricades, lights and other measures for the
protection of the public. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, curbs and other
public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored or
replaced in a manner satisfactory to the Borough.
C. Maintenance of sanitary sewer system. Pursuant to the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:89-3,97 the Board of Public Works is hereby vested with the
power, authority, right and privilege and there is hereby imposed upon
said Board the duty to provide for the maintenance and operation of the
public sanitary sewer system. Maintenance of the public sewer and all
work performed on the sewer system between the main line and the
property line, including the installation of building sewer laterals, shall
be performed by the Board or other person authorized by the Borough.
A. Prohibited acts. No person shall:
(1) Place or deposit or cause or permit to be placed or deposited in an
unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the
Borough or in any street or other area under the jurisdiction of the
Borough any human or animal excrement, garbage, industrial
waste, foul liquids or any other liquids or solid waste that is
malodorous or unsanitary.
(2) Discharge or cause or permit to be discharged to any natural outlet
or storm sewer in the Borough or any street or other area under the
jurisdiction of the Borough any domestic sewage, industrial waste
or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been
provided in accordance with this chapter.
(3) Uncover or cause or permit to be uncovered any portion of the
public sewer or any storm drain or the connecting branches thereof
or open any manhole or flush tank unless authorized, in writing, by
the Borough to do so.
(4) Open or cause or permit to be opened any public street or place for
the purpose of making any sewer connection or make or cause to
be made any connection with the public sewer or any building
connection or any other branch of the public sewer unless
authorized, in writing, by the Borough to do so.
(5) Make or cause or permit to be made any excavation within four feet
of any public sewer or blast any rock within 10 feet thereof unless
authorized, in writing, by the Borough to do so.
(6) Use or cause or permit to be used any metal, mechanical or
electrical cutters, eels or snakes or any other sewer-cleaning
97.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:89-3 was repealed by L. 1987, c. 379, § 1 effective 1-1-1988.
§ 81A-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81A-3
1:449
apparatus within the Borough without first having been authorized
by the Board of Public Works to do so.
(7) Breach, cut or remove or cause or permit to be broken, cut or
removed any pipe of the public sewer unless authorized, in writing,
by the Borough to do so.
(8) Direct the discharge or cause or permit the direction of the
discharge into any portion of the public sewer, directly or indirectly,
of any clear drainage, such as the discharge from air-conditioning
units, groundwater, surface water or rainwater from sidewalks,
yards, areas, courts, roofs or any sump, cistern or tank overflow,
combined sewers being hereby prohibited.
(9) Discharge or cause or permit the discharge into any building
connection, building sewer lateral or any portion of the public
sewer, directly or indirectly, of any drainage or overflow from
privies or other receptacles storing or designed to store organic
wastes or any underground drains or channels unless the
connection thereof to the building connection, building sewer
lateral or public sewer shall have been authorized and approved, in
writing, by the Board of Public Works.
(10) Connect or cause or permit the connection with any portion of the
public sewer, directly or indirectly, of any exhausts, boiler blowoffs,
sediments, drips or any pipes carrying or constructed to carry
acids, dyes, brine, germicides, greases, gasoline, naphtha,
radioactive materials or any other substance detrimental to the
sewers or their appurtenances or to the operation of the Borough
or the Authority sewer systems.
(11) Throw or deposit or cause or permit to be thrown or deposited in
any fixture, vessel, receptacle, inlet or opening connected, directly
or indirectly, with any portion of the public sewer anything other
than sewage. It is the intent hereby to prohibit any straw, garbage,
wood, glass, plastic, grease, ashes, cinders, fabrics or tar or other
viscous material or any other substance capable of causing
obstructions from being introduced into the public sewers.
B. Discharge restrictions. Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall
discharge or cause or permit to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes into any public sewer:
(1) Any liquid which may contain more than 100 parts per million by
weight of fat, oil or grease.
(2) Any gasoline, benzine, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas.
(3) Any liquid having a pH factor lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.0 or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or
§ 81A-3 PARK RIDGE CODE § 81A-3
1:450
a hazard to the structure, equipment and personnel of the Borough
or the Authority.
(4) Any liquid containing a toxic or poisonous substance in a sufficient
quantity so as to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment
processes, to constitute a hazard to humans or animals or to create
any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.
(5) Any liquid containing suspended solids of such character and
quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle
such matters at the sewage treatment plant.
(6) Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a
public nuisance.
C. Interceptors/traps.
(1) Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the Board of Public Works, they are necessary for the
proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive
amounts or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful
ingredients, except that such interceptors shall not be required for
one-family dwelling houses. All interceptors or traps shall be of a
type and capacity approved by the Board and shall be located so as
to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
(2) Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious
materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in
temperature. They shall be of a substantial construction and
watertight and shall be equipped with easily removable covers
which, when bolted in place, shall be gastight and watertight. All
grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the
owners, at their expense, in continuously effective operation at all
times.
D. All restaurants, as defined herein, within 90 days from adoption of this
chapter, shall be required to install and maintain an approved grease
interceptor or trap on all dish-washing equipment and sinks
discharging into the Borough's sanitary sewer system. It shall be the
responsibility of each owner to maintain the interceptor or trap to avoid
grease entering the sewer system and to post and maintain a log
adjacent to said interceptor or trap for each cleaning. Any designated
representative of the Board of Health or the Board of Public Works shall
have the right to inspect said equipment to ensure proper maintenance.
Failure to properly maintain said equipment shall be a violation of this
chapter. Further, the clearance and cleaning of any blockages in the
sanitary sewer mains attributable to a specific restaurant owner shall
be paid by the owner. Such charges shall include, but not be limited to,
the full cost for Borough labor, including fringe benefits and equipment
costs. Any property damage caused by sewer backups shall also be
borne by the owner causing the blockages.
§ 81A-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81A-3
1:451
§ 81A-4. Damages.
E. Any grease arising out of any cooking, grilling, frying or meat trimming
shall be recycled using a qualified firm equipped to handle such
materials.
F. Illicit connections. [Added 9-13-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-14]
(1) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged, through an
illicit connection to the municipal, physical or nonphysical
connection that discharges domestic sewage, noncontact cooling
water, process wastewater or other industrial waste to the
municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Park Ridge
Borough unless authorized under a New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection permit and that is also endorsed by the
Borough itself.
(2) Nonphysical connections may include, but are not limited to, leaks,
flows or overflows into the municipal separate storm sewer system.
(3) When an inspection of any building or unit located therein is
required by the Borough of Park Ridge for either construction
purposes, or the registration of said building and/or unit, or the
rental of said building and/or unit, or for the sale of said building
and/or unit, the Borough's Construction Official shall issue a
certificate of compliance upon approval of a certification of
compliance or after an inspection of the premises showing
compliance. [Added 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-017]
(4) Provided that the following Borough Officials display the proper
credentials and identification, the Construction Official, the
designated Housing Task Force Member, the Borough Engineer, the
Borough Fire Subcode Official, the Borough Fire Official, and/or
other appropriate Borough Subcode Official shall be permitted to
request entrance to any property for the purpose of inspecting,
observing, testing and sampling to confirm that there is no sump
pump or other prohibited discharge into the sanitary sewer system
in accordance with this chapter. [Added 6-14-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-017]
(5) All disconnections of said illicit connections shall be accomplished
by a complete and permanent method and performed in a
competent manner and approved and inspected by the
Construction Official, the designated Housing Task Force Member,
the Borough Engineer, the Borough Fire Subcode Official, the
Borough Fire Official and/or other appropriate Borough Subcode
Official. Any disconnection, plugging, capping, re-routing, altering,
or modifying must be done in accordance with all applicable state
and municipal buildings codes. [Added 6-14-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-017]
§ 81A-3 PARK RIDGE CODE § 81A-4
1:452
§ 81A-5. Administration and enforcement.
§ 81A-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-13-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-14]
Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of
this chapter or who shall participate or assist in the violation or failure to
comply or who, as owner, tenant or other person in occupancy, architect,
contractor or agent, servant or employee, shall permit the commission
of such violation or maintain such violation or shall suffer such violation
to continue shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine up to $1,000 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both, in the discretion
of the Municipal Court. Each day that such violation shall continue or
is permitted or suffered to be continued or maintained shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 81A-7. Excess usage charge system. [Amended 12-28-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-41]
A. Destruction or tampering prohibited. No person shall break, damage,
destroy, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or
equipment which is part of the Borough sewer system.
B. Liability. Any person who, by reason of a violation of the provisions of
this chapter or any other improper use of the Borough sewer system or
any of its branches, appurtenances or connections, shall cause damage
to said Borough sewer system or to the system or facilities of the
Authority to which the Borough sewer system is connected shall be
liable to the Borough for all costs and expenses that may be incurred by
the Borough for the correction of any such damage. The Borough shall
have the right to recover such costs and expenses and the cost and
expense of prosecuting its claim from any such person by the
appropriate action at law in a court of competent jurisdiction. The right
of the Borough to be reimbursed for any costs and expenses incurred
shall be an additional remedy, and such person shall also be subject to
the penalties contained in this chapter for violation of its provisions.
A. Jurisdiction. The Board of Health and the Board of Public Works shall
have concurrent jurisdiction in the administration and enforcement of
the provisions of this chapter.
B. Right of entry for inspections. The authorized officers, agents and
employees of the Borough and of the Board of Health, bearing proper
credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter upon all
properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
A. Regulation of sewer use. The use of all sanitary sewers in the Borough
of Park Ridge shall be in compliance with the rules and regulations of
the Bergen County Utilities Authority (BCUA).
§ 81A-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81A-7
1:453
B. Excess user charge system. The Borough of Park Ridge does hereby
adopt and enact an excess usage charge system for the use of the
sanitary sewers in the Borough of Park Ridge. All users, except exempt
users, shall be required to pay an annual pro rata charge computed on
an ad valorem basis in relation to the assessed value of real property
owned by the user within the Borough of Park Ridge. In addition, an
annual excess usage charge shall be computed on the previous calendar
year's water usage as reported by the Borough of Park Ridge Water
Department and the BCUA's current calendar year's equivalent rate per
gallon of flow and billed in accordance with the procedures as set forth
in § 81A-7H.
C. Threshold for imposition of excess usage charge.
(1) The sewer usage for each user shall be calculated based on the
Park Ridge Water Department's prior year's first and second
quarter billed water consumption multiplied by two.
(2) All users whose sewer usage for the prior year was less than or
equal to 250,000 gallons shall be exempt from the excess usage
charge.
(3) All users whose sewer usage for the prior year was more than
250,000 gallons shall pay an excess sewer usage charge equal to
100% of the BCUA's current year's equivalent rate for each gallon
in excess of 250,000 gallons used. To determine the annual excess
user charges for all users, the charges are calculated based on the
following formula:
Annual Excess User Charge = (Vu – 250,000 gallons) x Re
Where:
Vu = Previous calendar year's sewer usage (in gallons)
calculated by the sum of the first and second quarter
billed water consumption (in gallons) multiplied by
two.
Re = Current year's annual BCUA equivalent rate per
gallon, calculated as follows:
Residential Users
Re = [Rf + (1.0 x Rbod x Cbod x 8.34) + (1.0 x Rtss x Ctss x
8.34)] / 1,000,000
Where:
Rf = Current year's annual BCUA flow rate for treatment
of a unit of wastewater flow (rate/million gallons).
Rbod = Current year's annual BCUA BOD rate for treatment
of a unit of BOD (rate/1,000 pounds).
§ 81A-7 PARK RIDGE CODE § 81A-7
1:454
Cbod = Average BCUA municipal BOD concentration in
milligrams per liter.
Rtss = Current year's annual BCUA TSS rate for treatment
of a unit of TSS (rate/1,000 pounds).
Ctss = Average BCUA municipal TSS concentration in
milligrams per liter.
Commercial and Industrial Users
Re = [Rf + (1.5 x Rbod x Cbod x 8.34) + (1.5 x Rtss x Ctss x
8.34)] / 1,000,000
Where:
Rf = Current year's annual BCUA flow rate for treatment
of a unit of wastewater flow (rate/million gallons).
Rbod = Current year's annual BCUA BOD rate for treatment
of a unit of BOD (rate/1,000 pounds).
Cbod = Average BCUA municipal BOD concentration in
milligrams per liter.
Rtss = Current year's annual BCUA TSS rate for treatment
of a unit of TSS (rate/1,000 pounds).
Ctss = Average BCUA municipal TSS concentration in
milligrams per liter.
(4) For all real property containing multiple dwelling units that are
supplied water through an individual meter, the sewer usage for
each dwelling unit shall be calculated based on the total sewer
usage divided by the number of dwelling units. For each dwelling
unit's sewer usage over the two-hundred-fifty-thousand-gallon
threshold, the excess sewer charge shall be totaled and billed to
the owner of such real property.
(5) Calculations under this section shall include water utilized by a
user from the Park Ridge Water department as well as private
wells.
D. Exemption from excess usage charge. The following users are exempt
from the excess usage charge provided herein:
(1) The Borough of Park Ridge.
(2) Park Ridge Board of Education.
(3) Any users whose annual excess sewer bill as calculated under this
chapter is $50 or less in a given calendar year.
E. Private water wells. All units that are connected to the Borough of Park
Ridge sanitary sewers and are supplied water from privately owned
water wells shall be subject to the following provisions:
§ 81A-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81A-7
1:455
(1) The owners of wells existing as of the date of adoption of this
chapter shall notify the Municipal Clerk of the Borough of Park
Ridge, in writing, of the existence and location of such wells within
30 days after the date of passage of this chapter.
(2) The owners of wells constructed or completed after the adoption of
this chapter (in accordance with the procedures as set forth in
Chapter 100 of the Code of the Borough of Park Ridge) shall notify
the Municipal Clerk of the Borough of Park Ridge, in writing, of the
existence and location of such wells within 30 days of the first
usage of such well.
(3) The Borough Engineer of the Borough of Park Ridge may inspect
such well to determine the usage thereof. If, in the opinion of the
Borough of Park Ridge, such well's actual water production,
together with the other water usage of the owner thereof will result
in a sewer usage that will exceed 250,000 gallons of water per year,
the Borough Engineer shall submit his/her opinion, in writing, to
the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Park Ridge. After
receiving such opinion, the Borough Council may require the owner
of such well to install and maintain a water meter thereon, at the
owner's expense, by adoption of a resolution.
(4) If a water meter is required by resolution as provided in Subsection
E(3) above, the owner must install such meter within 60 days of
adoption thereof. If the owner shall fail to do so, the Borough
Council of the Borough of Park Ridge may, by resolution, provide
for the installation of such meter and add the cost thereof to the
excess usage charge levied under this chapter.
F. Meters exempt from excess usage calculation.
(1) Water meters, as determined by the Park Ridge Water Department,
used solely for the purpose of metering water usage of irrigation
systems shall be exempt from the excess usage calculation under
§ 81A-7C. Such determination must identify the separate account
number assigned to the meter, meter location, property owner's
name and billing address.
(2) Any user that believes it should be exempt pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter may request a change in classification for
purposes of this chapter. The user shall notify the Borough Clerk, in
writing, of this request within 30 days of receipt of a bill for an
excess usage charge. The Borough Clerk or his/her designee will
investigate the user's claims and submit a determination as to the
user's status within 30 days of receipt of the request.
G. Conformance with certain ordinances required. Before any sewer shall
be permitted to flow into any sanitary sewer of the Borough of Park
Ridge, the Plumbing Subcode Official shall first determine that such
sewer and associated drains function properly, in accordance with all
§ 81A-7 PARK RIDGE CODE § 81A-7
1:456
applicable rules, regulations and ordinances of the Borough of Park
Ridge.
H. Billing procedures. Billing for the excess usage charge imposed by
§ 81A-7B and C hereof shall be in accordance with the following
procedures:
(1) In May of each year, the Chief Financial Officer shall attend to the
preparation of bills computed on the previous calendar year's
usage and the current calendar year's flow charge rate. [Amended
7-11-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-012]
(2) Bills shall be mailed by the Municipal Tax Collector of the Borough
of Park Ridge to the owners of all properties as well as tenants in all
properties incurring excess usage charges not later than July 1 of
each year. [Amended 7-11-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-012]
(3) Bills are due and payable to the Borough of Park Ridge on August 1
and November 1 of each year. If such charges are not paid in full as
of that date, the unpaid charges shall be deemed delinquent from
such date, and such unpaid charges shall become a lien upon the
properties incurring them as of that date. [Amended 7-11-2017
by Ord. No. 2017-012]
(4) All excess usage charges which become delinquent under the
provisions of Subsection H(3) above shall bear interest and
penalties from the date of delinquency at the same rate as all
charges for general taxation and shall be collected and enforced in
the same manner as general taxation.
(5) No charge levied by § 81A-7B and C shall be invalid by reason of
error or omission in stating the name of the owner or owners of the
property affected by such charge, if such property or properties
have actually incurred such charges.
(6) No charge levied by § 81A-7B and C shall be invalid by reason of
the failure of a property owner to receive a bill. Every owner is
hereby put on notice to ascertain from the Borough of Park Ridge
the amount which may become due for such charges.
I. Availability of copies of rules and regulations. Not fewer than three
copies of the rules and regulations of the BCUA shall be on file with the
office of the Municipal Clerk of the Borough of Park Ridge for public
inspection during the Borough's business hours. In addition, copies of
such rules and regulations are available from the BCUA for the costs of
publication thereof.
J. Mayor and Clerk authorized signatories. The Mayor and Clerk of the
Borough of Park Ridge are hereby authorized to act as signatories upon,
and to execute on behalf of the Borough of Park Ridge, any amendment
of the existing service agreement with the BCUA, which embodies the
intent and purpose of this chapter.
§ 81A-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81A-8
1:457
§ 81A-8. Connection permit; fee. [Added 8-8-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-013]
A. Sewer connection permit and fee. No person shall connect to any sewer
line within the Borough of Park Ridge without first securing a sewer
connection permit from the Park Ridge Utility Department. There shall
be a sewer service connection fee established in accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:26A-11 in addition to any other sewer fees set
forth in Chapter 81A. This fee shall, pursuant to statute, be recalculated
at the end of each budget year and may be recalculated and changed by
ordinance of the Mayor and Council after public hearing, on an annual
basis. The sewer service connection fee shall be payable in full to the
Borough of Park Ridge at the time a sewer connection permit is issued
for connection to the Park Ridge sewer system. No sewer connection
permit shall be issued without payment of this fee.
B. Connection fee calculation. The sewer connection fee shall be $1,880
per equivalent dwelling unit as defined herein. The Borough shall
recompute the sewer connection fee per equivalent dwelling unit at the
end of each budget year as required by law. The number of equivalent
dwelling units for all facilities shall be calculated as follows:
(1) A single-family dwelling unit shall be equal to one equivalent
dwelling unit (EDU).
(2) For all other facilities, the number of equivalent dwelling units shall
be calculated as the ratio of projected average daily usage of the
proposed facility to the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection's recognized single-family residential demand of 300
gallons per day or 108,000 gallons per year. The projected average
demand for the facility shall be calculated using the flow standards
adopted by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection "Projected Flow Criteria" established in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 7:14A-23.3 and are incorporated herein by reference.
(3) If any existing building or buildings which are connected to the
Park Ridge sewer system are located on the property to be
developed and will be disconnected prior to the construction of the
new facility, the equivalent dwelling units shall be calculated as the
ratio of the projected net increase in the average daily usage of the
proposed facility pursuant to the NJDEP-recognized single-family
demand of 300 gallons per day or 108,000 gallons per year. The
projected average net increase in the average daily usage shall be
calculate as the difference between the projected average daily
usage of the proposed facility less the prior year's average daily
usage of the existing facilities that will be disconnected. The sewer
connection fee shall be based upon the net average increase.
§ 81A-8 PARK RIDGE CODE § 81A-8
1:458
Chapter 81B
SHADE TREE COMMITTEE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sight distance at intersections — See Ch. 82.
§ 81B-1. Definitions; word usage.
A. As used in this chapter, the terms hereinafter set forth shall be defined
and deemed to have the following meanings:
APPROVAL — Written permission of the Chairman of the Committee
is required whenever, pursuant to any provision of this chapter, the
Committee shall have occasion to pass upon a request for approval. It
shall, in determining whether or not to grant such approval, take into
consideration the nature, species, size, age and condition of any tree
involved; the location thereof in the street or park; the planting, care,
protection, maintenance or removal procedures involved; the public
safety and welfare; and the improvement and advancement of the shade
tree plan or program of the Committee.
COMMITTEE — The Shade Tree Committee of the Borough of Park
Ridge, including any of its duly appointed members and any of its duly
authorized agents or employees.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership or corporation, or any
combination thereof. Where, in the proper context, it is so required, this
term may be construed to designate the plural as well as the singular.
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRIC — The Borough of Park Ridge
Department of Electric which is charged with the responsibility for the
operation and maintenance of the Borough of Park Ridge electric utility.
DEPARTMENT OF WATER — The Borough of Park Ridge Department
of Water which is charged with the responsibility for the operation and
maintenance of the Borough of Park Ridge water utility.
PUBLIC LANDS — Any land or property owned by the Borough of Park
Ridge or the Board of Education.
STREET — Any road, avenue, street or highway dedicated to the public
use for street purpose, regardless of whether or not it has been formally
accepted by the Borough of Park Ridge. A street shall be deemed to
include all portions lying between the dedicated or established right-ofway
lines and/or planting easement thereof, said lines being identical
with the property lines of land abutting the street.
TREE — Any tree, shrub or plant, or any root, branch, flower or other
part thereof, that is located within any street or right-of-way.
§ 81A-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81B-1
1:459
§ 81B-2. Approval required for certain activities.
No person shall, without written approval, do any of the following acts:
§ 81B-3. Approval required prior to planting.
No person shall plant any tree or shrub on any public lands or street without
an approval.
§ 81B-4. Obstructions near trees.
§ 81B-5. Prevention of injuries.
B. Any term or provision of this chapter that contemplates, directs,
regulates or prohibits the doing of any act may, in applicable cases, and
where the context so requires, be construed to include the causing,
allowing, permitting or suffering of such act to be done by others under
the direction, control or supervision of the person charged therewith.
Every such act shall be deemed to be within the scope of this chapter,
regardless of whether it is a deliberate, intentional or purposeful act or
a careless, negligent or unintentional act.
A. Cut down, prune, break, injure, remove, disturb or interfere, in any way,
with any tree.
B. Spray with any chemical any tree or area adjacent to a tree so as to
cause injury or death to said tree.
C. Fasten any rope, wire, sign or other device to a tree or to any guard
about such tree.
D. Remove or damage any guard or device placed to protect any tree.
E. Close or obstruct any open space provided about the base of a tree to
permit the access of air, water and fertilizer to the roots of such tree.
A. No person shall, without an approval, construct on any street or public
land any stone, asphalt or cement sidewalk which shall impede the free
access of air and water to the roots of any tree.
B. Unless already existing, where any tree is to be surrounded by such
pavement, the pavement shall be no nearer to the base of the tree than
two feet.
A. No person shall place any substance injurious to plant growth on any
street or public land in such a manner as to injure any tree.
B. No person shall position any equipment or operate a combustion engine
in any street or on public lands in such a manner that the heat, vapors,
fuel or fumes therefrom may injure any tree.
§ 81B-1 PARK RIDGE CODE § 81B-5
1:460
§ 81B-6. Protection.
§ 81B-7. Wires; utility work; tree trimming.
C. Every person having or maintaining any underground or overhead
utility lines on any street or public land shall maintain such lines in such
a manner so as to safeguard the trees against any damage.
A. In the erection, alteration or repair of any structure or building, the
owner, contractor or other person in charge thereof shall place such
guards around all nearby trees as will effectually prevent injury to such
trees.
B. No person shall do any excavating within four feet of any tree without
an approval.
C. No person shall use or operate any power shovel, bulldozer or any other
implement or tool in such a manner as to damage or destroy any tree.
A. No person shall string any wires in or through a public park or property
without an approval.
B. Every person having or maintaining any electric, telephone, telegraph,
cable television or other wires running in or through a street or public
land shall securely fasten and maintain such wires in such manner as
will safeguard all trees against any damage.
C. No person shall, without an approval, attach or fasten any wire,
insulator or other device for holding any wire to any tree.
D. Whenever the Committee grants an approval to prune or remove any
tree, any person having a wire running in or through any street or
public land shall be required to remove such wire within 24 hours after
the service upon the person or his agent of a written notice to do so.
E. Any public utility or its agents may, upon receipt of an approval from the
Committee, prune or remove trees from utility wires in nonemergency
situations pursuant to a line clearance program.
F. Any public utility or its agents may undertake emergency tree work to
restore service or spot work to prevent interruption of electrical,
telephone, cable television or other wire services. In such event, the
utility will notify the Committee of said work within three business days
of its beginning.
G. The Departments of Water and Electric of the Borough of Park Ridge
are excluded from the operation of this chapter, except that, where
practicable, those Departments shall notify the Committee of their
pruning or removal of trees for purposes of line clearance or other
utility work at least three days prior to the beginning of their work.
§ 81B-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81B-8
1:461
§ 81B-8. Hindrance.
No person shall prevent, delay or in any manner interfere with the
Committee or its authorized agents in the performance of their lawful
duties.
§ 81B-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter or who fails
to comply with the terms and provisions of any approval issued pursuant
hereto shall, upon conviction in Municipal Court thereof, pay a fine of not
less than $200 nor more than $1,500 at the discretion of the court. Each day
that a violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 81B-10. Replacement of trees.
In addition to the penalties authorized by § 81B-9 of this chapter, the
Committee may require a person who removes or otherwise destroys a tree
in violation of a municipal ordinance to pay a replacement assessment to
the municipality. The replacement assessment shall be the value of the tree
as determined by the appraisal of a trained forester or certified tree expert
retained by the Committee for that purpose. In lieu of an appraisal, the
Committee may adopt a formula and schedule based upon the number of
square inches contained in a cross section of a trunk of the tree multiplied
by a predetermined value per square inch, not to exceed $27 per square
inch. The square inch cross section shall be calculated from the diameter at
chest height, and, if there is a multiple stem tree, then each truck shall be
measured and an average shall be determined for the tree. For the purposes
of this chapter, "diameter at chest height" shall mean the diameter of the
tree taken at a point 4 1/2 feet above ground level. The Committee shall
modify the value of the tree based upon its species variety, location and its
condition at the time of removal or destruction.
Chapter 82
SIGHT DISTANCE AT INTERSECTIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 80.
§ 82-1. Maximum height of brush and hedges.
The owner or tenant of land forming a corner lot or property shall keep all
brush, hedges and other plant life growing within 10 feet of any roadway
and within 25 feet of the intersection of two roadways cut to a height of not
more than 2 1/2 feet above the adjacent sidewalk elevation.
§ 81B-8 PARK RIDGE CODE § 82-2
1:462
§ 82-2. Maximum height of fence.
The owner or tenant of land forming a corner lot or property shall not
construct or maintain any fence or other structure within 10 feet of any
roadway and within 25 feet of the intersection of two roadways, which fence
or other structure is more than 2 1/2 feet above the adjacent curb level or,
where no curb exists, above the adjacent street level.
§ 82-3. Notice to cure violation.
The Police Department shall give the owner or tenant who violates any
provision of § 82-1 or 82-2 written notice to remove or correct the
prohibited condition so as to cure such violation within 15 days after receipt
of the notice.
§ 82-4. Request to Council for variance.
In any case where a strict application of this chapter would result in undue
hardship, the Council, after receipt of a request in writing stating the
reasons for such undue hardship, may by resolution grant a variance from
such strict application.
§ 82-5. Action by Borough Engineer.
When it appears that the owner or tenant of land and premises which
contain conditions in violation of this chapter cannot be brought within the
jurisdiction of the Municipal Court of the Borough, or where the prohibited
conditions continue after a hearing pursuant to a complaint under this
chapter, then the Borough Clerk, at the direction of the Council, may
notify the Borough Engineer in writing of the existence of such prohibited
conditions and request that the same be removed. The Borough Engineer,
following the receipt of such written notice, shall cause the removal or
correction of the prohibited conditions.
§ 82-6. Cost as lien; collection.
The cost of the work done by the Borough Engineer shall be certified by
the Engineer to the Council. Upon receipt of the certificate, the Council
shall examine the same and, if found correct, shall cause the cost as shown
thereon to be charged against said lands. If such cost is found to be
excessive, the Council shall cause the reasonable cost thereof to be charged
against said lands. The amount so charged shall forthwith become a lien
upon such lands and shall be added to and become and form part of the
taxes next to be assessed and levied against such lands. Such amount shall
bear interest at the same rate as other taxes and shall be collected and
enforced by the same officer and in the same manner as taxes. Proceedings
under this section may be in addition to or in lieu of a complaint in the
Municipal Court.
§ 82-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-7
1:463
§ 82-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-8-1974 by Ord. No.
74-16]
Any owner or tenant of land and premises who is given notice pursuant
to § 82-3 and refuses or neglects to comply with same within 15 days of
receipt of notice shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not
exceeding $500 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both.
A separate violation shall be deemed committed on each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 83
(RESERVED)
[Original Ch. 83, Signs, adopted 8-14-1972 by Ord. No. 72-15, as
amended, was repealed 5-12-1992 by Ord. No. 92-14.]
Chapter 84
SOIL MOVEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood hazard control — See Ch. 61.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 74.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 84A.
Street openings and excavations — See Ch.
85.
Subdivision and site plan review — See Ch.
87.
Zoning — See Ch. 101.
§ 84-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LOT —
MAJOR SOIL MOVING PERMIT — A permit allowing the movement of 300
cubic yards or more of soil or a permit for the movement of less than
300 cubic yards of soil where the Borough Engineer has determined that
the movement of soil may result in an adverse impact on the subject lot,
Borough roadways or adjacent or nearby properties.
Any parcel of land or portion thereof within the Borough of Park Ridge,
the boundary lines of which can be ascertained by reference to maps
and records, or either, in the office of the Borough Tax Assessor or in
the office of the Bergen County Clerk; or
A.
Any contiguous parcels of land under common ownership, which
ownership can be ascertained by reference to the maps and records, or
either, in the office of the Tax Assessor or the County Clerk.
B.
§ 82-7 PARK RIDGE CODE § 84-1
1:464
MINOR SOIL MOVING PERMIT — A permit allowing the movement of less
than 300 cubic yards but more than 50 cubic yards of soil.
MOVE — To dig; to excavate; to remove; to deposit; to import; to export;
to place; to fill; to grade, regrade, level or otherwise alter or change the
location or contour; to transport; to supply; provided, however, that nothing
in this chapter shall be construed to include plowing, spading, cultivating,
harrowing or disking of soil or any other operation usually and ordinarily
associated with the tilling of soil for agricultural or horticultural purposes.
OWNER — Any person seized in fee simple of any lot or having such other
interest or estate therein as will permit exercise of effective possession
thereof or dominion thereover.
SOIL — Any earth, sand, clay, loam, gravel, humus, rock or dirt, without
regard to the presence or absence therein of organic matter.
TOPSOIL — Soil that, in its natural state, constitutes the top layer of earth
and is composed of 2% or more, by weight, of organic matter and has the
ability to support vegetation.
§ 84-2. Findings by Council.
The Mayor and Council hereby find and determine that:
§ 84-3. Permit required.
No owner person shall cause, allow, permit or suffer any soil in excess of 50
cubic yards in and upon such lot to be moved unless and until such person
has first obtained a soil permit therefor as in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter. This section shall include the importing and exporting of soil
on any lot in the Borough.
§ 84-4. Review of applications; issuance of permits.
A. Unregulated and uncontrolled relocation, filling, excavation and
removal of soil on a large scale has resulted or will result in conditions
detrimental to public safety, health and general welfare, substantially
hampering and deterring the efforts of the Borough to effectuate the
general purpose of municipal planning; and
B. Continuation of the unregulated and uncontrolled relocation, filling,
excavation and removal of soil will result in serious and irreparable
damage to the public health and welfare by reason of consequent
erosion by water and wind; inadequate and improper surface water
drainage; interruption of septic and sanitary disposal systems; decrease
in or destruction of the fertility of soil; removal of lateral support of
abutting streets, lands and premises; creation of dangerous
depressions or pits; creation of dust storms and mosquito breeding
places; deterioration of property values; rendering of lands unfit or
unsuitable for their most appropriate uses; and creation of other factors
and elements hampering and deterring the coordinated, adjusted and
harmonious physical and aesthetic development of the Borough.
§ 84-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-4
1:465
§ 84-5. Form and content of application.
A. Applications for soil moving permits shall be filed with the Construction
Official. The Construction Official shall determine whether an
application requires a major soil moving permit or a minor soil moving
permit. The Construction Code Official shall obtain the written approval
of the Borough Engineer for all major soil moving permit applications
before issuance.
B. Inspection of site.
(1) Prior to the review of an application for a major soil moving permit,
the Borough Engineer shall make an inspection of the site from
which, to which or upon which the soil is to be moved and shall
make such engineering studies as may be required to determine
the effect of the movement of soil at the location as it relates to:
(a) Soil erosion by water and wind.
(b) Surface and subsurface water drainage and sanitary and septic
disposal systems.
(c) Soil fertility.
(d) Lateral support of abutting streets and lands.
(e) Public health and safety.
(f) Such other factors as may bear upon or relate to the
coordinated, adjusted and harmonious physical and aesthetic
development of the Borough.
(2) The Borough Engineer shall also inspect the aforesaid site to
determine whether stakes should be placed on each corner thereof
and whether grade stakes should be placed at the existing
elevation points designated on the topographical map.
C. Upon completion of all inspections, the Borough Engineer shall make a
report of such inspection and studies to the Construction Code Official,
which report shall include such conditions that the Borough Engineer
deems should be included in any soil moving permit.
D. Permits for soil moving shall be issued by the Construction Official and
shall include such conditions as the Borough Engineer deems
appropriate and necessary.
A. Application for a soil moving permit shall be filed in duplicate with the
Construction Official.
B. The application shall include the following:
(1) The applicant's name and address.
(2) The description of the lands in question.
§ 84-4 PARK RIDGE CODE § 84-5
1:466
(3) The name and address of the owner of the lands.
(4) The purpose or reason for moving the soil and whether it will be
done in connection with an application to the Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Adjustment and, if so, the filing date of the
application.
(5) The kind and quantity in cubic yards of soil to be moved.
(6) In case of removal, the place to which the soil is to be removed, the
proposed route of the vehicles within the Borough along which said
soil is to be transported and the kind and quantity of soil to be
removed.
(7) The proposed date of completion of the work.
(8) The source of all soil to be moved to a lot.
(9) The routes to be taken for the movement of all vehicles
transporting soil to and from the lot, together with the size of the
trucks to be used to transport soil.
(10) An application for a major soil moving permit shall be accompanied
by an original, together with one copy of a topographical map of the
lot upon which the proposed soil moving operations are to be
conducted and of all surrounding lands within 200 feet of the
perimeter of said lot. The map shall be prepared and certified by a
licensed professional engineer or a licensed surveyor, at a scale of
not less than one inch to 40 feet, and shall be keyed to the United
States Coast and Geodetic Survey datum when NJDEP so requires.
Said map shall, both as to the lot and all surrounding land, show the
following:
(a) The dimensions of the lot, and the lot and block numbers of the
lot and of each lot in the surrounding lands as shown on the Tax
Assessment Map of the Borough.
(b) The existing elevations of all lands, to be shown at five-foot
contour intervals for slopes in excess of 10% and at two-foot
contour intervals for lands of lesser slope.
(c) The existing elevations of all buildings, structures, streets,
streams, bodies of water and watercourses, natural or
artificial.
(d) All existing surface and subsurface water drainage conditions
and provisions therefor.
(e) All wooded areas and all trees having a diameter of six inches
or more at the base.
(f) The limits of the area or areas within the lot or lots in question
within which the soil moving operations are to be conducted,
§ 84-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-5
1:467
§ 84-6. Signature of applicant; endorsement of owners.
The application described in § 84-5 shall be signed by the applicant. It shall
also be endorsed by the owner or owners of the land, signifying that the
owners approve of the application, consent to have the applicant perform
the soil movement and that the applicant and owners agree, that in the
event of the failure of the applicant to complete all work, to cause the
proposed work to be completed or otherwise terminated in accordance with
the purposes and objectives of this chapter.
§ 84-7. Appeals.
and the existing elevations of said limits at intervals of not
more than 100 feet.
(g) The proposed final elevations at each point where existing
elevations shown on said map are to be changed as a result of
completion of the proposed work.
(h) Proposed slopes and lateral supports at the limits of the area
upon completion of the soil moving operations.
(i) Proposed provisions and facilities for surface water drainage
and, where applicable, channels of any streams, bodies of
water and watercourses, natural or artificial, including
detailed cross sections showing proposed channel widths, bank
slopes and method of erosion control thereof.
(j) Accurate cross sections showing the locations and quantities in
cubic yards of soil to be moved.
(k) A legend shall be indicated on said topographic plat, showing
sufficient symbols for existing and proposed elevations,
utilities, etc.
(l) Such other pertinent data as the Construction Official or
Borough Engineer may require.
A. The Planning Board is hereby designated as the referral agency for any
appeal of a determination of the Construction Code Official or Borough
Engineer in relation to a major soil moving permit under this chapter. In
the event an applicant wishes to appeal the determination of the
Construction Code Official or Borough Engineer, the applicant, upon
notice of said determination, may file an appeal to the Planning Board
by filing an application with the Secretary of the Planning Board on
such forms as are prescribed and supplied by the Planning Board. The
appeal shall consist of all materials required for an application. The
applicant shall file one original and 12 copies of all application
materials. Should the applicant have a pending application for
development scheduled to be heard before the Zoning Board of
Adjustment, said Board shall be authorized to review any appeal. Within
60 days after receipt of an appeal the Planning Board, or Zoning Board
§ 84-5 PARK RIDGE CODE § 84-7
1:468
§ 84-8. Permit fee; refund.
§ 84-9. Form, content and term of permit.
All soil moving permits shall be in such form as may be prescribed by
the Construction Official. Any soil moving permit shall be dated as of the
date it is actually issued, and the term of said permit shall not exceed one
year. All permits shall automatically expire on the termination date unless
an application for renewal has been made and approved in writing by the
Construction Official.
§ 84-10. Notice of approval; cash deposit or performance bond.
of Adjustment if applicable, shall complete its review and consideration
of the appeal and render its decision in writing to the Construction
Official who shall grant or refuse the permit in accordance with the
decision.
B. An applicant filing an appeal shall be entitled to request a public
hearing in front of the Board hearing the applicant's appeal. In the
event a public hearing is requested, the applicant shall provide notice
to the owners of all properties within 200 feet of the perimeter of the lot
that is the subject of the appeal.
A. The fee for a permit under this chapter shall accompany the
application. Such fee shall be computed at the rate of $0.25 per cubic
yard multiplied by the number of cubic yards to be removed, as stated
in the application and certified on the topographic map. In no event
shall the permit fee be less than $75 for one- and two-family
applications nor more than $1,000 for all other applications.
B. In addition to the fee set forth in Subsection A above, each applicant for
a soil removal permit shall pay an additional fee of $200 to the Land Use
Office of the Borough of Park Ridge, except that where the soil is to be
removed from lands zoned residential, the fee provided in this
Subsection B shall be $100.
C. In the event the permit is refused, the fee paid by the applicant
pursuant to Subsection A hereof shall be refunded to him after
deducting all expenses and costs incurred by the Borough for
engineering surveys and reports, inspection fees and legal fees in
processing the application for a soil permit. Said refund shall be
accompanied by a statement of the said costs and expenses incurred by
the Borough.
A. In the event the Borough Engineer or the Planning Board, or the Zoning
Board of Adjustment on an appeal, if applicable, recommends approval
of the soil removal application, the Construction Official shall forthwith
give notice to the applicant of the approval and of the amount of the
performance bond or cash deposit required. If the applicant fails to post
§ 84-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-10
1:469
§ 84-11. Determination of amount of bond or cash deposit.
The amount of bond or cash deposit shall be determined at the rate of not
less than $0.10 per cubic yard and not in excess of $0.50 per cubic yard
of the amount of soil to be moved; provided, however, that in no event
shall said bond or deposit be less than the principal amount of $2,000. In
ascertaining the rate upon which to compute the amount of the deposit or of
the bond, the Borough Engineer, or the Planning Board, or the Zoning Board
of Adjustment, if applicable, shall take into consideration such factors as
may bear upon the facility with which the proposed work may be performed,
including but not limited to the type and character of soil, the extent of
the area over which the soil-moving operations are to be conducted, the
extent and depth of the various cuts and fills, the extent to which the
area of operations is wooded, the proximity of the proposed operations to
streets, buildings, structures, natural or artificial streams or watercourses
and general drainage conditions.
§ 84-12. Application for amendment of permit.
Applications for the amendment to a major soil moving permit shall not be
accepted by the Construction Official without the written consent of the
surety on the bond approving said application for amendment or alteration
and consenting to extension of the bond coverage thereto.
§ 84-13. Application for release of bond.
Application for the release of any bond posted in accordance with the
terms of this chapter or a resolution of the Planning Board, or the Zoning
Board of Adjustment, if applicable, shall be accompanied by an affidavit
stating that the soil-moving operation has been completed in accordance
with the application and all plans, maps and other data filed therewith
the required performance bond or cash deposit within 60 days of the
notice, then the permit shall be automatically rescinded.
B. The soil moving permit shall not be issued unless the applicant posts
with the Borough a cash deposit or performance bond in form and with
surety acceptable to the Borough, in the amount the Borough Engineer
(or Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, if applicable)
determines, conditioned upon full and faithful performance by the
principal, within the time specified in the application, of all the
proposed work in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and of
the soil permit issued to the principal. In addition, the cash deposit or
bond shall be conditioned upon the repair, at the expense of the owner
or applicant, of any street or streets damaged by the transportation of
soil in connection with the application if, in the judgment of the
Planning Board, or the Zoning Board of Adjustment, if applicable, such
repairs are necessary. The term "expense," as used in this subsection,
shall include the cost of supervision by the Borough Engineer in
connection with such repairs.
§ 84-10 PARK RIDGE CODE § 84-13
1:470
and in accordance with all resolutions and conditions therein adopted by
the Planning Board, or the Zoning Board of Adjustment, if applicable. The
affidavit shall be executed by a licensed professional or civil engineer of the
State of New Jersey.
§ 84-14. Prohibited acts and conduct by permittees.
The holder of a permit issued under this chapter shall not:
§ 84-15. Storage and replacement of topsoil.
A. Conduct or maintain on the premises any sand, gravel or similar kind of
pit; any sand or gravel washing or screening machinery or equipment;
any business or industry not permitted in the district in which said
premises are located and classified by Chapter 101, Zoning; or any
endeavor or enterprise other than the grading of said premises in
accordance with the provision of said permit and, where applicable, the
necessary disposal of soil incidental to said grading or regrading.
B. Conduct or maintain any soil moving operations without having first
made adequate provision to control dust incidental to the use of
vehicles, machinery and equipment on the lands described in the soil
permit.
C. Neglect to dispose of, on or before the completion date stated in the
application:
(1) Any partially or wholly excavated boulders or other incombustible
debris resulting from the soil-moving operations, by burial or
removal.
(2) Any partially or wholly excavated stumps, felled or uprooted trees
or other combustible debris resulting from the soil-moving
operations, by combustion or removal from the premises.
D. Conduct any soil-moving operations beyond the expiration date as set
forth in the soil permit or extended expiration date as may duly be
granted by the Construction Official.
A. Whenever any person shall move topsoil in or upon any lot, provisions
shall be made for the storage of the topsoil within the boundary line of
said lot, unless specific permission to the contrary has been granted by
the Borough Engineer, Planning Board, or the Zoning Board of
Adjustment, if applicable.
B. Except as hereinafter otherwise provided in this section, all of the
topsoil so stored shall be uniformly replaced on or before the
completion date set forth in the soil permit, so that the final grade or
grades of said replaced topsoil shall be in accordance with the proposed
final grades shown on the topographical map.
§ 84-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-15
1:471
§ 84-16. Excavation depth.
No person shall, at any time in the course of the work, dig or excavate more
than six inches below the proposed final grades shown on the topographical
map unless:
§ 84-17. Soil deposit, fill-in and grade change restrictions.
No person shall deposit soil upon, fill in or raise the grade of any lot without
making provision for:
C. No person shall remove to any point beyond the boundary lines of the
lot any topsoil whatsoever unless and until topsoil not inferior in quality
to that to be removed shall first have been replaced uniformly to a
depth of not less than six inches, measured from the proposed final
grades as shown on the topographical map, over the entire surface or
area of the lot, excepting only such portions thereof as shall be or shall
have become, since the date of filing of said topographical map,
permanently covered by a building or structure, street pavement, curb,
sidewalk, driveway or other paved area or by any body of water or
waterway. In no event shall the person remove from the lot more topsoil
than that comprising the surplus or excess remaining after the
replacement of the topsoil as aforesaid.
A. The soil permit specifies otherwise and the performance bond makes
specific provision for replacement, on or before the completion date set
forth in the soil permit, of soil of sufficient quantity and kind to restore
the final grades to those shown on the topographical map; or
B. After issuance of the soil permit, the person, before digging or
excavating below said minimum level, applies to the Construction
Official or the Planning Board, or the Zoning Board of Adjustment, if
applicable, and is granted an amendment of the application and
topographical map then in effect, which amendment may be granted
upon such terms as the Construction Official deems necessary to assure
adherence to the purpose and objectives of this chapter.
A. The use in said work of soil or such other materials as will not result in
deviation from the proposed final grades or the uniformity thereof by
reason of abnormal shrinkage or settlement.
B. The collection and storage upon the lot of the original topsoil so that
said topsoil shall not be buried beneath soil or other material of inferior
quality, and the uniform replacement of the topsoil so stored over the
entire area or surface of the fill soil or other material so that the final
grade or grades of said replaced topsoil shall be in accordance with the
proposed final grades shown on the topographical map. In the event
that such provision is not practicable, provision shall be made for the
uniform placement over the entire area or surface of the fill soil or other
material, excepting only such portions that are or shall become
permanently covered by a building or structure, street pavement, curb,
§ 84-15 PARK RIDGE CODE § 84-17
1:472
§ 84-18. Certain persons exempt.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to affect or apply to any person
engaged in the moving of soil in and upon lands pursuant to any
government-sponsored soil conservation program.
§ 84-19. Right to enter upon lands.
For the purpose of administering and enforcing this chapter, any duly
authorized officer, agent or employee of the Borough shall have the right
to enter into and upon any lands for which an application has been filed
and upon which soil-moving operations are to be conducted, to examine and
inspect such lands.
§ 84-20. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 90 days, or both. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 84A
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 50.
Flood hazard control — See Ch. 61.
Garbage, rubbish and trash — See Ch. 64.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 74.
Sewers — See Ch. 81A.
Subdivision and site plan review — See Ch.
87.
Water conservation — See Ch. 99.
Wells — See Ch. 100.
Zoning — See Ch. 101.
§ 84A-1. Purpose; applicability; compatibility with other
requirements.
sidewalk, driveway or other paved area or by any body of water or
waterway, of a layer of topsoil not inferior in quality to that of the
original topsoil, to a depth of not less than six inches, measured from
the proposed final grades as shown on the topographical map.
A. Policy statement. Flood control, groundwater recharge, and pollutant
reduction through nonstructural or low-impact techniques shall be
explored before relying on structural BMPs. Structural BMPs should be
integrated with nonstructural stormwater management measures and
proper maintenance plans. Nonstructural measures include both
environmentally sensitive site design and source controls that prevent
§ 84-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84A-1
1:473
§ 84A-2. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
CAFRA CENTERS, CORES OR NODES — Those areas within boundaries
accepted by the Department pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:8E-5B.
CAFRA PLANNING MAP — The geographic depiction of the boundaries for
Coastal Planning Areas, CAFRA Centers, CAFRA Cores and CAFRA Nodes
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:7E-5B.3.
pollutants from being placed on the site. Source control plans should be
developed based upon physical site conditions and the origin, nature,
and the anticipated loading of potential pollutants. Multiple stormwater
management BMPs may be necessary to achieve the established
performance standards for water quality, quantity, and groundwater
recharge.
B. Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to establish minimum
stormwater management requirements and controls for major
development.
C. Applicability.
(1) This chapter shall be applicable to any site plan or subdivision that
requires preliminary or final site plan review:
(a) Nonresidential major developments; and
(b) Aspects of residential major developments that are not
preempted by the Residential Site Improvement Standards at
N.J.A.C. 5:21.
(2) This chapter shall also be applicable to all major developments
undertaken by Park Ridge.
D. Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements.
Development approvals issued pursuant to this chapter are to be
considered an integral part of development approvals under the
subdivision and site plan review process and do not relieve the
applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals
for activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule, act, or
ordinance. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this
chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. This
chapter is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other
ordinances, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law except
that, where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different
from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other
provision of law, the more restrictive provisions or higher standards
shall control.
§ 84A-1 PARK RIDGE CODE § 84A-2
1:474
COMPACTION — The increase in soil bulk density.
CORE — A pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic uses serving
the surrounding municipality, generally including housing and access to
public transportation.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — An agency designated by the County Board
of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater management plans
and implementing ordinance(s). The county review agency may either be
a county planning agency or a county water resource association created
under N.J.S.A 58:16A-55.5, if the ordinance or resolution delegates
authority to approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove municipal
stormwater management plans and implementing ordinances.
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGN ENGINEER — A person professionally qualified and duly licensed
in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may include, but not
necessarily be limited to, development of project requirements, creation
and development of project design and preparation of drawings and
specifications.
DESIGNATED CENTER — A state development and redevelopment plan
center as designated by the State Planning Commission such as urban,
regional, town, village, or hamlet.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or structure, any mining
excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any building or
other structure, or land or extension of use of land, for which permission
is required under the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
In the case of development of agricultural lands, "development" means
any activity that requires a state permit; any activity reviewed by the
County Agricultural Board (CAB) and the State Agricultural Development
Committee (SADC), and municipal review of any activity not exempted by
the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A 4:1C-1 et seq.
DRAINAGE AREA — A geographic area within which stormwater,
sediments, or dissolved materials drain to a particular receiving water body
or to a particular point along a receiving water body.
EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD — A neighborhood designated by the
Urban Coordinating Council in consultation and conjunction with the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority pursuant to N.J.S.A 55:19-69.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREAS — An area or feature which is
of significant environmental value, including but not limited to stream
corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered or
threatened species; large areas of contiguous open space or upland forest;
steep slopes; and wellhead protection and groundwater recharge areas.
Habitats of endangered or threatened species are identified using the
Department's Landscape Project as approved by the Department's
Endangered and Nongame Species Program.
§ 84A-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84A-2
1:475
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice or gravity.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer of
material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
INFILTRATION — The process by which water seeps into the soil from
precipitation.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Any development that provides for ultimately
disturbing one or more acres of land or increasing impervious surface by
one-quarter acre or more. Disturbance, for the purpose of this rule, is the
placement of impervious surface or exposure and/or movement of soil or
bedrock or clearing, cuffing, or removing of vegetation. Projects undertaken
by any government agency which otherwise meet the definition of "major
development" but which do not require approval under the Municipal Land
Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., are also considered major development.
MUNICIPALITY — Any city, borough, town, township, or village.
NODE — An area designated by the State Planning Commission
concentrating facilities and activities, which are not organized in a compact
form.
NUTRIENT — A chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or
phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the development of
organisms.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state and any state, interstate or
federal agency.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge, munitions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes, radioactive
substance [except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as
amended (42 U.S.C. § 2011 et seq.)], thermal waste, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal, agricultural, and
construction waste or runoff, or other residue discharged directly or
indirectly to the land, groundwaters or surface waters of the state, or
to a domestic treatment works. Pollutant includes both hazardous and
nonhazardous pollutants.
RECHARGE — The amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates into
the ground and is not evapotranspired.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is
being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water or
gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE — The lot or lots upon which a major development is to occur or has
occurred.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin.
§ 84A-2 PARK RIDGE CODE § 84A-2
1:476
STATE DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN METROPOLITAN
PLANNING AREA (PA1) — An area delineated on the State Plan Policy Map
and adopted by the State Planning Commission that is intended to be the
focus for much of the state's future redevelopment and revitalization efforts.
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — The geographic application of the State
Development and Redevelopment Plan's goals and statewide policies, and
the official map of these goals and policies.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, or is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or drainage facilities.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — An excavation or embankment
and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A stormwater
management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a detention basin or
infiltration basin), retain water in a permanent pool (a retention basin), or
be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most constructed stormwater
wetlands).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Any structural or
nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program, or other
method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated
pollutants, or to induce or control the infiltration or groundwater recharge
of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal nonstormwater discharges into
stormwater conveyances.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Water flow on the surface of the ground or in
storm sewers, resulting from precipitation.
TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — A flood hazard area, which may be
influenced by stormwater runoff from inland areas, but which is primarily
caused by the Atlantic Ocean.
URBAN COORDINATING COUNCIL EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD
— A neighborhood given priority access to state resources through the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority.
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONES — A zone designated by the New Jersey
Enterprise Zone Authority pursuant to the New Jersey Urban Enterprise
Zones Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60 et. seq.
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA — Previously developed portions of
areas:
Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) as the Metropolitan
Planning Area (PA1), Designated Centers, Cores or Nodes;
A.
B. Designated as CAFRA Centers, Cores or Nodes;
C. Designated as Urban Enterprise Zones; and
Designated as Urban Coordinating Council Empowerment
Neighborhoods.
D.
§ 84A-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84A-2
1:477
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams,
wetlands, and bodies of surface- or groundwater, whether natural or
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
WETLANDS OR WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence
of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
commonly known as "hydrophytic vegetation."
§ 84A-3. Design and performance standards for stormwater
management measures.
§ 84A-4. Stormwater management requirements for major
development.
A. Stormwater management measures for major development shall be
developed to meet the erosion control, groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality standards in
this section. To the maximum extent feasible, these standards shall be
met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater management strategies
into the design. If these strategies alone are not sufficient to meet these
standards, structural stormwater management measures necessary to
meet these standards shall be incorporated into the design.
B. The standards in this chapter apply only to new major development and
are intended to minimize the impact of stormwater runoff on water
quality and water quantity in receiving water bodies and maintain
groundwater recharge. The standards do not apply to new major
development to the extent that alternative design and performance
standards are applicable under a regional stormwater management
plan or water quality management plan adopted in accordance with
Department rules. Such alternative standards shall provide at least as
much protection from related-related loss of groundwater recharge,
related quantity and water quality impacts of major development
projects as would be provided under the standards in this section.
C. For site improvements regulated under the Residential Site
Improvement Standards (RSIS) at N.J.A.C. 5:21, the RSIS shall apply in
addition to this section except to the extent the RSIS are superseded by
this section or alternative standards applicable under a regional
stormwater management plan or water quality management plan
adopted in accordance with Department rules.
A. The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of a
major development.
B. Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse impacts of
concentrated flow on habitat for threatened and endangered species as
§ 84A-2 PARK RIDGE CODE § 84A-4
1:478
documented in the Department Landscape Project or Natural Heritage
Database established under N.J.S.A. 13:1B-15.147 through 15.150,
particularly Helonias bullata (swamp pink) and/or Clemmys
muhlenbergi (bog turtle).
C. The following linear development projects are exempt from the
groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater
runoff quality requirements at Subsections F and G:
(1) The construction of an underground utility line, provided that the
disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion;
(2) The construction of an aboveground utility line, provided that the
existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent
practicable; and
(3) The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk
or trail with a maximum width of 14 feet, provided that the access
is made of permeable material.
D. A waiver from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
requirements at Subsections F and G may be obtained for the
enlargement of an existing public roadway or railroad; or the
construction or enlargement of a public pedestrian access, provided
that the following conditions are met:
(1) The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the
project that cannot be accomplished by any other means;
(2) The applicant demonstrates through an alternatives analysis, that
through the use of nonstructural and structural stormwater
management strategies and measures, the option selected
complies with the requirements of Subsections F and G to the
maximum extent practicable;
(3) The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the requirements
at Subsections F and G, existing structures currently in use, such
as homes and buildings would need to be condemned; and
(4) The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other
rights to areas, including the potential to obtain through
condemnation lands not falling under Subsection D(3) above within
the upstream drainage area of the receiving stream, that would
provide additional opportunities to mitigate for requirements of
Subsections F and G that were not achievable on site.
E. Nonstructural stormwater management strategies.
(1) To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in Subsections F
and G shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater
management strategies at this subsection into the design. The
applicant shall identify the nonstructural measures incorporated
§ 84A-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84A-4
1:479
into the design of the project. If the applicant contends that it is
not feasible for engineering, environmental, or safety reasons to
incorporate any nonstructural stormwater management measures
identified in Subsection E(2) below into the design of a particular
project, the applicant shall identify the strategy considered and
provide a basis for the contention.
(2) Nonstructural stormwater management measures incorporated
into site design shall:
(a) Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss;
(b) Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect the
flow of runoff over impervious surfaces;
(c) Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation;
(d) Minimize the decrease in the time of concentration from
preconstruction to postconstruction. "Time of concentration" is
defined as the time it takes for runoff to travel from the
hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to the point
of interest within a watershed;
(e) Minimize land disturbance including clearing and grading;
(f) Minimize soil compaction;
(g) Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages
retention and planting of native vegetation and minimizes the
use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides;
(h) Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas;
(i) Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the use or
exposure of pollutants at the site in order to prevent or
minimize the release of those pollutants into stormwater
runoff. These source controls include, but are not limited to:
[1] Site design features that help to prevent accumulation of
trash and debris in drainage systems;
[2] Site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash
and debris from drainage systems;
[3] Site design features that help to prevent and/or contain
spills or other harmful accumulations of pollutants at
industrial or commercial developments; and
[4] When establishing vegetation after land disturbance,
applying fertilizer in accordance with the requirements
§ 84A-4 PARK RIDGE CODE § 84A-4
1:480
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and implementing rules.
(3) Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater management
measure to meet the performance standards in Subsections F and
G shall be dedicated to a government agency, subjected to a
conservation restriction filed with the appropriate County Clerk's
office, or subject to an approved equivalent restriction that ensures
that measure or an equivalent stormwater management measure
approved by the reviewing agency is maintained in perpetuity.
(4) Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management measures is
available in the New Jersey stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual.
F. Erosion control, groundwater recharge and runoff quantity standards.
(1) This subsection contains minimum design and performance
standards to control erosion, encourage and control infiltration and
groundwater recharge, and control stormwater runoff quantity
impacts of major development.
(a) The minimum design and performance standards for erosion
control are those established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and
implementing rules.
(b) The minimum design and performance standards for
groundwater recharge are as follows:
[1] The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and
factors for stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge
calculations at § 84A-5 either:
[a] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the site and its stormwater management
measures maintain 100% of the average annual
preconstruction groundwater recharge volume for the
site; or
[b] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the increase of stormwater runoff volume
from preconstruction to postconstruction for the twoyear
storm is infiltrated.
[2] This groundwater recharge requirement does not apply to
projects within the urban redevelopment area, or projects
subject to Subsection F(1)(b)[3] below.
[3] The following types of stormwater shall not be recharged:
[a] Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading. High
pollutant loading areas are areas in industrial and
§ 84A-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84A-4
1:481
commercial developments where solvents and/or
petroleum products are loaded/unloaded, stored, or
applied, areas where pesticides are loaded/unloaded
or stored; areas where hazardous materials are
expected to be present in greater than "reportable
quantities" as defined by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR
302.4; areas where recharge would be inconsistent
with Department-approved remedial action work plan
or landfill closure plan and areas with high risks for
spills of toxic materials, such as gas stations and
vehicle maintenance facilities; and
[b] Industrial stormwater exposed to source material.
"Source material" means any material(s) or
machinery, located at an industrial facility, that is
directly or indirectly related to process,
manufacturing or other industrial activities, which
could be a source of pollutants in any industrial
stormwater discharge to groundwater. Source
materials include, but are not limited to, raw
materials; intermediate products; final products;
waste materials; by-products; industrial machinery
and fuels, and lubricants, solvents, and detergents
that are related to process, manufacturing, or other
industrial activities that are exposed to stormwater.
[4] The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on
the groundwater table and design the site so as to avoid
adverse hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse hydraulic
impacts include, but are not limited to, exacerbating a
naturally or seasonally high-water table so as to cause
surficial ponding, flooding of basements, or interference
with the proper operation of subsurface sewage disposal
systems and other subsurface structures in the vicinity or
downgradient of the groundwater recharge area.
(c) In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the
design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors for
stormwater runoff calculations at § 84A-5, complete one of the
following:
[1] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that for stormwater leaving the site, postconstruction
runoff hydrographs for the two-, ten-, and one-hundredyear
storm events do not exceed, at any point in time, the
preconstruction runoff hydrographs for the same storm
events;
[2] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that there is no increase, as compared to the
§ 84A-4 PARK RIDGE CODE § 84A-4
1:482
preconstruction condition, in the peak runoff rates of
stormwater leaving the site for the two-, ten-, and onehundred-
year storm events and that the increased volume
or change in timing of stormwater runoff will not increase
flood damage at or downstream of the site. This analysis
shall include the analysis of impacts of existing land uses
and projected land uses assuming full development under
existing zoning and land use ordinances in the drainage
area;
[3] Design stormwater management measures so that the
postconstruction peak runoff rates for the two-, ten- and
one-hundred-year storm events are 50%, 75% and 80%,
respectively, of the preconstruction peak runoff rates. The
percentages apply only to the postconstruction
stormwater runoff that is attributable to the portion of the
site on which the proposed development or project is to be
constructed. The percentages shall not be applied to
postconstruction stormwater runoff into tidal flood hazard
areas if the increased volume of stormwater runoff will not
increase flood damages below the point of discharge; or
[4] In tidal flood hazard areas, stormwater runoff quantity
analysis in accordance with Subsection F(1)(c)[1], [2] and
[3] above shall only be applied if the increased volume of
stormwater runoff could increase flood damages below the
point of discharge.
(2) Any application for a new agricultural development that meets the
definition of major development at § 84A-2 shall be submitted to the
appropriate Soil Conservation District for review and approval in
accordance with the requirements of this section and any
applicable Soil Conservation District guidelines for stormwater
runoff quantity and erosion control. For the purposes of this
section, "agricultural development" means land uses normally
associated with the production of food, fiber and livestock for sale.
Such uses do not include the development of land for the
processing or sale of food and the manufacturing of agriculturally
related products.
G. Stormwater runoff quality standards.
(1) Stormwater management measures shall be designed to reduce the
postconstruction load of total suspended solids (TSS) in stormwater
runoff by 80% of the anticipated load from the developed site,
expressed as an annual average. stormwater management
measures shall only be required for water quality control if an
additional 1/4 acre of impervious surface is being proposed on a
development site. The requirement to reduce TSS does not apply to
any stormwater runoff in a discharge regulated under a numeric
effluent limitation for TSS imposed under the New Jersey Pollution
§ 84A-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84A-4
1:483
Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules, N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or
in a discharge specifically exempt under a NJPDES permit from
this requirement. The water quality design storm is 1.25 inches
of rainfall in two hours. Water quality calculations shall take into
account the distribution of rain from the water quality design
storm. The calculation of the volume of runoff may take into
account the implementation of nonstructural and structural
stormwater management measures.
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
0 0.0000 65 0.8917
5 0.0083 70 0.9917
10 0.0166 75 1.0500
15 0,0250 80 1.0840
20 0.0500 85 1.1170
25 0.0750 90 1.1500
30 0.1000 95 1.1750
35 0.1330 100 1.2000
40 0.1660 105 1.2250
45 0.2000 110 1.2334
50 0.2583 115 1.2417
55 0.3583 120 1.2500
60 .6250
(2) For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below presents
the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs designed in
accordance with the New Jersey stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual and other sources of technical
guidance are listed in § 84A-6. TSS reduction shall be calculated
based on the removal rates for the BMPs in Table 2 below.
(3) If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the required
80% TSS reduction for a site, the applicant shall utilize the
following formula to calculate TSS reduction:
R = A + B - (A x B)/100
§ 84A-4 PARK RIDGE CODE § 84A-4
1:484
Where :
R = Total TSS percent load removal from application of both
BMPs.
A = The TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first
BMP.
B = The TSS percent removal rate applicable to the second
BMP.
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice TSS Percent Removal Rate
Bioretention systems 90%
Constructed stormwater wetland 90%
Extended detention basin 40% to 60%
Infiltration structure 80%
Manufactured treatment device See § 84A-6C
Sand filter 80%
Vegetative filter strip 60% to 80%
Wet pond 50% to 90%
(4) If there is more than one on-site drainage area, the 80% TSS
removal rate shall apply to each drainage area, unless the runoff
from the subareas converge on site in which case the removal rate
can be demonstrated through a calculation using a weighted
average.
(5) Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to
reduce, to the maximum extent feasible, the postconstruction
nutrient load of the anticipated load from the developed site in
stormwater runoff generated from the water quality design storm.
In achieving reduction of nutrients to the maximum extent feasible,
the design of the site shall include nonstructural strategies and
structural measures that optimize nutrient removal while still
achieving the performance standards in Subsections F and G.
(6) Additional information and examples are contained in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, which may
be obtained from the address identified in § 84A-6.
(7) In accordance with the definition of FW1 at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4,
stormwater management measures shall be designed to prevent
any increase in stormwater runoff to waters classified as FW1.
(8) Special water resource protection areas shall be established along
all waters designated Category One at N.J.A.C. 7:9B and perennial
or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters as shown on the USGS Quadrangle Maps or in the
County Soil Surveys, within the associated HUC 14 drainage. These
§ 84A-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84A-4
1:485
areas shall be established for the protection of water quality,
aesthetic value, exceptional ecological significance, exceptional
recreational significance, exceptional water supply significance,
and exceptional fisheries significance of those established Category
One waters. These areas shall be designated and protected as
follows:
(a) The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water
resource protection area in accordance with one of the
following:
[1] A three-hundred-foot special water resource protection
area shall be provided on each side of the waterway,
measured perpendicular to the waterway from the top of
the bank outwards or from the center line of the waterway
where the bank is not defined, consisting of existing
vegetation or vegetation allowed to follow natural
succession is provided.
[2] Encroachment within the designated special water
resource protection area under Subsection G(8)(a)[1]
above shall only be allowed where previous development
or disturbance has occurred (for example, active
agricultural use, parking area or maintained lawn area).
The encroachment shall only be allowed where applicant
demonstrates that the functional value and overall
condition of the special water resource protection area will
be maintained to the maximum extent practicable. In no
case shall the remaining special water resource protection
area be reduced to less than 150 feet as measured
perpendicular to the top of bank of the waterway or center
line of the waterway where the bank is undefined. All
encroachments proposed under this subsection shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(b) All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow through
the special water resource protection area and shall comply
with the Standard For Off-Site Stability in the "Standards for
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey," established
under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A.
4:24-39 et seq.
(c) If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through the
special water resource protection area cannot comply with the
Standard For Off-Site Stability in the "Standards for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey," established
under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A.
4:24-39 et seq., then the stabilization measures in accordance
with the requirements of the above standards may be placed
within the special water resource protection area, provided
that:
§ 84A-4 PARK RIDGE CODE § 84A-4
1:486
[1] Stabilization measures shall not be placed within 150 feet
of the Category One waterway;
[2] Stormwater associated with discharges allowed by this
section shall achieve a 95% TSS postconstruction removal
rate;
[3] Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no impact on
receiving waterway;
[4] The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection
area will be maintained to the maximum extent
practicable;
[5] A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with the
appropriate Department staff and Soil Conservation
District staff to identify necessary stabilization measures;
and
[6] All encroachments proposed under this section shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(d) A stream corridor protection plan may be developed by a
regional stormwater management planning committee as an
element of a regional stormwater management plan, or by a
municipality through an adopted municipal stormwater
management plan. If a stream corridor protection plan for a
waterway subject to Subsection G(8) has been approved by the
Department of Environmental Protection, then the provisions
of the plan shall be the applicable special water resource
protection area requirements for that waterway. A stream
corridor protection plan for a waterway subject to Subsection
G(8) shall maintain or enhance the current functional value
and overall condition of the special water resource protection
area as defined in Subsection G(8)(a)[1] above. In no case shall
a stream corridor protection plan allow the reduction of the
Special Water Resource Protection Area to less than 150 feet
as measured perpendicular to the waterway subject to this
subsection.
(e) This subsection does not apply to the construction of one
individual single-family dwelling that is not part of a larger
development on a lot receiving preliminary or final subdivision
approval on or before [effective date of the Stormwater
Management Rules], provided that the construction begins on
or before [five years from effective date of the Stormwater
Management Rules].
§ 84A-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84A-5
1:487
§ 84A-5. Calculation of stormwater runoff and groundwater
recharge.
A. Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the following:
(1) The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the
following methods:
(a) The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation and
Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described in the NRCS
National Engineering Handbook Section 4 - Hydrology and
Technical Release 55 - Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds;
or
(b) The Rational Method for peak flow and the Modified Rational
Method for hydrograph computations.
(2) For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and groundwater
recharge, there is a presumption that the preconstruction condition
of a site or portion thereof is a wooded land use with good
hydrologic condition. The term "runoff coefficient" applies to both
the NRCS methodology at Subsection A(1)(a) and the Rational and
Modified Rational Methods at Subsection A(1)(b). A runoff
coefficient or a groundwater recharge land cover for an existing
condition may be used on all or a portion of the site if the design
engineer verifies that the hydrologic condition has existed on the
site or portion of the site for at least five years without interruption
prior to the time of application. If more than one land cover has
existed on the site during the five years immediately prior to the
time of application, the land cover with the lowest runoff potential
shall be used for the computations. In addition, there is the
presumption that the site is in good hydrologic condition (if the
land use type is pasture, lawn, or park), with good cover (if the land
use type is woods), or with good hydrologic condition and
conservation treatment (if the land use type is cultivation).
(3) In computing preconstruction stormwater runoff, the design
engineer shall account for all significant land features and
structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows, or
culverts, which may reduce preconstruction stormwater runoff
rates and volumes.
(4) In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the design
engineer shall consider the relative stormwater runoff rates and/or
volumes of pervious and impervious surfaces separately to
accurately compute the rates and volume of stormwater runoff
from the site. To calculate runoff from unconnected impervious
cover, urban impervious area modifications as described in the
NRCS Technical Release 55,Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds, and other methods may be employed.
§ 84A-5 PARK RIDGE CODE § 84A-5
1:488
§ 84A-6. Standards for structural stormwater management
measures.
(5) If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater management
measure is below the flood hazard design flood elevation as defined
at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the design engineer shall take into account the
effects of tail water in the design of structural stormwater
management measures.
B. Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with the
following: the New Jersey Geological Survey Geological Survey Report
GSR-32, A Method for Evaluating Groundwater Recharge Areas in New
Jersey, incorporated herein by reference as amended and
supplemented.
A. Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as
follows:
(1) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
take into account the existing site conditions, including, for
example, environmentally critical areas; wetlands; flood-prone
areas; slopes; depth to seasonal high-water table; soil type,
permeability and texture; drainage area and drainage patterns; and
the presence of solution-prone carbonate rocks (limestone).
(2) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and repairs, and
ensure proper functioning. Trash racks shall be installed at the
intake to the outlet structure as appropriate, and shall have parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars to the elevation of the
water quality design storm. For elevations higher than the water
quality design storm, the parallel bars at the outlet structure shall
be spaced no greater than 1/3 the width of the diameter of the
orifice or 1/3 the width of the weir, with a minimum spacing
between bars of one-inch and a maximum spacing between bars of
six inches. In addition, the design of trash racks must comply with
the requirements of § 84A-7C.
(3) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed,
constructed, and installed to be strong, durable, and corrosion
resistant. Measures that are consistent with the relevant portions
of the Residential Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3,
7.4, and 7.5 shall be deemed to meet this requirement.
(4) At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management basin,
the orifice size shall be a minimum of 2 1/2 inches in diameter.
(5) Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the
minimum safety standards for stormwater management basins at
§ 84A-7.
§ 84A-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84A-6
1:489
§ 84A-7. Safety standards for stormwater management basins.
B. Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the New
Jersey stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Other
stormwater management measures may be utilized, provided the
design engineer demonstrates that the proposed measure and its
design will accomplish the required water quantity, groundwater
recharge and water quality design and performance standards
established by this chapter.
C. Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the requirements
of this chapter, provided the pollutant removal rates are verified by the
New Jersey Corporation for Advanced Technology and certified by the
Department.
A. This section sets forth requirements to protect public safety through
the proper design and operation of stormwater management basins.
This subsection applies to any new stormwater management basin.
B. The provisions of this section are not intended to preempt more
stringent municipal or county safety requirements for new or existing
stormwater management basins.
C. Requirements for trash racks, overflow grates and escape provisions.
(1) A trash rack is a device designed to catch trash and debris and
prevent the clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet from the stormwater
management basin to ensure proper functioning of the basin
outlets in accordance with the following:
(a) The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater than
six-inch spacing between the bars.
(b) The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely affect
the hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or structure.
(c) The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is not to
exceed 2.5 feet per second under the full range of stage and
discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the basis of the net
area of opening through the rack.
(d) The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be rigid,
durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds/feet
square.
(2) An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the
overflow structure. If an outlet structure has an overflow grate,
such grate shall meet the following requirements:
(a) The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but
removable for emergencies and maintenance.
§ 84A-6 PARK RIDGE CODE § 84A-7
1:490
§ 84A-8. Requirements for site development stormwater plan.
(b) The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two inches
across the smallest dimension.
(c) The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per
square foot.
(3) For purposes of this section, "escape provisions" means the
permanent installation of ladders, steps, rungs, or other features
that provide easily accessible means of egress from stormwater
management basins. Stormwater management basins shall include
escape provisions as follows:
(a) If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure,
escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the structure.
With the prior approval of the reviewing agency identified in
Subsection D, a freestanding outlet structure may be exempted
from this requirement.
(b) Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
stormwater management basins having a permanent pool of
water deeper than two and one-half feet. Such safety ledges
shall be comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four to six
feet in width. One step shall be located approximately 2 1/2
feet below the permanent water surface, and the second step
shall be located one to 1 1/2 feet above the permanent water
surface. See an illustration of safety ledges in a stormwater
management basin on file in the Borough offices.
(c) In new stormwater management basins, the maximum interior
slope for an earthen dam, embankment, or berm shall not be
steeper than three horizontal to one vertical.
D. Variance or exemption from safety standards. A variance or exemption
from the safety standards for stormwater management basins may be
granted only upon a written finding by the appropriate reviewing
agency (municipality, county or Department) that the variance or
exemption will not constitute a threat to public safety.
A. Submission of site development stormwater plan.
(1) Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a development
subject to this chapter, the applicant shall submit all of the required
components of the Checklist for the Site Development Stormwater
Plan at Subsection C below as part of the submission of the
applicant's application for subdivision or site plan approval.
(2) The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the
standards set forth in this chapter.
§ 84A-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84A-8
1:491
(3) The applicant shall submit copies of the materials listed in the
checklist for site development stormwater plans in accordance with
Subsection C of this chapter.
B. Site development stormwater plan approval. The applicant's site
development project shall be reviewed as a part of the subdivision or
site plan review process by the municipal board or official from Park
Ridge. That municipal board or official shall consult the engineer
retained by the Planning and/or Zoning Board (as appropriate) to
determine if all the checklist requirements have been satisfied and to
determine if the project meets the standards set forth in this chapter.
C. Checklist requirements. The following information shall be required:
(1) Topographic base map. The reviewing engineer may require
upstream tributary drainage system information as necessary. It is
recommended that the topographic base map of the site be
submitted which extends a minimum of 200 feet beyond the limits
of the proposed development, at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet
or greater, showing two-foot contour intervals. The map as
appropriate may indicate the following: existing surface water
drainage, shorelines, steep slopes, soils, erodible soils, perennial or
intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category 1
waters, wetlands and floodplains along with their appropriate
buffer strips, marshlands and other wetlands, pervious or
vegetative surfaces, existing man-made structures, roads, bearing
and distances of property lines, and significant natural and manmade
features not otherwise shown.
(2) Environmental site analysis. A written and graphic description of
the natural and man-made features of the site and its environs. This
description should include a discussion of soil conditions, slopes,
wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the site. Particular
attention should be given to unique, unusual, or environmentally
sensitive features and to those that provide particular
opportunities or constraints for development.
(3) Project description and site plan(s). A map (or maps) at the scale of
the topographical base map indicating the location of existing and
proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, structural
facilities for stormwater management and sediment control, and
other permanent structures. The map(s) shall also clearly show
areas where alterations occur in the natural terrain and cover,
including lawns and other landscaping, and seasonal high
groundwater elevations. A written description of the site plan and
justification of proposed changes in natural conditions may also be
provided.
(4) Land use planning and source control plan. This plan shall provide
a demonstration of how the goals and standards of §§ 84A-3
through 84A-6 are being met. The focus of this plan shall be to
§ 84A-8 PARK RIDGE CODE § 84A-8
1:492
§ 84A-9. Maintenance and repair.
describe how the site is being developed to meet the objective
of controlling groundwater recharge, stormwater quality and
stormwater quantity problems at the source by land management
and source controls whenever possible.
(5) Stormwater management facilities map. The following information,
illustrated on a map of the same scale as the topographic base map,
shall be included:
(a) Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface
contours, land area to be occupied by the stormwater
management facilities and the type of vegetation thereon, and
details of the proposed plan to control and dispose of
stormwater.
(b) Details of all stormwater management facility designs, during
and after construction, including discharge provisions,
discharge capacity for each outlet at different levels of
detention and emergency spillway provisions with maximum
discharge capacity of each spillway.
(6) Calculations.
(a) Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations
for the predevelopment and post development conditions for
the design storms specified in § 84A-4 of this chapter.
(b) When the proposed stormwater management control measures
(e.g., infiltration basins) depends on the hydrologic properties
of soils, then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report
shall be based on on-site boring logs or soil pit profiles. The
number and location of required soil borings or soil pits shall
be determined based on what is needed to determine the
suitability and distribution of soil types present at the location
of the control measure.
(7) Maintenance and repair plan. The design and planning of the
stormwater management facility shall meet the maintenance
requirements of § 84A-9.
(8) Waiver from submission requirements. The municipal official or
board reviewing an application under this chapter may, in
consultation with the municipal engineer, waive submission of any
of the requirements in Subsection C(1) through (6) of this section
when it can be demonstrated that the information requested is
impossible to obtain or it would create a hardship on the applicant
to obtain and its absence will not materially affect the review
process.
§ 84A-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84A-9
1:493
A. Applicability. Projects subject to review as in § 84A-1C of this chapter
shall comply with the requirements of Subsections B and C.
B. General maintenance.
(1) The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
a major development.
(2) The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventative
maintenance tasks and schedules; cost estimates, including
estimated cost of sediment, debris, or trash removal; and the name,
address, and telephone number of the person or persons
responsible for preventative and corrective maintenance (including
replacement). If the maintenance plan identifies a person other
than the developer (for example, a public agency or homeowners'
association) as having the responsibility for maintenance, the plan
shall include documentation of such person's agreement to assume
this responsibility, or of the developer's obligation to dedicate a
stormwater management facility to such person under an
applicable ordinance or regulation. The maintenance of all
stormwater management facilities built on private property shall be
maintained by the property owner. The maintenance plan shall be
developed by the design engineer and approved by the Borough,
and shall be recorded upon the deed of record. For stormwater
management facilities built in the public right-of-way, the design
engineer shall provide a maintenance plan, which must be
approved by the Borough. Once the Borough takes ownership of
the facilities, the Borough shall maintain the facilities as required
in the municipal stormwater general permit.
(3) Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or transferred
to the owner or tenant of an individual property in a residential
development or project, unless such owner or tenant owns or
leases the entire residential development or project.
(4) If the person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above is not a public agency, the maintenance plan
and any future revisions based on Subsection B(7) below shall be
recorded upon the deed of record for each property on which the
maintenance described in the maintenance plan must be
undertaken.
(5) Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to
maintain the function of the stormwater management measure,
including repairs or replacement to the structure; removal of
sediment, debris, or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow and
ice removal; fence repair or replacement; restoration of vegetation;
and repair or replacement of no vegetated linings.
(6) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above shall maintain a detailed log of all
§ 84A-9 PARK RIDGE CODE § 84A-9
1:494
§ 84A-10. Violations and penalties.
For violation of this chapter, there shall be a fine of $500 for the first
offense; $750 for the second offense and $1,000 for each subsequent
offense. Every day a violation of this chapter occurs shall be a separate
and distinct offense. In addition to fines, a court of competent jurisdiction
may require implementation of any remedial measures recommended by the
Borough Engineer to correct the violations of this chapter.
preventative and corrective maintenance for the structural
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
the development, including a record of all inspections and copies of
all maintenance-related work orders.
(7) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above shall evaluate the effectiveness of the
maintenance plan at least once per year and adjust the plan and the
deed as needed.
(8) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above shall retain and make available, upon
request by any public entity with administrative, health,
environmental, or safety authority over the site, the maintenance
plan and the documentation required by Subsection B(6) and (7)
above.
(9) The requirements of Subsection B(3) and (4) do not apply to
stormwater management facilities that are dedicated to and
accepted by the municipality or another governmental agency.
(10) In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a
danger to public safety or public health, or if it is in need of
maintenance, the municipality shall so notify the responsible
person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the responsible
person shall have 14 days to effect maintenance and repair of the
facility in a manner that is approved by the Municipal Engineer or
his designee. If the responsible person fails or refuses to perform
such maintenance and repair, the municipality or county may
immediately proceed to do so and shall bill the cost thereof to the
responsible person.
C. Nothing in this section shall preclude the municipality in which the
major development is located from requiring the posting of a
performance or maintenance guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.
§ 84A-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84A-10
1:495
Chapter 85
STREET OPENINGS AND EXCAVATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 86.
Subdivision and site plan review — See Ch.
87.
Zoning — See Ch. 101.
§ 85-1. Permit required; fees; permits not issued during certain
periods; addendum for monitoring wells; term; revocation of
permit; utility permits; permit transfer; notice to departments.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to make an
excavation or to place any form of construction in, over or upon any
public road or street under the control of the Borough of Park Ridge or
to otherwise endanger or obstruct the normal flow of traffic or the
normal flow of surface water by the placing of any barricade, structure,
material or equipment not normally designed to be operated, placed or
used on the public road or street without first obtaining a written
permit, issued and approved by the Construction Code Official, and
upon payment of application fees as indicated in § 85-1B and § 85-13D
and submission of escrow for professional services and deposits or
bonds as indicated in § 85-5, Escrow; guaranty deposit or bond
requirements, § 85-13E and § 85-13F. A permit shall be required for
each and every street opening and excavation unless otherwise
authorized by the Construction Code Official.
B. An application fee shall be required for each and every street opening
and excavation unless otherwise authorized by the Construction Code
Official. An application fee shall be submitted in the amount of $250 for
each street opening or excavation. For trench cuts, the application fee
shall be $250 for the first of each street opening or excavation plus $20
per linear foot of trench. For fees associated with street openings and
excavations by public utility companies, see § 85-13D.
C. Street opening and excavation permits will not be issued between
December 1 and March 1 unless an emergency exists as confirmed by
the proper officials having jurisdiction over same.
D. For street openings and excavations involving the installation of
monitoring well(s), the requirements of the "Addendum to Street
Opening Permit for the Installation of Monitoring Well(s) on Borough of
Park Ridge Municipally Owned Property or in the Public Right-of-Way"
appended at the end of this section shall also apply.98 Where any
sections of the addendum conflict with other sections indicated in
98.Editor's Note: Said addendum is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 84A-10 PARK RIDGE CODE § 85-1
1:496
§ 85-2. Application for permit; signs posted; New Jersey One Call.
Chapter 85, Street Openings and Excavations, the requirements of the
addendum shall govern.
E. The permit shall remain in effect until a restoration inspection
certificate, as identified in § 85-6, for the permit has been issued.
F. The Construction Code Official may exercise his or her right to
immediately revoke the permit for failure to maintain the street
opening or excavation area in a safe manner as indicated in § 85-10 and
failure to submit and maintain appropriate application fees, escrow for
professional services, and deposits or bonds as indicated in § 85-1A, as
applicable.
G. A permit for street openings and excavations does not carry with it any
right to make drainage, sewer, water, gas, oil, steam, electric or telecom
connections. A separate permit to make such connections must be
obtained from the proper officials having jurisdiction over same.
H. A permit shall not be transferred except upon prior written consent of
the Construction Code Official.
I. Copies of the permit shall be forwarded by the Construction Code
Official to the Borough Engineer, Departments of Public Works,
Utilities, Police and Fire of the pending street opening.
A. Application for such permit shall be made on forms obtained at the
Construction Department. Said permit shall indicate the following
information, as applicable:
(1) Name, address, telephone number and email address of the
following:
(a) Applicant.
(b) Property owner for whose benefit opening is to be performed.
(c) Person who is to perform the work.
(d) Parties to be reached in the event of an emergency.
(2) Street address of premises adjacent to proposed opening.
(3) The nature, location and purpose of the work.
(4) Estimated date when work is to be commenced and completed.
(5) Estimated time of day when work is to be commenced and
completed.
(6) Plans and specifications or other drawings on permit, showing the
exact location and dimensions of all openings.
§ 85-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-2
1:497
§ 85-3. Notice of interruption of utilities; other department
approvals required.
(7) An acknowledgment that the applicant agrees to replace, at his/her
own cost and expense, the pavement, curb, gutter, lawn, sidewalk
and all other disturbed areas in accordance with current Borough
standards upon completion of the work necessitating the street
opening and excavation permit.
(8) A statement that the permittee will comply with the ordinance,
regulations and laws relating to the proposed work.
(9) Any other data reasonably required by the Construction Code
Official, Superintendent of Public Works or the Borough Engineer.
B. If the contemplated operation will completely obstruct any
thoroughfare or make inaccessible to vehicular traffic a length of more
than 200 feet of any thoroughfare for a period in excess of 24 hours,
then a period of not less than 72 hours shall elapse after the issuing of
the permit before the operation may be started, and the person, firm or
corporation to whom such permit is granted shall post conspicuous
signs in accordance with the provisions of Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey, with amendments thereof and supplements
thereto, at or near the site of the operation, setting forth that the
thoroughfare will be closed and the date, the reason for and the
duration of such closing.
C. Each permittee shall call 1-800-272-1000 to obtain a utility mark out at
least 72 hours prior to commencement of excavation of any street,
certify that (s)he has followed the mark-out procedure for determining
the location of utilities and obstructions within the area of the proposed
work, and submit a mark-out reference number to the Construction
Department, as provided by New Jersey One Call.
A. Where any utility installations require that services to existing users be
interrupted, such utility shall notify such users of the period of time
when the services will not be available. Such notice shall be given at
least 48 hours prior to the interruption of service. A copy of the notice
shall be provided to the Construction Department.
B. Any work for which a permit is issued shall be conducted so as not to
interfere with any water main or sewer, or any connection from a water
main or sewer to any building, unless prior permission for interference
has been obtained from the Borough Water and Sewer Department. All
rock within five feet of any water main, sewer or other pipe which may
become damaged shall be removed without blasting. No excavation
which may damage trees or shrubbery shall be made without the prior
permission of the Shade Tree Commission or the Borough Engineer.
§ 85-2 PARK RIDGE CODE § 85-4
1:498
§ 85-4. Emergency street openings.
Street openings may be made without the necessity of a written application,
as provided for in § 85-2 hereof, in emergencies such as broken or frozen
water mains or other happenings which would endanger public life, health
and safety, provided that notice thereof shall be immediately given verbally
to the Police Department. Written application for a permit shall
nevertheless be made to the Borough as soon as may be convenient but, in
any such event, within 48 hours or the next business day, all in accordance
with § 85-1 hereof.
§ 85-5. Escrow; guaranty deposit or bond requirements.
A. In addition to the required application fees, the permittee may be
required to establish one or more cash escrow accounts with the
Borough to cover the reasonable costs of professional review,
consultation and inspections.
(1) Upon receipt of an application for street opening, the permittee
shall be required to deposit, in addition to any application fees, a
sum of money which shall be held separate in escrow by the
Treasurer of the Borough and utilized for reimbursement of the
fees charged by professional experts for reviewing, consultation or
inspection of work for said application. Any fees charged against
that account shall first be approved by the Construction
Department. Upon receipt of an application, the initial amount to
be deposited shall be up to $2,500, as determined by the
Construction Code Official.
(2) Upon receipt of sufficient funds for the escrow account, the
Construction Code Official or his/her representative shall notify the
Borough Engineer and any other professionals engaged, that all
appropriate reviews, consulting and/or inspections shall be
undertaken.
(3) The Construction Department shall take no formal action unless all
application fees and escrow funds have been paid to the Treasurer
of the Borough of Park Ridge.
(4) If during the course of review, consultation or inspection it is
apparent to the Construction Department that said sum will not be
sufficient, then the permittee, upon being notified by the
Construction Code Official, shall within five days deposit to said
escrow account the additional funds. Failure to do so shall be
reason for revocation of the permit.
(5) Under extraordinary conditions not covered by this section, the
Borough Engineer shall receive a copy of the plan of the permittee
and, after evaluation, set a fee commensurate with the
circumstances in the exercise of his/her reasonable judgment.
§ 85-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-5
1:499
(6) The Borough Engineer and any other professionals engaged shall
submit vouchers for all necessary fees for examination and review,
which fees shall be paid in an ordinary manner.
(7) Any of the aforesaid moneys left in the escrow account, upon
satisfactory restoration of the opening as determined to the
satisfaction of the Construction Code Official, Superintendent of
Public Works or Borough Engineer, as the case may be, shall be
returned to the permittee as soon as it is possible.
B. No person, firm or corporation shall be granted a permit to open any
street until and unless there shall be deposited, as a guaranty of
performance with the Construction Code Official, an amount sufficient
to pay the expenses of repairing and replacing such public streets or
other surfaces or appurtenances within the street opening and
excavation area in accordance with the following provisions. A check
shall be deposited, made payable to the Borough of Park Ridge, in a
total amount equal to $50 per square yard of paved area opening, $5
per square yard for lawn area openings and $20 per lineal foot for curb
replacement; provided, however, that the minimum deposit shall be
$500. Where the deposit exceeds $1,000, a bond may be filed for the
excess over $500, satisfactory to the Borough as to form, amount and
surety, with the Borough Treasurer, which bond will be conditioned
upon replacing such opening or openings in the manner required
herein, and the work shall be performed and paid for by the person,
firm or corporation obtaining the permit. The filing of such bond shall
not relieve any person, firm or corporation of the necessity of securing a
permit and complying with all of the terms and conditions of this
chapter. Expenses, if any, incurred by the Borough for the maintenance
and repair of the replacement shall be deducted from the deposit
posted by the permittee. Subject to the terms and conditions of this
chapter, the deposit and bond shall be returned to the permittee one
year after the date of the issuance of the restoration inspection
certificate as indicated in § 85-6.
C. The Construction Code Official, Superintendent of Public Works, or
Borough Engineer may require an extended maintenance period in
excess of one year and an additional maintenance guarantee depending
upon the nature of the work involved. The additional obligation will be
released upon completion of the work and acceptance of the work by
the Construction Code Official, Superintendent of Public Works, or
Borough Engineer.
D. The Construction Code Official, Superintendent of Public Works, or
Borough Engineer shall have the right to secure the services necessary
to perform borings in the pavement, cut cores in the pavement or to
perform other investigations as deemed necessary to confirm that the
provisions of the street opening permit have been satisfied. The cost of
such investigations shall be deducted from the permittee's guarantee.
§ 85-5 PARK RIDGE CODE § 85-5
1:500
§ 85-6. Restoration inspection certificate.
Backfill and permanent restoration of the street shall be completed
according to the provisions of §§ 85-8, 85-9 and 85-13G, as applicable.
Upon completion of the work involved in such street opening, a request for
inspection shall be made to the Construction Code Official. The inspection
shall be performed by the Construction Code Official, Superintendent of
Public Works or the Borough Engineer. If the inspection discloses that the
street has been properly restored, (s)he shall issue a certificate of proper
restoration to the permittee.
§ 85-7. Responsibility for restoration and maintenance;
The permittee shall be responsible for the proper maintenance of that
portion of the street for which the permit has been issued, including
continued backfilling to compensate for settlement, for a period of one year
from the date of the certification of the proper restoration of the street by
the Construction Code Official, and such person shall further assume all
liability for damages resulting therefrom or in any way connected therewith.
In the event of the failure to restore the street opening properly within
the time set forth herein after the opening has been made or to maintain
the restored street properly for a period of one year from the date of the
aforesaid certificate of proper restoration, the Construction Code Official,
Superintendent of Public Works or the Borough Engineer may, upon three
days' notice to the person receiving the permit, undertake or authorize its
agent to undertake the restoration or maintenance work. Expenses, if any,
incurred by the Borough for the maintenance and repair of the replacement
shall be deducted from the deposit posted by the permittee.
§ 85-8. Trenching; backfill specifications; temporary backfill;
emergency situations; final backfill; tunneling backfill; special
conditions.
The following specifications shall govern trenching and backfill to be placed
in excavated trenches:
E. For escrow and bond requirements for street openings and excavations
by public utility companies, refer to § 85-13E and § 85-13F.
A. Edges of all excavation shall be cut in a straight line with a saw or an
approved pavement cutter. All excess material created as a result of
trenching shall be removed from the street and disposed of in
accordance with all applicable regulations regarding same. Where an
excavation is to extend the full width of the street, only half of the
excavation shall be made at one time and it shall be properly backfilled
and inspected, as herein provided, before the other half is excavated.
B. Backfill materials shall be dense graded aggregate or other material as
approved by the Construction Code Official, Superintendent of Public
Works or the Borough Engineer. Specifications for backfill materials
shall be in accordance with NJDOT Standard Specifications for Road
§ 85-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-8
1:501
§ 85-9. Pavement restoration specifications.
Upon completion of the opening and backfill, as specified, and upon the
Borough's being notified of the same, the following specifications shall
govern the maintenance and repair of street openings and excavations:
and Bridge Construction, 2019, or latest version, as amended. Certain
underground conduits, pipes, etc., which may require a sand cushion
adjacent to the structure for protective reasons, will be permitted if
indicated in the application and with approval of the Construction Code
Official, Superintendent of Public Works or the Borough Engineer. Clay
or heavy black loam shall not be used. The backfill is to be placed in
layers not exceeding 12 inches in thickness, moistened as required, and
each layer tamped until thoroughly compacted.
C. Except in the case of an emergency or special construction
requirements, all street openings and excavations shall be closed within
24 hours by the permittee, and thereafter maintained in a safe
condition for vehicular traffic until the permanent surface has been
restored. Each permittee shall completely backfill the trench to the
surface with dense graded aggregate or other material as approved by
the Construction Code Official, Superintendent of Public Works or the
Borough Engineer.
D. In the case of an emergency, a substituted closing may be constructed
as authorized by the Construction Code Official, Superintendent of
Public Works, or Borough Engineer.
E. Final backfill shall be installed up to six inches from the surface. Final
backfill shall be dense graded aggregate or other material as approved
by the Construction Code Official, Superintendent of Public Works or
the Borough Engineer. The backfill is to be placed in layers not
exceeding 12 inches in thickness, moistened as required, and each
layer tamped until thoroughly compacted up to six inches from the
surface. Final restoration above the final backfill shall be in accordance
with §§ 85-9 and 85-13G, as applicable.
F. In cases where it is necessary to resort to tunneling operations to reach
the point of connection with any main line, the backfill in the tunnel,
where required, shall be of bentonite or other acceptable method as
approved by the Borough Engineer.
G. The Construction Code Official, Superintendent of Public Works or the
Borough Engineer may impose special conditions in any special case.
A. Temporary restoration of pavement is to be made immediately after the
Construction Code Official, Superintendent of Public Works or the
Borough Engineer has inspected and approved the backfilling. The
temporary pavement shall consist of such material or materials as may
be designated by the Construction Code Official, Superintendent of
Public Works, or Borough Engineer, giving due consideration to the
§ 85-8 PARK RIDGE CODE § 85-9
1:502
§ 85-10. Responsibility for safety requirements; traffic control
devices; hold harmless.
surface material of the street involved. The permittee shall maintain
such temporary pavement in good repair so as to make the street safe
for traffic.
B. Permanent restoration of pavement shall be made within six months,
weather permitting, from the date the temporary pavement was
installed, but in no event later than one year from the estimated
starting date of the work involved in such street opening and
excavation, and such permanent restoration shall, as nearly as possible,
duplicate the original pavement in type, material and texture of surface.
The Construction Code Official shall be notified three days prior to
permanent restoration for quality control and Borough specification
adherence.
A. It shall be the responsibility of the person, firm or corporation opening
any thoroughfare or otherwise endangering or obstructing the normal
flow of traffic or the normal flow of surface water thereon to fully
protect both vehicular and pedestrian traffic from possible accident or
injury in accordance with the provisions of Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey and the amendments thereof and supplements
thereto.
B. Each permittee shall keep each respective opening properly guarded by
the placing of suitable barriers, crosswalks, notices, warning and/or
caution signs by day and flares and/or flashing lights at night and
manpower as may be required. All devices associated with traffic
control shall be in accordance with the Manual of Uniform Traffic
Control Devices. Work shall be performed in a manner and by a
schedule so as to effect the least traffic interference.
C. No street shall be closed to traffic unless permission is granted through
the office of the Chief of Police; provided, further, that no street shall be
so closed on a daily basis for more than one day without the grant of
permission from the office of the Chief of Police, or his/her designee. In
the event the Police Chief, or his/her designee, deems it necessary, an
off-duty Borough police officer shall be employed by the applicant to
direct traffic.
D. The permittee shall hold harmless the Borough, its officers and agents
from any loss, injury, claim, demand or damage resulting from any
negligence or fault of the permittee, or the agents of the permittee, in
connection with the performance of work covered by the permit. Should
an unsafe condition exist as determined by the Construction Code
Official, Superintendent of Public Works or Borough Engineer, the
Construction Code Official, Superintendent of Public Works or Borough
Engineer shall immediately notify the permittee. If the unsafe condition
is not corrected within four hours, the Construction Code Official,
Superintendent of Public Works or Borough Engineer and the permittee
§ 85-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-10
1:503
§ 85-11. Enforcement officer.
The Construction Code Official and/or Zoning Officer is hereby designated
as the enforcement officer to enforce the provisions of this chapter and is
the agent acting for the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Park Ridge in
connection herewith.
§ 85-12. Required notification; moratorium; exemptions; exemption
conditions; fees, escrow and bonds for exempt conditions.
is unresponsive to requests to address same, the Construction Code
Official, Superintendent of Public Works or Borough Engineer, if it
deems it advisable, shall authorize their agent to backfill the trench and
replace a permanent pavement over the opening for which the permit
was issued and charge or deduct same against the bond required in
§ 85-5.
A. Upon request by public utility companies, the Borough Engineer shall
notify public utility providers of planned work on Borough streets. Any
work to be done on these streets by the public utility must be completed
before paving is started. Such notice shall state that no street opening
permit shall be issued for openings, cuts or excavations in such
Borough street for a period of five years after the date of paving or
release of maintenance bond or guarantees associated with the work, if
one exists. The notice shall also notify such permittee that applications
for street opening permits, for work to be done prior to such paving
shall be submitted promptly in order that the work covered by the
permit may be completed before paving.
B. During such five-year period, no permit shall be issued to open, cut or
excavate in such Borough street unless, in the judgment of the
Construction Code Official, Superintendent of Public Works, or Borough
Engineer, an emergency exists which makes it absolutely essential that
the street opening permit be issued.
C. The restrictions in § 85-12A and B shall not apply to applications which
have received approval from the Construction Department, Planning
Board, Zoning Board or other regulatory agencies having jurisdiction
over same.
D. In the instance where street openings and excavations associated with
approvals for construction from the Construction Department, Planning
Board, Zoning Board or other regulatory agencies having jurisdiction
over same are required, final pavement restoration of the street surface
shall include infrared finish, milling and paving of half of the width of
the entire length of street from intersection to intersection or milling
and paving of the full width of the entire length of street from
intersection to intersection at the discretion of the Construction Code
Official, Superintendent of Public Works, or Borough Engineer.
§ 85-10 PARK RIDGE CODE § 85-12
1:504
§ 85-13. Street openings and excavations by public utilities; least
disturbance; preconstruction meeting; application fee; escrow fee;
guaranty; restoration.
E. The Construction Code Official is authorized to require fees, escrow and
bonds as stipulated in § 85-1B, § 85-5, Escrow; guaranty deposit or
bond requirements, § 85-13D, E and F to assure that any street opening
on streets paved within the past five years is restored satisfactorily. The
restoration shall include milling and repaving of the area so as to blend
uniformly with the adjacent street as per the conditions stated in the
permit, including infrared restoration, restoration of seams, restoration
of pavement markings, signage and all other appurtenances.
A. Utility companies, including those engaged in the installation of gas,
sewer, water, telecom and electric lines, shall report to the Department
of Public Works and the Borough Engineer, yearly, their intentions with
regard to prospective work requiring future street openings in the
community for the purpose of coordinating such activity with pavement
projects anticipated by the Borough.
B. Except in the case of an emergency, the Borough shall have the right to
schedule street openings with utility companies in a manner which will
create the least disturbance to pavement courses, in furtherance of
which purpose the Borough Engineer shall provide to the utilities a
schedule of expected street construction and resurfacing, upon request
of same by the utility company.
C. A preconstruction meeting may be required at the discretion of the
Construction Code Official, Superintendent of Public Works or Borough
Engineer.
D. Any public utility corporation having the lawful right to construct or
maintain pipes, conduits or tracks in any public street or place shall file,
with the Borough Treasurer, an application fee of up to $2,500.
E. Any public utility corporation having the lawful right to construct or
maintain pipes, conduits or tracks in any public street or place shall file,
with the Borough Treasurer, an escrow fee as stipulated in § 85-5,
Escrow; guaranty deposit or bond requirements.
F. Any public utility corporation having the lawful right to construct or
maintain pipes, conduits or tracks in any public street or place may file,
with the Borough Treasurer, an annual bond in the sum of up to
$25,000, conditioned upon the fulfillment of all the terms and
provisions of this chapter. Such bond shall be renewed each calendar
year and will entitle such corporation to make excavation for the
purpose of construction or maintenance of its pipes, conduits or tracks
for a period of one year. Release of said bond will be conditioned upon
replacing such opening or openings in the manner required within this
chapter, and the work shall be performed and paid for by the person,
firm or corporation obtaining the permit. The filing of such bond shall
§ 85-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-13
1:505
§ 85-14. Exemption for municipal department.
The Department of Public Utilities of the Borough of Park Ridge is exempt
from the requirements of the payment of fees, the making of cash deposits
and the posting of bonds to ensure proper maintenance under this chapter.
§ 85-15. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating this chapter shall be subject, upon
conviction, to a fine of not more than $500 or to imprisonment for not more
than 90 days, or both, at the discretion of the Judge imposing the same. No
notice shall be required prior to the issuance of a summons.
§ 85-16. Additional requirements and conditions in connection with
installation of monitoring well(s) on municipally owned property in
public right-of-way.
not relieve any person, firm or corporation of the necessity of securing
a permit and complying with all of the terms and conditions of this
chapter. Expenses, if any, incurred by the Borough for the maintenance
and repair of the replacement shall be deducted from the bond posted
by the permittee. Subject to the terms and conditions of this chapter,
the bond shall be returned to the permittee one year after the date
of the issuance of the restoration inspection certificate as indicated in
§ 85-6.
G. In situations where excavations for utility or utility trenches extend the
majority of a street from intersection to intersection or multiple street
openings and excavations are required within a street from intersection
to intersection, in addition to the backfill requirements in § 85-8 and
pavement restoration specifications in § 85-9, final pavement
restoration of the street surface shall include infrared finish, milling
and paving of half of the width of the entire length of street from
intersection to intersection or milling and paving of the full width of the
entire length of street from intersection to intersection at the discretion
of the Construction Code Official, Superintendent of Public Works, or
Borough Engineer.
A. In addition to the requirements set forth in §§ 85-1 through 85-15,
additional requirements, fees and conditions shall be applicable in
connection with the installation of monitoring well(s) on Borough of
Park Ridge municipally owned property in the public right-of-way, as
delineated herein:
(1) An application fee shall be submitted in the amount of $50.
(2) An inspection fee of $250.
(3) Performance/Maintenance Guarantee (Cash or Bond). The
permittee shall be required to furnish a $5,000 performance/
maintenance guarantee (per monitoring well) prior to
§ 85-13 PARK RIDGE CODE § 85-16
1:506
commencement of the work. This guarantee shall only be used
by the Borough for emergency purposes if the permittee fails to
resolve any problems with the well. The bond shall remain in full
force and effect for a period of one year from the date of closure of
the monitoring well.
(4) The location of the proposed monitoring well(s) shall be shown on a
site plan at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet minimum. Prior to the
submission of the permit, the applicant shall contact the Director of
Operations to review the proposed location to determine an
acceptable location. The location may be adjusted based on the
input from Borough officials.
(5) The construction detail of the monitoring well(s) shall be provided.
(6) The installation of the monitoring well(s) must be performed within
six months from the date of the issuance. If not installed within this
time frame, the permit will expire, and a new permit application
must be submitted.
(7) The installation of the monitoring well must be installed by a New
Jersey-licensed well driller and must have the appropriate New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) permit. A
copy of the permit must be provided to the Director of Operations
prior to the installation of the monitoring well.
(8) The well cap installed under this permit shall have information
printed on it giving the name and phone number of the responsible
entity in charge of the installation and maintenance of the well.
(9) Once installed, the monitoring well may exist in the public right-ofway
for a maximum of two years. The permittee shall inform the
Borough if additional time will be required for groundwater
monitoring, and shall obtain the Borough's written approval for any
time extension.
(10) The permit will stay active until the well is closed according to
NJDEP requirements.
(11) The well may only be used for groundwater sampling and
monitoring. The well may not be used for any other purpose
without written permission from the Borough.
(12) The permittee, its employees, agents and contractors, further
agree to indemnify, hold harmless, defend and pay on behalf of the
Borough, its employees, agents, and invites any and all costs which
may result from any and all claims for personal injury resulting
from the installation, sampling, removal, and restoration work
performed by the permittee, its employees, agents and contractor
under this agreement, including death and/or property damage
arising from all acts or omissions of the permittee, its employees,
§ 85-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-16
1:507
agents, and contractors, including reasonable attorneys' fees
engendered thereby.
(13) The permittee shall, within 48 hours' notification by the Borough,
adjust or cause to adjust the top of the well when such adjustment
will become necessary as a result of Borough's street resurfacing,
or other construction operations. In addition, the permittee shall
respond within 48 hours to perform any repairs, or resolve any
issues, as reported by the Borough.
(14) Insurance. The permittee, at the time of application, shall provide
at his or her own cost and expense, the following insurance to the
Borough of Park Ridge with insurance companies with an AM Best
Rating of A- or better and licensed in the State of New Jersey, which
insurance shall be evidenced by certificates and/or policies as
determined by the Borough of Park Ridge:
(a) General liability. The applicant shall provide comprehensive
general liability insurance with a combined single limit of
$1,000,000 each claim and a $2,000,000 aggregate for bodily
injury and property damage. A "claims made" policy is not
acceptable.
(b) Worker's compensation and employer's liability insurance. The
applicant shall provide proof of worker's compensation
insurance and be in compliance with the Compensation Law of
the State of New Jersey. In the event any work is sublet, the
applicant shall require the subcontractor similarly to provide
worker's compensation insurance for all of the latter's
employees to be engaged in such work unless such employees
are covered by the protection afforded by the applicant's
worker's compensation insurance. The employer's limit of
liability shall be a minimum of $500,000.
(c) Automobile liability. Automobile liability insurance, with a
combined single limit of liability per occurrence of $1,000,000
for bodily injury, property damage. This insurance shall include
bodily injury and property damage with the following
coverage: owned automobiles; hired automobiles and
nonowned automobiles.
(15) Additional insurance requirements. All policies and certificates of
insurance shall be approved by the Borough of Park Ridge's Risk
Manager prior to the inception of any work and shall contain the
following:
(a) Insurers shall have no right of recovery or subrogation against
the Borough of Park Ridge, including its agents and agencies, it
being the intention of the parties that the insurance policies so
affected shall protect the parties and be primary coverage for
any and all losses covered by the above-described insurance.
§ 85-16 PARK RIDGE CODE § 85-16
1:508
(b) The applicant shall assume all responsibility for loss or damage
to the applicant's materials, equipment and machinery
involved under the contract.
(c) In the event of interruption of coverage for any reason, all work
under the permit shall cease and not resume until coverage
has been restored.
(d) All certificates of insurance shall list the Borough of Park Ridge
as an additional insured for the purposes of the permit, and
shall include ISO Form CG2010 and CG 2037 (or its equivalent)
as determined solely by the Risk Manager:
Certificate Holder: Borough of Park Ridge
53 Park Avenue
Park Ridge, NJ 07963
(e) The certificate of insurance is subject to approval by the Office
of Risk Management and must be accompanied by an
endorsement page provided by the Borough. The endorsement
page must be filled out by the applicant's insurance company
and accompany the certificate of insurance and permit
application.
(16) If necessary, the permittee shall coordinate with the Park Ridge
Police Department to provide and maintain adequate traffic control
at the sole cost, risk and responsibility of the permittee and
successor in interest, during the course of the construction of the
well, and the monitoring and sampling periods or any other
operation within the Borough right-of-way.
(17) The permittee shall notify all adjacent residential and commercial
developments as to the intended construction, and shall post
notices indicating the type and the hours of construction and all
other subsequent work. The permittee shall diligently proceed to
complete all work with a minimum of inconvenience to the public.
(18) The permittee shall be responsible for the prevention of damage to
the adjacent property. No person shall excavate on land so close to
the property line as to endanger any adjoining public street,
sidewalk, alley, or any other public or private property without
supporting and protecting such property from settling, cracking,
erosion, silting, scour, or the damage which might result from the
permittee's operations.
(19) The permittee shall notify the Director of Operations, or his
designee, via email at least 48 hours prior of any intended
monitoring of the well to be conducted during the length of this
permit. Such notification shall contain the time and date of the
§ 85-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-16
1:509
Chapter 86
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles and motorcycles — See Ch. 45.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 74.
Street openings and excavations — See Ch.
85.
Subdivision and site plan review — See Ch.
87.
Zoning — See Ch. 101.
intended sampling, and shall be subject to the approval of the
Director of Operations.
(20) The permittee shall provide the Director of Operations with copies
of any sampling analysis results taken from the monitoring well.
(21) The permittee shall provide the Director of Operations copies of
any environmental reports submitted to the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection, U.S. EPA, or any other
public agency requiring the submittal of the reports. Copies of the
analysis and/or environmental reports shall be provided via email,
or in another electronic format (e.g., USB flash drive).
B. Permit application to be executed by permittee. The permittee shall be
required to execute a permit application which delineates the
permittee's agreement to maintain and operate any subject monitoring
wells according to all conditions, requirements and fees set forth in this
chapter.
§ 85-16 PARK RIDGE CODE § 85-16
1:510
ARTICLE I
Removal of Snow, Ice and Debris
[Adopted 3-8-1994 by Ord. No. 94-399]
§ 86-1. Duty of owner or tenant to remove.
The owner or tenant in possession of any lands abutting or bordering upon
sidewalks of any public streets of the Borough shall remove or cause to be
removed from the abutting sidewalks the following:
§ 86-2. Removal by Borough; costs as lien; collection of costs.
§ 86-3. Deposit of snow or ice on streets.
A. All snow or ice therefrom within 18 hours after the snow or ice shall
have been formed on the sidewalk or gutter.
B. All grass, weeds, brush and other impediments thereon within three
days of notice to remove the same, given or caused to be given by the
Director of Operations, or his designee; and the notice shall be served
upon the owner or tenant by personal service or registered or certified
mail addressed to the last known addressee of the premises.
A. In all cases where the owner or tenant shall fail or refuse to remove
snow, ice, grass, weeds, brush or other impediments within the time
period provided by § 86-1, the Director of Operations shall remove or
cause to be removed the snow, ice, grass, weeds, brush or other
impediments. The Director of Operations shall then certify the costs of
such removal to the Borough Council. Upon the receipt of these
certified costs, the Council shall examine these costs and, if it finds
them to be correct, shall cause the cost to be charged against the lands
abutting the public land upon which such removal of snow, ice, grass,
weeds, brush and other impediments have occurred, at the direction of
the Director of Operations or his designee.
B. The amount so charged shall become a lien in the tax upon the land and
shall be added to and become a part of the taxes next to be levied and
assessed upon the land. The amount shall bear interest at the same rate
and be collected and enforced by the same officers in the same manner
as taxes upon the real land.
A. No person, including the owner or occupant of any lands or premises
abutting or bordering upon any street, shall place, deposit, throw or
shovel any snow or ice into or upon that portion of any such street
which has been cleaned, plowed or shoveled of snow or ice by the
Borough or by any governmental agency or authority or by any public
utility having and exercising a franchise or permit to operate autobuses
99.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed original Art. I, Removal of Snow, Ice and
Debris, adopted 12-9-1963, as amended 7-8-1974 by Ord. No. 74-16.
§ 86-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 86-3
1:511
§ 86-4. Violations and penalties.
§ 86-4.1. Obstruction of fire hydrants. [Added 4-26-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-004A]
§ 86-4.2. Waiver of obligation to remove snow and ice. [Added
4-26-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-004A]
along any streets in the Borough, at any time after said street has been
cleaned or plowed as aforesaid.
B. No owner or occupant of any lands or premises abutting or bordering
upon any street shall cause, allow or permit any person to do or perform
any of said conduct prohibited by Subsection A of this section.
A. Any person who violates the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished for a first offense by a minimum fine of
$100. For each subsequent offense, the fine shall be not less than $100
nor more than $1,000 or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days
or 90 days of community service, or a combination thereof. A separate
offense is deemed to have been committed on each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues. [Amended 7-8-1974 by Ord.
No. 74-16]
B. An imposition or collection of the penalty or penalties imposed by this
article shall not bar the right of the Borough to collect the costs of
removal as provided herein.
A. The owner, tenant or occupant of lands abutting any fire hydrant shall
maintain the area within a five-foot perimeter of the center of the
hydrant free of all ice and snow. The removal of ice and/or snow shall be
completed within 24 hours after the final accumulation of snow or ice
has ceased.
B. In the event an owner, tenant or occupant fails to comply with the
provisions of Subsection A of this section, the snow or ice surrounding a
hydrant may be removed by the Borough, or any department of the
Borough, with the owner, tenant or occupant paying a charge of $75 to
the Borough for the service. Failure to remove snow or ice from a fire
hydrant shall not subject a person to the penalties contained in § 86-4 of
Article 86 of the Park Ridge Code.
A. An owner, tenant or occupant of land abutting a fire hydrant or sidewalk
who is a senior citizen, disabled resident or who is otherwise incapable
of removing snow or ice from an abutting sidewalk or fire hydrant may
apply to the Borough Administrator for a waiver from the obligation to
remove snow or ice from the sidewalk or fire hydrant.
B. The Borough Administrator shall maintain a list of individuals who have
requested a waiver of the obligation to remove snow and ice. Any
resident who applies for a waiver shall be added to said list. The
§ 86-3 PARK RIDGE CODE § 86-4.2
1:512
Borough Administrator shall make said list available to the Borough
Fire Department and the Borough Police Department.
C. No person who has requested a waiver from the obligation to remove
snow or ice from a sidewalk or fire hydrant shall be required to pay a
fine for failing to do so.
§ 86-4.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 86-4.2
1:513

ARTICLE II
Nuisances on Public Property, Sidewalks
[Adopted 12-9-1963]
§ 86-5. Substances leaking or falling from vehicles. [Amended
7-8-1974 by Ord. No. 74-16]
No person shall permit any stone, rock, cinders, dirt, soil, grass, garbage,
oil or any other substance, liquid or solid, to fall, spill, leak or be thrown on
any public street or sidewalk.
§ 86-6. Playing of games.
No person shall play football, baseball or any other game which interferes
or tends to interfere with the free, unobstructed and safe use by the public
of a public street.
§ 86-7. Placing encumbrances on streets. [Amended 11-10-1981 by
Ord. No. 81-16]
No person shall throw or place any stone, rock or other encumbrance upon
any street or sidewalk. No person shall park any bicycles, motorcycles or
any other vehicle as defined in Chapter 45 upon the sidewalks of any public
streets so as to obstruct the flow of pedestrian traffic, nor shall any owner or
tenant in possession of any lands abutting or bordering upon the sidewalks
of any public streets permit to be parked thereon bicycles, motorcycles or
any other vehicle so as to obstruct the flow of pedestrian traffic.
§ 86-8. Destroying, defacing, posting bills or trespassing upon
public property.
No person shall destroy or attempt to destroy or place or post bills upon or
write upon or deface or trespass upon any public property.
§ 86-9. Fire and water hydrants.
No person shall interfere with, deface or mutilate any fire or water hydrant
or any apparatus connected therewith which is under the control,
supervision or ownership of the Borough.
§ 86-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-8-1974 by Ord. No.
74-16]
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $500 or by imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 90 days, or both.
§ 86-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 86-10
1:515

ARTICLE III
Repair and Construction Specifications
[Adopted 7-8-1974 by Ord. No. 74-15]
§ 86-11. Duty to construct, repair, improve sidewalks and curbs.
The owner or owners of the lands fronting or bordering on any of the
streets, highways and avenues of the Borough of Park Ridge, when required
by a separate ordinance passed by the Council of the Borough of Park
Ridge, and when proper notice and procedure, as prescribed in N.J.S.A.
40:65-1 et seq., is given, shall construct, reconstruct, pave, repave, curb,
recurb, improve and repair at his, her or their own proper costs and
expense the sidewalks and curbs of the streets, highways and avenues;
provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall be construed to
affect any owner or owners of land fronting or bordering on any of the
streets, highways or avenues whose sidewalks and curbs on any said
streets, highways or avenues are now in good repair and construction, at
the established grade and paved in accordance herewith.
§ 86-12. Notice of improvement; contents.
Upon passage of an ordinance by the Council of the Borough of Park Ridge
requiring any of the aforesaid improvements, a notice of improvement shall
be served and the contents thereof, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:65-2, must
contain a description of the property affected sufficient to identify it, a
description of the improvement and a statement that the cost is to be borne
by the said owner or owners, and said notice shall state that unless the
owner or owners shall complete the same within 30 days after service
thereof, the municipality shall make the improvement at the expense of the
owner or owners.
§ 86-13. Service of notice.
The notice may be served personally upon all owners affected residing in
the municipality or by leaving the same at the usual place of residence
with a member of the family above the age of 14 years. In the event that
infants or incompetents are involved, such notice shall be served upon their
guardians, and such other service shall be made as prescribed by N.J.S.A.
40:65-3 and 40:65-4.
§ 86-14. Failure to comply.
In the event that any of the owners or any owner of the real estate affected
which are required to bear the whole cost of improvement after passage
of the ordinance therefor and after notice given as stated heretofore shall
fall to make such improvement as required by ordinance, then and in that
event the governing body may cause the improvement to be made under
the supervision of the proper municipal officer or may award a contract or
contracts therefor.
§ 86-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 86-15
1:517
§ 86-15. Assessment of costs.
The officer of the municipality in charge of such improvement shall keep
an accurate account of the cost thereof and shall assess such cost or the
proportion thereof required to be assessed under said ordinance upon such
properties in proportion to their respective frontage thereon and shall file
a report thereof under oath with the Municipal Clerk and shall proceed
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:65-8 regarding the assessment for the benefits of
local improvements.
§ 86-16. Interest on assessment; lien.
Such sidewalk and curbing assessment shall bear interest from the time of
confirmation at the same rate and with the same penalties for nonpayment
as assessments for local improvements in the municipality and, from the
confirmation thereof, shall be a first and paramount lien upon the real estate
assessed, to the same extent, to be collected and enforced in the same
manner as assessments for local improvements; and the governing body
may provide for payment pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:65-9.
§ 86-17. Construction requirements.
The construction of the aforesaid improvements mentioned herein shall be
in accordance with the requirements set forth as follows:
A. Forms shall be of steel or of smooth-surface wood not less than 2 inches
thick. Both sides of the curb or sidewalk shall contain forms. All forms
shall be firmly fastened before pouring of concrete shall be permitted
by the Borough Engineer. On curved streets, highways or avenues of
greater than two-hundred-fifty-foot radius on the center line, straight
forms not longer than 10 feet each may be used. On all curved streets,
highways or avenues of less than a two-hundred-fifty-foot radius,
curved forms shall be used to conform to the curvature of the street,
highway or avenue.
B. Subgrade. The base on which any curb or sidewalk is poured shall
consist of a minimum of four inches of compacted road gravel or stable
sand which does not contain clay, muck, stumps or any other materials
which could result in the settlement of the structure.
C. Curbs shall be Class B, air-entrained portland cement concrete having a
minimum twenty-eight-day compressive strength of 4,000 pounds per
square inch. Metal forms shall be used, except that wood forms may be
used on curves too sharp for satisfactory construction with metal forms.
The dimensions of the curbs shall be 18 inches in depth, six inches wide
at the top, eight inches wide at the base and tapered on the roadway
side. The materials and methods used for lubricating the forms shall be
such as will not discolor or stain the concrete. Forms shall be removed
when the concrete has hardened sufficiently to be self-supporting yet in
ample time to allow for finishing as hereinafter specified. The concrete
shall be tamped and spaded or vibrated so that the forms are
§ 86-15 PARK RIDGE CODE § 86-17
1:518
completely filled, the concrete is thoroughly compacted and mortar is
flushed to the face and top. The top shall be finished with a wood
float to an even, smooth and dense surface and, as soon as the forms
can be removed, the face shall be similarly finished. The edges of
the curb shall be rounded to the required radius with suitable edging
tools. In curbs, expansion joints shall be provided opposite joints in
abutting concrete pavement and at approximately equal distances of
not more than 20 feet between pavement joints, except as otherwise
specified or shown on the plans, and shall be filled with preformed
bituminous cellular-type joint filler, 1/2 inch thick, which shall be inset
1/4 inch from the top and face. Curb joints shall be neatly rounded to
one-fourth-inch radius. For headers, joints shall be provided as shown
on the plans incorporated herein.100 Between the concrete curbs and
concrete surface or base course, one-half-inch preformed bituminous
joint filler shall be installed and the joint shall be sealed with hotpoured
rubber-asphalt joint sealer. Where shown on the plans, the
curb shall be constructed monolithic with the adjoining pavement.
Concrete curbs and headers shall be cured with clear or translucent
liquid compound which shall be applied as soon as the concrete has
been finished. Gradual transitions shall be constructed where changes
in the size or shape of curbs occur in a continuous section. When the
curb is to be constructed upon a concrete pavement, all dirt, bituminous
material and other loose or adhering matter shall be removed from the
pavement, and the curb shall be doweled to the pavement with steel
dowels of the size and having the spacing shown on the plans. The
diameter of holes drilled in the pavement shall be not more than 3/4
inch greater than the diameter of the dowels. The dowels shall be set
in a one-to-two cement-sand mortar. Transverse joints in doweled curb
shall be installed directly over transverse joints and over definite cracks
in the pavement. Additional joints shall be installed between pavement
joints and cracks so as to divide the curb into sections of approximately
equal lengths of not more than 20 feet. The finished curb and headers
shall be neat and workmanlike in appearance and shall not vary from
the prescribed line and grade more than 1/4 inch at any point.
D. Sidewalks shall be Class C, air-entrained portland cement concrete
having a minimum twenty-eight-day compressive strength of 3,000
pounds per square inch. Sidewalks shall be four inches thick, except at
driveways, where sidewalks shall be six inches thick from the curb to
the edge of the sidewalk nearest the property line. After being placed,
the concrete shall be tamped, screeded and finished to true grade and
surface. The finish shall be made with a wood float, followed by
brushing with a wet soft-hair brush to a neat and workmanlike surface.
Transverse expansion joints 1/2 inch wide shall be provided at intervals
of not more than 20 feet and filled with preformed bituminous cellulartype
joint filler. Longitudinal joints 1/4 inch wide shall be provided
between curbs and abutting sidewalks and shall be filled with
preformed bituminous-type joint filler. The top of all joint filler shall be
100. Editor's Note: Said plans are on file in the Borough offices.
§ 86-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 86-17
1:519
1/4 inch below the top of the sidewalk. Transverse surface grooves
shall be cut in the sidewalk between expansion joints at intervals equal
to the sidewalk width. All edges shall be neatly rounded to 1/4 inch.
The concrete shall be cured with clear or translucent liquid compound
which shall be applied as soon as the concrete is finished. In residence
districts, sidewalks shall be four feet wide on all streets which are 50
feet wide between property lines. Sidewalks shall be five feet wide on
all streets which are 60 feet wide or more. In business districts, the
sidewalks shall extend from the curb to the property line. Transverse
contraction joints shall be installed at each junction with a driveway
and at a minimum of five-foot intervals. Transverse expansion joints
shall be installed at a minimum of forty-foot intervals, using a one-halfinch-
thick premolded asphaltic joint filler of standard make.
E. Grades. On all streets, highways or avenues in subdivisions which are
under Planning Board control, the subdivider shall provide complete
engineering plans, elevations referred to mean sea-level datum and
construction engineering for curbs and sidewalks subject to approval of
the Borough Engineer, in writing, on one copy of the approved plans.
No concrete shall be poured for curbs until the Borough Engineer has
checked the forms for alignment and grade. All sidewalks shall be laid
on a transverse grade line sloping upward 1/4 inch per foot from the top
of curb. Sidewalks constructed on streets, highways or avenues which
already have sidewalks nearby shall be aligned and graded to conform
to existing grades, avoiding steps or other breaks hazardous to
pedestrians. All sidewalks constructed on new streets, highways or
avenues shall be located one foot away from the property line. Top of
curb grades shall be even with the finished grade of the opposite center
line of the street, highway or avenue on streets, highways or avenues
having roadways which are from 25 feet to 35 feet in width; one inch
below on streets, highways or avenues having roadways from 35 feet to
45 feet in width; and two inches below center line of roadways from 45
feet to 60 feet in width. On all streets, highways or avenues which have
been officially dedicated and accepted for maintenance as public
streets, highways or avenues, the local governing body shall furnish the
property owner with a stakeout for grade and alignment to conform to
official grades of the street, highway or avenue in a manner to make
each unit constructed conform to the existing curbs and sidewalks. On
all streets, highways or avenues which have been dedicated by the filing
of a record map in the County Clerk's office after approval by the local
governing body, and said streets, highways or avenues have been
accepted for maintenance by the local governing body, the property
owner or owners, hereby known as "applicants," shall at their own
expense furnish the Borough Engineer with complete engineering
surveys of existing roads, curbs, sidewalks or natural ground between
adjacent block corners, together with duplicate plans and profiles
referred to mean sea-level datum, Coast and Geodetic Survey, of the
proposed construction. On streets, highways or avenues which are
unimproved, the standards for construction outlined in Chapter 87,
Subdivision and Site Plan Review, shall apply. Upon approval of the
§ 86-17 PARK RIDGE CODE § 86-17
1:520
§ 86-18. Deposit required.
A property owner requesting the Borough to furnish grades on a public
street, highway or avenue which has been accepted for maintenance shall
deposit a check for $0.25 per foot of curb, or a minimum of $25, with the
Borough Clerk when the request for curb grades is made. Construction of
the proposed sidewalk or curb shall be completed within 60 days of the
stakeout furnished by the Borough Engineer or the full deposit shall be
forfeited by the applicant. Upon satisfactory completion of the construction
of the curb and sidewalk, certified by the Borough Engineer to the Borough
Clerk, the deposit shall be refunded.
§ 86-19. Sidewalk and curb construction standards.
A copy of the sidewalk and curb construction standards is attached
hereto101 and made a part hereof and there shall be strict compliance
therewith.
§ 86-20. Exceptions.
The terms and provisions of this article concerning the construction of
sidewalks and curbing and deposits required herein shall not be applicable
to lots, parcels or lands governed by the ordinance and amendments thereto
relating to original subdivisions, the completion and improvements therein
plans by the Borough Engineer, the applicants shall at their own
expense have a licensed engineer lay out the construction work for line
and grade of curbs and sidewalks. No concrete shall be poured until the
Borough Engineer has checked the concrete forms for alignment and
grade.
F. Curb openings. The top of the curb may be lowered four inches from the
normal top level for a distance of 16 feet plus warping connections to
the standard curb, to serve as a connection with the street paving
where a driveway is needed by the property owner for off-street vehicle
parking. One such opening shall be permitted for each residential lot 99
feet or less, and two for lots greater than 99 feet. Each property owner
may have one sixteen-foot opening unless there is a capacity for offstreet
parking of five or more vehicles, when two openings may be
made. Special cases of large parking area openings shall be governed
by Planning Board recommendations. Entrances to gasoline service
stations in business areas shall be 36 feet for entrance and exit and
shall conform to New Jersey State Highway standards.
G. Embankment. Curbs which are constructed on streets where the
original grade of the unimproved ground between the curb and the
property line shall have an embankment constructed of stable earth to
the same transverse slope from the property line to the top of the curb
connected to back up the standing portion of the curb.
101. Editor's Note: Said standards are on file in the Borough offices.
§ 86-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 86-20
1:521
being guaranteed by the land subdivision provisions,102 together with all
its amendments. However, the construction requirements shall be complied
with by any and all persons, corporations, associations or partnerships
contemplating and constructing curbing and sidewalks.
§ 86-21. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction,
be subject for each and every violation to a fine of not more than $500 or be
imprisoned in the Bergen County Jail for a period not to exceed 90 days, or
both, at the discretion of the Municipal Judge or other proper judicial officer
before whom complaint shall be made under this article.
§ 86-22. In Lieu of Sidewalk Improvement Fund. [Added 9-14-1993
by Ord. No. 93-14]
Moneys contributed by applicants for waivers of sidewalk requirements in
accordance with § 87-8 of the Code of the Borough of Park Ridge shall be
placed in a separate account known as "In Lieu of Sidewalk Improvement
Fund" to be utilized by the Mayor and Council at their discretion for the
improvement of existing sidewalks and the construction of new sidewalks in
the Borough.
102. Editor's Note: See Ch. 87, Subdivision and Site Plan Review.
§ 86-20 PARK RIDGE CODE § 86-22
1:522
Chapter 87
SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN REVIEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use procedures — See Ch. 74.
Licensing — See Ch. 75.
Sight distances at intersections — See Ch. 82.
Soil removal — See Ch. 84.
Street openings and excavations — See Ch.
85.
Construction specifications for streets and
sidewalks — See Ch. 86, Art. III.
Zoning — See Ch. 101.
§ 86-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 86-22
1:523

ARTICLE I
Title and Purpose
§ 87-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Land Subdivision and Site Plan Review
Ordinance" of the Borough of Park Ridge.
§ 87-2. Purpose.
Such regulations are deemed necessary to protect the character, stability
and orderly development of all areas of the community; to secure safety
from fire, flood, panic and other natural and manmade disasters and
hazards; to encourage the proper location and design of streets; to promote
a desirable visual and aesthetic environment through creative development
techniques and good civic design and arrangements; to promote the
conservation of open space and valuable resources; to prevent degradation
of the environment through improper land use; to provide adequate light,
air and open space; to encourage planned developments which incorporate
the best features of design and relate the type, design and layout of
development to the particular site; and to provide rules, regulations and
procedures which will guide the appropriate development of lands within
the community in order to promote the public health, safety, morals and
general welfare.
§ 87-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-2
1:525

ARTICLE II
Definitions and Word Usage
§ 87-3. Word usage.
Unless the context otherwise indicates, the following definitions shall be
used in the interpretation and construction of this chapter. Words used in
the present tense include the future; the singular number shall include the
plural, and the plural the singular; the word "structure" shall include the
word "building"; the word "person" includes a corporation as well as an
individual; the word "lot" includes the word "plot"; the word "occupied"
includes the words "designed or intended to be occupied"; the word "used"
shall include the words "arranged, designed, constructed, altered,
converted, rented, leased or intended to be used"; the word "shall" is
mandatory and not optional; and the word "may" is permissive.
§ 87-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The administrative clerk for any application
before the Planning Board and the Board of Adjustment of Park Ridge.
APPLICANT or DEVELOPER — A developer submitting an application for
development. The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any land
proposed to be included in a proposed development, including the holder
of an option or contract to purchase or other person having an enforceable
proprietary interest in such land.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — The application form and all
accompanying documents required by ordinance for approval of a
subdivision plat, site plan, planned development, conditional use, zoning
variance or direction of the issuance of a permit pursuant to law.
APPROVING AUTHORITY — The Planning Board of Park Ridge or the Park
Ridge Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, as provided in Article III.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a construction adopted to
permanent, temporary or continuous occupancy and having a roof.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — An open space area within or related to a
site designated as a development, and designed and intended for the use
or enjoyment of residents and owners of the development. Common open
space may contain such complementary structures and improvements as
are necessary and appropriate for the use or enjoyment of residents and
owners of the development.
COMPLETE APPLICATION — An application form completed as specified
by ordinance and the rules and regulations of the municipal agency and
all accompanying documents required by ordinance for approval of the
application for development, including, where applicable, but not limited
to a site plan or subdivision plat, provided that the municipal agency may
require such additional information not specified in the ordinance or any
§ 87-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-4
1:527
revisions in the accompanying documents as are reasonably necessary to
make an informed decision as to whether the requirements necessary for
approval of the application for development have been met. The application
shall not be deemed incomplete for lack of any such additional information
or any revisions in the accompanying documents so required by the
municipal agency. An application shall be certified as complete immediately
upon the meeting of all requirements specified in the ordinance and in
the rules and regulations of the municipal agency and shall be deemed
complete as of the day it is so certified by the administrative officer for
purposes of the commencement of the time period for action by the
municipal agency.[Added 11-10-1980 by Ord. No. 80-10]
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district
only upon showing that such use in a specified location will comply with
the conditions and standards for the location or operation of such use
as contained in Chapter 101, Zoning, and upon the issuance of an
authorization therefor by the Planning Board.
CONVENTIONAL DEVELOPMENT — Development other than planned
development.
DAYS — The number of calendar days for the purpose of this chapter.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels;
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or other structure or of any
mining excavation or landfill; and any use or change in the use of any
building or other structure, or land or extension of use of land, for which
permission may be required.
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or groundwater from land
by drains, grading or other means, including control of runoff during and
after construction or development to minimize erosion and sedimentation,
to assure the adequacy of existing and proposed culverts and bridges, to
induce water recharge into the ground where practical, to lessen nonpoint
pollution, to maintain the integrity of stream channels for their biological
functions as well as for drainage, and the means necessary for water supply
preservation or prevention or alleviation of flooding.[Amended 5-10-1983
by Ord. No. 83-5]
DRAINAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The lands required for the installation of
stormwater sewers or drainage ditches or required along a natural stream
or watercourse for preserving the channel and providing for the flow of
water therein to safeguard the public against flood.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice and gravity.
FARM — An area of land which is actively devoted to agriculture or
horticultural use which occupies no less than five acres, exclusive of the
land upon which the farmhouse is located and such additional land as may
actually be used in connection with the farmhouse, as provided in N.J.S.A.
54:4-23.3, 54:4-23.4, 54.4-23.5 and 54:4-23.11.
§ 87-4 PARK RIDGE CODE § 87-4
1:528
FINAL APPROVAL — The official action of the approving authority taken on
a preliminary-approved major subdivision or site plan after all conditions,
engineering plans and other requirements have been completed or fulfilled
and the required improvements have been installed or guaranties properly
posted for their completion, or approval conditioned upon the posting of
such guaranties, which, in the case of subdivision, shall be filed with the
proper county recording officer.
GOVERNING BODY — The Mayor and Borough Council of the Borough of
Park Ridge.
HISTORIC SITE — Any building, structure, area or property that is
significant in the history, architecture, archeology or culture of this state,
its communities or the nation and has been so designated.
INTERESTED PARTY — For the purpose of this chapter, any person,
whether residing within or without the Borough of Park Ridge, whose right
to use, acquire or enjoy property is or may be affected by any action taken
under this chapter or whose right to use, acquire or enjoy property under
this chapter or under any other law of this state or the United States has
been denied, violated or infringed upon by an action or a failure to act under
this chapter.
LAND — Includes the improvements and fixtures on, above or below the
surface.[Added 5-10-1983 by Ord. No. 83-5]
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTY — Security, other than cash, which may be
accepted by Park Ridge for the maintenance of any improvements required
by this chapter.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision not classified as a minor
subdivision.
MASTER PLAN — A composite of one or more written or graphic proposals
for the development of Park Ridge, which shall have been duly adopted by
the Park Ridge Planning Board.
MINOR SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots which
proposes new development within the scope of development specifically
permitted by ordinance as a minor site plan; does not involve planned
development, any new street or extension of any off-tract improvement
which is to be prorated pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42; and contains the
informed determination as to whether the requirements established by
ordinance for approval of a minor site plan have been met.[Added
11-10-1980 by Ord. No. 80-10]
MINOR SUBDIVISION — A subdivision of land for the creation of three
or fewer lots, provided that such subdivision does not involve a planned
development, any new street or the extension of any off-tract improvement,
the cost of which is to be prorated pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-42.[Amended 11-10-1980 by Ord. No. 80-10]
§ 87-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-4
1:529
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot, the area, dimension or location of which
was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of Chapter 101,
Zoning, but which fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district
in which it is located by reason of such adoption, revision or
amendment.[Added 5-10-1983 by Ord. No. 83-5]
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure, the size, dimension or
location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment
of Chapter 101, Zoning, but which fails to conform to the requirements of
the zoning district in which it is located by reason of such adoption, revision
or amendment.[Added 5-10-1983 by Ord. No. 83-5]
NONCONFORMING USE — A use or activity which was lawful prior to the
adoption, revision or amendment of Chapter 101, Zoning, but which fails
to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located
by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment.[Added 5-10-1983 by
Ord. No. 83-5]
OFFICE BUILDING — Under the provisions of Chapter 220 of the Laws of
1975103 pertaining to physically handicapped persons, an "office building"
means a building or structure of more than 10,000 square feet of gross floor
area wherein commercial or business activity or service is performed or a
profession is practiced in all or the majority of such building or structure.
OFFICIAL MAP — A map and accompanying ordinance adopted by the
governing body of Park Ridge pursuant to law. Such a map shall be deemed
to be conclusive with respect to the location and width of streets and public
drainageways and the location and extent of flood control basins and public
areas, whether or not such streets, ways, basins or areas are improved or
unimproved or are in actual physical existence.
OFF-SITE — Located outside the lot lines of the lot in question but within
the property, of which the lot is part, which is the subject of a development
application or contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way.
OFF-TRACT — Not located on the property which is the subject of a
development application nor on a contiguous portion of a street or right-ofway.
ON-SITE — Located on the lot in question.
ON-TRACT — Located on the property which is the subject of a development
application or on a contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way.
OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved
and set aside, dedicated, designed or reserved for public or private use or
enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of land
adjoining or neighboring such "open space," provided that such areas may
be improved with only those buildings, structures, streets and off-street
parking and other improvements that are designed to be incidental to the
natural openness of the land.
103. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:32-4 et seq.
§ 87-4 PARK RIDGE CODE § 87-4
1:530
PARTY IMMEDIATELY CONCERNED — Any applicant for development, the
owners of the subject property and all owners of property and government
agencies entitled to notice.
PERFECTED APPLICATION — For the purpose of this chapter, a "perfected
application" shall be one that is submitted in a proper and complete form,
including all required application forms, maps and reviews, prior to
scheduling of a public hearing, where required, or formal action being taken
by the approving authority; all required fees are submitted and filed within
the appropriate time schedules; proof that no taxes or assessments for local
improvements are due or delinquent on the property for which approval is
sought; and all other governmental approvals are received by the approving
authority.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTY — Any security which may be accepted by
Park Ridge Borough, including cash, provided that the Borough shall not
require more than 10% of the total performance guaranty in cash.
PHYSICAL HANDICAP — A physical impairment which confines a person
to a wheelchair; causes a person to walk with difficulty or insecurity;
affects the sight or hearing to the extent that a person functioning in
public areas is insecure or exposed to danger; causes faulty coordination; or
reduces mobility, flexibility, coordination and perceptiveness to the extent
that facilities are needed for the safety of that person.
PLAN — The provisions for development of a planned development,
including a plat of subdivision, all covenants relating to use, location and
bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity of use or density of
development, public or private streets, ways and parking facilities, open
space and public facilities. The phase "provisions of the plan" when used in
this chapter shall mean the written and graphic materials referred to in this
definition.
PLANNED COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of a minimum
contiguous size as specified in Chapter 101, Zoning, to be developed
according to a plan as a single entity containing one or more structures with
appurtenant common areas to accommodate commercial or office uses, or
both.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT — Includes planned unit development, planned
residential development, residential cluster, planned commercial
development or planned industrial development.
PLANNED INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of a minimum
contiguous size as specified in Chapter 101, Zoning, to be developed
according to a plan as a single entity containing one or more structures with
appurtenant common areas to accommodate industrial uses.
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area with a specified
minimum contiguous acreage to be developed as a single entity, according
to a plan, containing one or more residential clusters, which may include
appropriate commercial or public or quasi-public uses all primarily for the
benefit of the residential development.
§ 87-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-4
1:531
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT — An area with a specific minimum
contiguous acreage to be developed as a single entity, according to a
plan, containing one or more residential clusters or planned residential
development and one or more public, quasi-public, commercial or industrial
areas in such ranges of ratios of nonresidential uses to residential uses as
shall be specified in Chapter 101, Zoning.
PLAT — A map or maps of a subdivision or site plan pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter.
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL — The conferral of certain rights pursuant to
this chapter, prior to final approval, after specific elements of a development
plan have been agreed upon by the approving authority and the applicant.
PRELIMINARY FLOOR PLANS AND ELEVATIONS — Architectural
drawings prepared during early and introductory stages of the design of a
project, illustrating in a schematic form, its scope, scale and relationship to
its site and immediate environs.
PUBLIC AREAS — Include public parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other
recreational areas; other public open spaces; scenic and historic sites; and
sites for schools and other public buildings and structures.
PUBLIC BUILDING — Under the provisions of Chapter 220 of the Laws
of 1975104 pertaining to physically handicapped persons, "public building"
means any building, structure, facility or complex used by the general
public, including but not limited to theaters, concert halls, auditoriums,
museums, schools, libraries, recreational facilities, public transportation
terminals and stations, factories, office buildings, business establishments,
passenger vehicle service stations, shopping centers, hotels or motels and
public eating places, constructed by any state, county or municipal
government agency or instrumentality or any private individual,
partnership, association or corporation, with the following exceptions: oneto
four-family private residences, warehouse storage areas and all buildings
classified as hazardous occupancies. As used herein, "hazardous
occupancy" means the occupancy or use of a building or structure or
any portion thereof that involves highly combustible, highly flammable or
explosive material, or which has inherent characteristics that constitute a
special fire hazard.
PUBLIC DRAINAGEWAY — The land reserved or dedicated for the
installation of stormwater sewers or drainage ditches or required along
a natural stream or watercourse for preserving the biological as well as
drainage function of the channel and providing for the flow of water to
safeguard the public against flood damage, sedimentation and erosion and
to assure the adequacy of existing and proposed culverts and bridges,
to induce water recharge into the ground where practical and to lessen
nonpoint pollution.[Amended 5-10-1983 by Ord. No. 83-5]
104. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:32-4 et seq.
§ 87-4 PARK RIDGE CODE § 87-4
1:532
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE — An open space area conveyed or otherwise
dedicated to a municipality, municipal agency, board of education, state or
county agency or other public body for recreational or conservational uses.
RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER — An area to be developed as a single entity,
according to a plan, containing residential housing units which have a
common or public open space area as an appurtenance.
RESUBDIVISION — The further division or relocation of lot lines of any
lot or lots within a subdivision previously made and approved or recorded
according to law or the alteration of any streets or the establishment of
any new streets within any subdivision previously made and approved or
recorded according to law, but does not include conveyances so as to
combine existing lots by deed or other instrument.
SEDIMENTATION — The deposition of soil that has been transported from
its site of origin by water, ice, wind, gravity or other natural means as a
product of erosion.
SIGHT TRIANGLE — A triangle-shaped easement established at the
intersection of two streets or a driveway and a street in which nothing
shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as to
obstruct vision between a height of two feet six inches above the center line
grade of the street or driveway. The Borough shall have the right of entry to
remove any obstruction to vision within the sight area not conforming to the
standards of this definition, following due notice to the property owner. Said
triangle shall be determined along such street lot lines or edge of driveway
25 feet distant from their joint intersection.
SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots on which is shown:
SKETCH PLAT — The sketch map of a subdivision to be used for the purpose
of discussion and classification and meeting the requirements of § 87-9
herein.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive or
other way which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway or which
is shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law or which is shown
on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the county recording officer
prior to the appointment of a Planning Board and the grant to such Board
of the power to review plats, and includes the land between the street lines,
whether improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavements, shoulders,
The existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including but not
necessarily limited to topography, vegetation, drainage, floodplains,
marshes and waterways.
A.
The location of all existing and proposed buildings, drives, parking
spaces, walkways, means of ingress and egress, drainage facilities,
utility services, landscaping, structures and signs, lighting and
screening devices.
B.
Any other information that may be reasonably required in order to
make an informed determination pursuant to this chapter.
C.
§ 87-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-4
1:533
gutters, curbs, sidewalks, parking area and other areas within the street.
For the purpose of this chapter, streets shall be classified as follows:
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for
occupancy, use or ornamentation whether installed on, above or below the
surface of a parcel of land.
SUBDIVISION — [Amended 11-10-1980 by Ord. No. 80-10]
ARTERIAL STREETS — Those which are used primarily for fast or
heavy traffic.
A.
COLLECTOR STREETS — Those which carry traffic from minor streets
to the major system of arterial streets, including the principal entrance
streets of a residential development and streets for circulation within
such a development.
B.
MINOR STREETS — Those which are used primarily for access to the
abutting properties.
C.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREETS — Streets which are parallel to and
adjacent to arterial streets and highways and which provide access to
abutting properties and protection from through traffic.
D.
The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, tracts,
parcels or other divisions of land for sale or development. The following
shall not be considered subdivisions within the meaning of this chapter
if no new streets are created:
Divisions of land found by the Planning Board or Subdivision
Committee thereof appointed by the Chairman to be for
agricultural purposes where all resulting parcels are five acres or
larger in size.
(1)
(2) Divisions of property by testamentary or intestate provisions.
Divisions of property upon court order, including but not limited to
judgments or foreclosure.
(3)
Consolidations of existing lots by deed or other recorded
instrument.
(4)
The conveyance of one or more adjoining lots, tracts or parcels of
land owned by the same person or persons and all of which are
found and certified by the administrative officer to conform to the
requirements of the municipal development regulations and are
shown and designated as separate lots, tracts or parcels on the Tax
Map or Atlas of the Borough.
(5)
Where a conveyance occurs between the Borough of Park Ridge
and any other person or entity and such conveyance is being made
either pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:12-1, Local Lands and Buildings
Law, or N.J.S.A. 40A:12a-1, the Local Redevelopment and Housing
Law, such conveyance of a parcel or parcels or parts thereof shall
(6)
A.
§ 87-4 PARK RIDGE CODE § 87-4
1:534
SUBDIVISION COMMITTEE — A Committee of at least three Planning
Board members, appointed by the Chairman of the Board, for the purpose
of classifying subdivisions in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
and performing such other duties relating to land subdivision as may be
conferred on the Committee by the Board.
TRANSCRIPT — A typed or printed verbatim record of the proceedings, or
reproduction thereof.[Added 11-10-1980 by Ord. No. 80-10]
not be considered a subdivision within the meaning of this chapter
and shall be exempt from subdivision approval. [Added 2-9-1999
by Ord. No. 99-1]
B. The term "subdivision" shall also include the term "resubdivision."
§ 87-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-4
1:535

ARTICLE III
Administration and Enforcement
§ 87-5. Approving authorities.
A. Planning Board as approving authority. In accordance with Chapter 291
of the Laws of 1975,105 the Planning Board shall act as approving
authority for subdivision plats as a condition for filing such plats with
the county recording officer, either individually or as a part of a
simultaneous application, and for site plan approval as follows:
(1) For minor subdivisions.
(2) For preliminary and final major subdivisions and site plans.
(3) For subdivisions and site plans which also require conditional use
approval.
(4) For minor and major subdivisions which require site plan approval.
(5) For subdivisions and site plans which also require planned
development approval.
(6) For subdivisions and site plans in which a variance is requested, in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60, from lot area, lot dimension,
setback and yard requirements, provided that relief from lot area
requirements shall not be granted for more than one lot.
(7) Concept review. At the request of the developer, the Planning Board
shall grant an informal review of a concept plan for a development
for which the developer intends to prepare and submit an
application for development. The developer shall not be required to
submit any fees for such an informal review. The developer shall
not be bound by any concept plan for which review is requested,
and the Planning Board shall not be bound by any such review.
[Added 11-10-1980 by Ord. No. 80-10]
B. Board of Adjustment as approving authority. In accordance with
Chapter 291 of the Laws of 1975,106 the Board of Adjustment shall act
as approving authority for subdivision plats as a condition for filing
such plats with the county recording officer and for site plan approval
as follows: where a use variance, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d, is
requested in which a subdivision and/or a site plan is a part of the
application.
C. (Reserved)107
105. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
106. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
107. Editor's Note: Original Subsection C, Planning Board and Board of Adjustment acting as
approving authority, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).
§ 87-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-5
1:537
§ 87-5.1. Application by corporation or partnership. [Added
4-28-1981 by Ord. No. 81-2]
§ 87-6. Fees.
D. Exception in application of regulations. Except for public hearings, the
approving authority, when acting upon applications for minor
preliminary and final subdivision approval and preliminary and final site
plan approval, shall have the power to grant such exceptions from the
requirements of this chapter as may be reasonable and within the
general purpose and intent of the provisions of this chapter, if the literal
enforcement of one or more provisions of the chapter is impracticable
or will exact undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining
to the land in question.
E. Simultaneous review and approval. Except as provided in Subsection C
of this section, the approving authority shall have the power to review
and approve one or more land use ordinance requirements
simultaneously with review for subdivision and site plan approval
without the applicant being required to make further application to the
approving authority, or the approving authority being required to hold
further hearings. The longest time period for action by the approving
authority, whether it is for subdivision conditional use, site plan
approval or variance, shall apply. Whenever approval of a conditional
use or a use variance is requested by the applicant, notice of the
hearing on the plat shall include references to the request for such
conditional use or use variance.
A. A corporation or partnership applying to a Planning Board or a Board of
Adjustment or to the governing body of a municipality for permission to
subdivide a parcel of land into six or more lots or applying for a
variance to construct a multiple dwelling of 25 or more family units or
for approval of a site to be used for commercial purposes shall list the
names and addresses of all stockholders or individual partners owning
at least 10% of its stock of any class or at least 10% of the interest in the
partnership, as the case may be.
B. If a corporation or partnership owns 10% or more of the stock of a
corporation or 10% or greater interest in a partnership, subject to
disclosure pursuant to Subsection A of this section, that corporation or
partnership shall list the names and addresses of its stockholders
holding 10% or more of its stock or of 10% or greater interest in the
partnership, as the case may be, and this requirement shall be followed
by every corporate stockholder or partner in a partnership, until the
names and addresses of the noncorporate stockholders and individual
partners exceeding the ten-percent ownership criterion established in
this section have been listed.
A. The following fees, to be revised annually by the Planning Board and
recommended to the Mayor and Council, shall accompany the
§ 87-5 PARK RIDGE CODE § 87-6
1:538
appropriate application.108 Fees for application for the rendering of any
service by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment or any
member of their administrative staffs which are not otherwise provided
by this section or any other section may be provided for and adopted
as part of the rules of the Boards, and copies of said rules or of the
separate fee schedule shall be available to the public. The following
fees shall be paid in cash or certified or bank check payable to the
Borough of Park Ridge as follows: [Amended 11-10-1980 by Ord. No.
80-10; 7-11-1989 by Ord. No. 89-22]
(1) Filing fee for classification of sketch plat: $25.
(2) Filing fee for minor subdivision: $50 plus $25 for each new lot.
(3) Filing fee for preliminary major subdivision: $125 plus $25 for each
lot.
(4) Filing fees for final subdivision:
(a) Creating less than four lots: $25 for each lot.
(b) Creating more than three lots: $100 plus $25 for each lot in
excess of three.
(5) Filing fee for preliminary site plan:
(a) For change of tenancy or change of use without any new
construction to buildings or parking areas: $50.
(b) For approval of multifamily buildings: $10 per dwelling unit,
provided that the minimum fee shall be $100 and the maximum
fee shall be $500.
(c) All other site plan approvals, exclusive of subdivision fee costs:
$25 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area for new
construction or for the total building where the existing
building has an addition thereto, provided that the minimum
fee is $100 and maximum fee shall be $500.
(6) Filing fee for final site plan:
(a) For change of tenancy or change of use without any new
construction to buildings or parking areas: $50.
(b) For approval of multifamily buildings: $10 per dwelling unit,
provided that the minimum fee shall be $100 and the maximum
fee shall be $500.
(c) All other site plan approvals, exclusive of subdivision fee costs:
$25 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area for new
construction or for the total building where the existing
108. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 51, Development Fees.
§ 87-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-6
1:539
building has an addition thereto, provided that the minimum
fee is $100 and the maximum fee shall be $500.
(7) Filing fee for simultaneously filing of preliminary and final site
plans:
(a) For change of tenancy or change of use without any new
construction to buildings or parking areas: $100.
(b) For approval of multifamily buildings: $20 per dwelling unit
with the minimum of $200 and a maximum of $1,000.
(c) All other site plan approvals exclusive of subdivision fee costs:
$50 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area for new
construction or for the total building where the existing
building has an addition thereto, provided that the minimum
fee is $200 and the maximum fee is $1,000.
(d) Minor site plan approval, exclusive of subdivision costs: $25
per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area for new construction
or for the total building where the existing building has an
addition thereto, provided that the minimum fee is $100 and a
maximum fee of $500.
(8) Filing fee for special permit for conditional uses: $200 for each
application.
B. Fees for variances. [Added 7-11-1989 by Ord. No. 89-22]
(1) There shall be a fee of $50 for residential variance applications not
involving a change of use pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70.
(2) There shall be a $200 fee for all other variance applications.
C. Fees for specific services:
(1) Reproduction costs. The fees for reproducing minutes of meetings,
reproducing transcripts to interested parties and copies of the
decision of the approving authority shall be the per-page charge as
established by the governing body for copying of any records. If a
fee is not established, then the statutory fee shall be charged.
(2) Certified list of persons requiring notice: $10.
(3) The fee for reproducing electronic minutes shall be the cost to the
municipality for purchasing the CD/disc.109
(4) Publication notice. In addition to any application or appeal fees, the
applicant shall reimburse the Borough for any publication costs
associated with the application.
D. Escrow fees.
109. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 87-6 PARK RIDGE CODE § 87-6
1:540
(1) Review of plans and reports.
(a) In addition to the required application fees established herein,
the applicant may be required to establish one or more cash
escrow accounts with Park Ridge to cover the reasonable costs
of professional review and consultation. Said escrow fees may
be required for major and minor subdivision review, site plan
review, floor area density bonus request as delineated in §
101-19 of the Borough Code, planned development review and
conditional use request or any variance request before the
approving authority. [Amended 11-29-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-035]
(b) Upon receipt of a development application, the applicant shall
be required to deposit, in addition to any application fees, a
sum of money which shall be held separate in escrow by the
Treasurer of the Borough of Park Ridge and utilized for
reimbursement of the fees charged by the technical experts for
reviewing said plans. Any fees charged against that account
shall first be approved by the approving authority. Upon an
application for a minor subdivision, the amount to be deposited
shall be $500. For an application for a major subdivision, the
amount to be deposited shall be $3,000. For an application
involving a site plan, the amount to be deposited shall be
$3,000. For an application for a floor-area-ratio bonus, the
amount to be deposited shall be $500 in addition to any other
costs noted above. [Amended 4-28-1981 by Ord. No. 81-2;
7-11-1989 by Ord. No. 89-22; 11-29-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-035]
(c) If during the course of review it is apparent to the approving
authority that said sum will not be sufficient, then the
applicant, upon being notified by the administrative officer,
shall within five days deposit to said escrow account the
additional funds. Failure to do so shall be deemed to make the
application incomplete.
(d) The Borough Engineer, planning consultant, approving
authority attorney and any other professionals engaged shall
submit vouchers for all necessary fees for examination and
review, which fees shall be paid in an ordinary manner.
(e) Any of the aforesaid moneys left in the escrow account upon
completion of the project or phase of the application procedure
as determined to the satisfaction of the approving authority, as
the case may be, shall be returned to the applicant as soon as it
is possible.
(f) Upon receipt of sufficient funds for the escrow account, the
administrative officer shall notify the Borough Engineer,
planning consultant, approving authority attorney and any
§ 87-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-6
1:541
other professionals engaged, that all appropriate examinations
and reviews shall be undertaken.
(g) The approving authority shall take no formal action unless all
application fees and escrow funds have been paid to the
Treasurer of the Borough of Park Ridge.
(2) Escrow fees for professional services.
(a) The applicant may be required to establish one or more cash
escrow accounts with Park Ridge to cover the reasonable costs
of engineering inspections and legal fees in the preparation of
builders' agreements and other legal documentation. Where
the above are required by the approving authority, the
applicant shall be required to follow the procedure outlined in
Subsection D(1) of this section.
(b) Engineering inspection may include the improvements relating
to street grading, pavements, gutters, curbs, sidewalks,
surveyors' monuments, culverts, storm sewers, drainage
structures, sanitary sewers and appurtenances and other
means of sewage disposal, grading of property and other
similar improvements as provided in this chapter and as may
be required by the approving authority and governing body.
(c) The approving authority shall not take any action on the
subject application until said cash escrow funds are
established with the Borough.
E. Fee for Tax Map amendment resulting from subdivision or lot
consolidation. Upon the approval of any minor or major subdivision or
lot consolidation, the applicant shall pay to the Borough of Park Ridge a
fee of $100 per lot for the purpose of updating and amending the
Borough Tax Map to reflect any necessary changes occasioned by such
subdivision or lot consolidation. [Added 4-27-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-11]
F. Escrow charges on development applications. [Added 1-1-1996 by
Ord. No. 95-19110]
(1) Responsibility for payment of professional services. An applicant
shall be responsible to reimburse the municipality or a municipal
agency for all expenses and fees incurred by the municipality or
municipal agency for the services of professional personnel
required or necessary to process an application for development,
including but not limited to the following services:
(a) Charges for reviews by professional personnel of applications
and accompanying documents.
110. Editor's Note: This ordinance was previously included as Chapter 57; it was moved to this
subsection at the request of the Borough.
§ 87-6 PARK RIDGE CODE § 87-6
1:542
(b) Issuance of reports by professional personnel to the municipal
agency setting forth recommendations resulting from the
review of any documents submitted by applicant.
(c) Charges for any telephone conference or meeting requested or
initiated by the applicant, his attorney or any of his experts.
(d) Review of additional documents submitted by the applicant
and issuances of reports relating thereto.
(e) Review or preparation of easements, developers' agreements,
deeds, resolutions or the like.
(f) Preparation for and attendance at special meetings.
(g) Site inspection and inspections of improvements relative to
proposed development plans.
(2) Deposit required; approval of bills; excessive or inadequate
deposit. No plats or site plans shall be signed or approved, nor shall
any zoning permits, building permits, certificates of occupancy,
resolutions of approval or other types of permits be issued with
respect to any development until an applicant has deposited with
the Chief Financial Officer an amount which the applicant and the
municipality or municipal agency agree is sufficient to satisfy the
estimated expenses and fees incurred by the municipality or the
municipal agency to pay professional personnel for professional
services. No bill for professional services shall be paid from said
deposit unless approved by the municipality or municipal agency. If
the amount deposited by an applicant exceeds the actual cost of
professional services, as approved by the municipality or municipal
agency, the applicant shall be entitled to a return of the excess,
together with such interest as allowed pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.1. If the actual cost of professional services exceeds the
amount deposited, the applicant shall immediately pay such
additional amount as is required to pay all actual costs of
professional services.
(3) Professional personnel; professional services. The term
"professional personnel" or "professional services" as used herein
shall include the services of a duly licensed engineer, surveyor,
planner, attorney, realtor, appraiser, architect, landscape architect,
noise engineer and traffic engineer or other expert who would
provide professional services to ensure that an application meets
performance standards set forth in the ordinance and other experts
whose testimony is in an area in which the applicant has presented
expert testimony.
(4) Obligation to maintain adequate escrows; payment prior to
approval.
§ 87-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-6
1:543
(a) Any application for development as defined by this section or
any other ordinance of the Borough of Park Ridge or any law of
the State of New Jersey shall be deemed incomplete if
adequate escrows are not placed on deposit with the
municipality in accordance with the provisions of this section.
The escrows as required by this section shall be replenished by
the applicant upon reasonable notice of the municipality for
any additional escrows, and the applicant's obligation to
maintain adequate escrows shall continue throughout the
course of an application for a development.
(b) No plat or site plan shall be signed, nor shall any zoning
permits, building permits, certificates of occupancy or any
other types of permits be issued with respect to any approved
application for development until all bills for reimbursable
services have been received by the municipality from
professional personnel rendering services in connection with
such application and payment has been approved by the
governing body unless the applicant shall have deposited with
the Chief Financial Officer an amount agreed upon by the
applicant and the municipal agency that is likely to be
sufficient to cover all reimbursable items; and upon posting
said deposit with the Chief Financial Officer, the appropriate
maps or permits may be signed and released or issued to the
developer. If the amount of the deposit exceeds the actual cost
as approved for payment by the governing body, the developer
shall be entitled to a return of the excess deposit, together with
such interest as allowed by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.1; but if the
charges submitted and approved by the governing body exceed
the amount of the deposit, the developer shall be liable for
payment to such deficiency.
(5) Charges by professionals; payment to professionals. No
professional personnel submitting charges to the municipality or
municipal agency for any of the services referred to in Subsection
F(1) of this section shall charge for any of the services
contemplated by that subsection at any higher rate or in any
different manner than would normally be charged the municipality
or municipal agency for similar work as ascertained by the
professional's contract of employment with the municipality or by
provisions of this section. Payment of any bill rendered by a
professional to the municipality with respect to any service for
which the municipality or municipal agency is entitled to
reimbursement under this section shall in no way be contingent
upon receipt of reimbursement from an applicant, nor shall any
payment to a professional be delayed pending reimbursement from
a developer.
(6) Depository; refund of interest; administrative expenses. Deposits
received pursuant to Subsection F(2) of this section shall be
§ 87-6 PARK RIDGE CODE § 87-6
1:544
deposited in a banking institution or savings and loan association in
the state insured by an agency of the federal government, or in any
other fund or depository approved for such deposits by the state, in
an account bearing interest at the minimum rate currently paid by
the institution or depository on time or savings deposit. All deposits
received pursuant to this section shall be held and administered
in accordance with the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq., and, in particular, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.2, including all rights
of appeal and the appeal procedure that is provided within that
statute. The municipality shall notify the applicant in writing of
the name and address of the institution or depository in which the
deposit is made and the amount of the deposit. The municipality
shall not be required to refund an amount of interest paid on a
deposit which does not exceed $100 for the year. If the amount
of interest exceeds $100, that entire amount shall belong to the
applicant and shall be refunded to him by the municipality annually
or at the time the deposit is repaid or applied to the purpose
for which it was deposited, as the case may be; except that the
municipality may retain for administrative expenses a sum
equivalent to no more than 33 1/3% of the entire amount, which
shall be in lieu of all other administrative and custodial expenses.
(7) Amount of escrow deposit required for applications. Escrow
deposits required for applications shall be as follows:
(a) Minor site plan. For development applications where the
square footage of the building is not greater than 3,000 square
feet:
[1] Engineering escrow: $500.
[2] Legal escrow: $500.
[3] Planner escrow: $500.
(b) Major site plan. For development applications where the
square footage of the building is in excess of 3,000 square feet:
[1] Engineering escrow: $3,500.
[2] Legal escrow: $1,750.
[3] Planner escrow: $1,750.
(c) Minor subdivision. For development of 3 lots or less:
[1] Engineering escrow: $1,000.
[2] Legal escrow: $500.
[3] Planner escrow: $500.
(d) Major subdivision. For development of more than 3 lots:
§ 87-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-6
1:545
§ 87-7. Public hearings.
[1] Engineering escrow: $4,000.
[2] Legal escrow: $1,250.
[3] Planner escrow: $2,000.
(e) Use variance.
[1] Engineering escrow: $500.
[2] Legal escrow: $750.
[3] Planner escrow: $1,500.
A. When required. A public hearing shall be required for all applications
except minor subdivision approval and final subdivision approval and
site plan review.
B. Availability of maps and documents prior to hearing. Any maps and
documents for which approval is sought at a hearing shall be on file and
available for public inspection, at least 10 days before the date of the
hearing, during normal business hours in the office of the
administrative officer.
C. Notice of public hearings.
(1) The applicant shall give notice of a public hearing to the owners of
all property as shown on the current tax records, located within
200 feet in all directions of the property in question.
(2) Said notice shall state the date, time and place of the hearing, the
nature of the matters to be considered and identification of the
property proposed for subdivision or development by street
address and block and lot numbers as shown on the current tax
duplicate in the Borough Tax Collector's office, a duplicate copy of
which shall be forwarded to the administrative officer. The notice
will also indicate that the maps and documents will be available at a
specific time and location for public inspection pursuant to
Subsection B of this section.
(3) Notice shall be given at least 10 days prior to the date of the public
hearing.
(4) The approving authority shall also cause notice of the hearing to be
published in an official newspaper of general circulation in the
Borough at least 10 days prior to the public hearing.111
(5) Proof of service upon property owners and proof of publication in
affidavit form shall be submitted to the administrative officer no
111. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 87-6 PARK RIDGE CODE § 87-7
1:546
less than 48 hours prior to the commencement of the public
hearing.
D. Certification of list of persons entitled to notice. Upon the written
request of an applicant, the Tax Collector of Park Ridge shall, within
seven days, make and certify a list from said current tax duplicates of
names and addresses of owners to whom the applicant is required to
give notice. The applicant shall be entitled to rely upon the information
contained in such list, and failure to give notice to any owner not on the
list shall not invalidate any hearing or proceeding.
E. Other notification. The applicant shall provide that notice for a hearing
on an application for the development of property be given by personal
service or certified mail, return receipt requested, to:112
(1) The clerk of a municipality involving property within 200 feet of
said municipality.
(2) The County Planning Board where the property is adjacent to an
existing county road or proposed road shown on the Official County
Map or on the County Master Plan, affects a county drainage
facility or adjoins other county land or is situated within 200 feet of
a municipal boundary.
(3) The Commissioner of Transportation where the property is
adjacent to a state highway.
(4) The Director of State and Regional Planning in the Department of
Community Affairs for an application exceeding 150 acres or 500
dwelling units. Such notice shall include a copy of any maps or
documents required to be filed with the administrative officer of
Park Ridge.
F. Effect of mailing notice. Any notice made by certified mail shall be
deemed complete upon mailing.
G. Verbatim recording required. The approving authority shall provide for
the verbatim recording of the proceedings by either stenographer or
mechanical or electronic means for public hearings. The authority shall
furnish its transcript, or duplicate recording in lieu thereof, on request
to any interested party at his expense.
H. Written findings and conclusions. Each decision of the approving
authority shall be in writing and shall include findings of facts and
conclusions based thereon.
I. Copies and notification of decision.
(1) A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the approving authority,
return receipt requested, within 10 days of the date of decision, to
the applicant, or, if represented, his attorney, without separate
112. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 87-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-7
1:547
§ 87-8. Minimum standards; waiver provisions.
charge, and to all who request a copy of the decision for a fee
as specified herein. A copy of the decision shall also be filed by
the approving authority in the office of the administrative officer.
The administrative officer shall make a copy of such filed decision
available to any interested party for a fee as specified herein and
available for public inspection at his office during reasonable
hours.113
(2) A brief notice shall be published in the official newspaper of the
community. Such publication shall be arranged by the approving
authority. The period of time in which an appeal of the decision may
be made shall run from the publication of the decision.
A. The rules, regulations and standards contained herein shall be
considered the minimum requirements for the protection of the public
health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Borough. Any action
taken under the terms of this chapter shall give primary consideration
to the above-mentioned matters and to the welfare of the entire
community. However, if the applicant can clearly demonstrate that,
because of peculiar conditions pertaining to his land, the literal
enforcement of one or more of these regulations is impracticable or will
exact undue hardship, the approving authority may permit such waivers
as may be reasonable and within the general purpose and intent of the
rules, regulations and standards established by this chapter.
B. The waiver provisions of this section shall be applicable to the entire
chapter herein, except where specifically prohibited by law.
C. In those developments in which applicant seeks a waiver of the
sidewalk requirement set forth in § 87-48C or 87-34N, the approving
authority shall grant such waiver pursuant to the requirements set forth
herein. [Added 9-14-1993 by Ord. No. 93-14]
D. In considering such waiver requests, the approving authority shall
apply the standards set forth in this subsection. [Added 9-14-1993 by
Ord. No. 93-14]
E. In the event that the approving authority grants such a waiver, such
relief shall only be permitted on the condition that the applicant shall
make a contribution to the Borough's In Lieu of Sidewalk Improvement
Fund. The amount of such contribution shall equal the cost the
applicant otherwise would have incurred to install sidewalks pursuant
to the appropriate municipal standards, as such cost is determined by
the Borough Engineer. [Added 9-14-1993 by Ord. No. 93-14]
113. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 87-7 PARK RIDGE CODE § 87-8
1:548
ARTICLE IV
Subdivision Classification and Minor Subdivisions
§ 87-9. (Reserved)114
§ 87-10. Submission of applications for minor subdivisions.
[Amended 3-8-1983 by Ord. No. 83-4; 5-10-1983 by Ord. No. 83-5]
An application shall be submitted to the administrative officer, in writing,
in duplicate on forms supplied by the approving authority. Receipt of an
application for minor subdivision approval shall be filed no less than 28 days
prior to the regular meeting date of the approving authority. Required fees,
as provided in Article III, shall be submitted with the application form.
§ 87-11. Map requirements.115
The application shall be accompanied by an original and 24 copies of the
proposed subdivision accurately drawn to a scale of not less than one inch
equals 50 feet certified by a licensed land surveyor. The minor subdivision
plat shall be in conformance with the Map Filing Act, P.L. 1960, c. 141
(N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.116), and shall indicate:
A. The location of the lots to be created in relation to the entire tract.
B. All existing structures and wooded areas within the subdivision and
within 200 feet thereof.
C. The name of the owner and of all adjoining property owners as
disclosed by the most recent municipal tax records.
D. The Tax Map sheet, block and lot numbers.
E. All streets and streams within 200 feet of the subdivision.
F. The area in square feet of all lots to be created.
G. A key map showing the entire subdivision and its relation to
surrounding areas.
H. Easements, streets, buildings, watercourses, railroads, bridges,
culverts, drainpipes, rights-of-way, drainage easements and prior
variances.
I. Acreage of the entire parcel to be subdivided.
J. History of any previous actions or restrictions on the property.
114. Editor's Note: Original § 87-9, Subdivision classification, as amended 3-8-1983 by Ord. No.
83-4 and 5-10-1983 by Ord. No. 83-5, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I).
115. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
116. Editor's Note: Said Act was repealed by L.2011, c. 217.
§ 87-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-12
1:549
§ 87-12. Action by approving authority.
§ 87-13. Approval; expiration.
§ 87-14. Effect of approval.
The zoning requirements and general terms and conditions, whether
conditional or otherwise, shall not be changed or abridged for a period
of two years after the date of minor subdivision approval, provided that
the approved minor subdivision shall have been duly recorded as provided
herein.
§ 87-15. Required guaranties.
Before recording a minor subdivision plat, or deed in lieu thereof, the
approving authority may require the installation and maintenance of onand
off-tract improvements. Said improvements may require the furnishing
A. The approving authority shall grant or deny approval within 45 days of
submission of a complete and perfected application or within such time
as may be consented to, in writing, by the applicant.
B. Failure of the approving authority to act within the time period shall
constitute minor subdivision approval. A certificate by the
administrative officer as to the failure of the approving authority shall
be issued on request of the applicant. The administrative officer's
signature shall be sufficient in lieu of the Chairman and Secretary of the
approving authority and shall be so accepted by the county recording
officer for the purposes of filing subdivision plats.
C. Whenever review or approval is required by the County Planning Board
or a state agency, the approving authority shall not accept an
application as perfected unless receipt of approval is received from said
county or state agency.
A. Minor subdivision approval shall be deemed to be final approval of the
subdivision subject to § 87-14.
B. Approval of a minor subdivision shall expire 190 days from the date of
approval by the approving authority unless within such a period a plat
in conformance with the Map Filing Act, P.L. 1960, c. 141 (N.J.S.A.
46:23-9.9 et seq.)117, or a deed clearly describing the approved minor
subdivision is filed by the developer with the county recording officer,
the Borough Engineer and the Borough Tax Assessor. In addition,
copies shall be submitted to the Borough Clerk, the Construction Code
Official, the Department of Public Utilities and the approving authority.
Any such plat or deed accepted for such filing shall have been signed by
the Chairman and Secretary of the approving authority. [Amended
3-8-1983 by Ord. No. 83-4; 5-10-1983 by Ord. No. 83-5]
117. Editor's Note: Said Act was repealed by L.2011, c. 217.
§ 87-12 PARK RIDGE CODE § 87-15
1:550
of performance and maintenance guaranties in accordance with Articles XI
and XII herein.
§ 87-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-15
1:551

ARTICLE V
Major Subdivision Preliminary Approval
§ 87-16. Submission of application. [Amended 3-8-1983 by Ord. No.
83-4; 5-10-1983 by Ord. No. 83-5]
An application shall be submitted to the administrative officer, in writing,
in duplicate on forms supplied by the approving authority. Receipt of an
application for preliminary major subdivision approval shall be filed no less
than 28 days prior to the regular meeting date of the approving authority.
Required fees, as provided in Article III, shall be submitted with the
application form.
§ 87-17. Preliminary plat requirements.
A. The application shall be accompanied by an original and 24 copies of
the proposed subdivision accurately drawn to scale of not less than one
inch equals 50 feet, certified by a licensed land surveyor as to existing
features and boundaries. The subdivision plat shall be in conformance
with the Map Filing Act, P.L. 1960, c. 141 (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.)118.
All design features shall be prepared by a licensed professional
engineer.119
B. Preliminary plat details. The preliminary plat shall contain the
following:
(1) Date. All revisions shall be noted and dated.
(2) Key map showing the location of the tract with references to the
surrounding properties, existing streets and streams within 500
feet of the subdivision.
(3) Title of development, North arrow, scale, block and lot number,
name and address of record owner and name and address, license
number and seal of person preparing the subdivision. If the owner
of the premises is a corporation, the name and address of the
president and secretary shall be submitted on the application.
(4) All distances shall be in feet and decimals of a foot and all bearings
shall be given to the nearest 10 seconds.
(5) The names, as shown on current tax records, of all owners of
property within 200 feet of the subdivision, together with the block
and lot numbers of the said property.
(6) The zoning district in which the parcel is located, together with the
zone boundaries within 200 feet of the extreme limits of the
property in question.
118. Editor's Note: Said Act was repealed by L.2011, c. 217.
119. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 87-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-17
1:553
(7) Survey data showing boundaries of the property, building or
setback lines and lines of existing and proposed streets, lots,
reservations, easements and areas dedicated to public use,
including grants, restrictions and rights-of-way, to be prepared by a
licensed land surveyor.
(8) Reference to any existing or proposed covenants, deed restrictions,
exceptions or variances covering all or any part of the parcel. A
copy of such covenants, deed restrictions, exceptions or variances
shall be submitted with the application.
(9) The distances, measured along the right-of-way lines of existing
streets abutting the property, to the nearest intersections with
other public streets.
(10) Location of existing buildings and all other structures, including
walls, fences, culverts and bridges, with spot elevations of such
buildings and structures. Structures to be removed shall be
indicated by dashed lines; structures to remain shall be indicated
by solid lines.
(11) Location of all existing and proposed storm drainage structures
and utility lines, whether publicly or privately owned, with pipe
sizes, grades and direction of flow, locations and inlets, manholes
or other appurtenances and appropriate invert and other
elevations. If any existing utility lines are underground, the
estimated location of said utility lines shall be shown, subject to the
Department of Public Utilities approval.
(12) Existing and proposed contours, referred to United States Coast
and Geodetic Survey datum, with a contour interval of one foot for
slopes of less than 3%; an interval of two feet for slopes of more
than 3% but less than 15%; and an interval of five feet for slopes of
15% or more. Existing contours are to be indicated by dashed lines
and proposed contours are to be indicated by solid lines.
(13) Location of existing rock outcrops, high points, watercourses,
depressions, ponds, marshes, wooded areas and other significant
existing features, including previous flood elevations of
watercourses. Ponds and marsh areas as determined by survey.
(14) All proposed streets, with profiles, indicating grading; and cross
sections showing width of roadway, location and width of sidewalks
and location and size of utility lines conforming to the Borough
standards and specifications.
(15) The location of all existing and proposed water lines, valves and
hydrants and all sewer lines or alternative means of sewerage and
sewerage disposal and treatment.
(16) Existing and proposed stormwater drainage system. All plans shall
be accompanied by a separate sketch showing all existing drainage
§ 87-17 PARK RIDGE CODE § 87-17
1:554
§ 87-18. Procedural requirements.
within 500 feet of any boundary, and all areas such as paved
areas, grassed areas, wooded areas and any other surface area
contributing to the calculations, and showing methods used in the
drainage calculations.
(17) Acreage, to the nearest tenth of an acre, of the tract to be
subdivided and the area in square feet of all lots.
(18) Any lands subject to the Farmland Assessment Act of 1964120 shall
be duly noted as to the valuation, assessment and taxation in
accordance with § 87-62 herein.
(19) Such other information or data as may be required by the
approving authority, the County Planning Board or other
governmental agencies for determination that the details of the
subdivision are in accordance with the standards of this chapter,
Chapter 101, Zoning, and all other applicable laws, ordinances or
resolutions.
A. Preliminary subdivision plat review.
(1) The applicant shall submit the preliminary subdivision application
and plat maps and payment of all required fees to the
administrative officer, who shall submit copies of the preliminary
plat to the following:
(a) Approving authority attorney.
(b) Borough Engineer.
(c) Planning consultant.
(d) Construction Code Official. [Amended 11-13-1978 by Ord.
No. 78-16]
(e) Board of Health.
(f) Department of Public Works.
(g) Fire Department.
(h) Police Department.
(i) Department of Public Utilities.
(j) Borough Administrator.
(k) Other municipal officials and agencies as directed by the
approving authority.
120. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 54:4-23.1 et seq.
§ 87-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-18
1:555
§ 87-19. Effect of preliminary approval.
(2) Said persons and boards shall make recommendations to the
approving authority in writing within 14 days of the application
submission. The approving authority shall take said
recommendations into account, but shall have the authority to
proceed in the absence of such recommendations if the approving
authority finds such recommendations not to be essential to its
determination.
(3) If the application for development is found to be incomplete, the
developer shall be notified in writing of the deficiencies therein by
the Board or the Board's designee for the determination of
completeness within 45 days of submission of such application or it
shall be deemed to be properly submitted. [Amended 11-10-1980
by Ord. No. 80-10]
(4) Where adjustments or changes are required in the plat submission,
the applicant shall be required to modify the plat in order to qualify
as a perfected application as to content and for public hearing
purposes.
B. Other governmental approvals. Any preliminary approval required for
county subdivision approval or any other county, state or federal
approval shall be submitted by the applicant for review and approval in
accordance with § 87-12 herein.
C. Public hearings. Upon submission of a perfected application, the
approving authority shall schedule a public hearing for the applicant.
The applicant shall meet all of the requirements established in § 87-7C
for public hearings.
D. Time period in which to act. The approving authority shall grant,
condition or deny preliminary subdivision approval within 45 days of a
perfected application or within such further time period as may be
consented to by the applicant for a subdivision of 10 or fewer lots, or 95
days for a subdivision containing more than 10 lots. Failure of the
approving authority to act within the prescribed time periods or to
obtain an extension from the applicant, in writing, shall constitute a
preliminary approval by the approving authority.
A. If the approving authority acts favorably on a preliminary plat, the
applicant shall submit six copies of a correct map to the administrative
officer. The Chairman and Secretary shall affix their signature to the
plat with a notation that it has received preliminary approval, and one
such plat shall be returned to the applicant for compliance with final
approval requirements.
B. Except as provided herein, preliminary approval of a major subdivision
shall confer the following rights for a three-year period from the date of
approval to the applicant:
§ 87-18 PARK RIDGE CODE § 87-19
1:556
(1) That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary
approval was granted shall not be changed, including but not
limited to use requirements; layout and design standards for
streets, curbs and sidewalks; lot size; year; dimensions and off-tract
improvements; except that nothing herein shall be construed to
prevent the Borough from modifying by ordinance such general
terms and conditions of preliminary approval as relate to public
health and safety.
(2) That the applicant may submit for final approval on or before the
expiration date of preliminary approval the whole or a section or
sections of the preliminary subdivision plat, as the case may be.
(3) That the applicant may apply for and the approving authority may
grant extensions on such preliminary approval for additional
periods of at least one year but not to exceed a total extension of
two years, provided that if the design standards have been revised
by ordinance, such revised standards shall govern beyond the
three-year period.
(4) In the case of a subdivision of 50 acres or more, the approving
authority may grant the rights referred to in Subsection B(1), (2)
and (3) above for such a period of time longer than three years as
shall be determined by the approving authority to be reasonable,
taking into consideration the number of dwelling units and
nonresidential floor area permissible under preliminary approval,
economic conditions and the comprehensiveness of the
development. The applicant may thereafter apply for and the
approving authority may thereafter grant an extension to
preliminary approval for such additional period of time as shall be
determined by the approving authority to be reasonable, taking
into consideration the number of dwelling units and nonresidential
floor area permissible under preliminary approval, the potential
number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area of the
section or sections awaiting final approval, economic conditions
and the comprehensiveness of the development, provided that if
the design standards have been revised, such revised standards
shall govern beyond the three-year period.
C. Failure to obtain final approval within the prescribed time limits as
herein defined shall void the preliminary plat approval.
§ 87-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-19
1:557

ARTICLE VI
Major Subdivision Final Approval
§ 87-20. Submission of application. [Amended 3-8-1983 by Ord. No.
83-4; 5-10-1983 by Ord. No. 83-5]
An application shall be submitted to the administrative officer, in writing,
in duplicate on forms supplied by the approving authority. Receipt of an
application for final subdivision approval shall be filed no less than 28 days
prior to the regular meeting date of the approving authority. Required fees,
as provided in Article III, shall be submitted with the application form.
§ 87-21. Final plat requirements.
A. The application shall be accompanied by an original and 24 copies of
the proposed final subdivision. The plat shall not differ substantially
from the approved preliminary plat.121
B. Final plat details. The final plat shall be drawn in ink on tracing cloth at
a scale of not less than one inch equals 50 feet and in compliance with
all the provisions of the Map Filing Act, P.L. 1960, c. 141, (N.J.S.A.
46:23-9.9 et seq.122). The final plat shall show or be accompanied by the
following:
(1) Date, name and location of the subdivision, name of owner, graphic
scale and reference meridian.
(2) Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, street names,
easements and other rights-of-way, land to be reserved or
dedicated to public use, all lot lines and other site lines; with
accurate dimensions, bearings or deflection angles and radii, arcs
and central angles of all curves; area of each lot.
(3) The names, exact locations and widths of all existing and recorded
streets intersecting or paralleling the plot boundaries within a
distance of 200 feet.
(4) The purpose of any easement or land reserved or dedicated to
public use shall be designated, and the proposed use of sites other
than residential shall be noted.
(5) Lot, block and street numbers as approved by the Borough
Engineer of the Borough of Park Ridge, including lot and block
numbers of abutting property.
(6) Minimum building setback line on all lots and other sites.
(7) Location and description of all monuments.
(8) Names of owners of adjoining unsubdivided land.
121. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
122. Editor's Note: Said Act was repealed by L.2011, c. 217.
§ 87-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-21
1:559
§ 87-22. Procedural requirements.
(9) Certification by applicant's surveyor and engineer as to the
accuracy of the details of the plat.
(10) Certification that the applicant is the agent or owner of the land, or
that the owner has given consent under an option agreement.
(11) When approval of a plat is required by any other officer or body of a
municipality, county or state, such approval shall be certified on the
plat, or evidence shall be submitted that an application has been
made for such approval.
(12) Proposed final grades of all streets shall be shown to a scale of one
inch equals five feet vertical and one inch equals 50 feet horizontal,
on sheets 22 inches by 36 inches, and drawings shall include both
plans and profiles and shall show elevations of all monuments
referred to United States Coast and Geodetic Survey level bench
marks, and such elevations shall be shown in feet and hundredths
of feet.
(13) Plans and profiles of storm and sanitary sewers and water mains.
(14) Certificate from Tax Collector that all taxes are paid to date.
(15)Written proof that the lands set aside or shown for easement,
public use or streets are free and clear of all liens and
encumbrances.
A. Final subdivision plat review.
(1) The applicant shall submit the completed application and maps and
the payment of all required fees to the administrative officer, who
shall submit copies of same to:
(a) Approving authority attorney.
(b) Borough Engineer.
(c) Planning consultant.
(d) Construction Code Official. [Amended 11-13-1978 by Ord.
No. 78-16]
(e) Board of Health.
(f) Department of Public Utilities.
(g) Fire Department.
(h) Police Department.
(i) Department of Public Works.
(j) Borough Administrator.
§ 87-21 PARK RIDGE CODE § 87-22
1:560
(k) Other municipal officials and agencies as directed by the
approving authority.
(2) Said persons and boards shall make recommendations in writing to
the approving authority within 14 days of the application
submission.
B. Determination as to compliance. The Borough Engineer and planner
and the approving authority attorney, where appropriate, may advise
the approving authority of the following:
(1) The nature of the improvements to be required as a condition of
final approval.
(2) The estimated value of the improvements installed or to be
installed.
(3) The nature and amount of performance guaranties, if any, to be
required as a condition to final approval.
(4) The provisions of open space reservation or dedication and the
standards for open space organizations.
(5) The effects, if any, of valuation, assessment and taxation of the
Farmlands Assessment Act.123
(6) The findings and compliance of all provisions under planned
development status.
(7) The amounts to be deposited to reimburse the approving authority
and Borough for costs incurred or to be incurred for legal,
engineering, planning and other professional reviews and work, for
recording fees and for any other costs anticipated by the approving
agency, where applicable.
(8) Any other conditions upon which final approval will be granted or
conditioned.
C. Applicant's responsibilities. The applicant shall be required to submit
the following prior to approving authority action:
(1) Enter into a developer's agreement, prepared by the approving
authority attorney, setting forth the obligations of all parties.
(2) Enter into a performance guaranty agreement in a form
satisfactory to the approving authority and Borough, complying
with Articles XI and XII where appropriate, guaranteeing
performance of the developer's agreement.
(3) The conveyance of any easements, rights-of-way or public lands in a
form and under conditions satisfactory to the approving authority
and Borough.
123. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 54:4-23.1 et seq.
§ 87-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-22
1:561
(4) Maintenance guaranties, if any, for work completed prior to final
approval.
(5) Evidence of compliance with any other conditions imposed by the
approving authority or other governmental agency or utility.
(6) Payment of all required fees as required herein.
(7) Proof of payment of taxes.
D. Other governmental approvals. Any final approval required for county
subdivision approval and any other county, state or federal approval
shall be submitted by the applicant for review and approval in
accordance with § 87-12 herein.
E. Approving authority action.
(1) Final approval shall be granted or denied within 45 days after
submission of a complete and perfected application to the
administrative officer or within such further time as may be
consented to by the applicant. Failure of the approving authority to
act within the period prescribed shall constitute final approval, and
a certificate of the administrative officer as to the failure of the
approving authority to act shall be issued on request of the
applicant, and it shall be sufficient in lieu of the written
endorsement or other evidence of approval and shall be so
accepted by the county recording officer for purposes of filing
subdivision plats.
(2) Unless the preliminary plat has been approved without changes,
the final plat shall incorporate all changes or modifications
required by the approving authority.
(3) The final plat shall be accompanied by a certificate of the Borough
Engineer that he is in receipt of a map which shows all utilities in
exact location and elevation and which identifies the utilities
already installed and those to be installed. The certificate shall also
state that the applicant has installed all required improvements or
that the applicant has posted a performance guaranty with the
Borough Collector-Treasurer in sufficient amount and proper form
to assure the completion of all required improvements.
(4) Upon final approval by the approving authority and the signature of
the Chairman and Secretary of the approving authority having
been placed on the original tracing, the applicant shall provide one
Mylar reproducible and six copies to the administrative officer, who
shall file a copy thereof with each of the following:
(a) Administrative officer.
(b) Borough Engineer.
§ 87-22 PARK RIDGE CODE § 87-22
1:562
§ 87-23. Effect of final approval.
(c) Construction Code Official. [Amended 11-13-1978 by Ord.
No. 78-16]
(d) Tax Assessor.
(e) Department of Public Utilities.
(f) Other governmental units or municipal officials where
required.
F. Final subdivision approval.
(1) Final subdivision approval shall expire 95 days from the date of
signing of the plat, unless within such period the plat shall have
been duly filed by the applicant with the county recording officer.
(2) The approving authority may for good and sufficient cause shown
extend the period of recording for an additional period not to
exceed 190 days from the date of signing the plat.
(3) No subdivision plat shall be accepted for filing by the county
recording officer until it has been approved by the approving
authority as indicated on the instrument by the signature of the
Chairman and Secretary of the approving authority or a certificate
has been issued pursuant to C. 291 of P.L. 1975.124 The signatures
of the Chairman and Secretary of the approving authority shall not
be affixed until the developer has posted the guaranties required
pursuant to Articles XI and XII of this chapter, where appropriate. If
the county recording officer records any plat without such
approval, such recording shall be deemed null and void, and upon
request of Park Ridge Borough, the plat shall be expunged from the
official records.
(4) It shall be the duty of the county recording officer to notify the
approving authority in writing within seven days of the filing of any
plat, identifying such instrument by its title, date of filing and
official number.
A. The zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary subdivision
approval first granted and all other rights conferred upon the applicant
pursuant to § 87-19 of this chapter, whether conditionally or otherwise,
shall not be changed for a period of two years after the date of final
approval, provided that the rights conferred by this section shall expire
if the plat has not been duly recorded within the required time period.
B. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the granting of
final approval terminates the time period of preliminary approval
124. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 87-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-23
1:563
pursuant to § 87-19 of this chapter for the section granted final
approval.
C. In the case of a subdivision or site plan for a planned development or
planned residential development or residential cluster of 50 acres or
more or conventional subdivision for 150 acres or more, the approving
authority may grant the rights referred to in Subsection A of this
section for such period of time longer than two years as shall be
determined by the approving agency to be reasonable, taking into
consideration the number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor
area permissible under final approval, economic conditions and the
comprehensiveness of the development. The applicant may thereafter
apply for and the approving authority may thereafter grant an
extension of final approval for such additional period of time as shall be
determined by the approving authority to be reasonable, taking into
consideration the number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor
area permissible under final approval, the number of dwelling units and
nonresidential floor area remaining to be developed, economic
conditions and the comprehensiveness of the development.
§ 87-23 PARK RIDGE CODE § 87-23
1:564
ARTICLE VII
Site Plan Approval
§ 87-24. Submission of and conformance to site plan required.
§ 87-25. When site plan approval required.
§ 87-26. Submission of application; minor site plan approval.
A. Except as provided herein, no building or excavation or occupancy
permit shall be issued for a building, structure or use, or any
enlargement, expansion or change of use or occupancy, unless a site
plan is first submitted and approved by the approving authority.
B. No certificate of occupancy shall be given unless all construction and
conditions conform to the site plan as approved, unless conditionally
approved by the approving authority as provided herein.
A. Site plan review shall not be required for single-family detached
dwellings or for such accessory uses as a private garage, toolhouse,
garden and private green houses, swimming pools and other similar
uses incidental to a single detached dwelling or for similar
improvements as accessory uses to a principal use. The exceptions
listed herein shall not be applicable to planned development groups.
B. Site plan approval shall not be required where:
(1) Minor repairs to the interior of a building does not involve
structural change or enlargement of the building, as determined by
the Construction Official.
(2) Renovations or alterations to the exterior design of a building or
structure which does not involve any enlargement of the building
or major structural change, as determined by the Construction
Official.
C. However, the Construction Official or Zoning Officer, at his or her
discretion, may refer any application for a building permit to the
approving authority for site plan approval, Subsection B(1) and (2)
notwithstanding, where, in the inspector's judgment, the construction,
reconstruction, alterations or change of use or occupancy will affect
circulation, water supply, sewerage disposal, garbage compactors,
drainage, landscaping, signs, lighting, off-street parking or loading or
the lack of any or all of these factors, environmental factors and other
considerations as specified in this chapter.
D. Except as provided in Subsection B(1) and (2) of this section, all
construction, reconstruction, alteration or enlargement of a building,
structure or use or a change of use or occupancy on or in a
nonconforming structure, use or lot shall require site plan approval.
§ 87-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-26
1:565
§ 87-27. Procedural requirements for preliminary approval.
A. An application shall be submitted to the administrative officer, in
writing, in duplicate on forms supplied by the approving authority.
Receipt of an application for preliminary site plan approval shall be
filed no less than 28 days prior to the regular meeting date of the
approving authority. Required fees, as provided in Article III, shall be
submitted with the application form. [Amended 3-8-1983 by Ord. No.
83-4; 5-10-1983 by Ord. No. 83-5]
B. The approving authority shall accept simultaneous applications for
preliminary and final site plan approval, where so requested by the
applicant, provided that all of the conditions, requirements and
safeguards established for preliminary and final site plan approval are
adhered to.
C. Notice for public hearing; minor site plan approval. [Added
11-10-1980 by Ord. No. 80-10]
(1) The approving authority may waive notice and public hearing for
an application if the approving authority finds that it conforms to
the definition of "minor site plan." Minor site plan approval shall be
deemed to be final approval of the site plan by the authority,
provided that the approving authority may condition such approval
on terms ensuring the provision of improvements pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-38, 40:55D-39, 40:55D-41 and 40:55D-53.
[Amended 3-8-1983 by Ord. No. 83-4]
(2) Minor site plan approval shall be granted or denied within 45 days
of the date of submission of a complete application to the
administrative officer, or within such further time as may be
consented to by the applicant. Failure of the approving authority to
act within the period prescribed shall constitute minor site plan
approval. [Amended 3-8-1983 by Ord. No. 83-4]
(3) Whenever review or approval of the application by the Bergen
County Planning Board is required by Section 8 of P.L. 1968, c. 285
(N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.6), the approving authority shall condition any
approval that it grants upon timely receipt of a favorable report on
the application by the Bergen County Planning Board or approval
by the Bergen County Planning Board by its failure to report
thereon within the required time period. [Amended 3-8-1983 by
Ord. No. 83-4]
(4) The zoning requirements and general terms and conditions,
whether conditional or otherwise, upon which minor site plan
approval was granted, shall not be changed for a period of two
years after the date of minor site plan approval.
A. Preliminary site plan review.
§ 87-26 PARK RIDGE CODE § 87-27
1:566
(1) The applicant shall submit the preliminary site plan application and
plat maps and payment of all required fees to the administrative
officer, who shall submit copies of the preliminary plat to the
following:
(a) Approving authority attorney.
(b) Borough Engineer.
(c) Planning consultant.
(d) Construction Code Official. [Amended 11-13-1978 by Ord.
No. 78-16]
(e) Board of Health.
(f) Department of Public Utilities.
(g) Fire Department.
(h) Police Department.
(i) Department of Public Works.
(j) Borough Administrator.
(k) Other municipal officials and agencies as directed by the
approving authority.
(2) Said professionals and boards shall make recommendation to the
approving authority in writing within 14 days of the application
submission. The approving authority shall take said
recommendations into account, but shall have the authority to
proceed in the absence of such recommendations which are not
essential to its determination.
(3) If an application for development is found to be incomplete, the
developer shall be notified in writing of the deficiencies therein by
the Board or the Board's designee for the determination of
completeness within 45 days of the submission of such application
or it shall be deemed to be properly submitted. [Amended
11-10-1980 by Ord. No. 80-10]
(4) Where adjustments or changes are required in the site plan
submission, the applicant shall be required to modify the plat in
order to qualify as a perfected application as to content and for
public hearing purposes.
B. Other governmental approvals. Any preliminary site plan approval
required for county site plan approval or for any other county, state or
federal agency shall be submitted by the applicant for review and
approval. The approving authority shall not take any final action until
approval is granted by said governmental agency or a statement
§ 87-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-27
1:567
authorizing the municipal approving authority to proceed in its
application.
C. Public hearings. Upon submission of a perfected application, at the
direction of the approving authority, the administrative officer shall
schedule a public hearing for the applicant. The applicant shall meet all
of the requirements established in § 87-7C for public hearings.
D. Time period in which to act.
(1) Upon the submission to the administrative officer of a complete
application for a site plan which involves 10 acres of land or less,
and 10 dwelling units or less, the approving authority shall grant or
deny preliminary approval within 45 days of the date of such
submission or within such further time as may be consented to by
the developer. Upon the submission of a complete application for a
site plan which involves more than 10 acres, or more than 10
dwelling units, the approving authority shall grant or deny
preliminary approval within 95 days of the date of such submission
or within such further time as may be consented to by the
developer. Otherwise, the approving authority shall be deemed to
have granted preliminary approval of the site plan. [Amended
11-10-1980 by Ord. No. 80-10; 3-8-1983 by Ord. No. 83-4]
(2) Failure of the approving authority to act within the prescribed time
periods or to obtain an extension from the applicant, in writing,
shall constitute a preliminary approval by the approving authority.
E. Applicant's responsibilities. Prior to approving authority acceptance of
a preliminary site plan or a simultaneous site plan for preliminary and
final approval, the applicant shall be required to:
(1) Enter into a developer's agreement, prepared by the approving
authority attorney, setting forth the obligations of all parties.
(2) Enter into a performance guaranty agreement, in a form
satisfactory to the approving authority and Borough, complying
with Articles XI and XII where appropriate, guaranteeing
performance to the developer's agreement.
(3) The conveyance of any easements, rights-of-way or public lands in a
form and under conditions satisfactory to the approving authority
and the Borough.
(4) Maintenance guaranties, if any, for work completed prior to final
approval.
(5) Evidence of compliance with any other conditions imposed by the
approving authority or other governmental agency or utility.
(6) Payment of all required fees as required herein.
(7) Proof of payment of taxes.
§ 87-27 PARK RIDGE CODE § 87-28
1:568
§ 87-28. Effect of preliminary approval.
§ 87-29. Application for final approval. [Amended 3-8-1983 by Ord.
No. 83-4; 5-10-1983 by Ord. No. 83-5]
An application shall be submitted to the administrative officer, in writing,
in duplicate on forms supplied by the approving authority. Receipt of an
application for final approval of a site plan shall be filed no less than 28 days
prior to the regular meeting date of the approving authority. Required fees,
as provided in Article III, shall be submitted with the application form.
§ 87-30. Procedural requirements for final approval.
A. Preliminary approval of a site plan shall confer upon the applicant the
following rights for a three-year period from the date of the preliminary
approval:
(1) That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary
approval was granted shall not be changed, including but not
limited to use requirements; layout and design standards for
streets, curbs and sidewalks; lot size; yard dimensions and on-tract
and off-tract improvements; and any requirements peculiar to the
specific site plan. The municipality may modify by ordinance such
general terms and conditions of preliminary approval as they may
relate to public health and safety.
(2) That the applicant may submit for final approval on or before the
expiration date of preliminary approval the whole or a section or
sections of the preliminary site plan.
(3) In the case of a site plan for an area of 50 acres or more, the
approving authority may grant the rights referred to in Subsection
A(1) and (2) above for a time period longer than three years as shall
be determined by the approving authority to be reasonable, taking
into consideration the number of dwelling units and nonresidential
floor area permissible under preliminary approval, economic
conditions and the comprehensiveness of the development. The
applicant may thereafter apply for and the approving authority may
thereafter grant an extension to preliminary approval for such
additional period of time as shall be determined by the approving
authority to be reasonable, taking into consideration the number of
dwelling units and nonresidential floor area permissible under
preliminary approval, the potential number of dwelling units and
nonresidential floor area of the section or sections awaiting final
approval, economic conditions and the comprehensiveness of the
development, provided that if the design standards have been
revised, such revised standards may govern.
B. Failure to obtain final approval within the prescribed time limits as
herein defined shall void the preliminary plat approval.
§ 87-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-30
1:569
A. Final site plan review.
(1) The applicant shall submit the final site plan application and plat
maps and payment of all required fees to the administrative officer,
who shall submit copies of the plat to the following:
(a) Approving authority attorney.
(b) Borough Engineer.
(c) Planning consultant.
(d) Construction Code Official. [Amended 11-13-1978 by Ord.
No. 78-16]
(e) Board of Health.
(f) Department of Public Utilities.
(g) Fire Department.
(h) Police Department.
(i) Department of Public Works.
(j) Borough Administrator.
(k) Other municipal officials and agencies as directed by the
approving authority.
(2) Said professionals and boards may make recommendations to the
approving authority, in writing, within 14 days of the application
submission. The approving authority shall take said
recommendations into account, but shall have the authority to
proceed in the absence of such recommendations if the approving
authority finds such recommendations not to be essential to its
determination.
(3) The approving authority shall review the application for final site
plan approval with or without conditions, provided that the
following requirements have been met:
(a) The detailed drawings, specifications and estimates meet all
applicable codes and ordinances.
(b) The final plans are substantially the same as the approved
preliminary site plan and conditions governing same.
(c) All improvements have been installed or bonds posted to
ensure the installation of improvements.
(d) The applicant agrees, in writing, to all conditions of final
approval.
§ 87-30 PARK RIDGE CODE § 87-30
1:570
§ 87-31. Effect of final approval.
(e) Proof has been submitted that no taxes or assessments for
local improvements are due or delinquent for which final site
plan approval is sought.
(f) All applicable fees have been paid prior to any final action by
the approving authority.
(g) Requirements of other governmental units have been complied
with.
B. Other governmental approvals. Any final site plan approval required for
county approval or any other county, state or federal agency approval
shall be submitted by the applicant for review and approval in
accordance with § 87-12 herein.
C. Time period in which to act.
(1) The approving authority shall grant, condition or deny final site
plan approval within 45 days from receipt of a perfected and
complete site plan application or within such further time as may
be consented to by the applicant.
(2) Failure of the approving authority to act within the prescribed time
period or to obtain an extension from the applicant, in writing, shall
constitute final approval, and a certificate of the administrative
officer as to the failure of the approving authority to act shall be
issued on request of the applicant, and it shall be sufficient in lieu
of the written endorsement or other evidence of approval.
D. Final site plan approval authorization. Upon approval of the site
development plan and upon compliance with all conditions, the
Engineer and the Chairman and the Secretary of the approving
authority shall be authorized to sign the plan and the Secretary shall
affix the seal of the Board. The applicant shall provide seven copies of
the approved site plan to the administrative officer who shall file a copy
thereof with each of the following:
(1) Administrative officer.
(2) Borough Engineer.
(3) Borough planner.
(4) Construction Code Official. [Amended 11-13-1978 by Ord. No.
78-16]
(5) Tax Assessor.
(6) Department of Public Works.
(7) Other governmental units or municipal officials where required.
§ 87-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-31
1:571
§ 87-32. Compliance required.
A. Final approval shall terminate the time period of preliminary approval
for the section granted final approval and shall guarantee the applicant
that the zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary approval
and all other rights conferred upon the applicant as part of preliminary
approval shall not be changed for a period of two years after the date of
final approval.
B. Final approval shall expire two years from the date of granting final
approval unless actual construction takes place. "Actual construction"
is defined as the placing of construction materials in their permanent
position, fastened in a permanent manner. An applicant whose site plan
approval has expired may resubmit a site plan.
C. In the case of site plan for a planned development of 50 acres or
conventional site plan for 150 acres or more, the approving authority
may extend the rights granted under final approval for such period of
time longer than two years as shall be determined by the approving
authority to be reasonable, taking into consideration the number of
dwelling units and nonresidential floor area permissible under final
approval, economic conditions and the comprehensiveness of the
development. The applicant may thereafter apply for and the approving
authority may thereafter grant an extension of final approval for such
additional time as shall be determined by the approving authority to be
reasonable taking into consideration the number of dwelling units and
nonresidential floor area permissible under final approval, the number
of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area remaining to be
developed, economic conditions and the comprehensiveness of the
development.
A. Compliance.
(1) All proposed improvements of development indicated on the
approved site plan shall meet the requirements of all applicable
codes, ordinances and specifications of the community, county,
state or federal governments and other agencies with jurisdiction
over matters pertaining to site development.
(2) It shall be the joint responsibility of the Engineer and the
Construction Code Official to enforce their respective rules and
regulations to ensure compliance with the site plan approval map
and other specified conditions as may be imposed on the
development.
B. Site plan binding. The site plan, as approved by the approving authority,
shall be binding upon the applicant. Any changes from the approved
plan shall require resubmission and reapproval by the approving
authority.
§ 87-31 PARK RIDGE CODE § 87-32
1:572
C. Revocation of building permit or certificate of occupancy. In the event
of a failure to comply with any condition of site plan approval, the
Construction Code Official or Zoning Officer, on his own initiative or
upon recommendation from the Borough Attorney, may revoke the
building permit or certificate of occupancy, as the case may be, and
seek to enjoin the violation or take such other steps as permitted by law.
[Amended 11-13-1978 by Ord. No. 78-16]
§ 87-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-32
1:573

ARTICLE VIII
Design Standards for Subdivision
§ 87-33. General.
§ 87-34. Streets.
The arrangements of streets not shown on the Master Plan or Official Map
shall be such as to provide for the appropriate extension of existing streets
or with a minimum right-of-way of 50 feet.
A. The applicant shall observe the following requirements and principles
of land subdivision in each subdivision or portion thereof:
(1) The subdivision plat shall conform to the design standards that will
encourage good development patterns within the Borough.
(2) Where either an Official Map or Master Plan, or both, have been
adopted, the subdivision shall conform to the proposals and
conditions shown thereon.
B. The streets, drainage rights-of-way, school sites, public parks and
playgrounds shown on an adopted Master Plan or Official Map shall be
considered in approval of subdivision plats.
A. Minor streets. Minor streets shall be so designed as to discourage
through traffic unless deemed necessary by the approving authority.
B. Subdivision abutting arterial streets. Subdivisions abutting arterial
streets may be required to provide a marginal service road or reverse
frontage with a buffer strip for planting or some other means of
separation of through and local traffic as the approving authority may
determine to be appropriate.
C. Pavement width of streets. The pavement width of all streets shall be a
minimum of 30 feet for all local streets and may be greater for collector
and arterial streets.
D. Minimum right-of-way width. The right-of-way width shall be measured
from lot line to lot line and shall not be less than 50 feet in any case,
except when shown at a greater width on the Master Plan or Official
Map of the Borough of Park Ridge or when said street constitutes an
extension of an existing street with a greater width than 50 feet.
E. Substandard street right-of-way and pavement width. In connection
with subdivisions that adjoin or include existing streets that do not
conform to widths as shown on the Master Plan or Official Map or the
street width requirements of this chapter, the applicant shall dedicate
additional right-of-way or pavement width along either one or both
sides of said road. If the subdivision is along one side only, one-half of
the required extra width shall be dedicated.
§ 87-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-34
1:575
§ 87-35. Block patterns.
F. Street grades. Grades of arterial and collector streets shall not exceed
6%. Grades on other streets shall not exceed 10%. No street shall have
a minimum grade of less than 1/2%.
G. Street intersections. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right
angles as is possible and in no case shall be less than 60°. The block
corners at intersections shall be rounded at the curbline with a curve
having a radius of not less than 20 feet.
H. Street jogs. Street jogs shall have center-line offsets of not less than
125 feet.
I. Reverse curve tangents. A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be
introduced between reverse curves on arterial and collector streets.
J. Street line deflection. When connecting street lines deflect from each
other at any one point by more than 10° and not more than 45°, they
shall be connected by a curve with a radius of not less than 100 feet for
minor streets and 300 feet for arterial and collector streets.
K. Change in grade. All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical
curves of sufficient radius to provide a smooth transition and proper
sight distance.
L. Cul-de-sac streets. Dead-end streets (culs-de-sac) shall not be longer
than 600 feet and shall provide a turnaround at the end with a radius of
not less than 50 feet and tangent whenever possible to the right side of
the street. If a dead-end street is of a temporary nature, a similar
turnaround shall be provided and provisions made for future extension
of the street and reversion of the excess right-of-way to the adjoining
properties.
M. Street names. No street shall have a name which will duplicate or so
nearly duplicate in the Park Ridge, Montvale and Woodcliff Lake
communities as to be confused with the names of existing streets. The
continuation of an existing street shall have the same name. The Police
Department shall approve the names of all street names.
N. Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be required unless waived by the approving
authority and shall provide a minimum walkway width of four feet
constructed in accordance with the requirements of the Borough
Engineer and in conformance with Chapter 86 of the Code of the
Borough of Park Ridge.
A. Block length and width or acreage within bounding roads shall be such
as to accommodate the size of lot required in the area by the Chapter
101, Zoning, and to provide for convenient access, circulation control
and safety of street traffic.
§ 87-34 PARK RIDGE CODE § 87-35
1:576
§ 87-36. Lots.
§ 87-37. Easements; natural features; public uses.
B. In blocks of 1,000 or more feet in length, pedestrian crosswalks may be
required in locations deemed necessary by the approving authority.
Such walkways shall be at least 10 feet wide in right-of-way with a fivefoot-
wide improved pavement surface. Said walkway may also include
other improvements, including streetlighting.
C. For all uses, including commercial, industrial and planned development
group areas, block sizes shall be sufficient to accommodate the
proposed uses and to permit reasonable access, circulation and firefighting
and emergency services.
A. Lot dimensions and areas shall not be less than the requirements of the
Zoning Ordinance.
B. Insofar as is practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight
streets and radial to curved streets.
C. Each lot must front upon an approved and improved street with a rightof-
way width of at least 50 feet in width, except as provided herein.
D. Where extra width has been dedicated for widening of existing streets,
lots shall begin at such extra width line, and all setbacks shall be
measured from such line.
E. Where there is a question as to the suitability of a lot or lots for their
intended use due to such factors as rock formations, drainage
conditions, watercourses, historic sites, flood conditions or similar
circumstances, the approving agency may, after adequate investigation,
withhold approval of such lots.
A. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway,
channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or
drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such
watercourses and such further width or construction, or both, as will be
adequate for the purpose.
B. Natural features such as trees, brooks, hilltops and views shall be
preserved whenever possible in designing any subdivision containing
such features.
C. Any public use as defined herein shall be of suitable size, shape and
location under the provision of reservation contained herein.
D. In a large-scale development, easements along rear property lines or
elsewhere for utility installation may be required. Such easements shall
be at least 15 feet wide and shall be located in consultation with the
utility companies or municipal departments concerned.
§ 87-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-38
1:577
§ 87-38. Water mains, culverts, storm and sanitary sewers.
All installations of water mains, culverts and storm and sanitary sewers
shall be connected with approved system and shall be adequate to handle
all present and probable future development.
§ 87-39. Underground utilities.
A. For all major subdivisions, the applicant shall arrange with the serving
utility for the underground installation of all utility distribution supply
lines and service connections in accordance with the provisions of the
applicable standard terms and conditions incorporated as a part of its
tariffs, as the same are then on file with the State of New Jersey Board
of Public Utility Commissioners, and shall submit to the approving
authority prior to the granting of final approval a written instrument
from each serving utility, which shall evidence full compliance with the
provisions of this subsection; provided, however, that lots in such
subdivisions which abut existing streets where overhead electric or
telephone distribution supply lines have theretofore been installed on
any portion of the street involved may be supplied with electric and
telephone service from such overhead lines, but the service connections
from the utilities' overhead lines shall be installed underground.
However, the applicant shall not be required to install electric
distribution supply lines underground if the Board of Public Works of
the Borough of Park Ridge requires such lines to utilize a voltage of 26
kilovolts or greater and the Board of Public Works passes a resolution
declaring that such distribution lines would present exceptional
operational and/or safety problems if installed underground. The
location of access facilities for servicing the utility in the proposed
subdivision shall be developed in conjunction with and as a part of the
complete subdivision plan. [Amended 6-9-1981 by Ord. No. 81-9]
B. Whenever the utility is not installed in the public right-of-way, an
appropriate utility easement not less than 20 feet in width shall be
provided.
C. The approving agencies of the Borough of Park Ridge may in their
discretion waive the installation of the underground utilities where
such installation will result in peculiar and exceptional practical
difficulties to or exceptional and undue hardship upon the applicant by
reason of exceptional topographic conditions or by reason of other
extraordinary and exceptional situation or condition of the lands in such
subdivision.
D. Whenever underground utilities are installed in accordance with the
provisions hereof, fire alarm systems servicing the development shall
also be installed in an appropriate subsurface distribution system
connecting the necessary alarm stations. The manner of installation and
the number and location of alarm stations shall be in a manner
approved by the Fire and Police Departments.
§ 87-38 PARK RIDGE CODE § 87-40
1:578
§ 87-40. Soil erosion and sediment control.
A. No topsoil shall be removed from the site or used as spoil. Topsoil
moved during the course of construction shall be redistributed so as to
provide at least six inches of cover to all areas of the subdivision and
shall be stabilized by seeding or planting. The applicant shall comply
with Chapter 84, Soil Removal.
B. All applications for subdivision shall be in accordance with the Park
Ridge Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Ordinance, or, where same
has not been adopted, the applicant shall meet the requirements of
Chapter 251, Laws of 1975, the New Jersey Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control Act.125
125. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.
§ 87-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-40
1:579

ARTICLE IX
Site Plan Details
§ 87-41. Required information.
A. All applications for site plan approval shall be prepared, signed and
sealed by a professional engineer. They shall bear the signature and the
seal of a licensed land surveyor as to topographic and boundary survey
data.
B. All site plans shall comply with the requirements hereinafter set forth
and shall contain the following information and data where applicable:
(1) A title block shall be indicated in the lower-right-hand corner of the
plan and shall include the name and address of the record owner,
including the block and lot number of the site; the title of the
development; and the name, address, license number and seal of
the person preparing the plan. If the owner is a corporation, the
name and address of the president and secretary shall be
submitted with the application.
(2) A date block of the site plan adjacent to the title block containing
the date of preparation. All subsequent revisions shall be noted and
dated.
(3) A key map showing the location of the tract with reference to
surrounding areas and existing street intersections within 500 feet
of the boundaries of the subject premises.
(4) A scale of not less than 50 feet to the inch shall be used and a
graphic representation of the scale shall be displayed, and a North
arrow. All distances and dimensions shall be in feet and decimals of
a foot and all bearings shall be given to the nearest 10 seconds.
(5) The names of all owners of adjacent property within 200 feet of the
subject premises, together with the block and lot numbers of said
property, as shown on the current municipal tax records.
(6) Zone boundaries shall be shown on the site plan as they affect the
parcel. Adjacent zone districts within 200 feet shall also be
indicated. Such features may be shown on a separate map or as a
key on the detail map itself.
(7) Survey data showing boundaries of the property, required building
or setback lines and lines of existing and proposed streets, lots,
reservations, easements and areas dedicated to public use,
including grants, restrictions and rights-of-way.
(8) Reference to any existing covenants, deed restrictions, easements
or exceptions that are in effect or are intended to cover all or any of
the tract. A copy of such covenant, deed restriction, easement or
exception shall be submitted with the application. If there are no
§ 87-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-41
1:581
known covenants, deed restrictions. easements or exceptions
affecting the site, a notation to that effect shall be indicated on the
site plan map.
(9) Location of existing buildings on the site which shall remain and all
other structures such as walls, fences, culverts, bridges, roadways,
etc., with spot elevations of such structures. Structures to be
removed shall be indicated by dashed lines; structures to remain
shall be indicated by solid lines.
(10) All distances as measured along the right-of-way lines of existing
streets abutting the property to the nearest intersection with any
other street.
(11) Location plans and elevations of all proposed buildings and other
structures, including required yard and setback areas, building
height in feet and stories, lot coverage and improved lot coverage
calculations.
(12) Location, height, dimensions and details of all signs, either
freestanding or affixed to a building. Where signs are not to be
provided, a notation to that effect shall be indicated on the site
plan.
(13) Location of all storm drainage structures, soil erosion and sediment
control devices and utility lines, whether publicly or privately
owned, with pipe sizes, grades and direction of flow. The estimated
location of the said existing underground utility lines shall be
shown.
(14) Existing and proposed contours, referred to United States Coast
and Geodetic Survey datum, with a contour interval of one foot for
slopes of 3% or less, an interval of two feet for slopes of more than
3% but less than 15% and an interval of five feet for slopes of 15%
or more. Existing contours are to be indicated by dashed lines and
proposed contours are to be indicated by solid lines.
(15) Location of existing rock outcrops, high points, watercourses,
depressions, ponds, marshes, wooded areas and other significant
existing features, including previous flood elevations of
watercourses, where available and ponds and marsh areas as may
be determined by survey. Unusual major conditions affecting the
subject property or surrounding areas shall be indicated.
(16) All proposed streets with profiles indicating grading; and cross
sections showing width of roadway, location and width of sidewalks
where required and location and size of utility lines according to
community standards and specifications.
(17) The proposed use or uses of land and buildings and proposed
location of buildings, including proposed grades. Floor space of all
buildings and estimated number of employees, housing units and
§ 87-41 PARK RIDGE CODE § 87-41
1:582
other capacity measurements where required shall also be
indicated. If the precise use of the building is unknown at the time
of application, an amendment plan showing the proposed use shall
be required prior to a certificate of occupancy.
(18) All means of vehicular ingress and egress to and from the site onto
public or private streets showing the size and location of driveways
and curb cuts, including the possible organization of traffic
channels, acceleration and deceleration lanes, additional width and
other traffic controls which may be required. Improvements such
as roads, curbs, sidewalks and other design detail shall be
indicated, including dimensions of parking stalls, access aisles,
curb radii, direction of traffic flow and other conditions as may be
required in Chapter 101, Zoning, or this Code.
(19) The location and design of any off-street parking areas or loading
areas showing size and location of bays, aisles and barriers.
(20) The location of all proposed water lines, valves and hydrants and
all sewer lines or alternative means of water supply or sewage
disposal and treatment in conformance with the municipal
standards and appropriate utility companies, where applicable.
(21) The proposed location, direction of illumination, power and time of
proposed outdoor lighting in conformance with applicable
standards of the community, including type of standards to be
employed, radius of light and intensity in footcandles.
(22) The proposed screening and landscaping and a planting plan
indicating natural vegetation to remain and areas to be planted and
type of vegetation to be utilized.
(23) The proposed stormwater drainage system as to conform with
designs based on a fifty-year storm, using a one-hour intensity of
2.0 inches. All site plans shall be accompanied by a plan sketch
showing all existing drainage within 500 feet of any boundary, and
all areas such as paved areas, grassed areas, wooded areas and any
other surface area contributing to the calculations and methods
used in the determination.
(24) Such other information or data as may be required by the
approving authority in order to determine that the details in the
site plan are in accordance with the standards of Chapter 101,
Zoning, and other municipal, county and state ordinances and
regulations.
§ 87-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-41
1:583

ARTICLE X
Design Standards for Site Plan Review
§ 87-42. General.
In preparing an application for site plan review, planned development
review, conditional use request and other matters requiring site plan review,
the applicant shall be guided by the design standards affecting off-street
parking and loading, traffic circulation, building design and layout, lighting,
buffering and landscaping, signs, drainage and other utilities and
environmental considerations contained herein.
§ 87-43. Off-street parking requirements.
A. (Reserved)126
B. (Reserved)127
C. Parking area design standards.
(1) Aisle width. Provisions shall be made for the safe and adequate
circulation of vehicles and pedestrians within and adjoining the
subject property. Aisle widths providing direct access to individual
parking stalls shall be in accordance with the standards in Table
X-2. Only one-way traffic shall be permitted in aisles of less than 24
feet in width.
Table X-2
Minimum Aisle Width
Parking Angle
(degrees)
Minimum Aisle Width
(feet)
0 (parallel parking) 12
30 12
45 13
60 18
90 (perpendicular parking) 24
(2) Parking stalls shall be nine feet by 18 feet in dimension, provided
that parking stalls serving lots which contain a supermarket shall
be 10 feet by 20 feet. [Amended 7-14-1992 by Ord. No. 92-20]
(3) Circulation within parking area.
126. Editor's Note: Original Subsection A, Number of parking spaces required, was repealed
9-13-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-19. See now § 101-62A.
127. Editor's Note: Original Subsection B, Location of parking spaces, as amended, was
repealed 9-13-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-19. See now § 101-62B.
§ 87-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-43
1:585
(a) All parking spaces shall be designed free and clear of any
obstruction to individual parking stalls.
(b) Such parking spaces shall be located in such a fashion as to
permit all vehicles to exit in a safe and orderly manner. Under
no condition shall vehicles be permitted to back out of a
parking lot driveway or otherwise block the free movement of
traffic within the parking area or specific points of safety
control, such as fire hydrants, doorways, elevators or other
similar locations.
(c) Aisle widths and circulation patterns shall be designed to
permit emergency and service vehicles such as delivery trucks,
solid waste collection vehicles and the like to have reasonable
access to and space for their intended functions.
(d) Pedestrian circulation within a parking area shall be, to as
great an extent as possible, separated from vehicular traffic.
Safety zones, crossing points and sidewalk areas, where
warranted, shall be provided.
(e) The use of pedestrian carts or other similar accessory vehicles
shall not be permitted to be retained within the driving area of
the parking facility.
(4) Driveway design criteria.
(a) Location of driveways. All entrance and exit driveways to a
public or private street shall be so located as to afford
maximum safety to said roadway and to provide for safe and
convenient ingress and egress and to minimize conflict with
the free flow of traffic. In no case shall unrestricted access
along the length of the street or streets upon which the parking
area abuts be permitted.
(b) Sight distances.
[1] The minimum sight distances established in Table X-3 shall
be adhered to between a driveway and the adjoining street
in accordance with the site triangle definition. Said
driveway shall be designed in profile and grading which
shall be reviewed by the Municipal Engineer.
[2] For the purpose of this chapter, site distance measurement
shall be measured from the driver's seat of a standing
vehicle located on that portion of the exit driveway that is
immediately contiguous to the traveled way with the front
of the vehicle 10 feet behind the right-of-way line of the
road, with the height of the eye 3.75 feet to the top of the
object 4.5 feet above the pavement.
§ 87-43 PARK RIDGE CODE § 87-43
1:586
Table X-3
Minimum Sight Distance From a Driveway and
Adjoining Street
Allowable Maximum Speed
on Roadway
(miles per hour)
Minimum Sight
Distance
(feet)
25 175
30 250
35 325
40 400
45 450
50 or more 500
(c) Where a site is located at the intersection of two streets, no
driveway entrance or exit shall be located within 50 feet of the
point where the curb return of the street intersection and the
curbline meet.
(d) No part of any driveway shall be located closer than 20 feet
from any other driveway on an adjoining parcel nor shall more
than one driveway be located closer than 40 feet to another
driveway on the same site as measured from the closest edge
of any two driveways along the same right-of-way line.
(e) No entrance or exit driveway shall be located on a traffic circle
or on a ramp of an interchange or within 50 feet of the
beginning of any ramp or other portion of an interchange.
§ 87-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-43
1:587
Table X-4
Driveway Widths, Depressed Curbs and Curb Return
Radius Standards
One-Way Operation Two-Way Operation
Driveway
Width
(feet)
Depressed
Curb
(feet)
Curb
Return
Radius
(feet)
Driveway
Width
(feet)
Depressed
Curb
(feet)
Curb
Return
Radius
(feet)
3- to
10-family
residence
12 to
15
32 to 35 20
min.
30
max.
22 to 26 44 to
50
20
min.
30
max.
Over
10-family
residence
15 to
16
35 to 38 20
min.
30
max.
24 to 30 46 to
52
25
min.
35
max.
Commercial
and
industrial
15 to
30
35 to 50 35
min.
45
max.
30 to 50 50 to
70
35
min.
45
max.
Service
stations
20 to
30
35 to 50 20
min.
35
max.
40 to 50 50 to
60
20
min.
35
max.
NOTE:
Driveways connecting to a public or private street at an angle
shall have the same widths as shown in Table X-4. The width
of depressed curb and the radius of curb returns shall provide
for the sharpest turning radii of vehicles using the driveway,
keeping said vehicles within their prescribed lanes.
(f) Geometric design. The geometric design of a driveway
connection to a public or private street shall be governed by
sound traffic engineering principles. The following guidelines
are utilized in preparing a geometric design, but some
deviation may be necessitated from time to time due to the
many variables encountered in the course of preparing a
design. The applicant should be aware, therefore, that
although the driveway layout may conform to these guidelines,
conditions may dictate deviation from them and requirements
of the Municipal Engineer shall be final.
§ 87-43 PARK RIDGE CODE § 87-43
1:588
[1] Two-way operation. Driveways used for two-way operation
will intersect a public or private street at an angle to as
near 90° as site conditions will permit and in no case will
be less than 60°.
[2] One-way operation. Driveways used for vehicles in one
direction of travel (right turn only) shall not form an angle
smaller than 45° with a public street.
[3] The dimensions of driveways shall be designed to
adequately accommodate the volume and character of
vehicles anticipated to be attracted daily onto the land
development for which a site plan is prepared. The
required maximum and minimum dimensions for
driveways connecting to a public or private street at 90°
are indicated in Table X-4. Driveways serving large
volumes of daily traffic or traffic over 25% of which is truck
traffic shall be required to utilize high to maximum
dimensions. Driveways serving low daily traffic volumes or
traffic less than 25% of which is truck traffic shall be
permitted to use low to minimum dimensions.
[4] Any vertical curve on a driveway shall be flat enough to
prevent the dragging of any vehicle undercarriage.
[5] Should the sidewalk be so close to the curb at a depressed
curb driveway as to cause the ramp to be too steep and be
likely to cause undercarriage drag, the sidewalk shall be
appropriately lowered to provide a suitable ramp gradient.
[6] The surface of any driveway shall be constructed with a
permanent pavement of a type specified by standards set
by the Municipal Engineer. Such pavement shall extend to
the paved portion of the public or private street pavement.
(5) Guardrails, wheel stops and parking lot stripping.
(a) Guardrails shall be provided in appropriate locations where
required for safety purposes.
(b) Wheel stops, permanently anchored to the ground, may be
required in appropriate locations. Parked vehicles shall not
overhang or extend over sidewalk areas, unless an additional
sidewalk width of 2 1/2 feet is provided to accommodate such
overhang.
(c) Parking stalls, driveways and aisles shall be clearly marked
and delineated. The approving authority may require certain
areas be maintained for fire-fighting purposes or other
emergency purposes. These areas as well as other pavement
signage shall be appropriately designated.
§ 87-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-43
1:589
(6) Minimum and maximum grades in parking areas. The minimum and
maximum parking grades shall be in accordance with the following
requirements:
Maximum
Grade
(percent)
Minimum Grade
(percent)
Parking stalls and service
aisles
6% 1/2%
Main approach walkways to
buildings
4% 1/2%
Collector or other service
walkways
8% 1/2%
Swales 10% 2%
Principal circulation aisles 8% 1/2%
Driveways; entrances and
exits
6%* 1/2%
NOTE:
* For a distance of 100 feet from the street right-of-way line.
(7) Maintenance of off-street parking and loading area. Every parcel of
land used as a public or private off-street parking or loading area
shall be maintained in good condition, free of hazards and
deterioration. All pavement areas, sidewalks, curbs, drainage
facilities, lighting, bumpers, guardrails, markings, signs,
landscaping and other improvements shall be maintained in
workable, safe and good condition.
(8) Other off-street parking requirements:
(a) Limitations as to use. All off-street parking areas shall be used
solely for the parking of passenger automobiles and no
commercial repair work or service of any kind shall be
conducted within the parking lot.
(b) Nonavailability. At any time that the required off-street parking
facilities cease to be available as required, the certificate of
occupancy for the building or buildings built in conjunction
with such parking areas shall be canceled and become null and
void.
(c) Charges. There shall be no charge made of the use of off-street
parking facilities, and no cars other than self-propelled
passenger vehicles shall be permitted to use any of the offstreet
parking facilities herein required, and no service of any
kind shall be extended to the vehicle occupying such off-street
parking facilities except for emergency purposes.
§ 87-43 PARK RIDGE CODE § 87-43
1:590
§ 87-44. Off-street loading requirements.
D. Off-street parking construction.
(1) All off-street parking areas shall be graded and drained so as to
dispose of all surface water in a manner so as not to unreasonably
impair the surroundings.
(2) All off-street parking areas, aisles and driveways shall be surfaced
with asphalt, bituminous or cement binder pavement according to
specifications established for this purpose by the Borough
Engineer.
(3) All parking areas and access drives shall be edged by a concrete
curb or Belgian block not exceeding six inches above the paved
surface or ground level.
A. In any district, in connection with every building or buildings group or
part thereof, hereinafter erected, which is to be utilized by industrial
and commercial uses or requires the distribution by vehicles of
materials or merchandise and for any residential development
containing 30 or more dwelling units and for large-scale public and
quasi-public uses, there shall be provided and maintained, on the same
zone lot with such building, off-street loading spaces in accordance with
the requirements of Table X-5.
B. Each such loading space shall not be less than 12 feet in width and 35
feet or more in length, depending upon the functions to be performed.
The overall floor-to-ceiling height or clear height distance shall not be
less than 12 feet, which may be increased where required.
Table X-5
Off-Street Loading Requirements
Land Use**
Floor Area at
Which First Berth
is Required
(square feet)
Floor Area at
Which Second
Berth is Required*
(square feet)
Industrial, manufacturing 5,000 40,000
Laboratory, research,
commercial
5,000 40,000
Retail 5,000 20,000
Service establishments 5,000 40,000
Commercial recreation 5,000 100,000
Restaurants 2,000 25,000
Office buildings 5,000 100,000
Funeral home 10,000 100,000
§ 87-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-44
1:591
§ 87-45. Lighting and signs.
Table X-5
Off-Street Loading Requirements
Land Use**
Floor Area at
Which First Berth
is Required
(square feet)
Floor Area at
Which Second
Berth is Required*
(square feet)
Residential apartment
building
20,000 100,000
Institutional, public
schools
10,000 100,000
Hospitals, nursing homes 10,000 100,000
Auditoriums, arenas 10,000 100,000
NOTES:
* An additional berth shall be required for each additional amount of
square feet as indicated as required between the need for one- and
two-berth intervals.
** In the case of a multiple-use building, the amount of off-street
loading required shall be equal to the sum of the parts, unless
same can be demonstrated to be in excess as shall be subject to
determination by the approving authority.
C. Except for required buffer areas, each such loading space may occupy
any required side or rear yard but shall not be located in the required
front yard. When adjoining a residential use, institutional use or place
of general assembly, a suitably screened or landscaped buffer shall be
provided.
D. Off-street loading spaces shall not be located within any fire prevention
zone, within 25 feet of any fire hydrant or within 10 feet of any stairway,
doorway, elevator or other general means of entry to and from a
building for the general public, nor shall it block or in any way interfere
with the free flow of pedestrians from any means of ingress or egress
nor shall it interfere with the free flow of pedestrians or vehicles. All
such loading spaces shall be appropriately indicated by sign or other
visual communication as to said location.
E. All loading and unloading operations shall be conducted entirely within
the boundaries of the lot concerned, and no vehicle or conveyance shall
in any manner use public streets, sidewalks or rights-of-way for loading
or unloading operations other than ingress or egress to the lot.
A. Lighting.
§ 87-44 PARK RIDGE CODE § 87-45
1:592
§ 87-46. (Reserved)129
§ 87-47. Utility improvements.
(1) In connection with every site plan, the applicant shall submit plans
for all proposed exterior lighting. These plans shall include the
location, type of light, radius of light and intensity in footcandles.
The following design standards shall be followed:
(a) The style of the light and light standard shall be consistent with
the architectural style of the principal building.
(b) The maximum height of freestanding lights shall not exceed
the height of the principal building or 25 feet, whichever is
less.
(c) All lights shall be shielded to restrict the maximum apex angle
of the cone of illumination to 150°.
(d) Where lights along property lines will be visible to adjacent
property, the lights shall be appropriately shielded.
(e) Spotlight-type fixtures attached to buildings shall be avoided,
except where properly screened from adjacent properties.
(f) Freestanding lights shall be so located and protected to avoid
being damaged by vehicles.
(g) Lighting shall not be permitted which requires flashing or
intermittent illumination. Lighting which requires change in
color, intensity or hue shall likewise be prohibited.
(2) Said lighting shall in no way interfere with, detract from or
diminish in any way the effectiveness of any traffic signal or similar
safety or warning device.
B. Signs.
(1) Each site plan application shall include a sign plan showing the
specific design, location, size, construction and illumination in
accordance with the Borough Sign Ordinance.128
(2) If the applicant is unable to provide said details for signs, the
approving authority shall condition its approval upon receipt of
same prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
A. Gas, electric and telephone service.
(1) Gas, electric and telephone service shall be provided by the
applicant in concert with the appropriate public utility providing
128. Editor's Note: See Ch. 101, Zoning, Art. X, Signs.
129. Editor's Note: Original § 87-46, Landscaping and buffer areas, was repealed 9-13-2005 by
Ord. No. 2005-19. See now § 101-63.
§ 87-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-47
1:593
§ 87-48. Street improvements.
such service. Said service on the site shall be provided as a part of
an underground system.
(2) If such facilities cannot be reasonably provided due to topographic
or geologic condition of the land or due to technological
circumstances, and where the applicant can adequately
demonstrate the lack of feasibility of same to the satisfaction of the
approving authority, a waiver of this requirement may be granted.
(3) Where existing utility lines such as electric and telephone poles
exist off-tract and require relocation as a result of the proposed
development, the approving authority shall be assured that said
relocation will not create or maintain any hazardous or dangerous
conditions.
B. Water supply and sanitary sewage disposal. Adequate provisions for
water supply and sanitary sewage disposal shall be indicated. Said
facilities shall include and not be limited to approvals, where
appropriate, of the engineer of the serving utility company, Department
of Health and Fire Department. The locations of all proposed fire
hydrants or similar facilities shall be indicated on the plan, and said
areas shall provide for appropriate fire lanes or protective areas which
shall not be impeded by parking or standing vehicles or other
obstructions, particularly in commercial centers.
C. Stormwater drainage.
(1) Provisions shall be made for the safe and adequate drainage of
surface runoff waters in and from the premises so that flooding and
erosion of the property and the property of others will be
prevented.
(2) Each site plan submitted to the approving authority shall be
reviewed by the engineer to establish requirements to prevent
adverse drainage conditions both on and off the site.
(3) The drainage systems shall be designed in conformance to
accepted engineering standards. To facilitate the review of the
proposed drainage facilities for development, design calculations
prepared by the applicant's engineer shall accompany the
application.
(4) The design considerations shall include and not be limited to
drainage areas, runoff calculations, storm drains, pipelines, inlet
designs and manholes.
(5) Unless otherwise stipulated by the Municipal Engineer, drainage
facilities shall be designed on the basis of a fifty-year storm, using a
one-hour intensity of two inches.
§ 87-47 PARK RIDGE CODE § 87-48
1:594
A. Curbing.
(1) General:
(a) Where curbing is lacking, an applicant for site plan approval
shall install curbing along the extent of all property fronting
public and private streets in accordance with municipal
standards and specifications.
(b) The Municipal Engineer may require curbing within parking
areas in order to facilitate drainage and provide separation
between pedestrian and vehicular movement.
(2) Alignment and grade. Curb grading and alignment is to be
determined as established in the area unless otherwise required by
the Municipal Engineer.
(3) Curbing at driveway openings. Where a proposed driveway is to
serve any land development of 50 or more parking spaces, curbing
need not be carried across the driveway opening as a depressed
curb, but rather may be swept back as curb returns. Where the
driveway serves a facility having less than 50 parking spaces, a
depressed curb driveway shall be utilized.
B. Street widening.
(1) The right-of-way width, measured from lot line to lot line, shall not
be less than 50 feet in width, except when shown at a greater width
on the Master Plan or Official Map or said street constitutes an
extension of an existing street with a greater width than 50 feet.
(2) In connection with site plans that adjoin or include existing streets
that do not conform to widths as shown on the Official Map or
Master Plan or are less than 50 feet in width, the applicant shall
dedicate additional width along either one or both sides of said
road. If the site plan is along one side only, one-half of the required
difference in roadway width shall be dedicated.
C. Sidewalks.
(1) Each land development requiring site plan approval may be
required to provide a sidewalk within the street right-of-way.
(2) Pedestrian walkways or sidewalks may also be required for any
development of 50 or more parking spaces within said parking area
to provide convenient and safe access for pedestrian circulation.
(3) Sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete, brick or other similar
material and shall be at least four feet in width.
(4) Sidewalks between parking areas and principal structures, along
aisles and driveways and wherever pedestrian traffic shall occur
§ 87-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-48
1:595
§ 87-49. Refuse collection and storage.
Provisions shall be made for the proper storage and collection of refuse. All
such storage shall be maintained within the confines of an enclosed building
or structure and shall be reasonably accessible for vehicular collection on
the site or shall be appropriately screened and landscaped where outdoor
storage is necessary.
§ 87-50. Other site plan requirements.
shall be raised six inches or more above the parking area except
when crossing streets or driveways.
(5) Sidewalk construction shall be in accordance with Chapter 86 of
the Code of the Borough of Park Ridge.
A. Retaining walls. Retaining walls shall be designed to be safe and
adequate for the purpose intended. Said walls shall not detract from the
aesthetic beauty of the site when constructed, and to this end shall be
fenced or landscaped in accordance with the plans to be approved by
the approving authority.
B. Design standards for physically handicapped persons.
(1) Design standards, when applicable. In accordance with Chapters
220, 221 and 224 of the Laws of 1975,130 all plans and
specifications for the construction or remodeling of any public
building, as defined herein, shall provide facilities for the physically
handicapped.
(2) Design facilities, buildings.
(a) All public buildings shall contain at least one principal
entrance, accessible to and usable by physically handicapped
persons, which shall be either ramped or at ground level.
(b) In any multistory building, an elevator sufficient in size to
accommodate a wheelchair shall be provided.
(3) Parking lot design.
(a) A minimum of 1% of the total number of parking spaces, but
not less than two parking spaces, shall be designed and
designated for physically handicapped persons. Said spaces
shall be most accessible and approximate to the building or
buildings which the parking spaces serve.
(b) Each space or group of spaces shall be identified with a clearly
visible sign displaying the international symbol of access along
with the following wording: "These spaces reserved for
physically handicapped drivers."
130. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:32-4 et seq.
§ 87-48 PARK RIDGE CODE § 87-50
1:596
(c) Each space shall be 12 feet wide to allow room for persons in
wheelchairs or on braces or crutches to get in and out of either
side of an automobile onto level, paved surface suitable for
wheeling and walking.
(d) Where possible, such spaces shall be located so that persons in
wheelchairs or using braces or crutches are not compelled to
wheel or walk behind parked cars.
(e) Where applicable, curb ramps shall be provided to permit
handicapped people access from parking area to sidewalk.
(4) Sidewalks. A sidewalk hereafter constructed or reconstructed on
public or private property for public use shall be constructed in a
manner that will facilitate use by physically handicapped persons.
At points of intersection between pedestrian and motorized lines of
travel, and at other points where necessary to avoid abrupt
changes in grade, a sidewalk shall slope gradually to street level so
as to provide an uninterrupted line of travel.
C. Environmental impact statement.
(1) When required. The approving authority may require the
preparation of an environmental impact statement for any site plan
application, conditional use request, planned development or major
subdivision.
(2) Elements of the environmental statement:
(a) An inventory of existing environmental conditions of the site
and in the surrounding region which describes air quality,
water supply, solid waste disposal, hydrology, geology, soils,
topography, vegetation, wildlife, aquatic organisms, ecology,
demography, land use and archeology.
(b) A project description, complete with maps and drawings,
which shall specify what is to be done and how it is to be done,
during construction and operation; a construction schedule
including:
[1] Reason for the project.
[2] The recommended or favored alternative solution.
[3] Parks, recreational sites, wildlife refuges and historic sites
described.
[4] Existing land use, zoning and Master Plan delineation of
project area.
[5] Ambient environmental assets mapped and described.
(c) A listing of all licenses, permits or other approvals required by
law and the status of each.
§ 87-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-50
1:597
§ 87-50.1. Outdoor cafes. [Added 7-11-2006by Ord. No. 2006-10]
(d) An assessment of the probable impact of the project upon all
topics in Subsection C(2)(a) above.
(e) A listing of adverse environmental impact, especially
irreversible damage which cannot be avoided, including water
quality, noise, air quality, traffic, undesirable land use patterns,
damage or disruption of significant plant or wildlife systems,
aesthetic values, destruction of natural resources,
displacement of people and business, displacement of viable
farms, destruction of man-made resources, disruption of
desirable community and regional growth and health, safety
and well-being of the public.
(f) Steps to be taken to minimize adverse environmental impacts
during construction and operation, both at the project site and
in the surrounding region, including but not limited to soil
erosion, preservation of trees, protection of watercourses,
protection of air resources, noise control and traffic control.
(3) Alternative considerations. Alternatives to all or any part of the
project, with reasons for their acceptability, including that of no
development; the available alternatives that might avoid some or
all of the adverse environmental effects, with the rationale for
acceptability or nonacceptability of each alternative; and a costbenefit
analysis of the impact on alternatives.
A. Checklist of requirements for site plan approval to permit an outdoor
cafe. The following information shall be submitted:
(1) A site plan, at a scale not less than 1/8 inch equals one foot,
identifying the location of the cafe, the required barrier between
the seating area and public circulation areas, screening proposed,
table and chair locations, and refuse disposal location, which
includes the existing square footage of the indoor dining area and
the square footage of proposed outdoor dining area;
(2) Photographs of lots adjacent to the cafe area;
(3) Photographs of the area where the cafe is to be located;
(4) Detailed screening plan;
(5) Detailed lighting plan, including details of the fixtures and levels of
illumination proposed;
(6) Details of additional signage;
(7) Total number of seats on site, both indoor and outdoor;
§ 87-50 PARK RIDGE CODE § 87-50.1
1:598
(8) The applicant must comply with the parking requirements for
restaurant uses. In calculating the required parking, all seats, both
indoor and outdoor, must be utilized.
B. In addition to this checklist, an applicant must comply with the
licensing provisions of Chapter 75 and the zoning regulations of
Chapter 101.
§ 87-50.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-50.1
1:599

ARTICLE XI
Performance and Maintenance Guarantees
§ 87-51. Developer's agreement.
With respect to all applications for subdivision and site plan approval, the
Borough of Park Ridge Planning Board shall condition any such approval
upon the execution of a developer's agreement between the Borough of
Park Ridge Planning Board (the "Board") and the applicant specifying,
in part, off-site, on-tract or off-tract improvements, public improvements,
bonding requirements, escrow requirements, other conditions imposed by
the Borough and such other terms and conditions as the Borough deems
appropriate. The Board may waive the requirement of a developer's
agreement in appropriate circumstances. Unless so waived, no certificate
of occupancy or building permit shall be issued respecting any application
for development requiring subdivision or site plan approval unless the
applicant has entered into a developer's agreement of a form specified
herein.
§ 87-52. Furnishing of performance guarantees; improvements.
A. Before filing of final subdivision plats or recording of minor subdivision
deeds or as a condition of final site plan approval or as a condition to
the issuance of a zoning permit pursuant to subsection d. of Section 52
of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65), or as a condition of approval of
a permit update under the State Uniform Construction Code for the
purpose of updating the name and address of the owner of property on
a construction permit, the Borough shall require and shall accept in
accordance with the standards set forth hereinbelow and regulations
adopted pursuant to Section 1 of P.L. 1999, c. 68 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53a)
for the purpose of assuring the installation and maintenance of certain
on-tract improvements, the furnishing of a performance guarantee, and
provision for a maintenance guarantee as set forth in this section.
(1) The developer shall furnish a performance guarantee in favor of the
Borough in an amount not to exceed 120% of the cost of installation
of only those improvements required by an approval or developer's
agreement, ordinance, or regulation to be dedicated to a public
entity, and that have not yet been installed, which cost shall be
determined by the Borough Engineer, according to the method of
calculation set forth in Section 15 of P.L. 1991, c. 256 (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.4), for the following improvements as shown on the
approved plans or plat:
(a) Streets;
(b) Pavement;
(c) Gutters;
(d) Curbs;
§ 87-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-52
1:601
§ 87-52.1. Safety and stabilization.
(e) Sidewalks;
(f) Street lighting;
(g) Street trees;
(h) Surveyor's monuments, as shown on the final map and
required by the Map Filing Law, P.L. 1960, c. 141 (N.J.S.A.
46:23-9.9 et seq.; repealed by Section 2 of P.L. 2011, C. 217) or
N.J.S.A. 46:26B-1 through N.J.S.A. 46:26B-8;
(i) Water mains;
(j) Sanitary sewers;
(k) Community septic systems;
(l) Drainage structures;
(m) Public improvements of open space; and
(n) Any grading necessitated by the preceding improvements.
(2) The developer shall also furnish a performance guarantee to
include, within an approved phase or section of a development,
privately owned perimeter buffer landscaping, as required by the
Borough Code or imposed as a condition of approval. At a
developer's option, a separate performance guarantee may be
posted for the privately held perimeter buffer landscaping.
(3) The Borough Engineer shall prepare an itemized cost estimate of
the improvements covered by the performance guarantee, which
itemized cost estimate shall be appended to each performance
guarantee posted by the obligor.
A. The developer shall also furnish to the Borough a safety and
stabilization guarantee in favor of the Borough. At the developer's
option, a safety and stabilization guarantee may be furnished either as a
separate guarantee or as a line item of the performance guarantee. A
safety and stabilization guarantee shall be available to the Borough
solely for the purpose of returning property that has been disturbed to a
safe and stable condition or otherwise implementing measures to
protect the public from access to an unsafe or unstable condition, only
in the circumstance that:
(1) Site disturbance has commenced and, thereafter, all work on the
development has ceased for a period of at least 60 consecutive days
following such commencement for reasons other than force
majeure.
§ 87-52 PARK RIDGE CODE § 87-52.1
1:602
§ 87-52.2. Temporary certificate of occupancy; guarantee.
(2) Work has not recommenced within 30 days following the provision
of written notice by the Borough to the developer of the Borough's
intent to claim payment under the guarantee.
(3) The Borough shall not provide notice of its intent to claim payment
under a safety and stabilization guarantee until a period of at least
60 days has elapsed during which all work on the development has
ceased for reasons other than force majeure. The Borough shall
provide written notice to the developer by certified mail or other
form of delivery providing evidence of receipt.
(4) The amount of a safety and stabilization guarantee for a
development with bonded improvements in an amount not
exceeding $100,000 shall be $5,000.
(5) The amount of a safety and stabilization bond guarantee for a
development with bonded improvements exceeding $100,000 shall
be calculated as a percentage of the bonded improvement costs of
the development or phase of development as follows:
(a) $5,000 for the first $100,000 of bonded improvement costs,
plus 2 1/2% of bonded improvement costs in excess of
$100,000 up to $1,000,000; plus
(b) 1% of bonded improvement costs in excess of $1,000,000.
(6) The Borough shall release a separate safety and stabilization
guarantee to a developer upon the developer's furnishing of a
performance guarantee which includes a line item for safety and
stabilization in the amount required under this subsection.
(7) The Borough shall release a safety and stabilization guarantee
upon the Borough Engineer's or other municipal official's
(designated by ordinance) determination that the development of
the project site has reached a point that the improvements installed
are adequate to avoid any potential threat to public safety.
A. In the event that the developer shall seek a temporary certificate of
occupancy for a development, unit, lot, building, or phase of
development, as a condition of the issuance thereof, the developer shall
furnish a separate guarantee, referred to herein as a "temporary
certificate of occupancy guarantee," in favor of the Borough in an
amount equal to 120% of the cost of installation of only those
improvements or items which remain to be completed or installed
under the terms of the temporary certificate of occupancy and which
are required to be installed or completed as a condition precedent to
the issuance of the permanent certificate of occupancy for the
development, unit, lot, building or phase of development and which are
not covered by an existing performance guarantee. Upon posting of a
temporary certificate of occupancy guarantee, all sums remaining
§ 87-52.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-52.2
1:603
§ 87-52.3. Acceptance of performance guarantee from successor
developer.
§ 87-53. Maintenance guarantee.
under a performance guarantee previously furnished by the developer
which relate to the development, unit, lot, building, or phase of
development for which the temporary certificate of occupancy is
sought, shall be released. The scope and amount of the temporary
certificate of occupancy guarantee shall be determined by the Borough
Engineer or such other municipal official designated by ordinance.
The temporary certificate of occupancy guarantee shall be released
by the Borough Engineer or other municipal official designated by
ordinance upon the issuance of a permanent certificate of occupancy
with regard to the development, unit, lot, building, or phase as to which
the temporary certificate of occupancy relates.
A. The Borough may accept a performance guarantee in favor of the
municipality from a successor developer as a replacement for a
performance guarantee that was previously furnished, pursuant to
section 41 of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53), for the purpose of
assuring the installation of improvements. The Borough shall not accept
a replacement performance guarantee without securing:
(1) Written confirmation from the new obligor that the intent of the
new obligor is to furnish a replacement performance guarantee,
relieving the predecessor obligor and surety, if any, of any
obligation to install improvements; and
(2) Written verification from the Borough engineer that the
replacement performance guarantee is of an amount sufficient to
cover the cost of the installation of improvements, but not to
exceed 120% of the cost of the installation, which verification shall
be determined consistent with section 41 of P.L. 1975, c. 291
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53).
B. An approving authority shall notify the governing body whenever it
accepts a replacement performance guarantee. Notice shall contain a
copy of the written conformation of the new obligor's intent to furnish a
replacement performance guarantee and the municipal engineer's
written verification of the sufficiency of the amount of that replacement
performance guarantee.
C. Within 30 days after receiving notice from the approving authority of its
acceptance of a replacement performance guarantee, the governing
body, by resolution, shall release the predecessor obligor from liability
pursuant to its performance guarantee.
A. Prior to the release of a performance guarantee required pursuant to
this section, the developer shall post with the Borough a maintenance
§ 87-52.2 PARK RIDGE CODE § 87-53
1:604
§ 87-54. Other agencies; utilities.
In the event that other governmental agencies or public utilities
automatically will own the utilities to be installed or the improvements
are covered by a performance or maintenance guarantee to another
governmental agency, no performance or maintenance guarantee, as the
case may be, shall be required by the Borough for such utilities or
improvements.
§ 87-55. Performance guarantees.
guarantee in an amount not to exceed 15% of the cost of the installation
of the improvements which are being released.
(1) The developer shall post with the Borough, upon the inspection and
issuance of final approval of the following private site
improvements by the Borough Engineer, a maintenance guarantee
in an amount not to exceed 15% of the cost of the installation of the
following private site improvements, which cost shall be
determined according to the method of calculation set forth in
section 15 of P.L. 1991, c. 256 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4):
(a) Stormwater management basins;
(b) In-flow and water quality structures within the basins; and
(c) The out-flow pipes and structures of the stormwater
management system, if any.
(2) The term of the maintenance guarantee shall be for a period not to
exceed two years and shall automatically expire at the end of the
established term.
A. The time allowed for installation of the bonded improvements for which
the performance guarantee has been provided may be extended by the
governing body by resolution. As a condition or as part of any such
extension, the amount of any performance guarantee shall be increased
or reduced, as the case may be, to an amount not to exceed 120% of the
cost of the installation, which cost shall be determined by the Borough
Engineer according to the method of calculation set forth in section 15
of P.L. 1991, c. 256 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4) as of the time of the passage
of the resolution.
B. If the required bonded improvements are not completed or corrected in
accordance with the performance guarantee, the obligor and surety, if
any, shall be liable thereon to the Borough for the reasonable cost of the
improvements not completed or corrected, and the Borough may either
prior to or after the receipt of the proceeds thereof complete such
improvements. Such completion or correction of improvements shall be
subject to the public bidding requirements of the Local Public Contracts
Law, P.L. 1971, c. 198 (N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.).
§ 87-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-55
1:605
C. Upon substantial completion of all required street improvements
(except for the top course) and appurtenant utility improvements, and
the connection of same to the public system, the obligor may request of
the governing body in writing, by certified mail addressed in care of the
Borough Clerk, that the Borough Engineer prepare, in accordance with
the itemized cost estimate prepared by the Borough Engineer and
appended to the performance guarantee pursuant to this section, a list
of all uncompleted or unsatisfactory completed bonded improvements.
If such a request is made, the obligor shall send a copy of the request to
the Borough Engineer. The request shall indicate which bonded
improvements have been completed and which bonded improvements
remain uncompleted in the judgment of the obligor. Thereupon the
Borough Engineer shall inspect all bonded improvements covered by
obligor's request and shall file a detailed list and report, in writing, with
the governing body, and shall simultaneously send a copy thereof to the
obligor not later than 45 days after receipt of the obligor's request.
(1) The list prepared by the Borough Engineer shall state, in detail,
with respect to each bonded improvement determined to be
incomplete or unsatisfactory, the nature and extent of the
incompleteness of each incomplete improvement or the nature and
extent of, and remedy for, the unsatisfactory state of each
completed bonded improvement determined to be unsatisfactory.
The report prepared by the Borough Engineer shall identify each
bonded improvement determined to be complete and satisfactory
together with a recommendation as to the amount of reduction to
be made in the performance guarantee relating to the completed
and satisfactory bonded improvement, in accordance with the
itemized cost estimate prepared by the Borough Engineer and
appended to the performance guarantee pursuant to Subsection A
of this section.
(2) The governing body, by resolution, shall either approve the bonded
improvements determined to be complete and satisfactory by the
Borough Engineer, or reject any or all of these bonded
improvements upon the establishment in the resolution of cause for
rejection, and shall approve and authorize the amount of reduction
to be made in the performance guarantee relating to the
improvements accepted, in accordance with the itemized cost
estimate prepared by the Borough Engineer and appended to the
performance guarantee pursuant to this section. This resolution
shall be adopted not later than 45 days after receipt of the list and
report prepared by the Borough Engineer. Upon adoption of the
resolution by the governing body, the obligor shall be released from
all liability pursuant to its performance guarantee with respect to
those approved bonded improvements, except for that portion
adequately sufficient to secure completion or correction of the
improvements not yet approved; provided that 30% of the amount
of the total performance guarantee and safety and stabilization
guarantee posted may be retained to ensure completion and
§ 87-55 PARK RIDGE CODE § 87-55
1:606
acceptability of all improvements. The safety and stabilization
guarantee shall be reduced by the same percentage as the
performance guarantee is being reduced at the time of each
performance guarantee reduction.
(3) For the purpose of releasing the obligor from liability pursuant to
its performance guarantee, the amount of the performance
guarantee attributable to each approved bond improvement shall
be reduced by the total amount for each such improvement, in
accordance with the itemized cost estimate prepared by the
Borough Engineer and appended to the performance guarantee
pursuant to Subsection A of this section, including any contingency
factor applied to the cost of installation. If the sum of the approved
bonded improvements would exceed 70% of the total amount of the
performance guarantee, then the Borough may retain 30% of the
amount of the total performance guarantee and safety and
stabilization guarantee to ensure completion and acceptability of
all bonded improvements, as provided above, except that any
amount of the performance guarantee attributable to bonded
improvements for which a temporary certificate of occupancy
guarantee has been posted shall be released from the performance
guarantee even if such release would reduce the amount held by
the Borough below 30%.
(4) If the Borough Engineer fails to send or provide the list and report
as requested by the obligor pursuant to this section within 45 days
from receipt of the request, the obligor may apply to the court in a
summary manner for an order compelling the Borough Engineer to
provide the list and report within a stated time and the cost of
applying to the court, including reasonable attorney's fees, may be
awarded to the prevailing party.
(5) If the governing body fails to approve or reject the bonded
improvements determined by the Borough Engineer to be complete
and satisfactory or reduce the performance guarantee for the
complete and satisfactory improvements within 45 days from the
receipt of the Borough Engineer's list and report, the obligor may
apply to the court in a summary manner for an order compelling,
within a stated time, approval of the complete and satisfactory
improvements and approval of a reduction in the performance
guarantee for the approvable complete and satisfactory
improvements in accordance with the itemized cost estimate
prepared by the Borough Engineer and appended to the
performance guarantee pursuant to this section; and the cost of
applying to the court, including reasonable attorney's fees, may be
awarded to the prevailing party.
(6) In the event that the obligor has made a cash deposit with the
Borough or approving authority as part of the performance
guarantee, then any partial reduction granted in the performance
guarantee pursuant to this subsection shall be applied to the cash
§ 87-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-55
1:607
§ 87-56. Inspection fees.
deposit in the same proportion as the original cash deposit bears
to the full amount of the performance guarantee, provided that if
the developer has furnished a safety and stabilization guarantee,
the Borough may retain cash equal to the amount of the remaining
safety and stabilization guarantee.
D. If any portion of the required bonded improvements is rejected, the
approving authority may require the obligor to complete or correct
such improvements and, upon completion or correction, the same
procedure of notification, as set forth in this section shall be followed.
E. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the right of the obligor to
contest by legal proceedings any determination of the governing body
or the Borough Engineer.
A. The obligor shall reimburse the Borough for reasonable inspection fees
paid to the Borough Engineer for the foregoing inspection of
improvements; which fees shall not exceed the sum of the amounts set
forth hereinbelow. The Borough shall require the developer to post the
inspection fees in escrow in an amount:
(1) Not to exceed, except for extraordinary circumstances, the greater
of $500 or 5% of the cost of bonded improvements that are subject
to a performance guarantee under this section; and
(2) Not to exceed 5% of the cost of private site improvements that are
not subject to a performance guarantee under this section, which
cost shall be determined pursuant to Section 15 of P.L. 1991, c. 256
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4).
B. For those developments for which the inspection fees total less than
$10,000, fees may, at the option of the developer, be paid in two
installments. The initial amount deposited in escrow by a developer
shall be 50% of the inspection fees. When the balance on deposit drops
to 10% of the inspection fees because the amount deposited by the
developer has been reduced by the amount paid to the Borough
Engineer for inspections, the developer shall deposit the remaining
50% of the inspection fees.
C. For those developments for which the inspection fees are total $10,000
or greater, fees may, at the option of the developer, be paid in four
installments. The initial amount deposited in escrow by a developer
shall be 25% of the inspection fees. When the balance on deposit drops
to 10% of the inspection fees because the amount deposited by the
developer has been reduced by the amount paid to the Borough
Engineer for inspection, the developer shall make additional deposits of
25% of the inspection fees.
D. If the Borough determines that the amount in escrow for the payment of
inspection fees, as calculated hereinabove, is insufficient to cover the
§ 87-55 PARK RIDGE CODE § 87-56
1:608
§ 87-57. Approved by stages or sections.
In the event that final approval is by stages or sections of development
pursuant to subsection a. of section 29 of P.L.1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-38), the provisions of this section shall be applied by stage or
section.
§ 87-58. Dedication of improvements to borough.
cost of additional required inspections, the developer shall deposit
additional funds in escrow. In such instance, the Borough shall deliver
to the developer a written inspection escrow deposit request, signed
by the Borough Engineer, which informs the developer of the need for
additional inspections, details the items or undertakings that require
inspection, estimates the time required for those inspections, and
estimates the cost of performing those inspections.
A. To the extent that any of the improvements have been dedicated to the
Borough on the subdivision plat or site plan, the governing body shall
be deemed, upon the release of any performance guarantee required
pursuant to § 87-55A, to accept dedication for public use of streets or
roads and any other improvements made thereon according to site
plans and subdivision plats approved by the approving authority,
provided that such improvements have been inspected and have
received final approval by the Borough Engineer.
B. Nothing in this article shall be construed to affect any suit or
proceeding impending in any court, or any rights acquired, or liability
incurred, or any cause or causes of action acquired or existing, under
any act or ordinance hereby repealed pursuant to this article, nor shall
any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or
affected by this article.
C. The various parts, sections and clauses of this article are hereby
declared to be severable. If any part, sentence, paragraph, section or
clause is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the remainder of the article shall not be affected thereby.
D. All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed as to such inconsistencies only.
E. In the event that any word, phrase, clause, section or provision of this
article is found by any court of competent jurisdiction to be
unenforceable, illegal or unconstitutional, such word, phrase, clause or
provision shall be severable from the balance of this article and the
remainder of this article shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 87-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-59
1:609
§ 87-59. Determination of applicant's share of improvement.
Where a cash contribution or other financial distribution is determined, the
following criteria shall be utilized in determining the proportionate share of
such improvement to the applicant:
A. Street widening, alignment, corrections, channelization of intersections
construction of barriers, new or improved traffic signalization, signs,
curbs, sidewalks, trees, utility improvements not covered elsewhere,
the construction of new streets and other similar street or traffic
improvements: The applicant's proportionate cost shall be in the ratio
of the estimated peak-hour traffic generated by the proposed property
or properties to the sum of the present deficiency in peak-hour traffic
capacity of the present facility and the estimated peak-hour traffic
generated by the proposed development. The ratio thus calculated shall
be increased by 10% for contingencies.
B. Water distribution facilities including the installation of new water
mains, the extension of existing water mains, the relocation of such
facilities and the installation of other appurtenances associated
therewith: The applicant's proportionate cost shall be in the ratio of the
estimated daily use of water from the property or properties in gallons
per day for the existing system or subsystem and the estimated daily
use of water for the proposed development. The ratio thus calculated
shall be increased by 10% for contingencies.
C. Sanitary sewage distribution facilities including installation, relocation
or replacement of collector and interceptor sewers and the installation,
relocation or replacement of other appurtenances associated therewith:
The applicant's proportionate cost shall be in the ratio of the estimated
daily flow in gallons to the sum of the present deficient capacity for the
existing system or subsystem and the estimated daily flow from the
proposed project or development. In the case where peak flow from the
proposed development may occur during the peak flow period for the
existing system, the ratio shall be the estimated peak flow rate from the
proposed development in gallons per minute to the sum of the present
peak flow deficiency in the existing system or subsystem and the
estimated peak flow rate from the proposed development. The greater
of the two ratios thus calculated shall be increased by 10% for
contingencies and shall be the ratio used to determine the cost to the
applicant.
D. Stormwater and drainage improvements, including the installation,
relocation or replacement of transmission lines, culverts, catch basins
and the installation, relocation or replacement of other appurtenances
associated therewith: The applicant's proportionate cost shall be in the
ratio of the estimated peak surface runoff as proposed to be delivered
into the existing system measured in cubic feet per second to the sum of
the existing peak hour flow in cubic feet per second deficient for the
existing system and the estimated peak flow as proposed to be
§ 87-59 PARK RIDGE CODE § 87-59
1:610
delivered. The ratio thus calculated shall be increased by 10% for
contingencies.
§ 87-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-59
1:611

ARTICLE XII
(Reserved)
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-59
1:613

ARTICLE XIII
Open Space, Public Areas and Planned Developments
§ 87-60. Open space organizations.
A. Under the provisions of this chapter and state statutes, the Borough of
Park Ridge, other governmental agencies, the Board of Education,
state, county and other public bodies can be designated to maintain and
accept public open space for recreational or conservational uses. These
public agencies can accept and maintain such open space, provided the
dedication is not conditioned upon same being made available to public
use.
B. Where a subdivision or site plan is required, this chapter shall require
that the applicant provide for an organization for the ownership and
maintenance of any open space for the benefit of owners or residents of
the development, if said open space is not dedicated to the municipality
or other governmental agency. Such organization shall not be dissolved
and shall not dispose of any open space, by sale or otherwise, except to
an organization conceived and established to own and maintain the
open space for the benefit of such development, and, thereafter, such
organization shall not be dissolved or dispose of any of its open space
without first offering to dedicate the same to Park Ridge Borough
wherein the land is located.
C. In the event that such organization shall fail to maintain the open space
in reasonable order and condition, the administrative officer designated
by resolution to administer this subsection may serve written notice
upon the owners of the development setting forth the manner in which
the organization has failed to maintain the open space in reasonable
condition, and said notice shall include a demand that such deficiencies
of maintenance be cured within 35 days thereof and shall state the date
and place of a hearing thereon which shall be held within 15 days of the
notice. At such hearing, the designated municipal body or
administrative officer may modify the terms of the original notice as to
deficiencies and may give a reasonable extension of time not to exceed
65 days within which they may be cured. If the deficiencies set forth in
the original notice or in the modification thereof shall not be cured
within said 35 days or any permitted extension thereof, the Borough, in
order to preserve the open space and maintain the same for a period of
one year, may enter upon and maintain such land. Said entry and
maintenance shall not vest in the public any rights to use the open
space except when the same is voluntarily dedicated to the public by
the owners. Before the expiration of said year, the designated Borough
body or officer, as the case may be, shall, upon its initiative or upon the
request of the organization theretofore responsible for the maintenance
of the open space, call a public hearing upon 15 days' written notice to
such organization and to the owners of the development, to be held by
such Borough body or officer, at which hearing such organization and
the owners of the development shall show cause why such maintenance
§ 87-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-60
1:615
§ 87-61. Reservation of public areas.
by the Borough shall not, at the election of the Borough, continue
for a succeeding year. If the designated borough body or officer shall
determine that such organization is ready and able to maintain said
open space in reasonable condition, the Borough shall cease to
maintain said open space at the end of said year. If the Borough body
or officer shall determine that such organization is not ready and able
to maintain said open space in reasonable condition, the Borough may,
in its discretion, continue to maintain said open space during the next
succeeding year, subject to a similar hearing and determination in each
year thereafter. The decision of the Borough body or officer in any such
case shall constitute a final administrative decision subject to judicial
review.
D. If a municipal body or officer is not designated by resolution to
administer this section, the governing body shall have the same powers
and be subject to the same restrictions as provided in this section.
E. The cost of such maintenance by the Borough shall be assessed pro rata
against the properties within the development that have a right of
enjoyment of the open space, in accordance with assessed value at the
time of imposition of the lien, and shall become a lien and tax on said
properties and be added to and be a part of the taxes to be levied and
assessed thereon, and enforced and collected with interest by the same
officers and in the same manner as other taxes.
A. Where applicable.
(1) If the Master Plan of Park Ridge or the Official Map of Park Ridge
provides for the reservation of designated streets, public
drainageways, flood control basins or public areas within the
proposed development, before approving a subdivision or site plan,
the approving authority may further require that such streets,
ways, basins or areas be shown on the plat in locations and sizes
suitable to their intended uses. The approving authority may
reserve the location and extent of such streets, ways, basins or
areas shown on the plat for a period of one year after the approval
of the final plat or within such further time as may be agreed to by
the developer.
(2) Unless during such a period or extension thereof the government
entity having jurisdiction shall have entered into a contract to
purchase or institute condemnation proceedings according to law
for the fee or a lesser interest in the land comprising such streets,
ways, basins or areas, the applicant shall not be bound by such
reservations shown on the plat and may proceed to use such land
for private use in accordance with the applicable development
regulations. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the
streets and roadways, flood control basins or public drainageways
§ 87-60 PARK RIDGE CODE § 87-61
1:616
§ 87-62. Planned development groups.
necessitated by the subdivision or land development and required
for final approval.
B. Compensation to applicant. The applicant shall be entitled to just
compensation for actual loss found to be caused by such temporary
reservation and deprivation of use. In such instances, unless a lesser
amount has previously been mutually agreed upon, just compensation
shall be deemed to be fair market value of an option to purchase the
land reserved for the period of reservation, provided that determination
of such fair market value shall include, but not be limited to,
consideration of real property taxes apportioned to the land reserved
and prorated for the period of reservation. The applicant shall be
compensated for the reasonable increased cost of legal, engineering or
other professional services incurred in connection with obtaining
subdivision or site plan approval caused by the reservation.
A. Comprehensive plan. The applicant for a planned development group
shall be required to submit a comprehensive plan for the entire area so
zoned and under the applicant's control. Said plan shall be submitted in
accordance with this chapter, Chapter 101, Zoning, and other
applicable municipal, county and state regulations. The comprehensive
plan shall be submitted as a part of the preliminary application.
B. Findings for planned developments. The approving authority shall find
the following facts and conclusions relative to planned developments:
(1) The departures by the proposed development from zoning
regulations otherwise applicable to the subject property conform to
Chapter 101, Zoning, standards pursuant to state statutes.
(2) That the proposals for maintenance and conservation of the
common open space are reliable, and the amount, location and
purpose of the common open space are adequate.
(3) That the provisions through the physical design of the proposed
development for public services, control over vehicular and
pedestrian traffic and the amenities of light and air, recreation and
visual enjoyment are adequate.
(4) That the proposed planned development will not have an adverse
impact upon the area in which it is proposed to be established.
(5) In the case of a proposed development which contemplates
construction over a period of years, that the terms and conditions
intended to protect the interests of the public and of the residents,
occupants and owners of the proposed development in the total
completion of the development are adequate.
§ 87-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-62
1:617
(6) In the deliberation of the proposed sequence of stages, the
approving authority shall be guided by the following criteria and
factors:
(a) That each stage is substantially self-functioning and selfsustaining
with regard to access, utility services, parking, open
space and other similar physical features and shall be capable
of occupancy, operation and maintenance upon completion of
construction and development.
(b) That each stage is properly related to every other segment of
the planned development and to the community as a whole and
to all necessary community services which are available or
which may be needed to serve the planned development in the
future.
(c) That adequate protection will be provided to ensure the proper
disposition of each stage through the use of maintenance and
performance guaranties, covenants and other formal
agreements.
(d) That the landowner will provide a balanced distribution for
development in each stage. Said distribution shall be judged on
the basis of the level of improvement costs, physical planning
and coordination required and other relationships which may
be necessary to undertake each stage or segment.
(7) The approving authority, at its discretion, may require additional
documentation and study by the applicant, including:
(a) A market feasibility study and other possible study techniques
of the demand for the principal proposed uses within each
stage, and the probable rental prices or sales costs for such
facilities and other relevant market data.
(b) A cost-benefit analysis or other similar study to review the
relative estimated municipal costs, services and ratables which
might be anticipated for each stage of development.
(c) An operational time-sequence chart of anticipated construction
and completion of various stages of development, including all
necessary municipal and other governmental approvals which
are required. Said chart may be in the form of a Program
Evaluation Review Technique or PERT chart.
(d) A circulation study both within the planned development and
as it may affect the surrounding areas, including estimates of
total automotive trips generated, peak-hour demand, present
and anticipated traffic volumes, existing street capacities and
other elements which may influence and be influenced by the
proposed planned development.
§ 87-62 PARK RIDGE CODE § 87-62
1:618
(e) An environmental impact statement.
C. Final approval, compliance with comprehensive plan.
(1) A plat submitted for final approval shall be required to be in total
compliance with Chapter 101, Zoning, and to be in substantial
compliance with the comprehensive preliminary plan.
(2) Any plat which is not in compliance with the comprehensive
preliminary plan for the entire site shall require an amendment to
the preliminary approval including new hearings.
§ 87-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-62
1:619

ARTICLE XIV
Penalties; Amendment; Interpretation
§ 87-63. Violations and penalties.
§ 87-64. Amendments.
All amendments of this chapter shall be adopted in accordance with the
provisions of New Jersey law.
§ 87-65. Interpretation of provisions.
In the interpretation and the application of the provisions of this chapter,
they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the
health, safety, morals and general welfare. It is not intended to interfere
with or abrogate or annul other rules, regulations or ordinances, provided
that where this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this
chapter shall apply.
A. Premature sale. If, before final subdivision approval has been granted,
any person transfers or sells or agrees to transfer or sell, except
pursuant to an agreement expressly conditioned on final subdivision
approval, as owner or agent, any land which forms a part of a
subdivision for which Borough approval is required, such person shall
be subject to a penalty of $500. Each lot disposition shall be deemed a
separate violation.
B. Civil action. In addition to the foregoing, Park Ridge Borough may
institute and maintain a civil action for injunctive relief and to set aside
and invalidate any conveyance made pursuant to such a contract of sale
if a certificate of compliance has not been issued in accordance with
law.
C. Effect of transferee, purchaser or grantee. In any such action, the
transferee, purchaser or grantee is entitled to a lien upon the portion of
the land from which the subdivision was made that remains in the
possession of the developer or his assigns or successors to secure the
return of any deposits made or purchase price paid, and also to a
reasonable search fee, survey expense and title closing expense, if any.
Any such action must be brought within two years after the date of the
recording of the instrument of transfer, sale or conveyance of said land
or within six years if unrecorded.
D. Other penalties. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine
not to exceed $500 for each offense. Each day that a violation occurs or
is committed shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 87-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-65
1:621

ARTICLE XV
Development Applications
[Added 11-13-1990 by Ord. No. 90-17]
§ 87-66. Applications to be completed in accordance with checklist.
All development applications before the Borough of Park Ridge Planning
Board and/or the Borough of Park Ridge Zoning Board of Adjustment which
seek site plan, minor subdivision or major subdivision approval as set forth
in Article IV (§ 87-9 et seq.), Article V (§ 87-16 et seq.), Major Subdivision
Preliminary Approval, Article VI (§ 87-20 et seq.), Major Subdivision
Preliminary Approval, Article VII (§ 87-24), Site Plan Approval, or any other
development application allowed by the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq., shall complete all applications in accordance with the
attached checklist, hereinafter referred to as the "the checklist."131
§ 87-67. Submission.
All applications shall be submitted and completed in accordance with the
checklist to the Land Use Officer. The checklist is created pursuant to
the Municipal Land Use Law and to satisfy the requirements of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-10.3.
131. Editor's Note: The checklist is included at the end of this chapter as Appendix A.
§ 87-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-67
1:623
Chapter 88
SWIMMING POOLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Health — See Ch. 17.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 50.
Zoning — See Ch. 101.
Public swimming pools — See Ch. 121.
§ 87-67 PARK RIDGE CODE § 87-67
1:624
ARTICLE I
General Requirements
§ 88-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CONSTRUCT or CONSTRUCTION — Includes building or installing a new
swimming pool or enlarging an existing swimming pool or any of its
facilities.
PORTABLE POOL — Any portable above-surface-type pool with an inside
horizontal dimension greater than 10 feet and a depth greater than 30
inches, said pool not being stationary or fixed but capable of being removed
for storage.
PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL — Any pool of a permanent-type construction
or any portable pool, the largest horizontal dimension of which exceeds
10 feet or the depth of which exceeds 30 inches and which exceeds 1,500
gallons in capacity, said "private swimming pool" to be used and maintained
for swimming purposes by an individual for use by his household and guests
without fee and located upon property owned, leased or otherwise used and
maintained by the owner of said pool.
SWIMMING POOL — Includes any fill-and-draw, flow-through and
recirculation pool, outdoor or indoor, which is artificially constructed to
provide recreational facilities for swimming, bathing or wading and all
buildings, equipment and appurtenances thereto. This definition shall not
include natural outdoor ponds, rivers, lakes or baths used for the cleansing
of the body or the practice of the healing arts.
WADING POOL — Any portable above-surface-type pool with a depth of less
than 30 inches and a liquid capacity of less than 1,500 gallons, said pool not
being stationary or fixed but being capable of removal for storage.
§ 88-2. Compliance required; use limited; precautions during
nonuse.
A. No person shall construct, maintain or operate any private swimming
pool within the borough except as provided in this chapter.
B. The use of any private swimming pool shall be limited to a single private
family and the owner's social guests.
C. When not being used during nonswimming months, a private swimming
pool must either be emptied of all waters or covered with a cover of
sufficient strength so as to support a weight of at least 300 pounds.
[Added 7-8-1974 by Ord. No. 74-16]
§ 88-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 88-3
1:625
§ 88-3. Permit required. [Amended 12-11-1978 by Ord. No. 78-20]
A construction permit shall be required for the construction or erection of a
private swimming pool and shall conform to the regulations of Chapter 101,
Zoning, and Chapter 50, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 88-4. Application for permit; contents. [Amended 12-11-1978 by
Ord. No. 78-20]
An application for a construction permit for the construction or erection of
a private swimming pool shall be made in writing to the Construction Code
Official. The application shall include all final plans, specifications and other
required reports, which may essentially be comprised of the following:
§ 88-5. Issuance of permit. [Amended 12-11-1978 by Ord. No.
78-20]
Upon compliance with all the provisions of this chapter and any other
pertinent ordinances and after approval by the Construction Code Office
and the Board of Health of the final plans, specifications and reports,
together with the data contained therein, a construction permit shall be
issued by the Construction Code Official for the location and construction of
the proposed pool upon the payment to the Construction Code Office of the
fees required in § 88-17 of this chapter.
A. Detailed plot plan of the entire property, showing existing buildings and
proposed pool, drawn to scale, with pertinent dimensions and grade
elevations shown in figures at pool, building and property lines. Said
plot plan shall be signed by the owner or his agent or a duly licensed
engineer or registered architect or land surveyor of New Jersey.
B. Pool layout, construction and dimensions, including piping
arrangements, pumps and all other pool appurtenances.
C. Details and specifications for water treatment units, with operating
instructions.
D. Details of disposal facilities for filtered wastewater and provisions for
emptying of pool.
E. Specifications for construction of pool shall accompany all detailed
plans and final reports.
§ 88-3 PARK RIDGE CODE § 88-5
1:626
ARTICLE II
Construction and Maintenance
§ 88-6. Location of private swimming pools.
§ 88-7. Construction material; inlets; bottoms.
§ 88-8. Fences or walls; gates or doors.
§ 88-9. Filters; recirculation system.
A. Setbacks for swimming pools are set forth in Chapter 101, Zoning.
[Amended 12-11-1978 by Ord. No. 78-20; 12-26-1991 by Ord. No.
91-18]
B. A private swimming pool of a permanent type shall not be constructed
or installed closer to any building than the distance, in feet, equal to the
maximum water depth, in feet, of the pool.
A. All materials used in the construction of private swimming pools shall
be waterproof and so designed and constructed as to facilitate
emptying and cleaning said pools. The materials used in said
construction shall be maintained and operated in such manner as to be
clean and sanitary at all times when such pool shall be subject to use.
B. Inlets of the treated water of any private swimming pool shall be so
located and spaced as to provide satisfactory dispersion of the water
throughout the pool and be so situated as not to interfere with draining,
cleaning or disinfecting the bottom and sides of the pool.
C. Sand or earth bottoms shall not be used.
A. All permanent-type swimming pools now existing or hereafter
constructed, installed, established or maintained shall be completely
surrounded by a fence or wall not less than four feet in height, which
shall be so constructed as not to have open holes or gaps, if any, larger
than four inches in diameter.
B. All enclosures, as provided in Subsection A above, shall have a gate or
door or gates and doors for ingress or egress, and gates or doors shall
not have open holes or gaps except as provided in Subsection A hereof.
Each gate or door shall be equipped with a self-closing and self-latching
device for keeping the gate or door securely closed at all times when
not in actual use. All gates and doors shall be locked when the pool is
not in use or is not under the supervision of an adult.
A. All pool water must be filtered and treated chemically.
B. All pools shall be equipped with a system having the capacity to
recirculate the entire contents of the pool at the minimum rate of three
recirculations in a twenty-four-hour period. [Amended 12-11-1978 by
Ord. No. 78-20]
§ 88-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 88-9
1:627
§ 88-10. Bathhouses; accessory buildings. [Amended 12-11-1978 by
Ord. No. 78-20]
Bathhouses shall not be required in conjunction with private swimming
pools. Any construction, however, including a bathhouse or screen
enclosure, shall conform to the requirements of Chapter 50, Construction
Codes, Uniform, and Chapter 101, Zoning.
§ 88-11. Discharge system. [Amended 12-11-1978 by Ord. No.
78-20]
All private swimming pools or portable pools shall be provided with the
necessary equipment for the drainage of the pool and for backwash water
disposal. The drainage from said pool may be made either to lawns, fields,
woods or an adequate dry well or sand filtering pit on the premises on which
said private pool or portable pool is located, and provision must be made
that the same does not overflow onto property belonging to others. Pool
water discharging into a brook must have a minimum chlorine residual of
1/10 part per million. The discharge of water from such pools into a storm
sewer or sanitary sewer shall be permitted only upon approval from the
Borough Engineer made upon written application and in accordance with
the regulations and recurring charges established by the Board of Public
Works. The area immediately adjacent to the pool shall be so designed as to
provide a slope to carry all surface waters away from the pool.
§ 88-12. Water supply system.
There shall be no physical connection with a potable public or private water
supply system. If a fill pipe is used, the same must be installed at a minimum
of two pipe diameters above the pool rim. A fill line shall not be required,
and pools may be filled manually by hose.
§ 88-13. Lighting.
No artificial lighting shall be maintained or operated in connection with
a private swimming pool or portable pool in such a manner as to be a
nuisance and annoyance to neighboring properties. Such lighting shall not
shine directly upon any abutting property. No unshielded lights shall be
permitted.
§ 88-14. Water tests.
Pool water shall be periodically tested for residual chlorine by the
orthotolidine method and color comparator having a set of standards for
varying chlorine content which range from 2/10 to 6/10 parts per million.
C. All pools shall be equipped with a pressure sand filter, a diatomaceous
filter or any similarly approved filter, which shall have sufficient
capacity to provide a complete recirculation of the entire contents of
the pool within 18 hours or less.
§ 88-9 PARK RIDGE CODE § 88-14
1:628
The pH of the pool water shall range from neutral 7.0 to slightly alkaline
7.6.
§ 88-15. Emergency closing.
All pools supplied by a public water supply system shall be subject to
closure by proclamation of the Mayor and Council during any period of
emergency water shortage.
§ 88-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 88-15
1:629

ARTICLE III
Registration and Fees
§ 88-16. Registration. [Amended 12-11-1978 by Ord. No. 78-20]
Every private swimming pool and portable pool, as defined in § 88-1, shall
be subject to a one-time registration fee of $10 payable to the Borough of
Park Ridge and payable upon approval of the construction permit.
§ 88-17. Fees. [Amended 12-11-1978 by Ord. No. 78-20]
§ 88-18. Exemption from registration and fee.
No registration and inspection fee shall be required for wading pools.
A. Construction permit fees shall be calculated as per § 50-2C(1)(c) of the
Code, i.e., $0.005 per cubic foot of pool volume; provided, however, that
the minimum fee shall be $20.
B. Fees for the construction of bathhouses, as provided in § 88-10, shall be
included in the minimum fee, provided that installation is coincidental
with the original installation.
C. All in-ground pools shall be charged an additional $5 to cover the cost
of a site inspection upon completion of excavation.
§ 88-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 88-18
1:631

ARTICLE IV
Inspections and Enforcement
§ 88-19. Inspection.
All pools shall be subject to inspection. The owner or operator of any pool
shall permit the Health Officer or other authorized official access to any
private swimming pool or portable pool and any appurtenance thereto for
the purpose of inspection to ascertain compliance with this chapter and all
other pertinent Borough ordinances at all reasonable times.
§ 88-20. Enforcement. [Amended 12-11-1978 by Ord. No. 78-20]
It shall be the duty of the Construction Code Official and the Health Officer
or their designee(s) to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
§ 88-21. Compliance required.
Every private swimming pool or portable pool constructed, installed,
established or maintained in the borough shall comply at all times with
the requirements of this chapter and with the sanitary requirements of the
Borough Board of Health.
§ 88-22. Hazard; notice to remove or abate; closing pool. [Amended
12-11-1978 by Ord. No. 78-20]
§ 88-23. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-8-1974 by Ord. No.
74-16]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $500 or by imprisonment for
a term not to exceed 90 days, or both. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
A. Any hazard to the health of the public which may exist in, develop in, be
in consequence of or be in connection with any pool shall be removed or
abated forthwith by the owner, lessee or occupant of the premises upon
receipt of a notice from the Borough Health Officer.
B. Upon the failure of the owner, lessee or occupant to take satisfactory or
reasonably prompt action to remove or abate such health hazard within
24 hours from the receipt of the notice referred to in Subsection A, the
Health Officer is authorized to summarily close the pool.
C. The Health Officer is also authorized to keep such pool closed until no
further hazard exists, subject to the right of appeal to the Mayor and
Council by the owner, lessee or occupant of such pool.
§ 88-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 88-23
1:633
Chapter 91
TAXICABS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 26. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 97.
§ 88-23 PARK RIDGE CODE § 88-23
1:634
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 91-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CRUISING — The driving of an empty taxicab, as defined herein, along a
public street or public place for the purpose of soliciting passengers.
PERSON — Includes a copartnership, association or corporation, and the
singular or plural, the masculine or feminine.
PUBLIC TAXICAB STAND — A section of a public street or of a public place
set apart under the terms of this chapter for the exclusive use of a taxicab
or a limited number of taxicabs, as defined herein.
TAXICAB — Any motor vehicle commonly called "taxi," "autocar," "public
hack," "omnibus" or by whatever name or designation any such vehicle
may now or hereafter be known or designated, engaging in the business of
carrying passengers for hire, which is held out, announced or advertised
to operate or run, or which is operated or run, over any of the streets
or highways of the Borough of Park Ridge in the County of Bergen, and
particularly into which are accepted and discharged such persons as may
offer themselves for transportation from points or places to points or places
within and without the Borough of Park Ridge upon the terms, provisions or
conditions prescribed in this chapter, or by the day or by the hour or other
fixed period, or by means of a fare established in this chapter; provided,
however, that nothing in this section contained shall be construed to include
any motor vehicle, by whatever name or designation, used in transporting
school children or school teachers, or any autobus, jitneys or other vehicles
which are hired by charter or pursuant to a particular contract for such
public conveyances as are by law subject to state or federal regulations
exclusively.
§ 91-2. Classes of licenses; number of licenses limited.
A. There are hereby established two classes of taxicab licenses, to be
known as "taxicab driver's license" and "taxicab owner's license,"
respectively.
(1) A taxicab driver's license shall entitle the person mentioned therein
to operate within the Borough of Park Ridge any taxicab duly
licensed hereunder until said license either expires or is
surrendered, suspended or revoked, and shall not be transferable.
(2) A taxicab owner's license shall entitle the taxicab therein described
to be operated in the Borough of Park Ridge by a driver duly
licensed hereunder until the said license either expires or is
surrendered, suspended or revoked, and shall not be transferable,
except as hereinafter set forth.
§ 91-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-2
1:635
§ 91-3. Trade restricted to licensed taxicabs.
No vehicle for the conveyance of passengers other than duly licensed
taxicabs for the use of which a fare is charged, except any vehicle used and
employed in transporting schoolchildren or school teachers and except any
vehicle which is subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of the state or federal
regulations, shall stand on or along any public street or public place within
said Borough, waiting for prospective passengers therefor.
B. No more than 12 taxicab owners' licenses shall be issued and in force at
any one time in the Borough of Park Ridge.
§ 91-2 PARK RIDGE CODE § 91-3
1:636
ARTICLE II
Taxicab Owner's License
§ 91-4. Expiration date; fee.
Every taxicab owner's license granted for each taxicab shall expire on
December 31 next succeeding the date of issuance thereof, unless sooner
suspended or revoked by the governing body of the Borough of Park Ridge.
The annual fee for such license shall be the sum of $15.
§ 91-5. Affidavit to accompany application.
No application for a taxicab owner's license shall be considered unless
the contents of the same shall have been verified by an affidavit annexed
thereto of the individual, a copartner of the copartnership or an officer of
the corporation seeking the license.
§ 91-6. Qualifications of licensees.
Every such licensee of a taxicab must be:
§ 91-7. Data required for application.
All applications for a taxicab owner's license shall be made by the owner,
lessee or bailee thereof, and every said application shall set forth therein
the name and type of vehicle for which said license is desired, the length
of time said vehicle has been in use, the number of persons said vehicle is
suitable for carrying, the motor number and serial number of said vehicle,
and also:
A. A person who is a citizen of the United States, over the age of 21 years,
and who shall have been a bona fide resident of the State of New Jersey
for at least one year immediately prior to the date of the application for
such license, and who has never been convicted of a crime involving
moral turpitude;
B. A copartnership, each of the members of which shall be a citizen of the
United States and shall have been a bona fide resident of the State of
New Jersey for at least one year immediately prior to the date of
application for such license, and who has never been convicted of a
crime involving moral turpitude; or
C. A corporation, each of the officers and stockholders of which shall be a
citizen of the United States and shall have been a bona fide resident of
the State of New Jersey for at least one year prior to the date of the
application for such license, and who has never been convicted of a
crime involving moral turpitude.
A. If the owner, lessee or bailee of said vehicle is an individual, the full
name and place of residence of the applicant and the length of time
during which he has resided in the State of New Jersey; his place of
birth; whether he is a citizen of the United States; the names and
§ 91-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-7
1:637
§ 91-8. Vehicle to be inspected prior to licensing.
No vehicle covered by the terms of this chapter shall be licensed until it
has been carefully inspected by the Police Department of said Borough
and found to be in a thoroughly safe, clean and fit condition for the
transportation of passengers.
§ 91-9. Disapproval, suspension or revocation of license for unsafe
or unfit vehicles.
The governing body of the Borough of Park Ridge may refuse to approve a
taxicab owner's license for, or if already issued, may suspend or revoke the
license of, any said vehicle found to be unsafe or unfit for the transportation
of passengers. The governing body of the Borough of Park Ridge is hereby
authorized and empowered to establish reasonable rules and regulations in
respect to the construction and condition or fitness of taxicabs for the safe,
proper and adequate transportation of passengers, and to enforce any such
rule or regulation by suspension or revocation of licenses.
§ 91-10. Approval of governing body required.
No taxicab owner's license to operate a taxicab shall be issued by the
Borough Clerk until the application has been approved by the governing
body of the Borough of Park Ridge.
§ 91-11. License card; display.
If, upon inspection, a taxicab is found to be in a safe, proper and fit condition
for the transportation of passengers and to conform to the provisions of
this chapter and to the rules and regulations established hereunder, and
upon approval by the governing body of this Borough and upon payment
of the proper license fee, said taxicab shall be licensed by the delivery by
addresses of all employers by whom, and all of the places of
employment in which, he has been employed during the period of
five ears immediately prior to the date of said application; his marital
status; whether he has been charged with, arrested for or convicted of
any crime or other violation; whether he has been previously licensed to
operate a taxicab, and if so, when and where; and whether any license
for the operation of a taxicab previously issued to him has ever been
suspended or revoked, and if so, for what cause.
B. If the owner, lessee or bailee of said vehicle is a copartnership, the firm
name and the location of its main office and any branch offices. Each
partner shall submit all of the personal information required under
Subsection A.
C. If the owner, lessee or bailee of said vehicle is a corporation, the
corporate name and the location of the main office and any branch
offices. Each of the officers and stockholders shall submit all of the
personal information required under Subsection A.
§ 91-7 PARK RIDGE CODE § 91-11
1:638
the Borough Clerk to the applicant therefor of a card in such form as may
be prescribed by the governing body of this Borough. Such card shall set
forth the location of the public taxicab stand to be used by said vehicle,
if any stand has been assigned for the use thereof, and the name of the
owner of said vehicle. Such card shall also contain the maximum rates of
fare established by this chapter. Said card shall be conspicuously displayed
within said taxicab.
§ 91-12. Transfer of license to different vehicle.
The governing body of the Borough of Park Ridge shall have the power
to approve or refuse the issuance of any of the licenses mentioned in this
chapter. A taxicab owner's license may be transferred to another vehicle
owned by the licensee upon approval thereof by the governing body of
the Borough of Park Ridge after inspection thereof has been made. Such
transfer shall be limited to equipment that is replaced. Such transfer shall
be made by filing a notice with the Borough Clerk for approval of the
governing body at its next meeting, and the licensee shall have the right to
temporarily operate the replaced equipment until such next meeting of the
said governing body.
§ 91-13. Compliance with state laws and rules.
It shall be unlawful for the owner, lessee and/or bailee of any taxicab to
operate or cause or permit the operation of the said taxicab, nor shall any
taxicab owner's license for said taxicab be issued or permitted to be in
effect, until and unless said owner, lessee or bailee shall have fully complied
and shall continue to comply with all of the rules of the State of New Jersey
in respect to such vehicle and the operation thereof.
§ 91-14. Suspension or revocation of license; reasons.
Any taxicab owner's license granted under the provisions of this chapter
may be suspended or revoked at any time by the governing body of the
Borough of Park Ridge if the vehicle for which said license shall have
been granted shall be used for any improper, unlawful or illegal business
or purpose, if said vehicle shall not be kept in a clean, safe and proper
condition for the transportation of the passengers, if said vehicle shall not
be kept in conformity with the terms of this chapter or the laws of the State
of New Jersey, or for any violation of any of the provisions of the said rules
or regulations established by the said governing body of the Borough of
Park Ridge.
§ 91-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-14
1:639

ARTICLE III
Taxicab Driver's License
§ 91-15. Application requirements.
No person shall drive a taxicab without first having obtained a taxicab
driver's license. Every applicant for such license to drive a taxicab shall
furnish satisfactory evidence that he has received a driver's license from the
Motor Vehicle Department of the State of New Jersey. Each applicant for
such license to drive a taxicab must:
§ 91-16. Approval by governing body required.
No taxicab driver's license shall be issued by the Borough Clerk unless and
until the application therefor has been approved by the governing body of
the Borough of Park Ridge.
§ 91-17. Expiration date; fee.
Every such taxicab driver's license shall expire not later than December 31
next succeeding the date of issuance thereof, unless sooner suspended or
revoked by the governing body of this Borough. The annual fee to be paid
for each such driver's license and for any renewal thereof shall be the sum
of $5.
§ 91-18. Deposit; badge.
Every such licensed driver shall deposit with the Borough Clerk before the
issuance of a license to him the sum of $3, and upon the making of such
deposit the Clerk shall issue to such licensed driver a badge of such form
and style as the governing body may direct, bearing the license number
of said driver, which badge, under penalty of suspension or revocation of
the license of such driver, shall be constantly and conspicuously displayed
A. State the name of the licensee of a taxicab by whom or which he will be
employed.
B. Be no less than 21 years of age, a citizen of the United States and a
bona fide resident of the State of New Jersey for at least one year next
preceding the date of such application. The governing body may, in a
specific case, waive the said age requirement.
C. Be able to read and write the English language.
D. Present, if required by the governing body of the Borough of Park
Ridge, evidence that he is of sound physique, good eyesight and is not
afflicted with any infection of body or infirmity of mind which might
render him unfit to safely and properly drive a taxicab.
E. Be clean and neat in dress and person.
F. Not be addicted to the use of intoxicating liquors or narcotics.
§ 91-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-18
1:641
on the driver's outer garment when he is engaged in his employment.
Such deposit will be returned upon expiration, suspension or revocation,
provided the badge is surrendered in good condition. In the event that such
badge is not returned within three months from expiration, suspension or
revocation of such driver's license, said deposit will be considered forfeited
and the moneys shall become the general funds of the Borough of Park
Ridge.
§ 91-19. Temporary driver's license; badge; fee.
The Borough Clerk shall be empowered to issue a temporary driver's
license, provided the approval of the Chief of Police is obtained; but in no
event shall such temporary license be granted for a longer period than 30
days. Any person to whom any such temporary license to drive a taxicab
shall have been issued shall be furnished by the Clerk with a badge of the
type hereinbefore described upon deposit of the sum of $3, which sum shall
be refunded upon the surrender of said badge in good condition. The fee for
any temporary permit shall be the sum of $1.
§ 91-20. Suspension or revocation.
Taxicab driver's licenses may be suspended or revoked at any time by the
governing body of the Borough of Park Ridge.
§ 91-18 PARK RIDGE CODE § 91-20
1:642
ARTICLE IV
Conduct of Business
§ 91-21. Standing taxicabs: where permitted.
No taxicab shall occupy any public taxicab stand other than the stand
designated in the license issued for the occupation by such taxicab. Such
licensee shall not permit his taxicabs to stand in any other place in said
Borough.
§ 91-22. Refusal to transport prohibited.
No driver of any taxicab shall refuse to transport any orderly person
applying for a taxicab who agrees to pay the proper rate of fare.
§ 91-23. Schedule of fares.
The licensee shall file with the Borough Clerk a schedule of fares to be
charged and the district boundaries or zones to and within which such fares
apply, including waiting time. Upon approval of the schedule by the Council,
the schedule shall remain effective until changed, with the consent and
approval of the Council. No fare in excess of the approved schedule shall be
permitted or charged.
§ 91-24. Additional charge for luggage: when permitted.
In addition to the fare for carrying said passengers, the licensee shall have
the right to charge $0.50 for each trunk or other chattels of unusual weight
or girth; no charge, however, shall be made for ordinary handbags and
suitcases.
§ 91-25. Charge for waiting.
Said taxicab driver shall have the right to charge for waiting time at the rate
of $3 per hour. This provision shall not apply to taxicabs hired by the hour.
§ 91-26. Sale or loan of license or badge prohibited.
No person shall sell, loan or otherwise dispose of any license issued under
the provisions of this chapter, nor any badge, card, plate or other thing
delivered by the Borough Clerk with any said license.
§ 91-27. Repairs in taxi stand prohibited.
No person shall make any repairs on any taxicab or paint any such vehicle
while occupying space in any such public taxicab stand.
§ 91-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-28
1:643
§ 91-28. Cruising prohibited.
No driver of any taxicab shall solicit employment in the transportation of
passengers by driving upon or along any street or highway or other such
places within the Borough of Park Ridge.
§ 91-29. Property left in taxicab; duty of driver.
Every driver of any taxicab shall, within a reasonable time after termination
of any hiring or employment, carefully search such taxicab for any property
lost or left within, and, unless any such property shall be sooner delivered
to the owner thereof, shall, within 24 hours after finding any such property,
deliver such property to the Police Department of the Borough of Park
Ridge.
§ 91-30. Insurance policy.
As provided by Chapter 16 of Title 48 of the Revised Statutes (N.J.S.A.
48:16-1 et seq.), each licensee shall file with the Borough Clerk an
insurance policy acceptable to the Council as to form and sufficiency, with
proof of premium prepaid, in amounts required by the Council, but not less
than those fixed by law.
§ 91-31. Authority to make rules and regulations.
There is hereby reserved to the governing body of the Borough of Park
Ridge the right to make such rules and regulations in relation to the
operation of taxicabs and the conduct of the operators thereof as it may
from time to time determine to be necessary and proper in the best interest
of the citizens of the Borough of Park Ridge.
§ 91-32. Violation of rules and regulations.
Any violation of such rules and regulations as made by the governing body
of the Borough of Park Ridge shall constitute a violation of this chapter,
punishable as hereinafter provided.
§ 91-33. Grounds for revocation or suspension.
A. The Council, after due notice and hearing, may revoke or suspend any
taxi license upon the following grounds:
(1) If the taxi becomes unfit or unsuited for the transportation of
passengers for hire.
(2) For failure to operate the taxi regularly within the limits of the
Borough as a taxi.
(3) For violation by the licensee of any provision of this chapter or of
any state law relating to the use or operation of such vehicles.
§ 91-28 PARK RIDGE CODE § 91-33
1:644
§ 91-34. Notice of intended suspension or revocation of license.
Every licensee shall be entitled to five days' notice in writing of the intended
action of the governing body to suspend or revoke such license. Such notice
shall state the reasons for such intended revocation or suspension. The
hearing on such intended revocation or suspension shall be conducted by
the governing body of the Borough of Park Ridge at the Municipal Building.
Every licensee affected shall have the right to be heard in person or by
counsel.
§ 91-35. Applicant's declaration of compliance.
Every applicant for any of the licenses to be granted under this chapter
shall attach a written consent to the application for such license whereby
the applicant agrees to abide by all of the provisions of this chapter and
the rules and regulations to be established hereunder, agreeing that the
issuance of such license is a privilege and that the same is subject to
revocation or suspension for any violation of the terms of this chapter or the
rules and regulations thereunder.
(4) For failure to provide and keep in force the insurance required by
law or by this chapter.
(5) For failure to observe all the terms and conditions under which the
license is granted.
B. This section shall be deemed to be in addition to and not in substitution
of the penalty provided in § 91-36.
§ 91-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-35
1:645

ARTICLE V
Penalties
§ 91-36. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply
with any order or regulation made thereunder, shall, severally, for each
and every such violation and noncompliance, forfeit and pay a penalty not
to exceed the sum of $500 or be imprisoned in the Bergen County Jail
for a period of not more than 90 days, at the discretion of the court or
jurisdictional officer before whom a conviction may be had. The imposition
of the foregoing penalties shall not bar the right of the governing body of
the Borough of Park Ridge to revoke or suspend the license of such offender.
§ 91-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-36
1:647
Chapter 92
TOWING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Abandoned or junked vehicles — See Ch. 96. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 97.
§ 92-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTOMOBILE — A motor vehicle of a private passenger or station wagon
type that is owned or leased and is neither used as a public or livery
conveyance for passengers nor rented to others with a driver; and a motor
vehicle with a pickup body or delivery sedan, a van or a panel truck or a
camper-type vehicle used for recreational purposes owned by an individual
or by husband and wife who are residents of the same household, not
customarily used in the occupation, profession or business of the owner(s).
BASIC TOWING SERVICE — The removal and transportation of an
automobile from a highway, street or other public or private road or a
parking area or from a storage facility, and other services normally incident
thereto, but does not include recovery of an automobile from a position
beyond the right-of-way or berm or from being impaled upon any other
object within the right-of-way or berm.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — Any vehicle other than that as defined as an
"automobile" pursuant to the definitions as contained in this chapter.
INSIDE BUILDINGS — A vehicle storage facility that is completely indoors,
having one or more openings in the walls for storage and removal of
vehicles, and that is secured by a locking device on each opening.
MOTOR VEHICLE ACCIDENT — An occurrence in which a private
passenger automobile comes in contact with any other object for which the
private passenger automobile must be towed or removed for placement in
a storage facility. This includes all situations which are accidental as to the
owner or operator of the motor vehicle even if they were caused by the
intentional acts of a perpetrator where the perpetrator was not the owner
or operator of the motor vehicle.
OUTSIDE SECURED — An automobile storage facility that is not indoors
and is secured by a fence, wall or other man-made barrier that is at least six
feet high. The facility is to be lighted at night.
OUTSIDE UNSECURED — An automobile storage facility that is not indoors
and is not secured by a fence, wall or other man-made barrier, and all
other storage facilities not defined above as "inside building" or "outside
secured."
§ 91-36 PARK RIDGE CODE § 92-1
1:648
STORAGE CHARGES FOR TWENTY-FOUR-HOUR PERIOD — The maximum
allowable amount to be charged by a storage facility for a twenty-four-hour
period or fraction thereof. A new twenty-four-hour period begins at 12:01
a.m.
TOW VEHICLE — Only those vehicles equipped with a boom or booms,
winches, slings, tilt beds, wheel lifts or underreach equipment specifically
designed by its manufacturer for the removal or transport of motor vehicles.
TOW VEHICLE'S BASE OF SERVICE — The towing operator's principal
place of business where the tow vehicle is stationed when not in use.
§ 92-2. Official towers to be appointed; towers' list; license
required; term.
A. The Mayor and Council shall appoint persons or companies meeting the
criteria set forth in this chapter and engaged in the business of offering
the services of a motor vehicle towing or wrecker service, whereby
damaged or disabled motor vehicles are towed or otherwise removed
from the place where they are damaged or disabled, by use of a tow
vehicle, as defined in this chapter. Such persons or companies shall be
known as "official towers."
B. Official towers shall be identified by means of a license that shall be
issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
C. Not less than 75 days prior to the beginning of each three-year term of
official towers' licenses, the Borough shall advertise for applications for
towing licenses for providing towing services pursuant to this chapter.
The advertisement shall be published in the official Borough
newspaper.
D. All applicants shall submit their applications at least 60 days prior to
the commencement date for each three-year period, and the
applications shall be reviewed in accordance with the procedures set
forth in this chapter. The award of a license to the successful applicants
shall be subject to compliance with the license requirements of the
chapter.
E. For the purposes of the licenses to be awarded, pursuant to the chapter,
in the year in which it is adopted, the initial term of the license shall be
from the date the license is issued until December 31, 1994. Licenses
issued thereafter shall be for a three-year period commencing on
January 1 of the year in which it was issued and terminating three years
thereafter.
F. Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter that provide for a threeyear
term of the license, official towers shall submit no later than
December 1 of each year that the towing license is in effect a detailed
certification certifying that the official tower meets the requirements of
this chapter in regard to the issuance of licenses. The certification shall
be submitted to the Chief of Police for his review and approval. Failure
§ 92-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-2
1:649
§ 92-3. Services to be furnished.
§ 92-4. Application process.
to submit the certification or failure to continue to abide by the
requirements of this chapter in regard to the issuance of a towing
license shall subject the official tower to revocation of the license in
accordance with the procedures contained herein.
A. Official towers shall furnish adequate and proper wrecking, towing,
storage and emergency repair services to motor vehicles damaged or
disabled within the limits of the Borough, when requested to do so by
the Chief of Police or his authorized designee.
B. No official tower shall subcontract any work to be performed pursuant
to this chapter without having first obtained prior written approval from
the Chief of Police. Any official tower to whom approval to subcontract
work has been given shall be responsible for the services performed by
the subcontractor and shall remain liable for any violation of this
chapter by the subcontractor.
A. Applications for inclusion on the official towers' list shall be made to the
Mayor and Council upon a form prepared by the Chief of Police and
approved by the Borough Attorney and shall contain all of the following
information:
(1) The name, residence and business address and telephone number
of the owner of the towing company. If the owner is a corporation,
the application shall contain the name, residence and business
address and telephone number of every stockholder owning more
than 10% of the issued stock.
(2) Such information as may be required by the Mayor and Council
concerning the personnel, vehicles, equipment and storage
facilities of such applicant, as hereinafter provided, showing that
the applicant meets the minimum standards of performance.
(3) A certificate or certificates of insurance evidencing adequate
insurance coverage as hereinafter provided.
(4) The names and addresses of two business references who have
known the applicant for at least two years.
(5) Certification that the applicant will be able to provide towing
services anywhere in the Borough with a maximum response time
of 20 minutes, except when extraordinary circumstances occur.
(6) Certification that the applicant will be available for service on
business premises 24 hours a day and that they will abide by the
fees contained in or referred to in this section.
§ 92-2 PARK RIDGE CODE § 92-4
1:650
(7) Consent to certification that will consent to appointment of the
Borough Clerk as the applicant's true and lawful attorney for the
purpose of acknowledging service out of any court of competent
jurisdiction to be served against the applicant.
(8) A site plan showing the location of the storage area, the number of
cars that can be stored and the total square footage area of the
storage area.
(9) Agreement to abide by the general rules and regulations
established by the Chief of Police in connection with towing
procedures within the Borough.
B. The applicant shall submit completed duplicate applications to the
Borough Clerk, who shall forward a copy to the Chief of Police for his
review and approval. The review by the Chief of Police shall consist of
the following:
(1) A background check to determine if either the applicant or the
applicant's personnel have been convicted of a criminal offense or
have had their drivers' licenses suspended or revoked within the
past year. Conviction of a criminal offense or suspension of drivers'
license within the past year shall be a cause for disqualification
from inclusion on the official towers' list.
(2) An inspection of the personnel, vehicles, equipment and storage
area proposed to be utilized by the applicant to verify the accuracy
of the information contained in the application and to determine
compliance with applicable laws and regulations and the standards
of performance required by this chapter.
C. An applicant may be included on the official towers' list by the Mayor
and Council, by resolution adopted at a regular public meeting, when,
from a consideration of the application and from such other information
as may otherwise be obtained, they find that all of the following
circumstances exist:
(1) The applicant has not knowingly and with intent to deceive made
any false, misleading or fraudulent statements of material fact in
the application or in any other document required pursuant to this
chapter.
(2) The applicant has met the standards in this chapter and has
furnished the required hold harmless agreement and certificate(s)
of insurance.
(3) The application has been reviewed and approved by the Chief of
Police.
(4) Neither the applicant nor the applicant's personnel have been
convicted of a criminal offense or had their drivers' license
suspended within the past year.
§ 92-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-4
1:651
§ 92-5. Licenses.
D. The Chief of Police shall conduct his review and render a report to the
Mayor and Council, recommending either approval or denial of the
application, within 21 days of receipt of the application from the
Borough Clerk. The Mayor and Council shall take action with regard to
the application within 14 days of receipt of the report of the Chief of
Police. The applicant or its representative shall be given notice of the
date on which the Mayor and Council will consider the application and
shall be permitted to appear and be heard at that time.
E. Written notice of the approval or denial of the application shall be
provided to the applicant within seven days of the decision of the Mayor
and Council.
F. If the Mayor and Council fail to take action within 60 days of receipt of a
complete application, the application shall be deemed to have been
denied.
A. Upon approval of the application as herein provided and payment of the
required fees, the Borough Clerk shall issue the applicant an official
tower's license for each tow vehicle or flatbed vehicle to be utilized in
providing services pursuant to this chapter.
B. The licenses, which shall be in a form approved by the Mayor and
Council, shall be displayed on the tow vehicle or flatbed vehicle at all
times.
C. The licenses shall be valid for the three-year period as set forth in the
chapter, shall be nontransferable and shall be subject to revocation by
the Mayor and Council for any of the following reasons:
(1) If it is subsequently determined that the applicant knowingly and
with intent to deceive made false, misleading or fraudulent
statements of material fact in the application or in any other
document required pursuant to this chapter.
(2) Violation of any federal or state law or municipal ordinance or
regulation relating to the operation of a motor vehicle or the
provision of towing services.
(3) Violation of any rule or regulation promulgated by the New Jersey
Department of Insurance.
(4) Unsatisfactory service provided pursuant to this chapter.
(5) Failure to annually certify compliance with the requirements of this
chapter as required by § 92-2F.
D. The license fee for the license issued under this section shall be $100
per license per vehicle. The fee for the annual review of certification
and inspection of vehicles and equipment submitted by the official
tower pursuant to § 92-2F of this chapter shall be $50 per vehicle.
§ 92-4 PARK RIDGE CODE § 92-5
1:652
§ 92-6. Minimum standards of performance.
To qualify for inclusion on the list of official towers, applicants must meet
the following minimum standards:
E. Licenses shall not be transferable from one vehicle to another without
the consent of the Chief of Police. Consent may be granted at the sole
discretion of the Chief, if the licensee demonstrates that the transferee
vehicle complies with all of the requirements of this chapter.
A. Minimum vehicle requirements.
(1) Every official tower shall maintain and have available to render
services required by this chapter a minimum of one regular tow
vehicle, one flatbed vehicle and one heavy-duty wrecker.
(2) Vehicle classes:
(a) Regular tow vehicles must be equipped with a boom or winch
assembly mounted on the chassis, a dolly assembly, a tow sling
or wheel lift assembly and at least 100 feet of either threeeighths-
inch or seven-sixteenths-inch cable attached to a motor
driven-winch.
(b) Flatbed vehicles must be equipped with a winch or
hydraulically operated bed which slides or tilts to
accommodate transporting of vehicles.
(3) Every official tower shall have available a heavy-duty wrecker, and
underreach shall be rated at 35,000 pounds and shall be capable of
towing new style buses and trucks with fiberglass front ends.
(4) All equipment shall comply with all state and federal regulations,
and all vehicle operators shall possess a CDL license for over
18,000 pounds.
(5) Each applicant shall submit, along with its application, proof of
ownership or lease of the vehicles which will be utilized to provide
services pursuant to this chapter.
B. Minimum equipment requirements.
(1) Every tow vehicle or flatbed vehicle shall be equipped with the
following:
(a) At least one amber rotating beacon or strobe light mounted on
the highest practical location of the vehicles, visible from 360°
when in use and visible at a minimum distance of 500 feet
during daylight hours.
(b) One snatch block per winch.
(c) Safety tow lights or magnetic tow lights for towing vehicles at
night, amber colored.
§ 92-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-6
1:653
(d) Extra chains and cable for pulling or securing a towed vehicle.
(e) At least one heavy-duty broom, a shovel, a crowbar or pry bar,
a set of jumper cables, a flashlight, one two-pound or larger
fire extinguisher of dry chemical type, one dozen flares or
similar warning devices for placement at the scene of an
accident or behind a disabled vehicle, at least 10 pounds of dry
sand or a drying compound for gasoline and oil spilled onto the
roadway and a sufficient quantity and types of tools to enable
the tow operator to perform proper and adequate emergency
repair services for the tow.
(2) Every tow vehicle or flatbed vehicle shall comply with any and all
state, federal and local laws, regulations and ordinances pertaining
to safety, lighting and towing equipment requirements and shall be
subject to inspection by the Chief of Police or his designee at any
time. No changes may be made in said vehicles or equipment
unless prior written approval is obtained from the Borough.
(3) Every tow vehicle or flatbed vehicle shall display the official tower's
license and shall have the name of the official tower displayed on
the vehicle in such manner and of such lettering as conforms to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-46.
C. Minimum personnel requirements. Official towers shall have available,
at all times, a minimum of two persons to provide the services required
by this chapter. All persons employed by official towers to provide the
services required by this chapter shall meet the following requirements
and be subject to the following regulations. They shall:
(1) Be competent mechanics able to provide minimum road service for
disabled vehicles.
(2) Have a valid driver's license having no restrictions or conditional
endorsements other than a condition requiring the wearing of
eyeglasses.
(3) Be mentally alert and present a neat appearance at all times.
(4) Obey all traffic laws and regulations.
(5) Be subject to inspection by the Chief of Police of the Borough and
shall be approved by the Chief prior to rendering any services
pursuant to this chapter.
(6) Not have been convicted of a crime nor had their driving privileges
suspended or revoked within the past year.
D. Minimum storage requirements.
(1) Every official tower shall maintain an inside building or outside
secured storage area meeting the following requirements:
§ 92-6 PARK RIDGE CODE § 92-6
1:654
§ 92-7. Utilization of official towers' list.
(a) The storage area shall be capable of storing a minimum of 10
passenger vehicles and one tractor and trailer. The area shall
have at least 800 square feet of inside storage facilities to hold
and protect police hold vehicles.
(b) The location of the storage area shall be either within the limits
of the Borough or at such location outside of the Borough as to
facilitate reasonable towing distances.
(c) The storage area shall be fully enclosed by a sturdy fence
having a minimum height of six feet, with at least one lockable
gate for ingress and egress, and shall be lighted from dusk to
dawn.
(d) The storage area shall be in an area legally zoned for such use.
(e) The storage facility shall be available 24 hours a day, 365 days
per year and shall be open to the public on weekdays during
normal business hours and for four hours on Saturdays. The
applicant shall specify the hours on which the facility will be
open on Saturdays. The applicant is not required to be open on
Sundays.
(f) The official tower shall have an employee on duty during all
hours in which the storage facility is open.
(g) The official tower shall not charge a release fee or other charge
for releasing vehicles to their owners after normal business
hours or on weekends.
(h) The official tower shall have available an area within the
Borough of Park Ridge to store vehicles involved in suspected
crimes or criminal activities as directed by the Chief of Police
or a location outside of the Borough of Park Ridge within a
reasonable towing distance; such location shall be subject to
the approval of the Chief of Police.
(2) The applicant shall, with its application, submit proof of ownership
or lease of the storage area.
(3) The official tower shall be responsible for ensuring the proper and
safe storage of all vehicles towed pursuant to this chapter. The
official tower shall be liable for any damage incurred by such
vehicles while in transit to or while stored in the storage areas.
A. Official towers shall be placed on the official towers' list at the
beginning of each three-year period in accordance with the procedures
as set forth in this chapter. The official towers shall rotate on the list for
one week at a time or for such a period as designated by the Chief of
Police in accordance with his rulemaking authority under this chapter.
§ 92-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-7
1:655
§ 92-8. Hold harmless agreement.
The applicant shall agree, in writing, to assume the defense of and
indemnify and hold harmless the Borough, its elected officials, boards,
commissions, officers, employees and agents from all suits, actions,
damages or claims to which the Borough may be subjected of any kind
and nature whatsoever resulting from, caused by, arising out of or as
a consequence of the provisions of towing, wrecking, storage and/or
emergency services provided at the request of the Borough pursuant to this
chapter. Official towers shall enter into a hold harmless agreement in a
form to be prepared by the Borough Attorney prior to being included on the
official towers' list.
§ 92-9. Insurance.
Unless otherwise changed by the Chief of Police under his rulemaking
authority, the one-week rotation shall commence at 12:00 midnight
Wednesday and terminate at 11:59 p.m. the following Tuesday.
B. The Borough shall request wrecking, towing and storage services from
each official tower in rotation. When called, the tower shall advise the
dispatcher if a vehicle is available and the estimated time of arrival. If
no tow vehicle is available or if, in the discretion of the Borough official
making the request, the response time is insufficient under the
circumstances to properly protect the public health, safety or welfare,
the next official tower on the list shall be called for that particular
towing event. The official tower who is at the top of the list, however,
shall remain on the top of the list for any subsequent calls until that
tower's one-week period at the top of the list is finished.
C. All requests for service shall be made by the Chief of Police or his
official designee.
D. The Borough shall request service only from official towers; provided,
however, that if no emergency or road hazard exists, the Borough shall
request such service from such other person as the owner of the motor
vehicle in need of such services may request; and provided further that
if none of the official towers are available or able to provide such
services as are requested by the Borough, or if an emergency exists, the
Borough may request such services from any other available source.
E. During adverse weather conditions, heavy traffic conditions or
emergency conditions, official towers shall give priority to requests
from the Borough over any other requests which may be received by the
official towers.
A. No person shall be included on the official towers' list unless and until
such person has provided to the Borough a certificate or certificates of
insurance evidencing that there is in effect the following insurance
coverages:
§ 92-7 PARK RIDGE CODE § 92-9
1:656
§ 92-10. Towing and storage fee schedule. [Amended 11-23-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-38]
(1) Automobile liability insurance in an amount not less than
$1,000,000 combined single limits.
(2) Workers' compensation as required by law.
(3) Garage keepers liability in an amount not less than $60,000 per
location.
(4) Garage liability in an amount not less than $1,000,000 combined
single limit.
(5) Sufficient comprehensive general public liability insurance to
protect the Borough from any liability, loss or damage arising out of
the activities to be conducted. Such insurance shall be in the
minimum amount of $1,000,000 for each person and $3,000,000 for
each accident.
B. Policies of insurance shall contain endorsements to provide collision
coverage for vehicles in tow.
C. Policies of insurance shall be written by insurance companies
authorized to do business in the State of New Jersey. Insurance
companies shall be acceptable to the Borough and shall have at least a
B+ rating by a recognized rating service.
D. The Borough of Park Ridge shall be named as an additional insured on
all policies of insurance provided pursuant to this chapter. All
certificates of insurance shall provide that the policies may not be
canceled, terminated or coverage decreased without 30 days' written
notice to the Borough.
E. Policies of insurance required by this chapter shall be maintained in full
force and effect at all times. In the event that any coverage is canceled,
terminated, interrupted or decreased in amount, the tower shall be
removed from the official towers' list until such time as the required
coverage is reinstated or replaced.
A. Fees for towing and storage of private passenger vehicles, damaged in
an accident or recovered after being stolen, may not exceed the fees
established by the New Jersey Department of Insurance pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 17:33B-47132. Those towing and storage fees, which are set
forth in N.J.A.C. 11:3-38.1, are incorporated herein by reference:
(1) The following is the fee schedule for towing services:
132. Editor's Note: Said provisions were repealed by L.1997, c. 387.
§ 92-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-10
1:657
Days
Towing Distance Fee
First mile or less $100
Each additional mile $3
Nights, Weekends and New Jersey State Holidays
Towing Distance Fee
First mile or less $125
Each additional mile $3
(2) The following is the fee schedule for storage services:
Storage Facility Capacity Fee
Inside building $45
Outside secured $35
(3) Pursuant to law, the fee schedules shall be reviewed by the New
Jersey Commissioner of Insurance on an annual basis and may be
revised if necessary. In the event that the above schedules are
revised by the Commissioner of Insurance, the revised fees shall be
the maximum fees that may be charged by official towers and this
chapter shall be amended accordingly.
(4) The following is the fee for winching services off road: up to $150
depending upon need.
(5) If "speedy dry" or similar is required: up to $35.
B. Fees for towing and storage of private passenger vehicles, other than
those damaged in an accident or recovered after being stolen, shall be
the same as those set forth in Subsection A if the official tower is called
to the scene by the Police Department of the Borough of Park Ridge in
accordance with this chapter. Any other towing services to private
passenger vehicles not involved in accidents or recovered after being
stolen when requested privately by individuals shall be at the rates as
agreed to between the individual and the tower.
C. Fees for all other types of vehicles other than private passenger
vehicles, pursuant to Subsections A and B of this section, shall be
determined in accordance with this subsection:
(1) The following is the fee schedule for towing services:
§ 92-10 PARK RIDGE CODE § 92-10
1:658
Type of Towing
Service
Class 1
(all vehicles 6,000
to 16,000 pounds'
gross vehicle
weight)
Class 2
(all vehicles 16,000
to 80,000 pounds'
gross vehicle
weight)
Days:
Standard tow $200 $300
Wheel lift $200 $300
Flatbed $200 $300
Nights:
Standard tow $250 $350
Wheel lift $250 $350
Flatbed $250 $350
(2) The following is the fee schedule for storage services:
Storage Facility Capacity Class 1 Class 2
Inside building $45 $65
Outside building $45 $65
(3) The fees set forth for nonpassenger vehicles in this section are the
maximum charges that shall apply for basic towing services. The
official towers, however, shall be allowed, for winching and
wrecking services over and above the basic towing services, an
additional $50 per hour for light-duty wrecker, $100 per hour for
medium wrecker and $150 per hour for heavy-duty wrecker. There
shall be no additional charges for any other services, including but
not limited to waiting time, cleanup costs and additional labor,
when only basic towing services, as defined, are provided.
D. The fees set forth in Subsections A and B of this section for towing rates
are the maximum charges that shall apply to a private passenger
automobile for basic towing services. There shall be no additional
charges other than those provided herein, including but not limited to
flatbedding, waiting time, winching, cleanup cost and additional labor,
when only basic towing services as defined, are provided. The official
towers, however, shall be allowed to charge for services other than
basic towing services, as defined in this chapter, the sum of $25 per
hour for any additional winching services required over and above the
basic towing services when removing a vehicle from a position beyond
the right-of-way or berm or from being impaled upon any other object
within the right-of-way or berm. In addition, the official towers may
charge a flat fee of $30 for any road service for private passenger
vehicles which do not need to be towed.
§ 92-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-10
1:659
§ 92-11. Miscellaneous provisions.
(1) Other than for commercial vehicles, the towing rates shall be
calculated based on the total distance traveled from the tow
vehicle's base of service to the job site and return, by way of the
shortest available route. Fractions shall be rounded up to the
nearest whole mile.
(2) Tow vehicles transporting multiple passenger cars at one time shall
receive the applicable fees for each vehicle transported.
(3) When towing services are required at the scene of an accident, the
day rate shall apply when the time of accident is between 8:00 a.m.
and 4:30 p.m., Monday through Friday, except New Jersey state
holidays. The night, weekend and holiday rate shall otherwise
apply.
(4) When towing services are otherwise required, the day rate shall
apply when the vehicle is transported (pickup to delivery) entirely
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through
Friday, except New Jersey state holidays. The night, weekend and
holiday rate shall otherwise apply.
E. The fees set forth on the schedule for storage fees are the maximum
storage charges per twenty-four-hour period that shall apply to a
private passenger automobile that is stored by a person.
A. Copies of this chapter and the schedule of fees that may be charged by
official towers shall be made available to the public during normal
business hours at the Borough Municipal Building. Copies shall also be
made available to the public at each official tower's place of business.
B. All official towers shall post, in a prominent place at each storage area
clearly visible to the public, a schedule of the fees that may be charged
for all services provided pursuant to this chapter.
C. The Borough reserves the right to make periodic unannounced
inspections of the personnel, vehicles, equipment and storage areas of
all official towers.
D. The relationship between an official tower and the Borough is one of an
independent contractor. Neither party shall be construed in any manner
whatsoever to be an employee of the other, nor shall any employee or
agent furnished by any party be construed to be an employee or agent
of the other party. Inclusion on the official towers' list shall not be
construed or considered as a joint venture, partnership, association,
contract of employment or profit sharing agreement.
E. The municipality shall not be liable or responsible for compensating the
official towers for any of the services performed under this chapter
unless those services are performed for the Borough vehicles.
Compensation shall be the responsibility of the owner of the towed
§ 92-10 PARK RIDGE CODE § 92-11
1:660
§ 92-12. Dispute resolution and license revocation.
§ 92-13. Violations and penalties.
motor vehicle, and the official tower shall proceed directly against the
owner.
F. The official tower shall, at all times, be solely responsible for the
conduct of its employees.
G. Each official tower shall keep and maintain adequate and complete
records showing all vehicles towed, stored and released, all services
rendered and all fees charged and collected. All records shall be
available for inspection by the Borough at any time during normal
business hours. Records shall be kept and maintained by the official
tower at one central location and shall be retained for a period of seven
years. Records may be written, printed or computerized as long as the
requirements of this subsection are met.
A. In the event that a complaint is received by the Borough involving the
improper or unsatisfactory performance of services by an official tower,
excessive charges or damage to a motor vehicle while in custody of the
tower, written notice of the same shall be provided by the Borough
Administrator to the official tower involved. The tower shall have the
opportunity to respond, in writing, within five days.
B. Within 14 days of receipt of the tower's response or within 21 days of
receipt of the complaint, if no response is received, the matter shall be
presented by the Borough Administrator to the Mayor and Council.
C. The Mayor and Council shall consider the matter at a regular public
meeting and may request that the complainant and the tower involved
appear and give testimony regarding the complaint.
D. If, after considering the matter, the Mayor and Council shall determine
that one of the causes for revocation of the official tower's license, as
set forth in § 92-5C, exists, the license shall be revoked and the tower
shall surrender the same to the Borough Administrator within one day.
E. Failure to surrender the license upon revocation shall constitute a
violation of this chapter.
F. Nothing contained herein shall prevent or limit the right of any person
to commence or maintain an action for damages or any other relief
directly against an official tower in a court of competent jurisdiction.
A. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000; and each
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter and each day the same
is violated shall be deemed and taken to be a separate and distinct
offense.
§ 92-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-13
1:661
Chapter 93
TRAILERS AND CAMP CARS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 97. Zoning — See Ch. 101.
§ 93-1. Findings by governing body. [Amended 10-14-1986 by Ord.
No. 86-25]
In order to protect the health, welfare and safety of the residents of the
Borough, it is deemed advisable to prohibit the parking or placing of trailers
or camp cars within the Borough, except trailers or camp cars 18 feet or less
in overall length, which may be parked or placed as hereinafter set forth.
The use of semitrailers for storage, further, is found to be contrary to the
best interests of the Borough of Park Ridge.
§ 93-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CAMP CAR — Any vehicle used or intended for use as a conveyance upon
the public streets or highways and duly licensed as such, and includes
self-propelled and non-self-propelled vehicles so designed, constructed and
reconstructed or added to by means of accessories in such a manner as to
permit the occupancy thereof as a temporary dwelling or sleeping place for
one or more persons, and having no foundation other than wheels, jacks
or skirtings so arranged as to be integral with or portable by said "camp
car."[Amended 10-14-1986 by Ord. No. 86-25]
SEMITRAILER — As defined in N.J.S.A. 39:1-1.[Added 10-14-1986 by Ord.
No. 86-25]
TRAILERS — As defined in N.J.S.A. 39:1-1.[Amended 10-14-1986 by Ord.
No. 86-25]
§ 93-3. Parking, placing or storing prohibited; exceptions.
B. In addition to the fine provided above, a violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be cause for revocation of the official
tower's license.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to park, place or store any trailer or
camp car on any street or on any private or public lands in the Borough
were such parking, placing or storing is for the purpose of dwelling or
sleeping in said trailer or camp car within the Borough.
§ 92-13 PARK RIDGE CODE § 93-3
1:662
§ 93-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-8-1974 by Ord. No.
74-16]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, shall upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $500 or by imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 90 days.
Chapter 96
VEHICLES, ABANDONED OR JUNKED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 26.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 60.
Garbage, rubbish and trash — See Ch. 64.
Municipal parking lots — See Ch. 76.
Parking on posted land — See Ch. 77.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 80.
Towing — See Ch. 92.
Zoning — See Ch. 101.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 112.
§ 96-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDONED — Any motor vehicle, omnibus, road tractor, trailer, truck,
truck tractor and vehicle which:
B. Trailers or camp cars having an overall length of 18 feet or less may be
parked temporarily on streets pursuant to applicable ordinances
governing the parking of other motor vehicles within the Borough133
and may be parked or stored on private property, provided that said
parking or storing is at least 15 feet from the side property line and is to
the rear of the building setback line of said property.
C. The use of semitrailers or trailers for the storage of goods,
merchandise, household furnishings or any other items within the
Borough is prohibited. [Added 10-14-1986 by Ord. No. 86-25]
D. Temporary variances from the strict requirements of this chapter may
be granted by the Mayor and Council for emergency hardships,
including but not limited to displacement by fire. Written application
therefor shall be made to the Borough Clerk. [Added 10-14-1986 by
Ord. No. 86-25]
Is parked without the current year's registration or identification
markers as required by law;
A.
133. Editor's Note: See Ch. 97, Vehicles and Traffic.
§ 93-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 96-1
1:663
MOTOR VEHICLE, OMNIBUS, ROAD TRACTOR, TRAILER, TRUCK, TRUCK
TRACTOR — As defined in N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 et seq., of the Revised Statutes of
the State of New Jersey.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
PROPERTY — Any real property within the municipality which is not a street
or highway.
STREET or HIGHWAY — The entire width between the boundary lines of
every way dedicated for public use for the purpose of vehicular travel,
whether accepted and maintained by the municipality or not.
§ 96-2. Abandonment of vehicles prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon a motor vehicle, omnibus,
road tractor, trailer, truck, truck tractor, machine or vehicle on any public
street or highway of the Borough; on any municipally owned or operated
parking lot; on any property which is owned, leased or maintained by
the Borough of Park Ridge; on any property which is owned, leased or
maintained by the Board of Education of the Borough of Park Ridge; or on
any property which is privately owned, leased, rented or occupied within
the municipality.
§ 96-3. Impounding abandoned vehicles; fixing of storage rates;
notice of impoundment [Amended 4-11-1989 by Ord. No. 89-11]
Has been continuously parked in any of the places mentioned in this
chapter for a period of 48 hours;
B.
Is so disabled as to constitute an obstruction to traffic and the driver
or person owning or in charge thereof neglects or refuses to move the
same to a place where it will not obstruct traffic;
C.
D. Is found to be mechanically inoperative; or
E. Is found without one or more tires.
A. Whenever any member of the Park Ridge Police Department finds any
motor vehicle, omnibus, road tractor, trailer, truck, truck tractor,
machine, or vehicle abandoned on any public street or highway of the
Borough or any public property described in § 96-2 of this chapter or
whenever such abandonment upon privately owned property is
reported to the Police Department by the owner, lessee, tenant or
occupant, the Police Department shall move or cause the removal of
this vehicle to such a garage or place as may be designated by the Chief
of Police of the Borough of Park Ridge as the garage or place for the
impoundment of such vehicles. Such vehicles shall be retained and
impounded until the person owning the vehicle shall first pay the
reasonable cost of removal and storage cost at the rate of $25 per day,
which results from the removal of the vehicle before regaining
possession of the vehicle.
§ 96-1 PARK RIDGE CODE § 96-3
1:664
§ 96-4. Sale of impounded vehicles.
Whenever any vehicle impounded by the Police Department shall remain
unclaimed for a period of 90 days, the vehicle shall be sold under the
direction of the Chief of Police at public auction to the highest bidder. Such
auction sale shall take place after notice of such sale has been given at least
seven days prior thereto by one publication in a newspaper circulating in
the Borough and upon mailing a copy of said notice to the owner of the
vehicle by regular mail at least seven days prior to the sale. The address of
the owner as shown on the records of the State Division of Motor Vehicles
shall be deemed sufficient for the purposes of this chapter.
§ 96-5. Abandonment on streets.
No person shall leave any wrecked, dismantled, nonoperating or junked
vehicle on any street or highway within the municipality.
§ 96-6. Abandonment on private or public property.
B. Whenever any vehicle is impounded as provided in this chapter, the
Chief of Police or a member of the Police Department designated by him
shall, within five days from the date of impoundment, notify the
registered owner in writing by personal service or by certified mail at
the last known address of the owner of the removal of such vehicle, the
reason for its removal, the location of the vehicle, the cost of the
removal and the daily storage charge of $25 per day.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to park, store or keep any wrecked,
disassembled, nonoperating or junked motor vehicle, omnibus, road
tractor, trailer, truck, truck tractor, machine or vehicle or parts thereof
upon public lands, as herein defined, or upon private lands owned,
leased, rented or occupied by such person or by another, unless
permission is obtained from the owner, lessee, tenant or occupant of
said land or from the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Park Ridge.
Such permission, if and when granted, shall be temporary and of an
emergency nature, and the time limitation thereof shall be
discretionary with the Mayor and Council.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person in charge or control of any property
within the Borough, whether as owner, lessee, tenant or occupant, to
allow or permit the storage or keeping of any wrecked, disassembled,
nonoperating or junked motor vehicle, omnibus, road tractor, trailer,
truck, truck tractor, machine or vehicle upon such property longer than
72 hours, except that this chapter shall not apply with regard to a
vehicle in an enclosed building or a vehicle on the premises of a
business enterprise, such as a repair garage, operated in a lawful place
and manner, when necessary to the operation of such business
enterprise, or a vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository
maintained in a lawful place and manner by the Borough.
§ 96-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 96-7
1:665
§ 96-7. Investigation upon complaints; notice to abate. [Amended
10-10-1966 by Ord. No. 66-10; 11-13-1978 by Ord. No. 78-16]
Upon complaint of any resident or property owner of the Borough of Park
Ridge or upon his own motion, the Construction Code Official or his
designated agent shall make an investigation of the condition complained of
and shall issue to the owner, lessee, tenant or occupant of the lands upon
which such violation exists a notice to abate the violation and effectively
remove the same within a period of 20 days from the date of such
notification.
§ 96-8. Reinspection.
At the expiration of said twenty-day period, the Building Inspector or his
agent shall reinspect said lands and shall report to the Mayor and Council
whether or not the unlawful condition previously found to exist has been
abated or remedied.
§ 96-9. Failure to comply.
In the event that the owner, lessee, tenant or occupant of said lands shall
refuse or neglect to abate or remedy the conditions constituting the
violation within said twenty-day period, the Mayor and Council shall cause
the unlawful condition to be abated and remedied.
§ 96-10. Abatement by Borough; costs.
Where such abatement is accomplished by and under the direction of the
Mayor and Council at public expense, the Mayor and Council shall cause
the cost thereof to be certified to it and the amount thereof shall be charged
against such lands where such violation occurred and shall be added to and
become a part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied against said lands,
the same to be enforced and collected as taxes upon the real property.
§ 96-11. Appeals for relief.
Appeals for relief from the provisions of this chapter may be made to the
Mayor and Council within a period of 20 days from the notification of such
violation as hereinabove provided or any extension thereof, and relief may,
by resolution, be granted by said Mayor and Council when in their opinion
such relief would not be detrimental to the public interest.
§ 96-12. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-8-1974 by Ord. No.
74-16]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof in the Municipal Court, be subject to a fine not exceeding $500 or
imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90 days, or both, at the discretion
of the Judge.
Chapter 97
§ 96-7 PARK RIDGE CODE § 96-12
1:666
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Towing — See Ch. 92. Abandoned or junked vehicles — See Ch. 96.
§ 96-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 96-12
1:667

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 97-1. Definitions.
Whenever any words and phrases are used in this chapter, the meaning
respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases
used herein.
§ 97-2. Repealer.
All former traffic ordinances of the Borough of Park Ridge are hereby
repealed, except provisions of Ordinance No. 74-5, adopted May 13, 1974,
which are hereby specifically saved from repeal, and except that this repeal
shall not affect or prevent the prosecution or punishment of any person for
any act done or committed in violation of any ordinance hereby repealed
prior to the taking effect of this chapter.
§ 97-3. Severability.
If any part or parts of this chapter are held to be invalid for any reason,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
chapter.
§ 97-4. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute, or
except as specifically provided in some other section of this chapter, every
person convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter or any
supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $50 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
§ 97-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-4
1:669

ARTICLE II
Parking
§ 97-5. Regulations not exclusive.
The provisions of this article imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person of the duty to observe other and more restrictive
provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles as set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138, any other New Jersey statute or as
hereinafter provided.
§ 97-6. Parking prohibited at all times.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or
parts thereof described in Schedule I attached to and made a part of this
chapter.134
§ 97-7. Parking prohibited during certain hours.
§ 97-8. Stopping or standing prohibited.
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle during the times specified in
Schedule III of any day upon any of the streets or parts of streets described
in said Schedule III attached to and made part of this chapter.136
§ 97-9. Parking time limited.
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit shown in
Schedule IV at any time between the hours listed in said Schedule IV of
any day upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule IV
attached to and made a part of this chapter.137
§ 97-10. Angle parking.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts thereof
described in Schedule V attached and made a part of this chapter except at
the angle designated and only with the painted white stall lines.138
A. No person shall park a vehicle on any street within the Borough of Park
Ridge between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
B. No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified in Schedule
II of any day upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in said
Schedule II attached to and made a part of this chapter.135
134. Editor's Note: See Ch. § 97-31.
135. Editor's Note: See § 97-32.
136. Editor's Note: See § 97-33.
137. Editor's Note: See § 97-34.
138. Editor's Note: See § 97-35.
§ 97-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-10
1:671

ARTICLE IIA
Park Ridge Firehouse Parking Restrictions
[Added 8-14-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-16]
§ 97-10.1. Designation of parking spaces for Fire Department
members.
The following spaces, which are located near the firehouse on Dietrich
Lane, shall be designated as parking for Fire Department members only.
They are as follows:
§ 97-10.2. Designation of no-parking zone.
The roadway that runs east to west along the south side of the Park Ridge
Firehouse shall be a no-parking zone. All parking or standing is prohibited
in that area.
§ 97-10.3. Signs posted.
All parking space designation and roadway designation shall be posted by
signs.
§ 97-10.4. Violations and penalties.
The fines for parking in any of the designated Fire Department spaces or
roadway shall be $50 for the first offense, plus court costs. The fines for all
subsequent offenses shall be $100, plus court costs.
A. Two parking spaces directly in front of the firehouse for the Fire Chief
and Assistant Fire Chief.
B. Seven parking spaces, which are east of the front of the firehouse and
border the Pascack Brook.
C. Twenty-five parking spaces, which are northeast of the front of the
firehouse and are parallel with the boundary line of Memorial Field.
D. Four parking spaces, which are located in the rear and on the westerly
side of the firehouse.
§ 97-10.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-10.4
1:673

ARTICLE IIB
Park Ridge Municipal Building Parking Restrictions
[Added 12-10-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-014]
§ 97-10.5. Designation of restricted parking.
All parking spaces located behind the Park Ridge Municipal Building and
Park Ridge Library shall be restricted between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
5:00 p.m. to use by Borough employees, Library employees and individuals
either having business in the Municipal Building or individuals using the
Library.
§ 97-10.6. Signage.
All restricted parking spaces pursuant to this article shall be posted with
signage describing the restrictions set forth in § 97-10.5.
§ 97-10.7. Violations and penalties.
The fine for parking in any of the designated and restricted spaces during
the restricted hours as set forth in this article shall be $50 for the first
offense, plus court costs. The fine for all subsequent offenses shall be $100,
plus court costs.
§ 97-10.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-10.7
1:675

ARTICLE III
Truck Exclusions
§ 97-11. Trucks over four tons excluded. [Amended 7-11-1995 by
Ord. No. 95-9]
Trucks over four tons' gross weight are hereby excluded from the streets or
parts of streets described in Schedule VI except for the pickup and delivery
of materials on such streets, said Schedule VI being attached to and made a
part of this chapter.139
139. Editor's Note: See § 97-36.
§ 97-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-11
1:677

ARTICLE IV
One-Way Streets
§ 97-12. One-way streets designated.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule VII attached to and
made a part of this chapter are hereby designated as one-way streets in the
direction indicated.140
140. Editor's Note: See § 97-37.
§ 97-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-12
1:679

ARTICLE V
Stop and Yield Intersections
§ 97-13. Through streets designated.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the streets or parts of
streets described in Schedule VIII attached to and made a part of this
chapter are hereby designated as through streets.141 Stop signs shall be
installed on the near right side of each street intersecting the through street
except where yield signs are provided for in the designations.
§ 97-14. Stop intersections designated.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
in Schedule IX attached to and made a part of this chapter are hereby
designated as stop intersections.142 Stop signs shall be installed as provided
therein.
§ 97-15. Yield intersections designated.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
in Schedule X attached to and made a part of this chapter are hereby
designated as yield intersections.143 Yield signs shall be installed as
provided therein.
141. Editor's Note: See § 97-38.
142. Editor's Note: See § 97-39.
143. Editor's Note: See § 97-40.
§ 97-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-15
1:681

ARTICLE VI
Special Zones and Areas
§ 97-16. Loading zones designated.
The locations described in Schedule XI attached to and made a part of this
chapter are hereby designated as loading zones.144
§ 97-17. Taxi stands designated.
The locations described in Schedule XII attached to and made a part of this
chapter are hereby designated as taxi stands.145
§ 97-18. Bus stops designated.
The locations described in Schedule XIII attached to and made a part of this
chapter are hereby designated as bus stops.146
144. Editor's Note: See § 97-41.
145. Editor's Note: See § 97-42.
146. Editor's Note: See § 97-43.
§ 97-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-18
1:683

ARTICLE VII
Turn Prohibitions and Lane Reservations
§ 97-19. U-turns.
No person shall make a U-turn on any of the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule XIV attached to and made a part of this chapter.147
§ 97-20. Turns at intersections.
No person shall make a turn of the kind designated (left, right, all) at any of
the locations described in Schedule XV attached to and made a part of this
chapter.148
§ 97-21. Lane reservations.
Lanes for right-hand turns, left-hand turns or through traffic only, as
indicated, are hereby reserved upon the streets or parts of streets described
in Schedule XVI attached to and made a part of this chapter,149 and traffic
in said lanes is hereby excluded from making any other maneuver.
147. Editor's Note: See § 97-44.
148. Editor's Note: See § 97-45.
149. Editor's Note: See § 97-46.
§ 97-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-21
1:685

ARTICLE VIII
Emergency No Parking
§ 97-22. Designation of snow emergency no-parking areas.
§ 97-23. Posting of signs.
§ 97-24. Removal of vehicles.
Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this article shall
be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of
traffic, and any peace officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle.
The owner shall pay the reasonable costs of the removal and storage which
may result from such removal, before regaining possession of the vehicle.
§ 97-25. Effectiveness of article.
The effectiveness of this article is contingent on signs being erected as
required by law.
A. Whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it covers
the street or highway, no vehicle shall be parked on either side of any of
the streets or parts thereof described in Schedule XVII attached to and
made a part of this chapter.150
B. The above parking prohibitions shall remain in effect after the snow has
ceased until the streets have been plowed sufficiently and to the extent
that parking will not interfere with the normal flow of traffic.
A. Upon the declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking upon
streets or sections of streets where temporary emergency no-parking
signs are displayed. The Chief of Police, or in his absence the ranking
police officer, is authorized to declare an emergency and to direct the
posting of said emergency no-parking signs when weather conditions,
accidents, fires or public celebrations dictate or require the avoidance
of hazards or other conditions which interfere with the free flow of
traffic.
B. Notification that the emergency no-parking signs are being or will be
posted shall be given to the operator or owner of any vehicle which has
been parked prior to the posting of the signs.
150. Editor's Note: See § 97-47.
§ 97-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-25
1:687

ARTICLE IX
Speed Limits
§ 97-26. Limits established.
The speed limit for both directions of traffic along the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule XVIII attached to and made a part of this
chapter,151 is hereby established at the rate of speed indicated.
§ 97-27. Posting of signs.
Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above designated speed limits as authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
151. Editor's Note: See § 97-48.
§ 97-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-27
1:689

ARTICLE X
Traffic Control Signals
§ 97-28. Traffic signals established.
Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated at the intersection of
those streets described in Schedule XIX attached to and made a part of this
chapter.152
§ 97-29. Installation of signals.
The traffic signal installation shall be in accordance with the provisions
of an act concerning motor vehicles and traffic regulations, Subtitle 1 of
Title 39 of the New Jersey Revised Statutes, shall conform to the design,
and shall be maintained in operation, as authorized by the Department of
Transportation of the State of New Jersey.
152. Editor's Note: See § 97-49.
§ 97-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-29
1:691

ARTICLE XI
No-Passing Zones
§ 97-30. No-passing zones established.
No-passing zones are hereby established and maintained along those
streets or parts of streets described in Schedule XX attached to and made
a part of this chapter,153 as authorized by the New Jersey Department
of Transportation in accordance with the sketch dated and numbered as
indicated.
153. Editor's Note: See § 97-50.
§ 97-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-30
1:693

ARTICLE XII
Schedules
[Amended 10-14-1975 by Ord. No. 75-13; 4-12-1976 by Ord. No.
76-2; 7-12-1976 by Ord. No. 76-10; 8-10-1976 by Ord. No. 76-15;
11-8-1976 by Ord. No. 76-25; 5-8-1978 by Ord. No. 78-9; 3-9-1982
by Ord. No. 82-3; 7-13-1982 by Ord. No. 82-13; 12-28-1982 by Ord.
No. 82-24; 10-11-1983 by Ord. No. 83-25; 7-10-1984 by Ord. No.
84-7; 12-11-1984 by Ord. No. 84-16; 4-9-1985 by Ord. No. 85-2;
11-12-1985 by Ord. No. 85-16; 2-11-1986 by Ord. No. 86-1;
8-12-1986 by Ord. No. 86-23; 7-14-1987 by Ord. No. 87-14]
§ 97-31. Schedule I: No Parking.
A. In accordance with the provisions of § 97-6, no person shall park a
vehicle at any time upon any of the following described streets or parts
of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Ann Terrace Both From the northerly curbline of
Fremont Avenue to a point 300 feet
north thereof
Berthoud Street Both From a point 70 feet east of the
easterly curbline of Highview Avenue
to a point 50 feet east thereof
Berthoud Street154 North From the westerly curbline of
Kinderkamack Road to North Maple
Avenue
Berthoud Street South From the westerly curbline of
Kinderkamack Road west to the
railroad right-of-way
Brae Boulevard Both From Spring Valley Road to Sony
Drive
Broadway East From Woodcliff Lake Borough line
north to Highland Street
Broadway West From Woodcliff Lake Borough line
north to a point 100 feet south of Park
Avenue
Capri Terrace Both From Park Avenue east to the easterly
curbline of Sturms Place
Chestnut Avenue
[Added 3-13-1990
by Ord. No. 90-3]
Both From a point starting 125 feet from its
intersection with Perry Street south to
its terminus
154. Editor's Note: For exceptions, see Subsection B, Exceptions for electric vehicles.
§ 97-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-31
1:695
Name of Street Side Location
Chestnut Street West From the southerly curbline of Park
Avenue to a point 150 feet south
thereof
Colony Avenue South From Spring Valley Road to Pascack
Road
Fremont Avenue Both From Pascack Road to Spring Valley
Road
Grand Avenue South From Warren Road to Mill Road
Hawthorne Avenue East From Market Street to Montvale
Borough line
Johnsvale Lane
[Repealed
3-11-2008 by
Ord. No.
2008-04]
Johnsvale Road
[Added 8-11-2009
by Ord. No.
2009-17]
North From the westerly curbline of Pascack
Road to a point 200 feet west thereof
Kinderkamack
Road
Both From Berthoud Street to the Montvale
Borough line
Kinderkamack
Road
East From Sibbald Drive to Morningside
Avenue
Kinderkamack
Road [Added
12-14-1993 by
Ord. No. 93-22]
West From the southerly curbline of
Berthoud Street to a point 185 feet
south thereof
Kinderkamack
Road [Added
12-14-1993 by
Ord. No. 93-22]
West From the northerly curbline of Perry
Street to a point 40 feet north thereof
Kinderkamack
Road
West From Woodcliff Lake Borough line to
Highland Street
Madison Avenue North From North Maple Avenue to
Kinderkamack Road
Madison Avenue
[Repealed
7-31-1995 by
Ord. No. 95-9]
Market Street
[Added 9-14-1993
by Ord. No.
93-15]
Both From Hawthorne Avenue to North
Maple Avenue
§ 97-31 PARK RIDGE CODE § 97-31
1:696
Name of Street Side Location
Market Street South Parking area at eastern terminus of
Market Street
Mill Lane Both From Pascack Road to Mill Road
Mill Road West From Grand Avenue to Mill Lane
Morningside
Avenue
North From River Vale Road to
Kinderkamack Road
North Fifth Street West From northerly curbline of Colony
Avenue to southerly curbline of Grand
Avenue
Noyes Drive
[Added
12-10-2002 by
Ord. No.
2002-14]
North From the intersection of Noyes Drive
and Hawthorne Avenue to a point
192.84 feet west thereof
Park Avenue North From Hawthorne Avenue east to a
point 40 feet east of the railroad rightof-
way
Park Avenue North From the westerly curbline of
Highview Avenue west to a point 350
feet east of the easterly curbline of
Kinderkamack Road
Park Avenue North From a point 150 feet east of the
easterly curbline of Mill Road to a
point 80 feet east thereof
Park Avenue
[Added 6-9-1992
by Ord. No.
92-18]
North From a point 108 feet from its
intersection with North Maple Avenue
to a point 232 feet from North Maple
Avenue
Park Avenue North From the easterly curbline of Pascack
Road to a point 225 feet east thereof
Park Avenue North From a point 100 feet east of the
easterly curbline of Willet Street
easterly to Mill Road
Park Avenue South From a point 75 feet east of the
easterly curbline of Mill Road to a
point 90 feet east thereof
Park Avenue South From the easterly curbline of Pascack
Road east to a point 300 feet east
thereof
Park Avenue
[Added 12-8-1992
by Ord. No.
92-29]
South From the easterly curbline of its
intersection with South Maple Avenue
to a point ending 40 feet east from
South Maple Avenue
§ 97-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-31
1:697
Name of Street Side Location
Pascack Road East From the Woodcliff Lake Borough line
to a point 380 feet north thereof
Pascack Road East From a point 480 feet north of the
Woodcliff Lake Borough line to Mill
Lane
Pascack Road West From the northerly curbline of Glen
Road north to a point 154 feet north of
the northerly curbline of West Park
Avenue
Perryland Street Both From Broadway to Kinderkamack
Road
Ridge Avenue
[Added 4-9-2013
by Ord. No.
2013-006]
North From a point 221 feet west of the
center line of Second Street to a point
344 feet west of the center line of
Second Street
Rock Avenue Both From Park Avenue to the River Vale
Township line
Roland Street Both From Broadway to Kinderkamack
Road
Sibbald Drive Both From the westerly curbline of Park
Avenue to a point 500 feet west
thereof
Sony Drive Both From Montvale Borough line south to
its terminus
South First Street East From the southerly curbline of Ridge
Avenue south for the entire length
South Maple
Avenue
East From the southerly curbline of Park
Avenue south for its entire length
South Maple
Avenue
West From the southerly curbline of Park
Avenue to a point 150 feet south
thereof
Spring Valley Road Both From the Woodcliff Lake Border to a
point 225 feet south of the southerly
curbline of Grand Avenue
Storms Avenue North From the easterly curbline of Pascack
Road to a point 100 feet east thereof
Storms Avenue South From Pascack Road east to Willet
Street
Sulak Lane [Added
8-11-2009 by
Ord. No.
2009-17]
North From the easterly curbline of Pascack
Road to a point 250 feet east thereof
§ 97-31 PARK RIDGE CODE § 97-31
1:698
§ 97-32. Schedule II: No Parking Certain Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 97-7, no person shall park a vehicle
between the hours listed upon any of the following described streets or
parts of streets;
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Alberon Drive
[Added
10-28-2014 by
Ord. No.
2014-024]
Both 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Mon.-Fri.
Entire length
Colony Avenue North 10:00 p.m. to 2:00
a.m./All
From Spring Valley
Road to Russet Place
Name of Street Side Location
Sulak Lane
[Repealed
8-11-2009 by
Ord. No.
2009-17]
Wampum Road Both From Pascack Road east for its entire
length
West Park Avenue
[Repealed
3-11-2008 by
Ord. No.
2008-04]
West Park Avenue
[Repealed
3-11-2008 by
Ord. No.
2008-04]
Willet Street East From Park Avenue to Storms Avenue
B. Exceptions for electric vehicles. [Added 7-24-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-013]
Name of street Side Location
Berthoud Street North From the westerly curbline of
Kinderkamack Road to a point 77 feet
west thereof
Berthoud Street North From the point starting 121 feet from
the westerly curbline of Kinderkamack
Road to its terminus
§ 97-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-32
1:699
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Crown Street Both 10:00 p.m. to 2:00
a.m./All
Entire length
Forest Avenue Both 10:00 p.m. to 2:00
a.m./All
From Colony Avenue
to Midland Avenue
Russet Place Both 10:00 p.m. to 2:00
a.m./All
Entire length
Sulak Lane
[Added
8-11-2009 by
Ord. No.
2009-17]
South 7:00 a.m. to 3:30
p.m./Mon.-Sat.
Entire length
§ 97-33. Schedule III: No Stopping or Standing.
In accordance with the provisions of § 97-8, no person shall stop or stand
a vehicle between the times specified upon any of the following described
streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Broadway East All From the northerly curbline of
Perryland Street to the
southerly curbline of Park
Avenue
Broadway West All From the southerly curbline of
Park Avenue to a point 100
feet south thereof
Grand Avenue South All From the easterly curbline of
Spring Valley Road to Warren
Road
Kinderkamack
Road
Both All From the northerly curbline of
Perryland Street to a point
225 feet north of Park Avenue
Park Avenue East All From northerly curbline of
Prospect Avenue to Vittorio
Court
Park Avenue North All From a point 250 feet east of
the easterly curbline of
Kinderkamack Road to a point
115 feet west of
Kinderkamack Road
Park Avenue South All From the westerly curbline of
Chestnut Avenue west to a
point 100 feet west of
Broadway
§ 97-32 PARK RIDGE CODE § 97-33
1:700
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Prospect Avenue North All From the easterly curbline of
Park Avenue easterly for a
distance of 400 feet
Sibbald Drive
[Added
9-13-2005 by
Ord. No.
2005-18;
amended
10-22-2013 by
Ord. No.
2013-013]
East 2:00 p.m. to
4:00
p.m./school
days only
From the easterly curbline of
Park Avenue to the
intersection of Hall Court
Spring Valley
Road
Both All From the southerly curbline of
Grand Avenue to a point 225
feet south thereof
Terrace Circle
[Added
9-27-2005 by
Ord. No.
2005-23]
Both 7:00 a.m. to
5:00
p.m./school
days only
Entire length
Warren Road
[Added
9-27-2005 by
Ord. No.
2005-23]
Both 7:00 a.m. to
5:00
p.m./school
days only
Entire length
Wield Court
[Added
9-13-2005 by
Ord. No.
2005-18]
West 2:00 p.m. to
4:00
p.m./school
days only
From Queen Court to King
Road
§ 97-34. Schedule IV: Time Limit Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 97-9, no person shall park a vehicle
for longer than the time limit shown upon any of the following streets or
parts of streets:
§ 97-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-34
1:701
Name of
Street Side Hours
Maximum
Time Location
Berthoud
Street
Both 6:00 a.m. to
2:00 a.m.
1 hour From Kinderkamack
Road to Highview
Avenue
Berthoud
Street [Added
7-24-2018 by
Ord. No.
2018-013]
North 6:00 a.m. to
2:00 a.m.
4 hours -
electric
vehicles
only
From a point 77 feet
from the westerly
curbline of
Kinderkamack Road to
a point 44 feet west
thereof
Birch Lane Both 6:00 a.m. to
2:00 a.m.
1 hour Entire length
Broadway East 6:00 a.m. to
2:00 a.m.
1 hour From the northerly
curbline of Highland
Street to the southerly
curbline of Perryland
Street
Broadway
[Added
8-11-2009 by
Ord. No.
2009-17]
West 6:00 a.m. to
2:00 a.m.
1 hour From the westerly
curbline of Broadway
to a point 218 feet
south thereof
Broadway
[Added
12-22-2009 by
Ord. No.
2009-26]
West 6:00 a.m. to
2:00 a.m.
1 hour From the westerly
curbline of Park
Avenue and Broadway
to a point 218 feet
west thereof
Chestnut
Avenue [Added
3-13-1990 by
Ord. No. 90-3]
Both 6:00 a.m. to
2:00 a.m.
1 hour From Perry Street to a
point 125 feet south
thereof
Colony Avenue North 6:00 a.m. to
2:00 a.m.
1 hour From Russet Place to
Pascack Road
Doxey Drive Both 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
Mon.–Fri.
1 hour From Spring Valley
Road to its terminus
Emily Drive Both 6:00 a.m. to
2:00 a.m.
1 hour From Spring Valley
Road to its terminus
Frederick
Court [Added
3-11-2008 by
Ord. No.
2008-04]
Both 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
1 hour Entire length
§ 97-34 PARK RIDGE CODE § 97-34
1:702
Name of
Street Side Hours
Maximum
Time Location
Hawthorne
Avenue
East 6:00 a.m. to
2:00 a.m.
1 hour From the northerly
curbline of Park
Avenue to the
southerly curbline of
Market Street
Hawthorne
Avenue
West 6:00 a.m. to
2:00 a.m.
1 hour From the northerly
curbline of Park
Avenue to the
southerly curbline of
Berthoud Street
Highview
Avenue [Added
3-13-1990 by
Ord. No. 90-3]
Both 6:00 a.m. to
2:00 a.m.
1 hour From Park Avenue for
its entire length
Johnsvale Lane
[Repealed
3-11-2008 by
Ord. No.
2008-04]
Johnsvale Lane
[Added
3-11-2008 by
Ord. No.
2008-04]
Both 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
1 hour Entire length
Kinderkamack
Road
East 6:00 a.m. to
2:00 a.m.
1 hour From Morningside
Avenue north to a
point opposite the
northerly curbline of
Perryland Street
Kinderkamack
Road
East 6:00 a.m. to
2:00 a.m.
2 hours From a point 225 feet
north of Park Avenue
northerly to Berthoud
Street
Kinderkamack
Road
West 6:00 a.m. to
2:00 a.m.
1 hour From Highland Street
to the southerly
curbline of Perryland
Street and from a
point 225 feet north of
Park Avenue north to
Berthoud Street
Laurence Court
[Added
6-8-1993 by
Ord. No. 93-9]
Both 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Mon.–Fri.
1 hour From Alberon Drive to
its terminus
§ 97-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-34
1:703
Name of
Street Side Hours
Maximum
Time Location
Madison
Avenue
South 6:00 a.m. to
2:00 a.m.
1 hour From Hawthorne
Avenue to
Kinderkamack Road
Madison
Avenue [Added
7-11-1995 by
Ord. No. 95-9]
South 6:00 a.m. to
2:00 a.m.
2 hours From North Maple
Avenue to Hawthorne
Avenue
Market Street Both 6:00 a.m. to
2:00 a.m.
1 hour From North Maple
Avenue to Hawthorne
Avenue
Market Street North 6:00 a.m. to
2:00 a.m.
1 hour Parking area at
eastern terminus of
Market Street
North Maple
Avenue
Both 6:00 a.m. to
2:00 a.m.
1 hour From Park Avenue to
Perry Street
Park Avenue North 6:00 a.m. to
2:00 a.m.
1 hour From a point 250 feet
east of the easterly
curbline of
Kinderkamack Road to
a point 100 feet east
thereof
Park Avenue North 6:00 a.m. to
2:00 a.m.
1 hour From a point 25 feet
east of the easterly
curbline of Mill Road
to a point 125 feet east
thereof
Park Avenue North 6:00 a.m. to
2:00 a.m.
1 hour From a point 80 feet
east thereof to the
westerly curbline of
North Maple Avenue
Park Avenue North 6:00 a.m. to
2:00 a.m.
30 min. From the easterly
curbline of North
Maple Avenue to the
westerly curbline of
Hawthorne Avenue
Park Avenue North 6:00 a.m. to
2:00 a.m.
1 hour From a point 225 feet
east of the easterly
curbline of Pascack
Road to a point 100
feet east of the
easterly curbline of
Willet Street
§ 97-34 PARK RIDGE CODE § 97-34
1:704
Name of
Street Side Hours
Maximum
Time Location
Park Avenue North 6:00 a.m. to
2:00 a.m.
30 min. From a point 40 feet
east of the railroad
right-of-way to a point
80 feet east thereof
Park Avenue North 6:00 a.m. to
2:00 a.m.
1 hour From a point 80 feet
east thereof to the
westerly curbline of
North Maple Avenue
Park Avenue North 6:00 a.m. to
2:00 a.m.
30 min. From the easterly
curbline of North
Maple Avenue to the
westerly curbline of
Hawthorne Avenue
Park Avenue North 6:00 a.m. to
2:00 a.m.
1 hour From a point 225 feet
east of the easterly
curbline of Pascack
Road to a point 100
feet east of the
easterly curbline of
Willet Street
Park Avenue North 6:00 a.m. to
2:00 a.m.
30 min. From a point 40 feet
east of the railroad
right-of-way to a point
80 feet east thereof
Park Avenue South 6:00 a.m. to
2:00 a.m.
1 hour From a point 165 feet
east of the easterly
curbline of Mill Road
to the westerly
curbline of South
Maple Avenue
Park Avenue South 6:00 a.m. to
2:00 a.m.
1 hour From a point 300 feet
east of the easterly
curbline of Pascack
Road east to a point 75
feet east of the
easterly curbline of
Mill Road
Park Avenue South 6:00 a.m. to
2:00 a.m.
2 hours From easterly curbline
of South Maple Avenue
east to a point 100 feet
west of Broadway
§ 97-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-34
1:705
Name of
Street Side Hours
Maximum
Time Location
Pascack Road West 6:00 a.m. to
2:00 a.m.
1 hour From a point 154 feet
north of the northerly
curbline of West Park
Avenue to Lakeview
Avenue
Perry Street
[Added
12-14-1993 by
Ord. No.
93-22]
Both 6:00 a.m. to
2:00 a.m.
1 hour From Hawthorne
Avenue to North Maple
Avenue
Perry Street Both 6:00 a.m. to
2:00 a.m.
1 hour From Kinderkamack
Road to Highview
Avenue
Ridge Avenue Both 6:00 a.m. to
2:00 a.m.
1 hour From Pascack Road to
Fifth Street
South Maple
Avenue
West 6:00 a.m. to
2:00 a.m.
1 hour From a point 150 feet
south of Park Avenue
for its entire length
Split Rock Lane Both 6:00 a.m. to
2:00 a.m.
1 hour From Grand Avenue to
Warren Road
Storms Avenue North 6:00 a.m. to
2:00 a.m.
1 hour From a point 100 feet
east of the easterly
curbline of Pascack
Road east to Willet
Street
Sulak Lane
[Added
8-11-2009 by
Ord. No.
2009-17]
North 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
Mon.-Sat.
1 hour From a point 250 feet
east of the curbline of
Pascack Road east to
the end
Terrace Circle Both 6:00 a.m. to
2:00 a.m.
1 hour Entire length
Warren Road
[Amended
9-27-2005 by
Ord. No.
2005-23]
Both 5:00 p.m. to
2:00 a.m.
1 hour Entire length
West Park
Avenue [Added
3-11-2008 by
Ord. No.
2008-04]
Both 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
school days
1 hour Entire length
§ 97-34 PARK RIDGE CODE § 97-34
1:706
Name of
Street Side Hours
Maximum
Time Location
West Park
Avenue
[Repealed
3-11-2008 by
Ord. No.
2008-04]
West Park
Avenue
[Repealed
3-11-2008 by
Ord. No.
2008-04]
Willet Street West 6:00 a.m. to
2:00 a.m.
1 hour From Park Avenue to
Storms Avenue
§ 97-35. Schedule V: Angle Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 97-10, no person shall park a vehicle
upon any of the following streets or parts of streets except at the angle
indicated:
Name of Street Side Angle Location
Hawthorne East 60° From Park Avenue to Market Street
Market Street North 90° Parking area at the eastern
terminus of Market Street
§ 97-36. Schedule VI: Trucks Over Four Tons Excluded. [Amended
7-34-1995 by Ord. No. 95-9]
In accordance with the provisions of § 97-34, trucks over four tons gross
weight are hereby excluded from the following described streets, except for
the delivery and pick up of materials on such streets.
Name of Street Location
Mill Lane From Mill Road to Pascack Road
Mill Road From Grand Avenue to Mill Lane
§ 97-37. Schedule VII: One-Way Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 97-12, the following described streets
or parts of streets are hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction
indicated:
§ 97-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-37
1:707
Name of Street Direction Limits
First Street North From North Avenue to Spring Valley
Road
North Avenue East From Spring Valley Road to First
Street
§ 97-38. Schedule VIII: Through Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 97-13, the following described streets
or parts of streets are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall
be installed on the near right side of each street intersecting the through
street except where yield signs are provided for in the designations:
Name of Street Limits
Brae Boulevard From Spring Valley Road to Sony Drive
Colony Avenue - Lawn Street From Spring Valley Road to Grand
Avenue
Fairview Avenue From the Montvale Borough line to the
south curbline of Rock Avenue
Grobel Place From Capri Terrace to Vitmar Place
Hawthorne Avenue From Park Avenue to the Montvale
Borough line
Highview Avenue Entire length
Homestead Place From Park Avenue to Grobel Place
Louville Avenue [Added
9-34-1990 by Ord. No. 90-14]
From North Fifth Street west to its
terminus
Morningside Avenue From Kinderkamack Road to Rivervale
Road
North Avenue From Spring Valley Road to Second
Street
North Fifth Street From Colony Avenue to Grand Avenue
North Fifth Street From Ridge Avenue to Colony Avenue
North Maple Avenue From Park Avenue northerly to its
terminus
Randolph Street - Lakeview
Avenue
From Pascack Road to Colony Avenue
Ridge Avenue From Pascack Road to Spring Valley
Road
Rivervale Road From Park Avenue (northerly
intersection) to Park Avenue (southerly
intersection)
Rock Avenue From Park Avenue to the west curbline
of Fairview Avenue
§ 97-37 PARK RIDGE CODE § 97-38
1:708
Name of Street Limits
Sibbald Drive From Kinderkamack Road to Park
Avenue
South Fifth Street From Fremont Avenue to Ridge Avenue
South Fourth Street [Added
12-13-1988 by Ord. No.
88-13]
From Fremont Avenue to Ridge Avenue
South Third Street [Added
12-13-1988 by Ord. No.
88-13]
From Fremont Avenue to Ridge Avenue
§ 97-39. Schedule IX. Stop Intersections. [Amended 9-10-2013 by
Ord. No. 2013-012]
In accordance with the provisions of § 97-14, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as stop intersections:
Stop Sign on At Intersection of
Willet Street Storms Avenue
Brae Boulevard Sony Drive
§ 97-40. Schedule X: Yield Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 97-15, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as yield intersections and yield signs
shall be installed as follows:
Yield Sign on At Intersection of
(Reserved)
§ 97-41. Schedule XI: Loading Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of § 97-16, the following described
locations are hereby designated as loading zones:
Name of Street Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 97-42. Schedule XII: Taxi Stands.
In accordance with the provisions of § 97-17, the following described
locations are hereby designated as taxi stands:
(Reserved)
§ 97-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-43
1:709
§ 97-43. Schedule XIII: Bus Stops.
In accordance with the provisions of § 97-18, the following described
locations are hereby designated as bus stops:
A. Along Broadway, northbound on the easterly side thereof at:
(1) Highland Street, near side, beginning at the southerly curbline of
Highland Street and extending 120 feet south thereof.
(2) The northerly curbline of Perryland Street to a point 100 feet north
thereof.
B. Along Broadway, southbound on the westerly side thereof at:
(1) Highland Street, near side, beginning at a point opposite the
northerly curbline of Highland Street and extending 120 feet north
thereof.
C. Along Kinderkamack Road, northbound on the easterly side thereof at:
(1) Cypress Street, near side, beginning at a point opposite the south
curbline of Cypress Street and extending 135 feet south thereof.
(2) Morningside Avenue, near side, beginning at the southerly curbline
of Morningside Avenue and extending 135 feet south thereof.
(3) Park Avenue, far side, 120 feet north of the northerly curbline of
Park Avenue.
(4) (Reserved)155
(5) Shopping center, midblock, beginning at a point 245 feet south of
the Montvale Borough line and extending 135 feet south thereof.
D. Along Kinderkamack Road. southbound on the westerly side thereof at:
(1) Shopping center, midblock, beginning at a point 480 feet south of
the Montvale Borough line and extending 135 feet north thereof.
(2) Perry Street, near side, beginning at the northerly curbline of Perry
Street and extending 135 feet north thereof.
(3) Beginning at a point 150 feet north of the northerly curbline of Park
Avenue and extending to a point 255 feet north of the northerly
curbline of Park Avenue.
(4) Oakland Street, near side, beginning at the northerly curbline of
Oakland Street and extending 135 feet north thereof.
(5) Cypress Street, near side, beginning at the northerly curbline of
Cypress Street and extending 135 feet north thereof.
155. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection C(4), regarding a bus stop on Perry Street, was repealed
1-24-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-001.
§ 97-43 PARK RIDGE CODE § 97-43
1:710
§ 97-44. Schedule XIV: U-Turn Prohibitions.
In accordance with the provisions of § 97-19, no person shall make a U-turn
at any of the following locations:
Name of Street Location
(Reserved)
§ 97-45. Schedule XV: Prohibited Turns at Intersections. [Amended
7-34-1995 by Ord. No. 95-9]
In accordance with the provisions of § 97-20 and Article 21 of Title 39:4-197,
no person shall make a turn of the kind designated below at any of the
following locations:
E. Along Park Avenue, eastbound on the southerly side thereof at:
(1) Hawthorne Avenue, midblock, beginning at a point opposite the
westerly curbline of Hawthorne Avenue and extending 120 feet
east thereof.
F. Along Park Avenue, westbound on the northerly side thereof at:
(1) Willet Street, near side, beginning at the easterly curbline of Willet
Street and extending 120 feet west thereof.
G. Along Pascack Road, northbound on the easterly side thereof at:
(1) Fremont Avenue, near side, beginning at a point opposite the
southerly curbline of Fremont Avenue and extending 120 feet south
thereof.
(2) West Park Avenue, near side, beginning at a point opposite the
southerly curbline of West Park Avenue and extending 120 feet
south thereof.
H. Along Pascack Road, southbound on the westerly side thereof at:
(1) West Park Avenue, far side, beginning at a point 35 feet south of the
southerly curbline of West Park Avenue and extending 105 feet
south thereof.
(2) Fremont Avenue, far side, beginning at a point 30 feet south of the
southerly curbline of Fremont Avenue and extending 120 feet south
thereof.
(3) (Reserved)156
156. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection H(3), regarding a bus stop on Glen Road, was repealed
1-24-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-001.
§ 97-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-45
1:711
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Prohibited Turn Location
Colony Avenue East Left turn from
driveway
176 Colony Avenue
Johnsvale Road
[Added
12-13-2011 by
Ord. No.
2011-036]
East Right turn
between 2:00 p.m.
and 4:00 p.m. on
school days
At the intersection
with Pascack Road
Kinderkamack
Road [Added
9-10-2013 by
Ord. No.
2013-012]
North Left turn from
driveway
122 Kinderkamack
Road
Kinderkamack
Road [Added
8-13-1996 by
Ord. No. 96-11]
North Northerly exit:
Ridgemont
Shopping Center
183–187
Kinderkamack Road
Kinderkamack
Road [Added
8-13-1996 by
Ord. No. 96-11]
South Southerly exit:
Ridgemont
Shopping Center
183–187
Kinderkamack Road
Kinderkamack
Road [Added
8-13-1996 by
Ord. No. 96-11]
South Northerly exit:
Ridgemont
Shopping Center
183–187
Kinderkamack Road
Park Avenue East Left turn into
driveways on the
north side of Park
Avenue
Between Broadway
and Kinderkamack
Road
Park Avenue South Left turns from
driveways on the
north side of Park
Avenue
Between Broadway
and Kinderkamack
Road
Park Avenue
[Added
3-13-2001 by
Ord. No. 2001-4]
West Left turn into First
Union Bank
driveway
Between
Kinderkamack Road
and Broadway
§ 97-45 PARK RIDGE CODE § 97-45
1:712
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Prohibited Turn Location
Sibbald Drive
[Added
9-13-2005 by
Ord. No.
2005-18]
East Right turn from
the intersection of
the Eastbrook
School exit and
Sibbald Drive/2:00
p.m. to 4:00
p.m./school days
only
Eastbrook School
Wampum Road
[Added
12-13-2011 by
Ord. No.
2011-036]
West Right turn
between 2:00 p.m.
and 4:00 p.m. on
school days
At the intersection
with Pascack Road
§ 97-46. Schedule XVI: Lane Reservations.
In accordance with the provisions of § 97-21, lanes for right-hand turns, lefthand
turns and through traffic only, as indicated, are hereby reserved upon
the streets or parts of streets described below:
Name of
Street
Direction
of Travel
Lane
Reserved
Permitted
Action Location
Broadway North Right Right turn
only
Intersection of
Broadway and Park
Avenue
Kinderkamack
Road [Added
8-13-1996 by
Ord. No.
96-11]
South Left Left turn
only
At center entrance to
Ridgemont Center
Kinderkamack
Road
South Right Right turn
only
Intersection of
Kinderkamack Road
and Park Avenue
Kinderkamack
Road [Added
8-13-1996 by
Ord. No.
96-11]
South Right Right turn
only
Intersection of Park
Avenue and
Kinderkamack Road
Park Avenue East Left Left turn
only
Intersection of
Kinderkamack Road
Park Avenue
[Added
8-13-1996 by
Ord. No.
96-11]
South Left Left turn
only
Intersection of Park
Avenue and Prospect
Avenue
§ 97-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-46
1:713
Name of
Street
Direction
of Travel
Lane
Reserved
Permitted
Action Location
Park Avenue
[Added
4-8-1997 by
Ord. No.
97-6]
West Left Left turn
only
Intersection of Park
Avenue and
Broadway
Park Avenue
[Added
8-13-1996 by
Ord. No.
96-11]
West Left Left turn
only
Intersection of Park
Avenue and
Kinderkamack Road
Park Avenue
[Added
4-8-1997 by
Ord. No.
97-6]
West Left Left turn
only
Intersection of Park
Avenue and Pascack
Road
§ 97-47. Schedule XVII: Snow Emergency No-Parking Areas.
Pursuant to the provisions of § 97-22, no person shall park a vehicle upon
either side of any of the streets or parts of streets thereof listed below
whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it covers the
street or highway:
Name of Street Location
(Reserved)
§ 97-48. Schedule XVIII: Speed Limits.
Pursuant to the provisions of § 97-26, speed limits are hereby established
upon the following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Brae Boulevard 30 Entire length
Ridge Avenue 30 Entire length
§ 97-49. Schedule XIX: Traffic Control Signals. [Amended 9-10-2013
by Ord. No. 2013-012]
Pursuant to § 97-28, traffic control signals shall be installed at the following
described intersections:
Intersection
Kinderkamack Road and Park Avenue
§ 97-46 PARK RIDGE CODE § 97-50
1:714
§ 97-50. Schedule XX: No-Passing Zones.
Pursuant to § 97-30, no-passing zones are hereby established and shall be
maintained upon the following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Sketch Dated Sketch Number
(Reserved)
§ 97-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-50
1:715
Chapter 98
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 81A.
Water conservation — See Ch. 99.
Wells — See Ch. 100.
§ 97-50 PARK RIDGE CODE § 97-50
1:716
ARTICLE I
Meter Readings
[Adopted 5-13-1986 by Ord. No. 86-15]
§ 98-1. Readings from interior meters to control.
The Mayor and Council, on the advice of the Board of Public Works, find that
the readings of interior water meters are more reliable than the readings of
exterior water meters, due to the former's protection from the elements and
other hazards, and therefore the readings from interior meters shall control
for determining water consumption and charges therefor.
§ 98-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-1
1:717

ARTICLE II
Water Rates
[Adopted 9-11-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-015]
§ 98-2. Water rates. [Amended 2-26-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-003;
12-30-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-030]
A. The following rates are hereby fixed for the sale of water by the Park
Ridge Water Department within the Borough of Park Ridge and so much
of the Borough of Woodcliff Lake as is serviced by the Borough of Park
Ridge Water Department effective for all water bills rendered as of
January 1, 2020.
B. Meter service rates. Whenever the term "fixed charge" is used in this
article, said fixed charge shall be in addition to any applicable charges
for water consumption.
(1) General meter service. This rate shall be applicable to use of water
supplied through meters.
(a) Fixed charge: does not include any water consumption.
Meter Size
(inches)
Fixed Charge
(per quarter)
5/8 $16.83
3/4 $25.26
1 $43.29
1 1/4 or 1 1/2 $86.59
2 $138.30
3 $259.77
4 $432.95
6 $865.90
(b) Meter rates: for each gallon consumed during the quarter,
$4.64 per 1,000 gallons. This rate includes the state water tax
pursuant to L. 1983, c. 443.157
(2) General metered service: senior citizens.
(a) This rate shall be applied to use of water supplied through
residential meters when the following criteria and conditions
are met:
[1] The customer must be at least 65 years of age or totally
disabled.
157. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 58:12A-21 et seq.
§ 98-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-2
1:719
[2] The customer's household income which is that total
income earned by all residents of that household is not to
exceed $25,000 from all sources taxable and nontaxable,
but not including social security.
[3] The customer must qualify for senior citizens state tax
exemption of real property or for the state-regulated
Lifeline Program.
[4] All senior citizens to be recertified annually.
[5] The Chief Financial Officer shall be the enforcing agent.
(b) Senior citizen rates shall be as follows:
[1] Rate: $2.32 per 1,000 gallons.
[2] Fixed charge per quarter: $8.43.
C. Unmetered service for fire protection. This rate shall be applicable to
use of unmetered private fire service and shall be charged for each
premises so serviced.
(1) Rate per year.
Size of Service
(inches) Rate
4 $953
6 $2,020
8 $3,233
10 $3,964
(2) Private fire hydrant: $50.51.
(3) Maintenance of private facilities: At cost.
D. Metered hydrant service rates.
(1) Rate: $4.64 per 1,000 gallons.
(2) Minimum charge per year: $200. This rate includes the state water
tax pursuant to L. 1983, c. 443.158
E. Replacement of damaged meters: actual cost, including parts and labor.
F. Trouble call-out (when problem is unrelated to service provided by the
Park Ridge Water Department): actual cost, including parts and labor.
158. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 58:12A-21 et seq.
§ 98-2 PARK RIDGE CODE § 98-2.1
1:720
§ 98-2.1. Water service connection fee. [Added 6-13-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-009]
There shall be a water service connection fee established in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40A:31-11 in addition to the fees for water services and supply
set forth in Chapter 98. This fee shall, pursuant to statute, be recalculated
at the end of each budget year and may be recalculated and changed by
ordinance of the Mayor and Council after public hearing, on an annual
basis. The water service connection fee shall be payable in full to the
Borough of Park Ridge Water Department at the time a building water
connection permit is issued for connection to the Park Ridge water system.
No water connection permit shall be issued without payment of this fee.
§ 98-2.2. Connection fee calculation. [Added 6-13-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-009]
The water service connection fee shall be $1,915 per equivalent dwelling
unit as defined by law. The number of equivalent dwelling units for all
facilities shall be calculated as follows:
§ 98-2.3. Prior usage credit. [Added 6-13-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-009]
If any existing building(s) which are connected to the Park Ridge water
system are located on the property to be developed, and will be
disconnected prior to the construction of the new facility, the equivalent
dwelling units shall be calculated as the ratio of the projected net increase
in the average daily usage of the proposed facility to the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection's (NJDEP) recognized singlefamily
residential demand of 300 gallons per day or 108,000 gallons per
year. The projected average net increase in the average daily usage shall be
calculated as the difference between the projected average daily usage of
the proposed facility, less the prior year's average daily usage of the existing
facilities that will be disconnected. The water service connection fee shall
be based upon the net average increase.
A. A single-family dwelling unit shall be equal to one equivalent dwelling
unit.
B. For all other facilities, the number of equivalent dwelling units shall be
calculated as the ratio of projected average daily usage of the proposed
facility to the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection's
(NJDEP) recognized single-family residential demand of 300 gallons per
day or 108,000 gallons per year. The projected average demand for the
facility shall be calculated using the flow standards adopted by the
NJDEP under N.J.A.C. 7:14A-23.3, "Projected Flow Criteria" and are
incorporated herein by reference.
§ 98-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-2.4
1:721
§ 98-2.4. Severability. [Added 6-13-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-009]
If any section, part of any section, or clause or phrase of this article is for
any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not
affect the remaining provisions of this article. The governing body of the
Borough of Park Ridge declares that it would have passed the article and
each section and subsection thereof, irrespective of the facts that one or
more of the subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases may be declared
unconstitutional or invalid.
§ 98-2.4 PARK RIDGE CODE § 98-2.4
1:722
ARTICLE III
Payments and Deposits
[Adopted 2-25-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-006]
§ 98-3. Payment terms and security deposits.
A. Payment terms. Bills are due and payable when rendered. If unpaid at
the end of 20 days, a ten-day grace period will be allowed. Following the
30th day, the grace period will no longer be applicable and interest shall
accrue from the first day of delinquency, retroactive to Day 21, at a rate
of 8% per annum on the first $1,500 and 18% per annum for any
amount over $1,500. Additionally, the Board of Public Works reserves
the right to terminate service following suitable written notice.
B. Shutoffs.
(1) Customers who are delinquent 60 days or more from the billing due
date are subject to discontinuation of services.
(2) Customers whose service is disconnected will be charged a shutoff
fee of $75. There will be no reconnect fee during the Park Ridge
Water Department's normal business hours of 7:30 a.m. to 3:00
p.m., Monday through Friday.
(3) Customers will be charged a reconnection fee of $150 during
nonbusiness hours, prior to 7:30 a.m. and after 3:00 p.m. Monday
through Friday.
C. Security deposits, residential users. Owners on record of property
within the Borough of Park Ridge shall not be required to pay a deposit.
All tenants within the Borough of Park Ridge and all Woodcliff Lake
residents shall be required to pay a deposit as follows:
(1) Tenants and Woodcliff Lake residents: $200.
(2) Residents with a lawn sprinkling system: $400.
(3) Senior citizen, Lifeline and disability: $100.
D. Security deposits, commercial users. All new commercial users within
the Boroughs of Park Ridge and Woodcliff Lake shall be required to pay
a deposit based on meter size as follows:
Size
(inches) Fee
5/8, 3/4, 1, 1 1/2 $ 300
2 $1,000
3 $2,500
4 $5,000
§ 98-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-3
1:723
Size
(inches) Fee
6 $7,000
E. Security deposits held on account. Security deposits must be paid in full
when an account is opened. Failure to pay said security deposit within
three business days shall result in discontinuation of service. Such
deposit will be held until the premises are vacated and all final bills are
paid in full. Interest on the deposit is applied to the account when
payable. The Board of Public Works shall have the right to increase the
amount of a deposit if in its judgment such action is necessary.
F. Delinquent accounts. All residential and commercial users, both owner
and tenant whose account becomes 30 days or more delinquent shall be
subject to an increase in deposit based upon an estimated billing which
would accrue for three months' services calculated using the highest
quarterly billing from the preceding twelve-month period. If services
have not been in effect for 12 months, then an average would be
calculated based upon time occupied.
§ 98-3 PARK RIDGE CODE § 98-3
1:724
Chapter 99
WATER CONSERVATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 14.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 60.
Sewers — See Ch. 81A.
Water — See Ch. 98.
§ 99-1. When enforceable.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforceable only if they are invoked
and made effective by proclamation of the Mayor, or in his absence, by the
Council.
§ 99-2. Uses permitted and prohibited. [Amended 7-8-1974 by Ord.
No. 74-16]
No person shall use any water obtained from the municipal water system
except for vitally necessary purposes. Such water shall not be used for
the watering of lawns, streets or other places, public or private, during
the months of June, July, August and September, except as provided in the
implementing proclamation set forth above.
§ 99-3. Purposes.
This chapter shall be liberally construed as intended to conserve water
and advance the public health and welfare, to provide and keep in reserve
sufficient water for fire-fighting purposes or other emergency and to
provide an available supply thereof to meet daily minimum requirements of
each consumer.
§ 99-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-8-1974 by Ord. No.
74-16]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $500 or by imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 90 days, or both.
Chapter 100
WELLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 81A.
Water — See Ch. 98.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 112.
§ 98-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-4
1:725

ARTICLE I
Drilling of Private Water Wells
[Adopted 5-12-1987 by Ord. No. 87-8]
§ 100-1. Findings.
The Mayor and Council, on the advice of the Board of Public Works, find
that permitting the uncontrolled drilling of private water wells within the
Borough of Park Ridge and the possible contamination of its water supply
aquifers and introduction of pollutants into the Borough's water supply
system through intentional or inadvertent interconnection presents a clear
and present danger to the residents of the Borough of Park Ridge.
§ 100-2. Construction to be performed by public authority.
No private water well shall be drilled or constructed within the Borough of
Park Ridge by any entity or person other than the Board of Public Works, its
agents, servants or employees, except as herein provided.
§ 100-3. Interconnection with public system prohibited.
In order to prevent the introduction of untreated, untested water into
the Borough's system, no private water well now or hereafter drilled or
constructed within the borough shall be interconnected with the public
potable water supply system of the Borough of Park Ridge.
§ 100-4. Drawings to be submitted; hardship exemption.
Where a public water supply is otherwise unavailable or if a property
owner of the Borough wishes an exemption from this article, the property
owner shall provide to the Mayor and Council and the Board of Public
Works detailed engineering drawings indicating the location, design and
construction of the proposed well and the measures adopted to prevent
interconnection of the proposed well supply system with the public water
supply system of the Borough and contamination of the aquifer. Such
applications for a hardship exemption from this article shall be granted only
for nondomestic water use.
§ 100-5. Inspection; fee.
Any private water well installed by exemption under this article shall be
inspected annually by the Superintendent of the Borough Water Department
or his designee to assure compliance with this article. The applicant shall
pay to the Department of Utilities an inspection fee in the amount of $100
per annum.
§ 100-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-5
1:727
Chapter 101
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 50.
Development fees — See Ch. 51.
Flood hazard control — See Ch. 61.
House numbering — See Ch. 69.
Housing standards — See Ch. 70.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 74.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 80.
Sight distance at intersections — See Ch. 82.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 84A.
Subdivision and site plan review — See Ch.
87.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 88.
§ 100-5 PARK RIDGE CODE § 100-5
1:728
ARTICLE I
Title; Purpose
§ 101-1. Title; reproduction fee.
§ 101-2. Purpose.
The regulations set forth herein are deemed necessary to achieve the
following purposes:
A. This chapter shall be known as and cited to as the "Zoning Ordinance of
the Borough of Park Ridge."
B. The Borough may charge a fee equal to the cost incurred by the
Borough to reproduce a copy of the entire chapter, plus administrative
costs.
A. To guide the appropriate use or development of all lands in the Borough
in a manner which will promote the public health, safety, morals and
general welfare.
B. To secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other natural and man-made
disasters.
C. To provide adequate light, air and open space.
D. To ensure that the development of Park Ridge does not conflict with the
development and general welfare of neighboring municipalities, the
county and the state as a whole.
E. To promote the establishment of appropriate population densities and
concentrations that will contribute to the well-being of persons,
neighborhoods, communities and regions and to the preservation of the
environment.
F. To encourage the appropriate and efficient expenditure of public funds
by the coordination of public development with land use policies.
G. To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for a variety of
residential, recreational, commercial and office uses and open space,
both public and private, according to their respective environmental
requirements, in order to meet the needs of all New Jersey citizens.
H. To encourage the location and design of transportation routes which
will promote the free flow of traffic while discouraging the location of
such facilities and routes which result in congestion or blight.
I. To promote a desirable visual and aesthetic environment through
creative development techniques and good civic design and
arrangements.
J. To promote the conservation of historic sites and districts, open space
and valuable natural resources and to prevent urban sprawl and
§ 101-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-2
1:729
degradation of the environment and energy resources through
improper use of land.
K. To encourage planned developments which incorporate the best
features of design and relate the type, design and layout of residential,
commercial and recreational development to the particular site.
L. To encourage coordination of the various public and private procedures
and activities shaping land development with a view of lessening the
cost of such development and to the more efficient use of land.
§ 101-2 PARK RIDGE CODE § 101-2
1:730
ARTICLE II
Word Usage and Definitions
§ 101-3. Word usage.
Unless the context otherwise indicates, the following definitions shall be
used in the interpretation and construction of this chapter. Words used in
the present tense include the future and the future the present; the singular
number shall include the plural and the plural the singular; the word
"structure" includes the word "building"; the word "lot" includes the word
"plot"; the word "occupied" includes the words "designated or intended to
be occupied"; the word "used" shall include the words "arranged, designed,
constructed, altered, converted, rented, leased or intended to be used";
the word "shall" is mandatory and not optional; and the word "may" is
permissive.
§ 101-4. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, selected phrases and words are defined as
follows:
ACCESSORY EQUIPMENT — All equipment which creates noise or
vibrations such as any heating, ventilation, air-conditioning equipment,
swimming pool pumps, filtering equipment and pool heaters.[Added
10-14-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-9]
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure subordinate to the
principal use or structure on the same lot and serving a purpose customarily
incidental to the principal use or the principal structure.
ALTERATION, STRUCTURAL — Any changes in the supporting members
of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders, or in the
dimensions or configuration of the roof or exterior walls.
ANIMAL BOARDING — Any structure or premises designed for the feeding,
housing and exercising of animals not owned by the owner of the premises
and for which the owner of the premises may receive compensation.[Added
5-25-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-17]
ANIMAL KENNEL — Any structure or premises in which animals are
boarded, groomed, bred or trained for a fee, compensation or any other
commercial gain.[Added 5-25-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-17]
ANIMAL SHELTER — A facility used to house or contain stray, homeless,
abandoned or unwanted animals and that is owned, operated or maintained
by a public body, established humane society, animal welfare society or
other nonprofit organization devoted to the welfare, protection and humane
treatment of animals.[Added 5-25-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-17]
APPLICANT — A developer submitting an application for development.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — The application form and all
accompanying documents required by ordinance for approval of a
subdivision, site plan, conditional use, zoning variance or direction of the
§ 101-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-4
1:731
issuance of a permit pursuant to law, as required by Chapter 87, Subdivision
and Site Plan Review, and the rules and regulations of the approving
authority.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION or GASOLINE STATION — A building
or place of business where gasoline, fuel, oil and grease and/or batteries,
tires and automobile accessories are supplied and dispensed directly to the
motor vehicle trade and where mechanical repair but not body repair may
be rendered as an accessory activity, provided that all mechanical repair
takes place within the confines of a building.159
BOARD (APPROVING AUTHORITY) — The Planning Board or Zoning Board
of Adjustment of the Borough of Park Ridge, as appropriate.160
BUFFER AREA — A contiguous area of specified width adjacent to a lot
either in its natural state or planted with evergreen or other suitable
vegetation so as to form an effective year-round noise and visual screen.
Such areas may contain fences, underground utilities and earth berms, but
shall not include any principal or accessory building or use, parking areas
and aisles or storage areas, except that driveways providing access from
the street onto the site and which extend through a front yard buffer may
be included. Approved signs may also be placed in a required buffer.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a construction adapted
to permanent, temporary or continuous occupancy by persons, animals or
property, and having a roof.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The ratio of the horizontal area measured from
the exterior surface of the exterior walls of the ground floor of all principle
and accessory buildings on the lot to the total lot area.[Added 9-13-2005
by Ord. No. 2005-19]
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance of the building measured from
the midpoint of the highest slope roof of the structure to the average
finished grade, six feet from the building foundation, at the midpoint of each
building wall and at a point six feet from each building corner (measured
as if the building wall was extended six feet from the building
corner).[Amended 3-11-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-02]
BUILDING PERMIT — The permit issued by the Construction Code Official
to ensure that the structure complies with the Uniform Construction
Code,161 this chapter, and Chapter 87, Subdivision and Site Plan Review,
and other state, county and local ordinances applicable to the construction
itself, upon payment of the fees required by Borough ordinances.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A structure in which is conducted the principal
use of the site on which it is situated.162
159. Editor's Note: The original definition of "basement," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 7-11-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-8.
160. Editor's Note: The original definition of "boardinghouse," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 7-11-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-8.
161. Editor's Note: See Ch. 50, Construction Codes, Uniform.
162. Editor's Note: The original definition of "cellar," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 7-11-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-8.
§ 101-4 PARK RIDGE CODE § 101-4
1:732
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — A certificate issued upon completion of
a building or alteration thereof or the change of use thereof, indicating
the exact purpose for which the building is to be used and certifying its
compliance and the compliance of the structure itself with this chapter and
other Borough ordinances, as well as conditions of the approving authority
or other agencies in consideration of the grant to construct, alter or change
the use thereof.
CHILD-CARE CENTER — An institution offering the provision of
supplemental parental care and supervision for nonrelated children, on
a regular basis during part or all of the day, under license by the New
Jersey Department of Human Services. The term "child-care center," as
used herein, includes the terms "infant-care center," "day nursery," "daycare
center," "nursery school" or similar.[Added 12-26-1991 by Ord. No.
91-18]
COMMON OPEN SPACE — An open space area within or related to a site
designated as a development and designed and intended for the use or
enjoyment of the residents and owners of the development. Common open
space may contain such complementary structures and improvements as
are necessary and appropriate for the use or enjoyment of the residents and
owners of the development.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCES FOR THE DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED —
Any community residential facility licensed pursuant to P.L. 1977, c. 488
(N.J.S.A. 30:11B-1 et seq.), providing food, shelter and personal guidance,
under such supervision as required, to not more than 15 developmentally
disabled or mentally ill persons who require assistance, temporarily or
permanently, in order to live in the community, and shall include, but not
be limited to, group homes, halfway houses, intermediate care facilities,
supervised apartment living arrangements and hostels. Such a residence
shall not be considered a health care facility within the meaning of the
Health Care Facilities Planning Act (P.L. 1971, c. 136; N.J.S.A. 26:2H-1 et
seq.). In the case of such a "community residence" housing mentally ill
persons, such residence shall have been approved for a purchase of services
contract or an affiliation agreement pursuant to such procedures as shall
be established by regulation of the Division of Mental Health and Hospitals
of the Department of Human Services. As used herein, "developmentally
disabled person" means a person who is developmentally disabled as
defined in Section 2 of P.L. 1977, c. 448 (N.J.S.A. 30:11B-2), and "mentally ill
person" means a person who is afflicted with a mental illness as defined in
N.J.S.A. 30:4-23,163 but shall not include a person who has been committed
after having been found not guilty of a criminal offense by reason of insanity
or having been found unfit to be tried on a criminal charge.
COMMUNITY SHELTER FOR VICTIMS OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE — Any
shelter approved for a purchase of services contract and certified pursuant
to standards and procedures established by regulation of the Department
of Human Services pursuant to P.L. 1979, c. 335 (N.J.S.A. 30:40-1-14),
providing food, shelter, medical care, legal assistance, personal guidance
163. Editor's Note: Said provisions were repealed by L.1987, c. 116, effective 6-7-1989.
§ 101-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-4
1:733
and other services to not more than 15 persons who have been victims of
domestic violence, including any children of such victims, who temporarily
require shelter and assistance in order to protect their physical or
psychological welfare.
COMPLETE APPLICATION — An application form completed as specified by
ordinance and the rules and regulations of the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment, and all accompanying documents required by
ordinance for approval of the application for development including, where
applicable, but not limited to a site plan or subdivision plat, provided
that the Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment may require
such additional information not specified by ordinance or any revisions
in the accompanying documents as is reasonably necessary to make an
informed decision as to whether the requirements necessary for approval
of the application for development have been met. The "application" shall
not be deemed incomplete for lack of any such additional information or
any revisions in the accompanying documents so required by the Planning
Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment. An "application" shall be certified as
"complete" immediately upon the meeting of all requirements established
by ordinance and the rules and regulations of the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment and shall be deemed "complete" as of the date it is so
certified by the administrative officer for purposes of the commencement of
the time period for action by the approving authority.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district
only upon showing that such use in a specified location shall comply with
the conditions and standards for the location or operation of such use as
contained in this chapter and the issuance of an authorization thereof by
the Planning Board.
CONTINUING-CARE RETIREMENT COMMUNITY — An age-restricted
development that provides continuing accommodations and care from
independent living to long-term bed care on a contract basis and also
provides lifelong care in exchange for payment of fees.[Added 8-8-1995 by
Ord. No. 95-12]
COURT — Any area which is bounded on three or more sides by buildings
or walls which effectively enclose the area.
DENSITY — The number of dwelling units per gross area of land developed
or to be developed.
DETENTION BASIN — Those areas which exist or are created for the
temporary storage of stormwater and controlled discharge of this water to
a receiving drainage system.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any
land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including the
holder of an option or contract to purchase or other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels;
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or other structure or of any
§ 101-4 PARK RIDGE CODE § 101-4
1:734
mining, excavation or landfill; and any use or change in the use of any
building or other structure or land or extension of use of land, for which
permission may be required.
DISTRICT OR ZONE — Any portion of the territory of the Borough of
Park Ridge within which certain uniform regulations and requirements, or
various combinations thereof, apply under the provisions of this chapter.
DWELLING — Any permanent building or portion thereof designed or used
exclusively as the residence of one or more persons.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY — A building which is completely
surrounded by permanent open space occupied or intended for
occupancy exclusively by one family, with cooking, sleeping and
sanitary facilities for the use of the occupants of the dwelling unit; also
referred to as a "single-family dwelling."
A.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A building occupied or intended for
occupancy as separate living quarters for no more than two families,
with separate access, cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities for the
exclusive use of the occupants of each unit, which units are separated
from each other by vertical walls to the underside of the roof or by
horizontal floors; also referred to as a "duplex dwelling." For the
purposes of this chapter, two-family dwellings are prohibited, and
consequently, a structure cannot be designed to include a separate
dwelling unit regardless of the nature of the intended use; however,
two-family dwellings which were created before 1960 are hereby
categorized as preexisting nonconforming uses. [Amended
12-26-1991 by Ord. No. 91-18]
B.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A structure or building occupied or
intended for occupancy as separate living quarters for more than two
families, with separate cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities for the
exclusive use of the occupants of each unit.
C.
DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE — A one-family dwelling in a row of units in
which each unit has its own front and rear access to the outside, no unit
is located over another unit, and each unit is separated from any other
unit by one or more common fire-resistant walls.
D.
DWELLING, GARDEN APARTMENT — One or more multiple-family
buildings with dwelling units located one above the other, but not to
include more than two such units and side-to-side units, containing offstreet
parking, landscaped areas and other appurtenant facilities as
more fully required herein.
E.
DWELLING, TRAILER — A vehicle with or without its own motor power
and used for dwelling purposes and which is prohibited in Park Ridge.
(See "recreational trailer" below.) [Amended 12-26-1991 by Ord. No.
91-18]
F.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms occupied or intended for
occupancy as separate living quarters by one family or household,
G.
§ 101-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-4
1:735
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — The erection, construction, alteration or
maintenance, by public utilities or a municipal or other government agency,
of electrical, gas, water transmission or distribution systems or collection,
communication, water supply or sewage treatment and collection systems,
including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire
alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, light stanchions, telephone
lines, hydrants and other similar equipment and accessories in connection
therewith, reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate services by
such public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies for the
public health, safety or general welfare, but not including buildings.
FAMILY — Any number of persons related by blood, marriage or adoption
or living together as a single housekeeping unit.
FLOOD HAZARD AREA — The rivers or other watercourses and adjacent
land areas subject to inundation, as defined by the New Jersey Department
of Environmental Protection, in the event of the design flood. These areas
include but are not necessarily limited to the floodway and flood-fringe
areas as delineated on the Flood Insurance Study for the Borough of Park
Ridge, dated April 1980, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps
and Flood Boundary Maps prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.[Amended 12-26-1991 by Ord. No. 91-18]
FLOODWAY — The rivers or other watercourses and the adjacent land areas
to be reserved in order to discharge the design flood without cumulatively
increasing the water surface elevation more than 0.2 foot or as defined by
the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
FLOOR AREA (GROSS) — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the
several floors of a building or structure from the exterior face of exterior
walls or from a center line of a wall separating two buildings.[Amended
5-28-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-8]
FLOOR AREA (NET) — The total of all floor areas of a building, excluding
stairwells, elevator shafts, equipment rooms, interior vehicular parking or
loading and all floors below the first or ground floor, except when used
or intended to be used for human habitation or service to the public. The
net floor area should be utilized for the purposes of imposing parking
regulations, provided that no more than 10% of the gross floor area may be
reduced for these common area calculations.[Added 5-28-2002 by Ord.
No. 2002-8; 5-28-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-8]
FLOOR AREA RATIO — The gross floor area of all principal buildings or
structures on a lot divided by the total lot area. The gross floor area of all
principal buildings or structures excludes any floor area where the finished
floor level is greater than three feet below the average grade measured
six feet from the structure and any floor area associated with a detached
garage.[Amended 7-11-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-8; 11-10-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009-23]
provided that access is directly from the outside or through a common
hall and that cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities are provided
within the dwelling for the exclusive use of the occupants.
§ 101-4 PARK RIDGE CODE § 101-4
1:736
GARAGE — A structure used for the storage of one or more vehicles.
GARAGE, REPAIR — Any building, structure, premises and land in which
a business or service involving the maintenance, servicing or repair of
vehicles, but not body repair of vehicles, is conducted or rendered.
GARAGE WIDTH — The horizontal distance between the outside of the
opposing walls, measured parallel to the garage door(s) which allow
vehicles to enter and exit.[Added 4-12-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-009]
GRADE, FINISHED — The completed surface of lawns, walks and roads
brought to grades as shown on approved plans relating thereto.
GREEN ROOF — A conventional roof that is covered with a layer of
vegetation, also known as "living roofs." There are two types of green roofs:
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several
floors of a building measured from the exterior walls of the building, but not
including interior parking lots.
HANDICAPPED PERSON — For the purpose of this chapter, a person shall
be considered "handicapped" if such person is determined, pursuant to
federal regulations adopted by the Secretary of Health and Human
Services, to have an impairment which is expected to be long-continued and
of an indefinite duration, which substantially impedes his or her ability to
live independently in conventional housing and which is of such a nature
that mobility could be improved by more suitable housing than conventional
facilities provide. A "handicapped person" shall be one exhibiting essentially
physical disabilities, provided that said person shall be able to live
essentially as an independent individual or within a family or does not
require continuous medical supervision or care, as provided in the rules and
regulations of the Bergen County Housing Authority.
HISTORIC SITE — Any real property, man made structure, natural object
or configuration or any portion or group of the foregoing which has been
formally designated in the Master Plan as being of historical,
archaeological, cultural, scenic or architectural significance.
HOME OCCUPATION — An activity which is incidental to the use of a
dwelling for residential purposes and is conducted as a conditional use in
the resident's dwelling unit.
HOUSING FOR THE HANDICAPPED — Multifamily housing provided for
physically handicapped persons in accordance with the definition of a
handicapped person as contained herein. Said housing shall not be
construed to be a nursing home, hospital, housing for the developmentally
Intensive roofs, which are thicker and can support a wider variety of
plants but are heavier and require more maintenance; and
A.
Extensive roofs, which are covered in a light layer of vegetation and
are lighter than an intensive green roof. For purposes of this chapter,
an extensive green roof includes a soil depth range between three
and six inches sufficient to support smaller plant communities. [Added
9-13-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-026]
B.
§ 101-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-4
1:737
disabled, group housing, group care housing or any other form of
institutional and quasi-institutional facilities. Each dwelling unit shall
contain separate kitchen, living room, bedroom and sanitary facilities for
each family or household resident therein.
IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE — Any material which reduces or prevents
absorption of stormwater into land and which reduces percolation to a rate
slower than 120 minutes per inch.164
INDEPENDENT AND ASSISTED-LIVING FACILITIES — A building that
provides a residential living environment assisted by congregate meals,
housekeeping and personal services for persons 62 years of age or older
who have temporary or periodic difficulties with one or more essential
activities of daily living and for any person, regardless of age, who has a
physical or developmental disability.[Added 8-8-1995 by Ord. No. 95-12]
INSTITUTIONAL USE — A nonprofit, religious, or public use such as a
church, library, public or private school, hospital or government-owned
or -operated building, structure or land used for such institutional
purposes.[Added 5-27-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-010]
JUNK MOTOR VEHICLES AND MACHINERY — Includes any automobiles,
motor vehicles, parts thereof and/or machinery no longer in actual or
current use as such or which is dismounted or disassembled, being
overhauled or wholly unfit for use without rebuilding or reconditioning, or
which has been discarded for the original use for which it was intended or
is not licensed for the current year.
JUNKYARD — An area of more than 100 square feet utilized for the deposit,
collection, storage, keeping or abandonment of wrecked or inoperative
automobiles or other vehicles or parts thereof, wastepaper, rags, sheet
metal, used building materials, house furnishings, machinery or other scrap
materials.
LOADING SPACE or LOADING AREA — An off-street space or berth on the
same lot with a building or a group of buildings, for temporary parking of a
commercial vehicle while loading or unloading materials or equipment.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise, as permitted by law, and to be used, developed or built upon as
a unit.
LOT, CORNER — A parcel of land located at the junction of and abutting
two intersecting streets or at the bend of the same street where the
angle of intersection does not exceed 135°.
A.
LOT, INTERIOR — A parcel of land other than a corner lot or threesided
lot.
B.
C. LOT, THREE-SIDED — A lot having frontage along three streets.
164. Editor's Note: The original definition of "improved lot coverage," which immediately
followed this definition, was repealed 9-13-2005 by Ord. No. 205-19.
§ 101-4 PARK RIDGE CODE § 101-4
1:738
LOT DEPTH — A horizontal distance between the front lot line and rear lot
line, measured perpendicular or radial to the front lot line at the midpoint
of the lot frontage to the furthest distance thereof or taken as the average
of three measurements, one taken at each corner and one taken at the
midpoint for irregularly shaped parcels.
LOT FRONTAGE — The length of the front lot line.
LOT LINE — A line of record bounding the lot.
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured
parallel to the front lot line at the required front yard setback line.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot the area, dimension or location of which
was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of this chapter, but
which fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it
is located by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure the size, dimension or
location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment
of this chapter but which fails to conform to the requirements of the
zoning district in which it is located by reason of such adoption, revision or
amendment.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use or activity which was lawful prior to the
adoption, revision or amendment of this chapter but which fails to conform
to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by reason of
such adoption, revision or amendment.
OPEN SPACE — An area of land or water essentially unimproved and
set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public or private use or
enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of the owners and occupants of land
adjoining or neighboring such open space, provided that such areas may be
improved with only those improvements that are designed to be incidental
to the natural openness of the land.
LOT, THROUGH — A parcel of land which extends through from one
street to another, and which streets do not intersect at the property.165
D.
LOT LINE, FRONT — The line which separates the publicly owned or
controlled street right-of-way from the private property which abuts
upon the street, as distinct from a sidewalk line, curbline or edge-ofpavement
line. On a street or highway shown on the adopted Master
Plan of the Borough, the "front lot line" shall be considered to be the
proposed right-of-way line for the street.
A.
LOT LINE, REAR — The lot line opposite and most distant from the
front lot line.
B.
C. LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line.
165. Editor's Note: The original definition of "lot coverage," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 9-13-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-19.
§ 101-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-4
1:739
PARKING SPACE — A place that is arranged and intended, exclusively,
for the parking of one motor vehicle in a parking area or a garage in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter and Chapter 87,
Subdivision and Site Plan Review. A "parking space" shall also mean a
"parking stall."
PATIO — A level, landscaped and/or surfaced area directly adjacent to a
principal building, which will be no more than one step up, as defined by
BOCA, at its maximum distance from the finished grade. Such structures
which are more than one step up, as defined by BOCA, shall be considered
a deck.
PERFORMANCE STANDARD — A criterion established to control noise,
odor, smoke, toxic or noxious matter, vibration, fire and explosion hazards,
glare or heat generated by or inherent in uses of land or buildings.
PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of the Borough of Park Ridge.
PROFESSIONAL, RESIDENT — Includes the following: an architect,
accountant, chiropractor, dentist, surgeon or physician, engineer, land
surveyor, lawyer, professional planner and real estate or insurance agent
or broker, provided that the professional person owns and occupies, as a
dwelling, the unit used in the practice of the profession and that the use
does not exceed 30% of the floor area.
PUBLIC AREAS — Public parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other
recreational areas; other public open spaces; scenic and historic sites; and
sites for schools and other public buildings and structures.
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE — An open space area conveyed or otherwise
dedicated to a municipality, municipal agency, Board of Education, state or
county agency or other public body for recreational or conservation uses.
RESTAURANT — An establishment where food and drink are prepared,
served and consumed primarily within the principal building.[Amended
12-26-1991 by Ord. No. 91-18; 8-8-1995 by Ord. No. 95-12]
RESTAURANT, TAKEOUT — An establishment where food and/or beverages
are sold in a form ready for consumption, where all or a significant portion
of the consumption takes place or is designed to take place outside the
confines of the restaurant.[Added 8-8-1995 by Ord. No. 95-12]
RETAIL TRADE — An establishment engaged in selling goods or
merchandise to the general public and rendering services incidental to the
sale of such goods.
RETENTION BASIN — Those areas which exist or are created for the
storage of stormwater and absorption of this water into the ground.
ROOMING HOUSE — See "boardinghouse."
SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS —
BUSINESS SERVICES — Establishments primarily engaged in
rendering services to business establishments on a fee or contract
basis, such as advertising and mailing, employment services,
A.
§ 101-4 PARK RIDGE CODE § 101-4
1:740
SIGHT TRIANGLES — A triangular-shaped portion of land established at
street intersections formed by the street lines drawn between points along
such street lines 25 feet from their point of intersection in which nothing
is erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as to
limit or obstruct the sight distance of motorists entering or leaving the
intersection. Also known as a "sight easement."[Added 5-27-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-010]
STORY — That portion of a building between the surface of any floor and the
surface of the floor above it or, if there is no floor above it, then the space
between the surface of the floor and the ceiling above it.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive
or other way which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway or
which is shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law or which
is shown on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the County
Recording Officer prior to the appointment of a Planning Board and the
grant to such Board of the power to review plats; and includes the land
between street lines, whether improved or unimproved, and may comprise
pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, parking areas and other
areas within the street lines.
STREET LINE — The line which separates the publicly owned or controlled
street right-of-way from the private property which abuts upon the street as
distinct from a sidewalk line, curbline or edge-of-pavement line. On a street
or highway shown on the adopted Master Plan of the Borough, the street
line shall be considered to be the proposed right-of-way line for the street.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for
occupancy, use or ornamentation, whether installed on, above or below the
surface of a parcel of land.
management and consulting services, development and testing,
photofinishing, copying and supply services.
PERSONAL AND HOUSEHOLD SERVICES — Establishments primarily
engaged in providing personal/household services, including
photographic studios, beauty shops, barbershops, shoe repair, clothing
repair and rental shops; on-premises repair of small household
appliances; and instructional classes limited to dance, karate and
similar activities, music and ceramic classes; provided, however, that
mortuary services and dry-cleaning establishments are specifically
excluded. [Amended 12-26-1991 by Ord. No. 91-18]
B.
A. (Reserved)166
STORY, FIRST — The lowest story or the ground story of any building,
the floor of which is not more than 12 inches below the average ground
level of the exterior walls of the building.
B.
166. Editor's Note: Original Subsection A, "story, half," was repealed 7-11-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-8.
§ 101-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-4
1:741
TRAILER — A vehicle with or without its own motive power, including
campers and mobile homes, designed to be used as temporary living
quarters or to hold camping and recreational equipment; any nonmotorized
open or closed vehicle pulled by another vehicle designed to carry
equipment, debris, other vehicles or any other materials.[Amended
12-26-1991 by Ord. No. 91-18; 7-11-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-8]
USE — The specific purpose for which land or a building, structure or
facilities are designed, arranged or intended or for which they are or may
be occupied or maintained.
VARIANCE — Permission to depart from the literal requirements of this
chapter pursuant to law.
VEGETATIVE WASTE — Waste materials from farms, plant nurseries and
greenhouses that are produced from the raising of plants. This waste
includes such crop residues as plant stalks, hulls, leaves and tree wastes
processed through a wood chipper. Also included are noncrop residues such
as leaves, grass clippings, tree parts, shrubbery and garden wastes.[Added
9-13-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-026]
VETERINARY HOSPITAL — A place where animals are given medical care
and the boarding of animals is limited to short-term care incidental to the
hospital use.[Added 5-25-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-17]
WAREHOUSE — A building used primarily for the storage of goods and/or
materials.
WETLANDS — Those areas that are inundated by surface or groundwater
with a frequency sufficient to support and, under normal circumstances,
that do or would support a prevalence of vegetative or aquatic life that
requires saturated or seasonally saturated soil conditions for growth and
reproduction. Wetlands include but are not limited to swamps, marshes,
bogs and similar areas such as sloughs, potholes, wet meadows, river
overflows, mud flats and natural ponds. Wetlands shall include, but not
be limited to, those shown on the United States Department of Interior
wetlands maps or similar maps published by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection.
YARD —
YARD — An open space which lies between the principal or accessory
building or buildings and the nearest lot line and which is unoccupied
and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as provided by this
chapter. (See the illustrations at the end of this chapter.)
A.
YARD, FRONT — A space extending the full width of the lot between
any building and the front lot line and measured perpendicular to the
building at the closest point to the front lot line.
B.
YARD, REAR — A space extending across the full width of the lot
between the principal building and the rear lot line and measured
perpendicular to the building to the closest point of the rear lot line.
C.
§ 101-4 PARK RIDGE CODE § 101-4
1:742
ZONING BOARD — The Zoning Board of Adjustment of the Borough of Park
Ridge.
ZONING OFFICER — The administrative officer designated to administer
this chapter.
YARD, SIDE — A space extending from the front yard to the rear yard
between the principal building and the side lot line and measured
perpendicular from the side lot line closest to the principal building.
D.
§ 101-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-4
1:743

ARTICLE III
Establishment of Zoning Districts and Map
§ 101-5. Districts designated. [Amended 7-14-1992 by Ord. No.
92-20; 1-27-1998 by Ord. No. 98-1; 9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-11;
9-13-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-19; 5-25-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-17;
4-26-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-015; 8-23-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-025167]
For the purpose of this chapter, the Borough of Park Ridge is hereby divided
into the following zone districts:
Zone
Designation Zone Description
R-40 One-Family Residential
R-20 One-Family Residential
R-15 One-Family Residential
R-10 One-Family Residential
R-HH Housing for the Handicapped
AH-1 Affordable Housing
AH-2 Affordable Housing
AH-3 Affordable Housing Overlay
GA-1 Garden Apartments
GA-2 Garden Apartments
RT Residential Townhouse
BUS-1 Business
BUS-2 Business and Professional Office
BUS-3 Mixed Business
ORL Office Research Laboratory
RP Residential Professional
NB Neighborhood Business
§ 101-6. Zoning Map. [Amended 9-13-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-19;
9-13-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-026]
The location of boundaries of the districts that are established on the Zoning
Map of the Borough of Park Ridge, as prepared by Burgis Associates dated
June 22, 2011, as amended or supplemented, is incorporated herein by
reference and made a part of this chapter.168
§ 101-7. Interpretation of boundaries.
167. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
168. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 101-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-7
1:745
A. Designations of zone boundaries. The zone boundary lines are intended
generally to follow the center lines of streets, existing lot lines, the
center lines of rivers, streams and other waterways and municipal
boundary lines. When a district boundary line does not follow such a
line, its position shall be shown on the Zoning Map by a specific
dimension expressing its distance, in feet, from a street line or other
boundary line as indicated or shall be determined by the use of the
scale appearing on such map.
B. Determination of doubtful lines. In cases of uncertainty or
disagreement as to the true location of any zone boundary line, the
determination thereof shall lie with the Board of Adjustment.
§ 101-7 PARK RIDGE CODE § 101-7
1:746
ARTICLE IV
District Regulations
§ 101-8. Schedule of regulations. [Amended 9-13-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-19]
All regulations which control development in each of the districts
designated in this chapter are set forth on the attached Schedules IV-1 and
VI-2 which are attached hereto and made a part of this chapter.169
§ 101-9. Application of regulations.
§ 101-10. General regulations.
A. No building shall be erected, moved, altered, constructed,
reconstructed or enlarged except as specified in this chapter, nor shall
any land or building be used for any purpose or in any manner, except in
conformity with all the regulations, requirements and/or restrictions
specified in this chapter for the district in which such building or land is
located.
B. In interpreting and applying this chapter, the requirements contained
herein are declared to be the minimum requirements for the protection
and promotion of the public health, safety, morals and general welfare.
A. Any use not specifically designated as a principal permitted use,
accessory use or conditional use is specifically prohibited from any zone
district in the Borough of Park Ridge.
B. No yard or other open space provided about any building for the
purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be
considered as providing a yard or open space for any other building.
C. The area or dimension of any lot, yard or other space shall not be
reduced to less than the minimum required by this chapter, and if
already existing at less than the minimum required by this chapter, said
area or dimension may be continued and shall not be further reduced.
D. All off-street parking and loading shall be located on the lot on which
the principal use is located.
E. In cases of uncertainty or disagreement as to the proper application of
any of the requirements of this chapter, the determination thereof shall
lie with the Board of Adjustment.
F. The sale or display of goods outside the confines of a building or
structure is prohibited, except for the following:
(1) The sale of products for garden supply and building material
establishments.
169. Editor's Note: Schedules IV-1 and IV-2 are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 101-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-10
1:747
§ 101-11. Number of buildings restricted.
There shall be no more than one principal building on each lot in any
district, except as permitted for townhouses, garden apartments and
housing for the handicapped, as regulated herein.
§ 101-12. Limitation on number of uses on lot. [Amended 4-26-2011
by Ord. No. 2011-015]
There shall be no more than one principal use on each lot in any residential
district, ORL District and B-2 District. Multiple uses shall be permitted on a
lot in the B-1 District, provided that offices within a mixed-use building shall
be limited to the second floor of the building.
(2) The sale of gasoline and related automotive goods at automobile
service stations.
(3) Sidewalk sales, subject to the issuance of the applicable permit by
the Borough.
(4) Outdoor sales for nonprofit and philanthropic organizations,
subject to the issuance of any applicable permit by the Borough.
G. Prohibition of sale of marijuana and related products in all zones.
[Added 10-23-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-017]
(1) In every zoning district referred to in § 101-10 of this chapter, no
land or building shall be used or allowed to be used for the sale or
distribution of marijuana, which includes retail and wholesale
marijuana stores, retail and wholesale marijuana cultivation
facilities, retail and wholesale marijuana products manufacturing
facilities, and retail and wholesale marijuana testing facilities, and
the operation of retail and wholesale marijuana social clubs.
(2) All activities related to the abovementioned retail and wholesale
uses such as, but not limited to, cultivation, possession, extraction,
manufacturing, processing, storing, laboratory testing, labeling,
transporting, delivering, dispensing, transferring and distributing
are expressly prohibited within the Borough. The foregoing shall
not be construed to limit any privileges or rights of a qualifying
patient, primary caregiver, registered or otherwise, or registered
dispensary pursuant to the New Jersey Compassionate Use Medical
Marijuana Act, N.J.S.A. 24:6I-1.
(3) Fines and penalties. The maximum penalty for violation of any
provision of this subsection shall, upon conviction, be a fine not
exceeding $2,000 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90
days or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, at the
discretion of the Municipal Court Judge.
§ 101-10 PARK RIDGE CODE § 101-13
1:748
§ 101-13. Corner lots.
Corner lots shall have two front yards for measurement purposes.
§ 101-14. Preexisting nonconforming two-family dwellings.
Preexisting nonconforming owner-occupied two-family dwellings shall be
permitted to be enlarged or otherwise improved, provided that no additional
dwelling units result from the improvement and that none of the applicable
zone district's yard, coverage and height restrictions are violated.
§ 101-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-14
1:749

ARTICLE V
Supplementary Lot, Yard and Bulk Regulations
§ 101-15. Lot regulations.
A. Every principal building or structure shall be built upon a lot with at
least the minimum required frontage upon an improved and approved
street.
B. The minimum lot width shall be measured at the required front yard
setback line. However, in cases of irregularly shaped lots whose sides
are not parallel, the lot width may be measured at either the required
front yard setback or front lot line, as follows:
(1) In cases of irregularly shaped lots whose sides are not parallel and
the lot width is measured at the required front yard setback, the
street frontage shall not be less than 60% of the minimum lot width
required, provided that the lot width measured at the front yard
setback line shall conform to the minimum width specified in the
zoning schedule for the district in which the lot is contained.
(2) In cases of irregularly shaped lots whose sides are not parallel, the
lot width may be measured at the front lot line, provided that the
width of the lot measured at the required front yard setback line
shall not be less than 85% of the required lot width measured at the
front lot line.
C. Corner lots shall have a required front yard along each street line and
one required rear yard opposite a front yard, as illustrated in the sketch
maps in the appendix.170 The rear yard shall be identified in the
following manner: [Amended 8-14-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-17]
(1) A corner lot that has an existing dwelling shall identify its rear yard
in a manner consistent with the dwelling's orientation and rear
facade.
(2) A corner lot that is vacant or is the subject of a development
application before either the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall identify its rear lot as that which is opposite from
the site's wider front yard width.
(3) The rear yard design should be consistent with the sketch maps
included in the appendix of this chapter.171All other yards shall be
considered side yards.
(4) Maps, which appear in the appendix of this chapter, are illustrative
of the changes set forth in this Subsection C and are incorporated
herein by reference.
170. Editor's Note: The sketch maps are included as Diagrams 1 through 4 at the end of this
chapter.
171. Editor's Note: The sketch maps are included as Diagrams 1 through 4 at the end of this
chapter.
§ 101-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-15
1:751
§ 101-16. Yard regulations.
D. Within any sight triangle, no grade, vegetation, sign or other object
shall be allowed to exceed a height of 30 inches above the adjacent
roadway or be placed in such manner as to limit or obstruct the sight
distance of motorists entering or leaving the intersection. Said triangle
shall be formed by the street lines of such lot and a line drawn between
points along such street lines 25 feet distant from their point of
intersection.
E. Where a single lot under individual ownership extends from one street
to another, it is defined herein as a "through lot" with street frontage on
two different streets. Such lots are now prohibited as legal lots in the
Borough of Park Ridge. [Amended 9-13-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-19]
F. In all cases where a lot is divided by one or more district boundary
lines, regulations for the less-restricted portions of such lot shall not
extend into the more-restricted portion.
G. Street front regulation. In all lots in all districts, except for lots in the
NB Neighborhood Business Zone District, the minimum street frontage
required shall be 75% of the minimum lot width as provided in each
district, and in no case shall a lot have less than 75 feet of street
frontage. [Added 9-13-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-19; amended
5-25-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-17]
A. General regulations.
(1) No building or part thereof shall project into any required yard
except as provided hereafter.
(2) No yard or open space required in connection with any building or
use shall be considered as providing a required open space for any
other building on the same or any other lot.
B. Projections into required yards; general exceptions.
(1) The ordinary projection of parapets, windowsills, doorposts,
rainwater leaders and similar ornamental or structural fixtures
may project a maximum distance of six inches into required yards.
(2) Cornices, canopies, eaves, bay windows, balconies and necessary
landings and other similar architectural features may project a
maximum distance of two feet into required yards. Front steps may
project a maximum distance of four feet into a required front yard.
(3) Chimneys or flues may project a maximum distance of three feet
into required yards.
(4) Patios and decks may be located in any rear yard and must conform
to the building side yard setbacks in all zones. [Amended
6-13-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-12]
§ 101-15 PARK RIDGE CODE § 101-16
1:752
§ 101-17. Height regulations. [Amended 3-11-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-02]
(5) Fences and walls may project into any required yard, subject to
§ 101-21E where applicable.
(6) Accessory equipment designed in accordance with § 101-21A.
[Added 10-14-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-9]
C. Front yard requirements affected by Master Plan or Official Map.
Where any lot fronts upon a street right-of-way which is proposed to be
widened as indicated on an Official Map or an adopted Master Plan of
the Borough of Park Ridge, the front yard shall be measured from such
proposed future right-of-way line.
D. Front yard and area requirements affected by future widening. Where
any lot fronts upon a street right-of-way which is proposed to be
widened by means of a proposed dedication of land for a right-of-way
widening or proposed easement for road-widening purposes, the front
yard and lot area shall be measured from such proposed future right-ofway
or easement line. [Amended 12-26-1991 by Ord. No. 91-18]
A. No building or structure shall have a greater number of feet than are
permitted in the district where such building is located.
B. Chimneys, flues, church spires, belfries, cupolas, parapet walls,
flagpoles, fire towers, water towers and all other necessary mechanical
appurtenances and similar features, but excluding telegraph, radio and
television transmission or other antennas, shall be exempt from the
height provisions of this chapter, provided that:
(1) In the ORL Zone, the height of each such feature, except parapet
walls, shall not exceed 18 feet and 1 1/2 stories above the level of
such roof, whichever is less. Parapet walls shall not extend more
than four feet above the height of the building.
(2) In all other zones, the height of each such feature, except parapet
walls, shall not exceed 10 feet above the level of such roof. Parapet
walls shall not extend more than four feet above the height of the
building.
(3) The aggregate area covered by all such features, but excluding
solar heating features, shall not exceed 15% of the area of the roof
of the building of which they are a part.
(4) The exterior treatment of all such mechanical penthouses and
other projections permitted herein shall be of materials
substantially similar to the facade of the building itself and shall be
similarly designed so as to be architecturally an integral part of the
structure. The determination of compliance with all aspects of this
section shall be by the approving authority as a function of site plan
approval.
§ 101-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-17
1:753
§ 101-18. Lot coverage regulations.
§ 101-19. Floor area ratio bonuses.173 [Added 4-26-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-013; amended 11-29-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-035]
Requirements for permitted floor area ratio bonuses as delineated in §
101-8, Schedule IV-2:174
(5) Height regulations governing antennas are subject to § 101-22G.
C. In addition to all other applicable height limitations contained in this
chapter, no exterior facade of a building or structure shall have a height
greater than 32 feet. For purposes of this section alone, the exterior
facade of a structure includes all building facades which abut finished
grade, and shall include any parallel facade constructed within six feet
of that exterior facade.172 [Amended 4-26-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-014]
(1) The height of the exterior facade of the building or structure is
measured from finished grade adjacent to that portion of the facade
measured six feet out from any portion of said facade, to the
highest point on that building facade.
(2) Measurements shall be taken from grade level measured upward
on the same plane as the facade to the highest point of the
structure located on that same plane or any parallel facade
constructed within six feet of said facade.
D. The minimum roof slope for all buildings located in residential zone
districts is 5/12.
A. The maximum lot coverage for each lot shall not be greater than is
permitted in the district where such buildings and structures are
located.
B. The maximum improved lot coverage for each lot shall not be greater
than is permitted in the district where such buildings, structures and
other improvements are located.
A. A developer shall be entitled to an increase in the permitted floor area
ratio for a residential structure if the proposed development complies
with the requirements set forth in § 101-19D or 101-19E below.
B. In order to qualify for the permitted increase in floor area ratio, the
following items shall be submitted for review by the Borough's
professionals:
172. Editor's Note: See e.g., the maximum building height measurement diagrams, elevation
and plan views, included at the end of this chapter.
173. Editor's Note: Original § 101-19, Buffer regulations, was repealed 9-13-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-19. See now § 101-63.
174. Editor's Note: Schedule IV-2 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 101-17 PARK RIDGE CODE § 101-19
1:754
(1) For a green building strategies bonus, all of the following items
shall be submitted:
(a) Certification of compliance from a licensed architect.
(b) LEED homes project checklist detailing sufficient points to
achieve certified status in the following categories: water
efficiency, energy and atmosphere, materials and resources,
indoor environmental quality.
(c) Details for all design components identified on the LEED
checklist shall be included on the signed and sealed
architectural plans.
(2) For an architectural guidelines bonus, all of the following items
shall be submitted:
(a) Building elevations for each facade fronting on a public rightof-
way and floor plans for all floors in the structure.
(b) Dimensions and calculations for each design component that is
being utilized to meet the standards identified in Subsection D
below.
C. Applications that do not require public hearings before the Planning
Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be reviewed by the Borough
Planner. No building permit shall be issued prior to the completion of
the Borough Planner's review.
D. Green building strategies. If a developer incorporates green building
strategies, which result in the LEED (Leadership in Energy and
Environmental Design) certification of the development, the property
may be developed with an additional two-percent floor area ratio over
the maximum. The development may incorporate such elements as
pervious paving materials, green architecture, indigenous landscaping,
gray water reuse, and solar energy use.
E. Architectural guidelines. A structure must meet both of the criteria in
Subsection E(1) and (2) below to be deemed in compliance with this
section. If the structure does meet both the criteria below, an additional
four-percent floor area ratio over the maximum for a residential
structure shall be permitted.
(1) Facade vertical articulation. Each building facade facing a public
right-of-way must have elements of vertical articulation comprised
of columns, recessed or projecting window features, entry designs,
overhangs, ornamental projection of the molding, or recession or
protrusion of the main surface of the wall itself. The vertical
articulations shall be designed in accordance with the following:
(a) Each vertical articulation must be a minimum of one foot deep.
§ 101-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-19
1:755
(b) Each projection may extend into the required front yard a
maximum of two feet in depth.
(c) The total width of the building facade projections, identified in
§ 101-19E(1), must occupy between 20% and 60% of the total
facade width.
(2) Building materials. Exterior building materials shall be classified as
either primary, secondary or accent materials. The facade must be
designed in accordance with the following:
(a) Primary materials are materials that shall cover at least 80% of
the facade of the building.
(b) Secondary materials are materials that shall cover not more
than 20% of the facade.
(c) Accent materials may include door and window frames, lintels,
cornices and other elements and may cover no more than 10%
of the facade.
§ 101-19 PARK RIDGE CODE § 101-19
1:756
ARTICLE VI
Supplementary Regulations Governing Certain Uses
§ 101-20. Regulations governing certain principal permitted uses.
A. Places of worship. Churches, temples and other places of worship shall
be governed by the following regulations:
(1) Area, bulk and yard requirements:
(a) Minimum lot area: two acres.
(b) Minimum lot width: 200 feet.
(c) Minimum lot depth: 300 feet.
(d) Minimum front yard: 50 feet.
(e) Minimum side yards: 35 feet.
(f) Minimum rear yard: 40 feet.
(g) Maximum building height: 2 1/2 stories; 35 feet.
(h) Maximum building coverage: 30%.
(i) Maximum impervious coverage: 75%.
(j) Minimum buffer width: 50 feet.
(2) Where two or more buildings are located on a site, they shall be
separated by a yard area at least twice the average height of the
two buildings or 40 feet, whichever is greater.
B. Community residences. Community residences for the developmentally
disabled and community shelters for victims of domestic violence shall
be a permitted use in all residential districts, subject to the following:
(1) A community residence or shelter shall comply fully with all zoning
and health regulations applicable to single-family residences in the
zone district in which it is located.
(2) A community residence or shelter may not be occupied by more
than six residents, excluding resident staff.
C. Housing for the handicapped. Housing for the handicapped shall be
permitted in the R-HH Zone, subject to all applicable zone district
regulations and the following:
(1) Recreational and sitting areas shall be provided in the amount of
200 square feet per dwelling unit.
(2) Where two or more buildings are on a site, they shall be separated
by a yard area which is at least twice the average height of the two
buildings or 40 feet, whichever is greater.
§ 101-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-20
1:757
(3) All buildings and site design construction shall, minimally, be in
accordance with regulations for physically handicapped persons as
provided by law.
(4) Each dwelling unit for handicapped persons shall be provided with
two means of access.
D. Townhouses (R-T Zone).
(1) Density. The maximum gross residential density for townhouse
development shall be four dwelling units per acre.
(2) Street and roadway setbacks. A minimum fifty-foot setback shall be
provided from any external street right-of-way or from any major
street as part of any overall circulation plan adopted by the
Planning Board or Official Map adopted by the governing body. A
thirty-foot setback shall be provided from any internal roadway or
driveway to any building.
(3) Buffer area.
(a) A minimum buffer area of at least 100 feet shall be provided
from all external lot lines, except that portion which fronts
upon an external street. Such buffer area shall be kept in its
natural state where wooded, and when natural vegetation is
sparse or nonexistent, the landowner may be required to
provide a year-round visual screen as determined by the
approving authority.
(b) Notwithstanding the general standards set forth herein, the
approving authority, upon specific findings or particular
circumstances relating to configuration, natural vegetation or
the lack of the same, soil conditions, drainage or other similar
site characteristics or where said proposed development is
compatible with existing development, may increase the
required buffer area to 150 feet or may permit the reduction of
said buffer area to 75 feet.
(c) No principal or accessory use or structure, including, without
limitation, off-street parking and loading areas, shall be
permitted within the required buffer area; but the approving
authority may, upon a finding of reasons thereof, permit a
portion of a buffer area to be used for utility easements or
streets to ensure access to or from adjacent property.
(d) Required buffer areas shall be included for the purposes of
computing compliance with open space requirements and may
be conveyed to unit owners as part of common elements, but in
no case shall a buffer area be utilized for any active
recreational use.
§ 101-20 PARK RIDGE CODE § 101-20
1:758
(4) Individual area, yard and bulk controls. In the event that the
townhouse development involves the conveyance of a fee interest,
not only for the individual dwelling unit but also for a portion of a
townhouse lot, each individual unit ownership shall meet the
following standards:
(a) Minimum lot area: 3,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width: 30 feet.
(c) Minimum front yard: 30 feet.
(d) Minimum side yards: None required, but where provided,
there shall be a minimum of 40 feet or that which is prescribed
by Subsection D(5) below, whichever is greater.
(e) Minimum rear yard: 30 feet.
(f) Maximum lot coverage: 40%. [Amended 12-26-1991 by Ord.
No. 91-18]
(g) Maximum improved lot coverage: 60%.
(5) Distance between buildings. The minimum distance between any
two buildings, other than buildings containing common walls and
used as townhouses, shall be no less than 40 feet or as computed,
in feet, under the following formula, whichever is greater:
S =
(La + Lb) + 2 (Ha + Hb)
6
Where:
S = The required minimum horizontal distance between any
wall of Building A, at any given level, and any wall
of Building B, at any given level, or the vertical
prolongation of either.
La = The total length of Building A. Building A shall be that
structure which is equal to or the greater in length of
the two buildings selected.
Lb = The total length of Building B.
Ha = The height of Building A. The height of Building A is the
average height above the finished grade to the nearest
wall or walls facing Building B.
Hb = The height of Building B. The height of Building B is the
average height above the finished grade of the nearest
wall or walls facing Building A.
(6) Design limitations.
§ 101-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-20
1:759
(a) Individual townhouse units may be combined into one building,
provided that said overall structure shall not contain more than
four townhouse units. No such group of townhouses shall
exceed a length of 120 feet.
(b) No more than two adjacent townhouse units shall be
constructed without providing a staggered front building wall
offset of not less than five feet.
(c) No rear yard shall be adjacent to any front yard.
(d) Each townhouse shall not have less than two means of ingress
and egress into each dwelling unit.
(e) Each townhouse shall have no less than two walls with window
exposure.
(f) Overall design, both as to architectural features and
construction materials, shall be subject to review by the
approving authority in order to avoid excessive similarity or
dissimilarity and to preserve property values within the
development and for adjacent developments.
(g) Electric, gas and telephone service shall be provided as part of
an underground system.
(7) Open space.
(a) Required amount. Each townhouse development shall contain
a minimum of 25% of its total land area in open space.
(b) Computation. Required open space may include common
recreation areas and required buffer areas for computation
purposes, as well as other permitted open space functions as
defined herein, provided that recreational or sitting areas shall
be provided in the amount of no less than 300 square feet per
dwelling unit.
(8) Off-street parking requirements.
(a) There shall be at least two off-street parking spaces in the
townhouse development allocated for each dwelling unit,
exclusive of private driveway space. At least one of these
parking spaces shall be provided in a one-car enclosed garage
attached to the dwelling unit.
(b) No detached garages on individual lots or in the common space
shall be permitted, and any attached garage shall conform
architecturally to the townhouse unit to which it is accessory
and shall adhere to the yard requirements set forth for the
principal building.
§ 101-20 PARK RIDGE CODE § 101-20
1:760
(c) Additional parking may be required by the approving authority
to service accessory buildings and uses.
(9) Ownership restrictions. All townhouse developments shall provide
easements, deed restrictions or other devices, as required by the
approving authority and approved by the attorney for the
approving authority, so as to ensure, preserve and protect buffer
areas, common open spaces and the overall use of the development
consistent with the purposes set forth in this chapter.
E. Multifamily, garden apartments and townhouses (GA Zones).
(1) Density. [Amended 4-12-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-011]
(a) A maximum density of 18 dwelling units per acre shall be
permitted for applications in the GA-1 Zone that set aside 10%
of the total number of dwelling units for low- to moderateincome
households.
(b) All development applications in the GA-1 Zone not providing a
set-aside for low- to moderate-income units shall have a
maximum density of 12 dwelling units per acre.
(c) A maximum density of 20 dwelling units per acre shall be
permitted in the GA-2 Zone.
(2) Buffer area.
(a) A minimum twenty-five-foot buffer shall be provided from all
external lot lines, except that portion which fronts on an
external street. Such buffer shall be kept in its natural state
where wooded, and when its natural vegetation is sparse or
nonexistent, the landowner may be required to provide a yearround
visual screen as determined by the approving authority.
(b) No principal or accessory use or structure, including, without
limitation, off-street parking and loading areas, shall be
permitted within the required buffer area; but the approving
authority may, upon a finding of reasons thereof, permit a
portion of a buffer area to be used for utility easements or
streets to ensure access to or from adjacent property.
(c) Required buffer areas shall be included for the purposes of
computing compliance with open space requirements and may
be conveyed to unit owners as part of common elements, but in
no case shall a buffer area be utilized for any active
recreational or other active use.
(3) Area, yard and bulk requirements.
(a) The area, yard and bulk requirements applicable to permitted
uses are as set forth in the Schedule of Area, Yard and Bulk
Requirements.175
§ 101-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-20
1:761
(b) Yards between buildings. The following minimum yards
between buildings shall be provided:
[1] Front-to-front units: 60 feet.
[2] Back-to-back units: 60 feet.
[3] Front-to-back units: 60 feet.
[4] Front-to-side units: 45 feet.
[5] Side-to-side units: 30 feet.
[6] Side-to-back units: 30 feet.
(c) Buildings shall not exceed 160 feet in length.
(d) Each residential development shall contain a minimum of 25%
of its total land area in open space.
(e) A maximum building coverage of 20% shall be permitted in the
GA-1 Zone for those applications that set aside 10% of the total
number of dwelling units for low- to moderate-income
households. All development applications not providing a setaside
for low- to moderate-income units shall have a maximum
building coverage of 18% in accordance with the Schedule of
Area, Yard and Bulk Requirements as it appears at the end of
this chapter. [Added 4-12-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-011]
(4) Recreation space. Recreation and sitting areas shall be provided at
a ratio of 200 square feet per dwelling unit.
(5) In order to qualify for the density bonus permitted in
§ 101-20E(1)(a) and the coverage bonus permitted in
§ 101-20E(3)(e) for the GA-1 Zone, the units set aside for low- to
moderate-income households must qualify as deed-restricted units
in accordance with state regulations, and the Borough must be able
to receive credits for such units towards its affordable housing
obligation. [Added 4-12-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-011]
F. (Reserved)176
G. Child-care facilities. Applications for child-care centers as a permitted
principal use shall comply with the following: [Added 12-26-1991 by
Ord. No. 91-18]
(1) Area and bulk regulations: [Amended 4-26-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-015]
175. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Area, Bulk and Yard Requirements is included at the end of
this chapter.
176. Editor's Note: Original Subsection F, Multifamily dwellings above commercial uses (CH
Zone), was repealed 4-26-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-015.
§ 101-20 PARK RIDGE CODE § 101-20
1:762
District
Regulation ORL B-1, B-2
Minimum lot area (square feet) 60,000 40,000
Minimum lot width (feet) 150 150
Minimum lot depth (feet) 200 150
Minimum front yard (feet) 50 20*
Minimum side yards (feet) 25 25
Minimum rear yards (feet) 50 50
Maximum building coverage 25% 30%
Maximum impervious coverage 60% 65%
Maximum building height
(stories/feet)
2/30 2/30
NOTE:
* Twenty feet in B-1; 50 feet in B-2 Zone.
(2) A minimum of 150 square feet of outdoor play area shall be
provided for the first five children, plus an additional 30 square feet
of play area per child at peak usage. [Amended 7-11-2000 by
Ord. No. 2000-8]
(3) One off-street parking space shall be provided for every five
children, plus an additional space shall be provided for each staff
member on site at peak hour. [Amended 7-11-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-8]
(4) Such facility shall comply with all applicable governmental
requirements and shall be licensed by the New Jersey Department
of Human Services.
(5) A child-care facility may be permitted to occupy an entire building
or a portion of an existing building which is partially occupied by
other uses, irrespective of any other ordinance limitations on the
number of principal permitted uses allowed on a lot.
H. Construction in planned unit development. [Added 9-14-1993 by Ord.
No. 93-13]
(1) Whenever any owner of a residential unit which is physically
attached to another residential unit and which is part of a
townhouse or similar development, which development was
constructed pursuant to a site plan approved by the Planning
Board, wishes to undertake construction activities which, when
completed, will result in a deviation from the approved site plan,
the procedures set forth below shall be followed.
(2) The owner shall submit an application for a building permit to the
Borough's Construction Official. In addition to whatever else may
§ 101-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-20
1:763
be required to be submitted with such an application, the
application shall include:
(a) A plan or plans showing the location of structures, as
contemplated by the approved site plan and the proposed
deviations from the approved site plan.
(b) Consent to the application from any owner of property on
which the proposed construction is located, if different from
the applicant, and from the condominium or homeowners'
association, if the proposed construction is located on common
or limited common elements as defined in the relevant master
deed or similar document.
(c) Any additional application or escrow fees, as prescribed by the
Planning Board, with the consent of the Mayor and Council.
(3) The Construction Official shall forthwith deliver a copy of the
application and all supporting documentation to the Secretary of
the Planning Board.
(4) Action by Planning Board.
(a) The Planning Board, no later than at its next regularly
scheduled meeting after receipt by the Secretary of the Board
of a properly and fully completed application (provided the
application has been received by the Secretary of the Planning
Board at least five days before the next regularly scheduled
meeting), shall take the following action:
[1] Determine, by motion, that the application does not
require a formal hearing before the Planning Board and so
inform the Construction Official;
[2] Determine, by motion, that the application does require a
formal hearing before the Planning Board and so inform
the Construction Official; or
[3] Determine, by motion, that some other action is required
and so inform the Construction Official.
(b) If the Planning Board fails to take any action within the time
period set forth above, the Secretary of the Planning Board
shall return the application to the Construction Official with a
notation that the Planning Board has taken no action, and the
Construction Official shall thereafter process the application
on the basis that no action is required by the Planning Board.
(5) In deciding whether a formal hearing shall be required, the
Planning Board shall determine whether the proposed construction
activities will result in a substantial deviation from the approved
site plan, taking into consideration the following:
§ 101-20 PARK RIDGE CODE § 101-20
1:764
(a) Adverse effect upon stormwater drainage or sewerage lines.
(b) Adverse effect upon other residential units within or without
the development.
(c) Ability of emergency vehicles to access the development.
(d) Failure to comply with zoning and building requirements.
(6) The Construction Official shall not approve the application until
notice has been received from the Secretary of the Planning Board,
as provided above.
I. Continuing-care facilities. Continuing-care facilities with permitted
accessory uses customarily associated with those facilities or elderly
housing facilities shall be permitted in the B-2 Zone subject to the
following requirements: [Added 8-8-1995 by Ord. No. 95-12]
(1) Area and bulk requirements:
Requirement
District
B-2
Minimum lot area (acres) 4.0
Minimum lot depth (feet) 300
Minimum front yard (feet) 50
Minimum side yard (feet) 25
Minimum rear yard (feet) 35
Maximum building coverage 30%
Maximum impervious coverage 65%
Maximum density (du/acre) 15
Minimum buffer width (feet) 10
Minimum distance between
buildings (feet)
35
Maximum height (stories/feet) 3/40
(2) Density for purposes of compliance with this chapter shall be
calculated as 0.5 for each assisted living unit bed and 0.25 per
nursing home unit bed.
(3) Permitted accessory uses for continuing-care facilities shall include
those uses which are customarily associated with elderly housing
facilities such as personal and recreational services and small gift
and necessity shops solely for use of the elderly housing community
or their visitors.
J. Outdoor cafes. [Added 7-11-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-11]
§ 101-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-20
1:765
(1) Outdoor cafes shall be permitted to be located on the public rightof-
way or on private property in commercial districts only where
restaurants are a principal permitted use or identified as a
permitted conditional use.
(2) Outdoor cafes shall only be permitted as an accessory use located
on the same lot as the principal permitted restaurant use.
(3) The area devoted to outdoor dining areas shall not exceed 15% of
the restaurant's dining area.
(4) Location and design.
(a) Outdoor dining areas shall only be located on the public rightof-
way or on private property, side yard, rear yard or front yard
within the permitted building area immediately adjacent to the
building.
(b) The operation of an outdoor cafe shall be located such that
there is 24 inches of clear and unobstructed passageway
between the tables, chairs, barriers, street trees, bike racks,
lampposts, sign posts and the other fixtures or obstructions.
[Amended 12-23-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-16]
(c) Outdoor dining must be located six feet away from any
driveway or parking area, except on-street parking.
[Amended 12-23-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-16]
(d) Outdoor dining must be set back from the curbline of a street
intersection five feet and must maintain motorist site distance
identified in § 87-43C(4) of the Borough of Park Ridge Code.
[Amended 12-23-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-16]
(e) (Reserved)177
(f) Alcohol is only to be served in conjunction with food service
and in compliance with Chapter 75, Licensing, Article III,
Outdoor Cafes.
(5) Cleaning of areas. Each licensee is responsible for keeping the area
of the outdoor café and the adjacent walks and streets free and
clear of any debris or litter occasioned by the café. Tables must be
bussed and reset immediately upon departure of the patron. Areas
must be cleaned as needed and at the time that business closes and
at the beginning of each business day, but not later than 9:00 a.m.
(6) Lighting. All lighting must be directed towards the cafe area and
shall comply with § 87-45A(1) of the Borough of Park Ridge Code.
All lighting associated with a café, if approved, shall be permitted
for a two-month trial period, wherein the Borough reserves the
177. Editor's Note: Original Subsection J(4)(e), regarding the number of tables used for
outdoor dining, was repealed 3-24-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-08.
§ 101-20 PARK RIDGE CODE § 101-20
1:766
right to inspect the installed lighting and request modifications
if necessary. After the trial period is over and the Borough has
inspected the installed lighting, it may stay in place as long as the
café is in operation.
(7) Noise generation. Amplified music and live entertainment is not
permitted in outdoor dining areas.
(8) Screening. A screen visually separating adjacent private property
from the proposed outdoor dining area must be provided. The
screening may include landscaping, retaining walls, and/or fencing
materials or any combination thereof.
(9) Buffers. All outdoor cafes must be 50 feet from the property line of
a residential property. The reviewing agency may require a buffer,
which may include a staggered row of evergreen plantings,
supplemented by additional ornamental and deciduous plant
material.
(10) Umbrellas, awnings, canopies, and heating units. All umbrellas,
awnings, canopies, and heating units are not permitted in outdoor
café areas.
(11) (Reserved)178
(12) Tables, chairs, umbrellas, etc. Tables and chairs must be either
wood or metal. No plastic is allowed. Umbrellas must be plain in
color with no advertisements. The style of the outdoor furniture
should be consistent with the architecture of the building and the
furniture and lighting fixtures in the downtown area. [Added
12-23-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-16]
(13) Indemnification of Borough. No license required by this chapter
shall be granted to any person to operate an outdoor café until such
person shall have filed with the Construction Code Official a
statement agreeing to indemnify and hold harmless the Borough of
Park Ridge, its agents, servants, representatives or employees from
any or all claims, damages, judgment costs or expenses, including
attorneys' fees, which they or any of them may incur or be required
to pay because of any personal injury, including death, or property
damage suffered by any person or persons as a result of or related
in any way to the operation and maintenance of the outdoor cafe for
which the license is issued. [Added 12-23-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-16]
(14) Insurance requirements. [Added 12-23-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-16]
178. Editor's Note: Original Subsection J(11), Parking requirements, was repealed 3-24-2009
by Ord. No. 2009-08.
§ 101-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-20
1:767
(a) No license required by this chapter shall be granted to any
person to operate an outdoor cafe until such person shall have
first filed with the Construction Code Official a comprehensive
general liability policy issued to such person by a public
liability insurance company authorized to do business in the
State of New Jersey affording the coverage set forth below in
the amounts specified. Such insurance policy shall name the
Borough of Park Ridge, 55 Park Avenue, Park Ridge, New
Jersey 07656, its agents, officers, servants, representatives
and employees as additional insured with respect to the
operation and maintenance of the outdoor café in the following
amounts:
Liability Amount of Coverage
Bodily injury
Each person $300,000
Each accident $1,000,000
Property damage
Each person $300,000
Each accident $1,000,000
(b) The insurance coverage required by this section shall at all
times be maintained for the full amount. The policy of
insurance required by this section shall be filed with the
Construction Code Official and contain a clause obligating the
company issuing the policy to give not less than 30 days'
written notice to the Borough Clerk before cancellation or
amendments of any of the terms thereof. Notice of cancellation
shall not relieve the company issuing such policy of liability or
claim arising before the cancellation became effective. The
cancellation of any such policy shall have the immediate effect
of suspending the license of such person to operate the outdoor
cafe covered thereby until a new policy complying with the
provisions of this section is filed with the Construction Code
Official and a letter, in writing, confirming the new effective
date of the license is issued by the Construction Code Official.
(c) Every insurance policy required hereunder shall contain a
provision for continuing liability thereunder to the full amount
thereof, notwithstanding any recovery therein, that the liability
of the insured shall not be affected by the insolvency or the
bankruptcy of the insured, and that until the policy is canceled
the insurance company will not be relieved from liability on
account of nonpayment of such premium or of any act of
omission by the named insured. Such policy of insurance shall
be further conditioned for the payment of any and all
judgments up to the limits of such policy.
§ 101-20 PARK RIDGE CODE § 101-20
1:768
§ 101-21. Regulations governing certain accessory structures and
uses.
K. Veterinary hospitals. Veterinary hospitals shall be a permitted use in the
NB Neighborhood Business Zone District, subject to the following:
[Added 5-25-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-17]
(1) Veterinary hospitals shall be permitted to offer overnight stay for
animals, provided that such boarding activities are incidental to the
hospital use and do not include the boarding of animals outdoors.
In no event shall animal boarding, kennels or shelters, as defined at
§ 101-4, be permitted in the NB Neighborhood Business Zone
District.
(2) Retail sales shall be permitted as an accessory use to veterinary
hospitals, provided that such use shall not occupy more than 20%
of the total gross floor area of the hospital.
A. Accessory structures and uses in residential districts.
(1) Accessory structures or uses shall not be located in the required
front yard or within the front half of the side yard of any residential
zone and may be erected anywhere within the required rear yard,
except as provided herein:
(a) In all residential zones, no accessory structure or use shall be
located within five feet of a side or rear property line, except as
provided: patios shall require a ten-foot setback; hot tubs,
whether permanent or portable, shall require a twenty-foot
setback; detached garages shall require a twenty-foot setback;
accessory structures other than patios, decks, hot tubs or
detached garages which are greater than 150 square feet in
area but no larger than 325 square feet in area shall be set
back minimally 10 feet from side and rear property lines, and
such structures which are greater than 325 square feet in area
shall be set back minimally 20 feet from side and rear property
lines; and decks require a twenty-foot setback. [Amended
12-26-1991 by Ord. No. 91-18; 8-8-1995 by Ord. No.
95-12; 7-11-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-8]
(b) Accessory structures shall be set back minimally 10 feet from
the principal building. [Amended 12-26-1991 by Ord. No.
91-18]
(c) Light posts, mailboxes, fences, signs and retaining walls shall
be permitted within the required front yard of any residential
use. Off-street parking is also permitted in a front yard,
restricted to the driveway area.
(d) Additionally, the regulations provided elsewhere in this
chapter, as outlined in Article V herein, shall also apply.
§ 101-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-21
1:769
(e) The height of an accessory structure shall be measured by the
same method required for a principal building. [Added
7-11-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-8]
(2) Every accessory structure or use in a residential zone, except for a
three-car garage, shall not exceed a height of 12 feet or 1 1/2
stories. Three-car garages shall be allowed a height of 14 feet or
1 1/2 stories. The exceptions that are provided in § 101-17 are still
maintained. [Amended 8-8-1995 by Ord. No. 95-12]
(3) (Reserved)179
(4) When an accessory structure or use is attached to the principal
building, it shall comply in all respects with the requirements of
this chapter applicable to the principal building or use.
(5) In the case of a through lot, no accessory structure or use shall
encroach upon that fourth of the lot depth nearest each street upon
which the lot has frontage.
(6) No accessory structure shall be used for human habitation.
[Amended 12-26-1991 by Ord. No. 91-18]
(7) Sheds and similar storage structures shall not be greater than 150
square feet. [Added 7-11-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-8; amended
5-28-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-8]
(8) Accessory equipment shall be located on the lot in accordance with
the following regulations: [Added 10-14-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-9]
(a) The closest portion of a heating, ventilation and airconditioning
unit shall be located at a maximum of five feet
from the principal structure.
(b) All accessory equipment, including pool equipment, must be
located at a minimum of 15 feet from all property lines.
(9) In addition to the above-noted regulations, accessory equipment
must be screened if one of the following characteristics applies to
the proposed equipment: [Added 10-14-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-9]
(a) It can be seen from the street; or
(b) It is located in a side yard.
(10) The screening required above must be either evergreen plantings
that match the height of the equipment proposed or a board on
board fencing at least four feet in height. [Added 10-14-2003 by
Ord. No. 2003-9]
179. Editor's Note: Original Subsection A(3), regarding the rear-yard area occupied by an
accessory structure or use, was repealed 4-12-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-010.
§ 101-21 PARK RIDGE CODE § 101-21
1:770
(11) Retaining walls shall be designed in accordance with the following:
[Added 3-11-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-02]
(a) Retaining walls shall not exceed four feet in height.
(b) If additional height is necessary, the wall must be tiered, with
each tier not exceeding the four foot height limit and set back a
minimum of six feet from the adjacent tier.
(c) All walls must be set back off the property line a minimum of
eight feet in the R-10 Zone District and a minimum of 10 feet in
all other residential districts.
(d) Retaining walls shall be set back a minimum of six feet from
the principal building except where the retaining wall extends
perpendicular to that principal building.
B. Accessory structures and uses in nonresidential districts.
(1) Accessory structures or uses shall not be located in the required
front yard of a nonresidential zone, except that off-street parking
spaces shall be permitted, but in no case shall said parking lot or
portion thereof be permitted closer than 30 feet from the street
line.
(2) Accessory structures or uses shall not be located within eight feet
of a side or rear lot line. Accessory structures shall be minimally 15
feet from the principal building.
(3) Additionally, the regulations provided elsewhere in this chapter, as
outlined in Article V herein, shall also apply.
(4) No off-street loading area or loading facility shall be permitted in a
front yard.
(5) No accessory structure or use in a nonresidential zone shall exceed
a height of 15 feet or 1 1/2 stories, except as provided in § 101-17.
(6) In any nonresidential zone, when an accessory structure or use is
attached to the principal building, it shall comply in all respects
with the requirements of this chapter applicable to the principal
building or use.
(7) No accessory structure or use shall occupy an area greater than
15% of the area of the rear yard. [Amended 12-26-1991 by Ord.
No. 91-18]
(8) The height of an accessory structure shall be measured by the same
method required for a principal building. [Added 7-11-2000 by
Ord. No. 2000-8]
C. Private garages in residential zones. Private garages shall be permitted
as accessory uses in all residential zones, either as detached structures
or as part of the main building, for the storage of no more than three
§ 101-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-21
1:771
automobiles which shall be owned by the occupants of the main
building. Not more than one commercial vehicle which shall not exceed
6,000 pounds in gross weight shall be stored in said garage. Detached
garages for single-family dwellings, which exist as of June 1, 2000, are
permitted. However, after July 1, 2000, no new detached garage may
exceed 450 square feet in area and be designed to accommodate two
vehicles. [Amended 7-11-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-8]
D. Swimming pools and tennis courts.
(1) Swimming pools and tennis courts shall not be located within 20
feet of a property line nor closer to a street line than the rear wall
of the dwelling to which they are accessory uses.
(2) Swimming pools shall be subject to Chapter 88, Swimming Pools.
[Amended 12-26-1991 by Ord. No. 91-18]
(3) Swimming pools and tennis courts shall be suitably fenced in
accordance with the Borough requirements as set forth in
Subsection E below and the following: The inner face of the side of
all such swimming pools shall not be located less than 20 feet from
any and all property lines, and any paved surfaces around the pool
shall not be located less than 15 feet from all property lines. The
area within the fifteen-foot setback shall be appropriately
landscaped to serve as a buffer and visual screen. No part of the
pool shall be nearer to any street line than the rear wall of the main
building which is located nearest to the street nor closer to the rear
or side wall than the maximum depth of the pool. [Amended
12-26-1991 by Ord. No. 91-18; 8-8-1995 by Ord. No. 95-12]
E. Fences and walls.
(1) No fence or wall shall be erected, altered or constructed in any
residential zone which shall exceed six feet in height above ground
level, except that no fence exceeding four feet in height shall be
permitted in the front yard.
(2) No fence or wall shall be erected, altered or constructed in any
nonresidential zone which shall exceed eight feet in height above
ground level.
(3) Notwithstanding the above provisions, if it is demonstrated that a
retaining wall of a height greater than that set forth in Subsection
E(1) and (2) above is necessary, said retaining wall shall be
terraced to enable suitable plantings to be installed along the
retaining wall.
(4) Notwithstanding the above provisions, no fence or wall shall be
erected, altered or constructed in any zone which shall violate the
provisions set forth in Chapter 82, Sight Distance at Intersections,
or the provisions of § 101-15 herein regarding sight triangles.
[Amended 12-26-1991 by Ord. No. 91-18]
§ 101-21 PARK RIDGE CODE § 101-21
1:772
(5) Fences surrounding the perimeter of tennis courts shall be exempt
from the above fencing requirements. Said fence shall not exceed
12 feet in height above ground level and shall not be closer than 15
feet to any side or rear property line nor be located in any required
front yard.
(6) The finished side of a fence shall face the adjoining properties.
F. Signs. Signs shall be regulated in accordance with Article X, Signs.
[Amended 12-26-1991 by Ord. No. 91-18]
G. Office of a resident professional.
(1) An office of a resident professional shall not exceed 30% of the floor
area of the building in which it is located.
(2) An office of a resident professional shall have a maximum of two
employees and one professional and shall provide four parking
spaces in a double-width driveway.
(3) An office of a resident professional shall be permitted on all
principal roadways as identified in the Borough Land Use Plan.180
Principal roadways are identified as Kinderkamack Road, Grand
Avenue, Broadway, Pascack Road, Spring Valley Road, Ridge
Avenue, Fremont Avenue, Park Avenue and Prospect Avenue.
H. Child-care center facilities. Application for a child-care center as a
permitted accessory use shall comply with the following: [Added
12-26-1991 by Ord. No. 91-18; amended 4-26-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-015]
(1) A child-care center shall be permitted to occupy as an accessory
use a portion of a building which is occupied as a principal
permitted use in the ORL, B-1, and B-2 Zones. This use shall be
available to the occupants of the building and may also be available
to others, provided that:
(a) The facility is licensed by the New Jersey Department of
Human Services.
(b) A minimum of 150 square feet of outdoor play area per child
shall be provided. Play areas shall be permitted in the rear and
side yards only and shall be enclosed by a fence at least four
feet in height and landscaped and screened from adjoining
properties.
(c) The area and bulk requirements applicable to the zone in
which the site is located shall be complied with.
(d) No more than 15% of a building shall be occupied as a day-care
center.
180. Editor's Note: The Borough Land Use Plan is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 101-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-21
1:773
(e) No additional parking shall be required where a child-care
facility is available solely to the occupants of the building. A
minimum of one parking space shall be provided for every 10
children for which the center is designed, where the center is
to be open to individuals not working in the building.
I. Temporary storage containers. [Added 7-10-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-15]
(1) Definition. "Temporary storage container" shall mean a container
designed for the outdoor storage of personal property for
temporary use, delivered and removed by vehicle.
(2) Temporary storage container use provisions.
(a) Location. Temporary storage containers shall be placed only in
the driveway, allotted parking spaces, or on property such that
they are not located in the right-of-way and do not obstruct the
sidewalk. The following provisions shall also apply:
[1] No temporary storage container shall be located within
five feet of a property line.
[2] Temporary storage containers shall be set back minimally
15 feet from the principal building.
[3] No temporary storage container or containers shall occupy
an area greater than 10% of the area of the front, side, or
rear yard in which it is located.
[4] The applicant shall utilize existing buffers when
determining the location for a temporary storage
container in order to screen the container from adjoining
properties.
[5] Temporary storage containers shall not obstruct
circulation for vehicles, particularly emergency vehicles.
[6] Temporary storage containers shall not be placed in an
area that would reduce parking to a level inconsistent with
the Borough ordinance and the Residential Site
Improvement Standards (RSIS).
[7] All temporary storage containers must have a container
permit as required by Chapter 75, Licensing.
(b) Size. A temporary storage container shall not be larger than
150 square feet in area and no higher than 10 feet from grade.
(c) Use.
[1] The use of any temporary storage container shall be
confined to the property owner whose land the container is
placed upon.
§ 101-21 PARK RIDGE CODE § 101-21
1:774
[2] The containers are intended to store common household
items.
[3] The following items are expressly prohibited from being
stored or kept within a temporary storage container:
[a] Hazardous substances, including chemical, flammable
or explosive materials;
[b] Trash.
[4] In addition, temporary storage containers shall not be
used for temporary habitation of humans or animals.
(d) Signage for any temporary storage container shall comply with
the following:
[1] A temporary storage container shall have no signage other
than the name, address, and telephone number of the
person or firm engaged in the business of renting or
otherwise placing the temporary storage container.
[2] The sign must be permanently adhered to or painted on
the temporary storage container.
[3] A temporary storage container shall have no more than
one sign attached to a side, and no more than two signs
total.
[4] A sign attached to a temporary storage container shall be
no larger than 15% of the area of the side it is attached to.
(e) Lighting. There shall be no lighting fixtures attached to a
temporary storage container, nor shall any lighting fixture be
solely utilized to light a container.
(f) Maintenance.
[1] Any temporary storage container shall be in good
condition, free from evidence of deterioration, weathering,
discoloration, rust, ripping, tearing, or other holes or
breaks.
[2] When not in use, the temporary storage container shall be
kept locked.
(g) Applicability.
[1] In addition to compliance to all other requirements of the
Borough of Park Ridge development regulations, the use of
temporary storage containers must comply with the
standards established by this section.
§ 101-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-21
1:775
§ 101-22. Regulations governing certain conditional uses.
[2] Where requirements of any part of this section may
conflict with any other section of the Borough of Park
Ridge development regulations, this section shall prevail.
A. Essential services.
(1) Enclosed structures. Such public utility services as and including
electric substations, transformers, switches and auxiliary
apparatus serving a distribution area, water well sites and pumping
stations in all zones shall be subject to the following regulations:
(a) The location, design and operation of such facility may not
adversely affect the character of the surrounding residential
area. Adequate fences, barriers and other safety devices shall
be provided. Such facilities shall be adequately landscaped and
screened.
(b) The location of the structures regulated in this section shall
comply with the setback requirements of the zone in which
they are located; provided, however, that telephone cabinets
and electric relay stations may be located at property lines.
Such facilities shall be landscaped and screened in order to
minimize their visual impact. [Amended 12-26-1991 by Ord.
No. 91-18]
(2) Open structures and facilities.
(a) Such uses shall be limited to the erection, construction,
alteration or maintenance, by public utilities or municipal or
other governmental agencies, of electric, gas, water
transmission or distribution/collection systems, telephone and
cable television lines, communication, water supply or sewage
treatment and collection systems, including poles, wires,
mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm
boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, light stanchions,
telephone lines, hydrants and other similar equipment and
accessories in connection therewith reasonably necessary for
the furnishing of adequate services by public utilities or
municipal or other governmental agencies of for the public
health, safety or general welfare, but not including buildings.
[Amended 12-26-1991 by Ord. No. 91-18]
(b) Adequate landscaping or screening shall be provided, where
applicable.
B. Public, private or parochial school.
(1) All nonpublic schools, where permitted, shall be subject to the
following:
§ 101-21 PARK RIDGE CODE § 101-22
1:776
(a) Said school or institution shall be a nonprofit organization
within the meaning of the Internal Revenue Act and registered
effectively as such thereunder.
(b) Such school shall have as its prime purpose the general
education of students in the arts and sciences and shall be
licensed by the State Department of Education as required by
law.
(c) Any school permitted under this section shall be permitted on
the principal roadways as identified in the Borough Land Use
Plan181 and § 101-21G(3).
(2) All schools permitted herein shall comply with all applicable
regulations of the State Board of Education and to the following:
(a) Minimum lot area: two acres, plus one acre per 100 pupils.
(b) Minimum lot width: 150 feet.
(c) Minimum front yard: 75 feet.
(d) Minimum side yards: 35 feet.
(e) Minimum rear yard: 50 feet.
(f) Minimum recreation area: 100 square feet per pupil.
(g) Maximum building coverage: 15%.
(h) Maximum building height: one story; 15 feet.
(i) Minimum buffer: 50 feet.
C. Community residences.
(1) Community residences housing more than six persons for the
developmentally disabled and community shelters for victims of
domestic violence shall be permitted as a conditional use in all
residential districts, subject to the provisions of this section.
(2) A community residence or shelter shall comply fully with all zoning
and health regulations applicable to single-family residences in the
zoning districts in which it is located.
(3) A community residence or shelter shall not be occupied by more
than 15 developmentally disabled persons or victims of domestic
violence, as defined herein.
(4) A community residence or shelter must be located at a distance of
at least 1,500 feet from any other existing community residence,
shelter or school.
181. Editor's Note: The Borough Land Use Plan is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 101-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-22
1:777
(5) A minimum of two parking spaces shall be required for the first six
occupants of a community residence or shelter, plus one additional
space for each additional three occupants.
D. Automobile service stations.
(1) No gasoline service station, garage or automobile repair facility
shall be located within 200 feet of a school, place of worship,
hospital, funeral home, theater, library or any place of public
assembly nor within 800 feet of another auto service station or
garage or other services similar to the proposed use. [Amended
5-14-1992 by Ord. No. 92-15]
(2) Vehicular access to or exit from a service station shall not be closer
to the intersection of any two streets than 50 feet, nor shall any
such drive be located within 30 feet of any boundary line of any
residential district or residential use.
(3) Fuel pumps shall be permitted within the required front yard but in
no event closer than 30 feet from the street line.
(4) No outdoor hydraulic or mechanical lifts shall be permitted. All
automobile repair work shall be done inside the building.
(5) Automobile service stations shall require a minimum lot area of
20,000 square feet with at least 200 feet of street frontage. The
yard and bulk requirements of the B-2 Zone shall be applicable to
automobile service stations.
(6) Hours of operation shall be limited to between 6:00 a.m. and 10:00
p.m. [Added 5-14-1992 by Ord. No. 92-15]
E. Veterans, civic and community clubs. All buildings shall be a minimum
25 feet from any property line.
F. Hotels and motels.
(1) A hotel or motel shall provide facilities for sleeping, dining,
conferences, meetings and other similar purposes which shall be
contained within the hotel or motel building. All facilities within the
hotel or motel shall be fully accessible to handicapped persons.
(2) No hotel or motel shall be located closer than 3,000 feet to any
other hotel or motel within the limits of Park Ridge.
(3) A hotel or motel shall have its front entrance or entrances and all
parking lot and driveway access from a public street located in the
Borough of Park Ridge.
(a) Where a hotel or motel abuts a residential or townhouse
district, a buffer zone no less than 100 feet wide shall be
provided from all external lot lines, except that portion which
fronts upon an existing external street or roadway.
§ 101-22 PARK RIDGE CODE § 101-22
1:778
(b) The approving authority, upon specific findings of particular
circumstances relating to conditions of topography, natural
features, lot configuration, natural vegetation or the lack of the
same, drainage or other similar site characteristics or where
said proposed development is compatible with existing
development, may increase the required buffer area to 150 feet
or may permit the reduction of said buffer area to 75 feet.
(c) No principal or accessory use or structure, including, without
limitation, off-street parking and loading areas, shall be
permitted within the required buffer area; but the approving
authority may, upon a finding of reasons therefor, permit a
portion of a buffer area to be used for utility easements or
streets to ensure access to or from adjacent property.
(d) Required buffer areas shall be included for the purposes of
computing compliance with open space requirements, but in
no case shall a buffer area be utilized for any active use.
(4) The maximum improved lot coverage shall be 70%.
(5) Height.
(a) The maximum building height shall be four stories or 40 feet,
measured at the top of the roof.
(b) Certain appurtenances, such as elevators, towers, condensers,
chimneys and similar mechanical equipment, may, because of
function and design, have to be or would normally be located
above the flat roof surface and, therefore, shall be allowed
within the following standards:
[1] The maximum vertical height of said appurtenances above
the permitted maximum flat roof height shall not exceed
12 feet.
[2] The total square footage measured at the flat roof shall not
exceed 15% of the gross roof area.
[3] Purely architectural embellishments for purposes of
providing light such as atrium roofs or skylights shall also
be permitted, provided that the same do not exceed a
height of 10 feet above the finished roof, and provided that
the same do not occupy, in accordance with the other
appurtenances heretofore allowed by this section, more
than 20% of the roof area.
[4] The exterior treatment of all such mechanical penthouses
and other projections also permitted herein shall be of
materials substantially similar to the facades of the
building itself and shall be designed so as to be an
architecturally integral part of the structure.
§ 101-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-22
1:779
(6) The maximum floor area ratio shall be 0.275.
(7) Within any hotel or motel there shall be a minimum total floor area,
including public areas, of 650 square feet for each bedroom or
bedroom suite.
(8) The maximum aggregate length of the front building wall, including
any extension or prolongation thereof, shall not exceed 70% of the
lot width as measured at the required front yard setback line.
G. Satellite dish antenna.
(1) No more than one satellite antenna shall be permitted on a lot, and
such antenna shall be accessory to the principal permitted use on a
lot.
(2) The satellite antenna shall be designed for use by the occupants of
the main building, provided that, in the case of the Townhouse
Residential, Garden Apartment and Housing for the Handicapped
Zones, the antennas shall be designed for use by the occupants of
the townhouse or multifamily dwelling units.
(3) The above provision with respect to the Townhouse Residential,
Garden Apartment and Housing for the Handicapped Zones does
not confer any franchise rights upon an applicant. The applicant
shall demonstrate that such use does not violate any existing cable
television or other franchise agreements.
(4) Ground-mounted and roof-mounted satellite antennas shall be
permitted, as regulated herein, and shall require a building permit.
Tower-mounted satellite dish antennas are prohibited. [Amended
12-26-1991 by Ord. No. 91-18]
(5) Size and height requirements.
(a) Ground-mounted antenna. The maximum permitted size and
height of a ground-mounted satellite antenna shall be in
accordance with the requirements set forth in Table VI-1.
Table VI-1
Maximum Size and Height Regulations
Ground-Mounted Antenna
Zone
Diameter1
(feet)
Height2
(feet)
R-40, R-20, B-1 and B-2 10 12
Townhouse, Garden
Apartment and HH
12 15
ORL 16 20
§ 101-22 PARK RIDGE CODE § 101-22
1:780
NOTES:
1 Diameter of antenna reflector. It is noted that, in general,
a satellite antenna has a reflector that is circular in shape
with a concave surface. Where an antenna reflector is not
circular, the term "diameter," as used herein, shall be
considered to include the distance between the extreme
points across the plane formed by the outer edge of the
reflector surface.
2 As measured from ground level at the foundation.
(b) Roof-mounted antenna.
[1] In the ORL Zone, the diameter of the antenna shall be no
more than 12 feet, and the maximum antenna height shall
be no more than 15 feet above the roof at the point at
which the antenna is situated.
[2] Roof-mounted antennas are prohibited in all zones other
than the ORL, B-1 and B-3 Zones, and in the B-1 and B-3
Zones, satellite antennas shall be permitted with a
diameter of no more than six feet and a maximum height
no greater than eight feet above the roof at the point
where the antenna is situated. [Amended 8-8-1995 by
Ord. No. 95-12; 4-26-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-015]
[3] A satellite dish antenna no wider than 18 inches is
permitted in all residential zones and a permit is not
required to erect a conforming satellite antenna in any
residential zone. [Added 8-8-1995 by Ord. No. 95-12]
(6) Setback requirements.
(a) In the R-40, R-20, B-1 and B-2 Zones, the satellite antennas
shall be located in the rear yards and shall be set back a
minimum of 20 feet from all property lines.
(b) In the Townhouse Residential, Garden Apartment and HH
Zones, the satellite antennas shall be located in the rear yards
and shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from all property
lines.
(c) In the ORl Zone, the satellite antenna may be permitted in the
rear or side yard and shall be set back a minimum of 30 feet
from all property lines.
(7) Landscape/buffer requirements.
(a) The applicant shall provide buffer plantings and screening in
order to minimize the satellite antenna's visual impact on
adjacent properties and from the street. Buffer plantings in the
form of evergreens or similar dense cover shall be provided in
§ 101-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-22
1:781
the general area of property lines or other suitable location to
minimize the visual impact of the antenna.
(b) Roof-mounted antennas shall be located in a position on the
roof that will minimize the visual impact from the street and
adjacent properties.
(8) Installation. The satellite antenna shall be erected on a secure
ground-mounted foundation or roof-mounted base and be designed
to survive static wind loads of not less than 100 miles per hour at
any antenna elevation, angle or directional position.
(9) This Subsection G is not intended to regulate CB antennas, which
are regulated in accordance with applicable federal regulations.
[Added 12-26-1991 by Ord. No. 91-18]
H. Home occupation.
(1) A home occupation shall be incidental to the use of a dwelling unit
for residential purposes. The area set aside for home occupations
shall not exceed 30% of the total floor area of such residence,
provided that in no event shall more than 500 square feet of the
floor area of the dwelling unit be used in connection with a home
occupation or for storage purposes in connection with a home
occupation.
(2) Only members of the immediate family permanently residing on the
premises shall be employed in the home occupation.
(3) A home occupation may be open to the public between 8:00 a.m.
and 8:00 p.m. but shall not be open on Sundays or legal holidays.
(4) No more than one home occupation shall be permitted within any
single dwelling unit.
(5) A home occupation shall be carried on wholly within the principal
building. No home occupation nor any storage of goods, materials
or products connected with a home occupation shall be allowed in
accessory buildings or attached or detached garages, driveways,
walkways or yards.
(6) Merchandise shall not be displayed or offered for sale either within
or outside of the residence.
(7) There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the dwelling
or premises or visible evidence of the conduct of a home occupation
except for signage as permitted in Article X of Chapter 101 of the
Borough Code. [Amended 5-27-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-010]
(8) No equipment or process shall be used in a home occupation which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes or odor detectable to the
normal senses off the property. No equipment or process shall be
used which creates visual or audible electrical interference in any
§ 101-22 PARK RIDGE CODE § 101-22
1:782
radio or television receiver off the premises or causes fluctuations
in line voltage off the premises.
(9) The use shall not generate additional pedestrian or vehicular
traffic. Visitors, customers or deliveries shall not exceed those
normally and reasonably occurring for a residence, including not
more than two business visitors an hour and eight a day and not
more than two deliveries of products or materials a week.
(10) The home occupation shall not involve the use of commercial
vehicles for delivery of materials to or from the premises, other
than one vehicle not to exceed 3/4 ton owned by the resident of the
dwelling, which shall be parked in an adequate off-street parking
area.
(11) The use shall not require additional off-street parking spaces for
clients or customers of the home occupation.
I. Restaurants. [Added 8-8-1995 by Ord. No. 95-12; amended
1-24-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-1]
(1) Restaurants and takeout restaurants, as defined in § 101-4, are
permitted as conditional uses in the B1 Zone. [Amended
4-26-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-015]
(2) These uses are permitted if they meet the following conditions:
(a) Except as otherwise provided herein, restaurants shall
conform to the area, bulk and yard requirements for the B1
Zone as set forth on Schedule IV-2 of Chapter 101.182
[Amended 4-26-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-015]
(b) Parking standards:
[1] Restaurants shall provide off-street parking at the ratio of
one parking space per three seats.
[2] Takeout restaurants shall not be required to have any offstreet
parking spaces. Every such business shall, however,
have four seats as a designated waiting area. Counters and
tables for waiting with a consumption of food are
prohibited.
182. Editor's Note: Schedule IV-2 is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 101-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-22
1:783

ARTICLE VII
Off-Street Parking, Loading and Driveways
§ 101-23. Off-street parking, loading, driveways required. [Amended
4-12-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-009]
A. In all districts, there shall be provided, at the time any building,
structure or use is erected, enlarged or increased in capacity, off-street
parking, driveways and loading spaces for automobiles and other
vehicles in accordance with the requirements set forth in Chapter 87,
Subdivision and Site Plan Review. Such facilities shall be completed
prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. For detached onefamily
dwellings for which site plan approval is not required, there shall
be provided a minimum of two off-street parking spaces, one of which
shall be enclosed.
B. All garages shall have a paved driveway connecting it to the public
right-of-way.
C. No part of any driveway shall be located nearer than 10 feet to any
other driveway on an adjoining parcel, nor shall more than one
driveway be located closer than 40 feet to another driveway on the
same site measured from the closest edge of any two driveways.
D. No driveway shall be located nearer than five feet to any property line
measured from the closest edge of the driveway to the property line.
E. Driveways in residential zoning districts shall be subject to the
provisions of Subsections A, B and D hereinabove. In addition,
driveways in residential districts shall be designed in accordance with
Figure 1183 and comply with the following requirements:
(1) Curb cuts.
(a) No driveway shall have a curb cut greater than 20 feet in
width. Dwellings with a garage 12 feet or less in width are
considered a one-car garage and shall have a curb cut no
greater than 16 feet in width.
(b) There shall not be more than one curb cut on any property,
except that properties which comply with the following criteria
shall be allowed to have multiple curb cuts: if the property has
100 feet or more of street frontage, can comply with all the
requirements of this section and is located on one of the
following streets:
[1] Park Avenue.
[2] Kinderkamack Road.
[3] Pascack Road.
183. Editor's Note: The figure pertaining to driveways is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 101-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-23
1:785
§ 101-24. Outdoor parking.
[4] Fremont Avenue.
[5] Ridge Avenue.
[6] Grand Avenue.
[7] Spring Valley Road.
(2) Pavement width.
(a) For a side-loaded garage, the width shall not extend beyond
the width of the garage. For a front-loaded garage, the width of
the driveway shall not extend beyond the width of the garage,
except that the width of the driveway may be extended up to a
maximum of two feet beyond the side of the garage which is
closest to the interior of the dwelling.
(b) In addition to the width extension permitted in Subsection
E(2)(a) above, additional driveway width beyond the width of
the garage is permitted in accordance with the following table
and Figure 1. For front-loaded garages, said width extension
shall not be permitted on the side of the driveway that is
closest to the dwelling. For side-loaded garages, the maximum
additional driveway width shall not extend beyond the width of
the garage and shall be parallel to the garage door(s) in
accordance with Figure 1.184
Garage Width
(feet)
Maximum Additional Driveway
Width Permitted
(feet)
< 12 10
> 12 and < 24 8
> 24 2
(3) Side-loaded garages.
(a) For dwellings having side-loading garages, no portion of the
driveway which is located in the front yard shall be wider than
permitted in the following table:
Garage Width
(feet)
Driveway Width
(feet)
< 12 16
> 13 20
184. Editor's Note: The figure pertaining to driveways is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 101-23 PARK RIDGE CODE § 101-24
1:786
A. The following vehicles shall not be permitted to be parked in a yard or
driveway in any residential zone:
(1) Unregistered or inoperative vehicles of any type.
(2) Buses exceeding a weight of 8,000 pounds or a design capacity
exceeding 20 passengers. [Amended 12-26-1991 by Ord. No.
91-18]
(3) Trailers; construction and earth-moving equipment; tractors,
meaning every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for
drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load
other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load to be drawn;
and commercial trailers. [Amended 7-11-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-8]
(4) Trucks, meaning every motor vehicle designed, used or maintained
primarily for the transportation of property, having a gross vehicle
weight in excess of 7,500 pounds; provided, however, that this
prohibition shall not apply to trucks being used in the rendering of
service to the premises on a temporary basis.
B. The use of trailers in any zone in connection with site construction shall
be permitted, subject to the following regulations and restrictions:
(1) Such trailers shall be located on the lot on which construction is
progressing and shall not be located within 25 feet of the boundary
line of any abutting residential lot.
(2) Such trailers shall be used only as field offices and not for any
dwelling use whatsoever.
(3) Such trailers shall not be moved onto a construction site until the
date on or after which construction actually commences and shall
be removed from such site on or before the completion of
construction. If construction is interrupted and ceases for more
than 60 days, the construction trailer shall be removed until actual
construction commences again.
C. Boats, boat trailers and recreation trailers or vehicles may be stored onsite,
provided that they are located behind the front line of the dwelling
unit and the vehicle is screened along side and rear property lines.
Screening should consist of evergreen landscape material, six feet to
eight feet in height, sufficient to screen boats, boat trailers, recreation
trailers or vehicles stored on site from side and rear views. [Amended
12-26-1991 by Ord. No. 91-18; 7-11-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-8]
§ 101-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-24
1:787

ARTICLE VIII
Nonconforming Uses and Structures
§ 101-25. Continuation of use.
A use, building or structure which is lawfully in existence at the effective
date of this chapter and shall be made nonconforming at the passage of this
chapter or any applicable amendment thereto may be continued, except as
otherwise provided herein.
§ 101-26. Regulation of nonconforming uses.
No existing use, structure, building or premises devoted to a nonconforming
use shall be enlarged, extended, reconstructed or structurally altered,
except when changed to a conforming use or when required to do so by law
as follows:
§ 101-27. Abandonment.
A nonconforming use shall be considered to be abandoned if there occurs a
cessation of the use for a period of one year and/or for any longer period of
time, and such nonconforming use shall not thereafter be revived.
§ 101-28. Nonconforming buildings lawfully under construction.
Any nonconforming building or structure lawfully under construction on the
effective date of this chapter, pursuant to plans filed with and approved by
the Construction Official and approved by all other municipal boards and
agencies as required under law, may be completed and may be used for the
nonconforming use for which it was designed, to the same extent as if such
A. Normal maintenance and repair of a structure containing a
nonconforming use is permitted, provided that it does not extend the
area or volume of space occupied by the nonconforming use and does
not increase the number of dwelling units, and further provided that a
structure shall not be repaired if it had been damaged to an extent
exceeding 50% of its assessed value.
B. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a
safe or lawful condition any part of any building or structure declared
unsafe or unlawful by the Construction Official or other authorized
state or Borough official.
C. Change of title or ownership does not discontinue a nonconforming use.
D. Notwithstanding the provisions set forth in this section, a
nonconforming single-family dwelling which complies with the use
requirements of this chapter and is nonconforming because of height,
area, yard and/or parking requirements may be enlarged or extended,
provided that any such enlargement, extension or alteration shall
conform to the presently existing requirements of this chapter and that
such requirements are not further violated.
§ 101-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-28
1:789
building had been completed and had been in use on the effective date of
this chapter, provided that such building or structure shall be completed
within one year after the effective date of this chapter.
§ 101-28 PARK RIDGE CODE § 101-28
1:790
ARTICLE IX
Performance Standards
§ 101-29. General application.
All nonresidential uses, either existing or proposed, shall be subject to the
following standards.
§ 101-30. Compliance with performance standards.
§ 101-31. Determination where performance standards are to be
measured.
The location where determinations are to be made for measurement of
performance standards shall be made as follows:
§ 101-32. Performance standards.
A. Prior to commencement of construction and/or operation. Any
application for a building permit or a certificate of occupancy for a use
which shall be subject to performance standards shall be accompanied
by a sworn statement by the owner of subject property that said use
shall be operated in accordance with the performance standards set
forth herein.
B. Continued compliance. Continued compliance with performance
standards shall be required and enforcement of continued compliance
with these performance standards shall be enforced by the
Construction Official, Borough Engineer, Health Officer and Fire
Prevention Bureau.
A. At property lines of the use creating such element for vibration, glare,
air pollution, odor, dust, water pollution or noise.
B. At the point of emission for smoke.
A. Vibration. No vibration shall be permitted which is detectable without
instruments at points of measurement specified in § 101-31 herein.
B. Glare. No direct or sky-reflected glare shall be visible at the points of
measurement specified in § 101-31 herein.
C. Smoke.
(1) The emission standard of this chapter or as promulgated by the
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, whichever is
more restrictive, shall pertain.
(2) No emission shall be permitted, from any chimney or otherwise, of
visible gray smoke at a shade equal to or darker than No. 1 on the
Power's Micro-Ringelmann Chart, published by McGraw Hill
Publishing Company, Inc., copyright 1954, being a direct facsimile
§ 101-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-32
1:791
reduction of a standard Ringelmann Chart as issued by the United
States Bureau of Mines.
(3) The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to:
(a) Visible gray smoke of a shade not darker than No. 2 of said
chart which may be emitted for not more than four minutes in
any thirty-minute period.
(b) Smoke resulting from any fire ignited solely for the purpose of
training or research in fire prevention or protection.
(c) Smoke from locomotives, the shade or appearance of which is
equal to but not darker than No. 3 of the Power's Micro-
Ringelmann Chart for a period or periods aggregating no more
than 30 seconds in any three consecutive minutes, or smoke of
said density for a period aggregating no more than four
minutes in any 15 consecutive minutes when building a new
fire.
(d) Household fireplaces.
D. Odors. There shall be no emission of odorous gases or other odorous
matter in such quantities as to be offensive as measured as set forth in
§ 101-31.
E. Fly ash and dust. No emission of any fly ash or dust shall be permitted
to be discharged from any stack, chimney or by other means into the
open air in excess of the quantity set forth in regulations promulgated
by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
F. Noise.
(1) There shall be no noise from any source, other than transportation
facilities or temporary construction work, which shall exceed the
values given in the following table in any octave band or frequency.
The sound level analyzer that conforms to the specifications
published by the American Standard Sound Level Meters for
Measurement of Noise and Other Sounds Z24.3-1944, American
Standards Association, Inc., New York, New York and the American
Standard Specifications for an Octave-band Filter Set for the
Analysis of Noise and Other Sounds Z24.10-1953, American
Standards Association, Inc., New York, New York shall be used.
Frequency Band
in Cycles
per Second
Sound Pressure Level
in Decibels
Re 0.0002 dyne-cm (2)
0 to 75 65
75 to 150 50
150 to 300 44
§ 101-32 PARK RIDGE CODE § 101-32
1:792
Frequency Band
in Cycles
per Second
Sound Pressure Level
in Decibels
Re 0.0002 dyne-cm (2)
300 to 600 38
600 to 1,200 35
1,200 to 2,400 32
2,400 to 4,800 29
Above 4,800 26
(2) If objectionable noises due to intermittence, beat frequency or
hammering exist or if the noise is not smooth and continuous,
corrections shall be made to the above tables by subtracting five
decibels from each decibel level given.
G. Radioactivity or electrical disturbance. No activities shall be permitted
which emit dangerous radioactivity. No activities shall be permitted
where electrical disturbances adversely affect the operation of any
equipment. All applicable federal and state regulations shall be
complied with.
H. Fire and explosion hazard.
(1) All activities involving storage of flammable and explosive
materials shall be provided with adequate safety devices against
the hazard of fire and explosion and adequate fire-fighting and firesuppression
equipment and devices standard in this industry.
Burning of waste materials in open fires is prohibited. The relevant
provisions of state and local laws and regulation shall also apply.
(2) All raw materials, fuels and finished products shall be stored in
underground tanks. The storage of crude oil or any other volatile or
inflammable liquid in aboveground tanks with individual capacity
greater than 500 gallons is prohibited.
I. Liquids or solid waste. There shall be no discharge of any wastes of any
kind into any river, reservoir, pond or lake. The discharge of untreated
wastes into any streams shall also be prohibited. All methods of sewage
and industrial waste treatment and disposal shall be approved by the
Borough and the New Jersey State Department of Environmental
Protection.
§ 101-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-32
1:793

ARTICLE X
Signs
[Added 12-26-1991 by Ord. No. 91-18; amended 5-14-1992 by Ord.
No. 92-15; 8-8-1995 by Ord. No. 95-12; 7-11-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-8; 9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-10; 9-13-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-19; 4-6-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-015; 8-23-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-025; 2-11-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-001; 5-27-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-010]
§ 101-33. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
ALTERATION — A change in the size or shape of an existing sign, provided
that a change in the copy or color of an existing sign or the changing or
replacing of a sign face or pane on an existing sign, without any change in
the size or shape of the sign, is not an alteration.
ANIMATED SIGN — A sign employing actual motion, the illusion of motion,
or light and/or color changes achieved through mechanical, electrical or
electronic means, which are differentiated from changeable signs as defined
and regulated by this Code, including the following types:
ENVIRONMENTALLY ACTIVATED — Animated signs or devices
motivated by wind, thermal changes, or other natural environmental
input. Includes spinners, pinwheels, pennant strings, and/or other
devices or displays that respond to naturally occurring external
motions.
A.
MECHANICALLY ACTIVATED — Animated signs characterized by
repetitive motions and/or rotations activated by a mechanical system
powered by electric motors or other mechanically induced means.
B.
ELECTRICALLY ACTIVATED — Animated signs producing the illusion
of movement by means of electronic, electrical or electromechanical
input and/or illumination capable of simulating movement through
employment of the characteristics of one or both of the classifications
noted below:
FLASHING — Animated signs or animated portions of signs whose
illumination is characterized by a repetitive cycle in which the
period of illumination is either the same as or less than the period
of nonillumination. For the purposes of this article, flashing will not
be defined as occurring if the cyclical period between on-off phases
of illumination exceeds four seconds.
(1)
PATTERNED ILLUSIONARY MOVEMENT — Animated signs or
animated portions of signs whose illumination is characterized by
simulated movement through alternate or sequential activation
of various illuminated elements for the purposes of producing
(2)
C.
§ 101-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-33
1:795
AWNING — An architectural projection or shelter projecting from and
supported by the exterior wall of a building and composed of a covering
of rigid and/or nonrigid materials and/or fabric on a supporting framework
that may be either permanent or retractable.
AWNING SIGN — A sign displayed on or attached flat against the surface or
surfaces or an awning.
BANNER SIGN — A flexible substrate on which copy or graphics may be
displayed.
BUILDING FACADE — A portion of any exterior elevation of a building
extending vertically from grade to the top of a parapet wall or eaves and
horizontally across the entire width of the building elevation.
BUILDING SIGN — A sign that is applied or affixed to a building.
CANOPY (ATTACHED) — A multisided overhead structure or architectural
projection supported by attachment to a building on one or more sides
and either cantilevered from such building or also supported by columns at
additional points.
CHANGEABLE SIGN — A sign with the capability of content change by
means of manual or remote input, includes the following types:
CONFORMING SIGN — A sign that is legally installed in conformance with
all prevailing jurisdictional laws and ordinances.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN — Any sign that is designed and erected for the
purpose of providing direction and/or orientation for pedestrian or vehicular
traffic.
DISPLAY TIME — The amount of time a message and/or graphic is displayed
on an electronic message sign.
DOUBLE-FACED SIGN — A sign with two faces, back to back.
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTER OR SIGN (EMC) — An electronically
activated changeable sign whose variable message and/or graphic
presentation capability can be electronically programmed by computer from
a remote location.
repetitive light patterns designed to appear in some form of
constant motion.
MANUALLY ACTIVATED — Changeable signs whose message copy or
content can be changed manually on a display surface.
A.
ELECTRICALLY ACTIVATED — Changeable sign whose message copy
or content can be changed by means of remote electrically energized
on-off switching combinations of alphabetic or pictographic component
arranged on a display surface. Illumination may be integral to the
components, such as characterized by lamps or other light-emitting
devices, or it may be from an external light source designed to reflect
off the changeable component display.
B.
§ 101-33 PARK RIDGE CODE § 101-33
1:796
EXTERNALLY ILLUMINATED SIGN — A sign characterized by the use of
artificial light reflecting off its surface(s)
EXTERIOR SIGN — Any sign placed outside a building.
FLASHING SIGN — See "animated," "electrically activated."
FOOTCANDLE — An English unit of measurement of the amount of light
falling upon a surface (illuminance). One footcandle is equal to one lumen
per square foot.
FREESTANDING SIGN — A sign principally supported by one or more
columns, poles or braces placed in or upon the ground.
ILLUMINANCE — The amount of light falling upon a real or imaginary
surface, commonly called "light level" or "illumination." Measured in
footcandles (lumens/square foot) in the English system and lux (lumens/
square meter) in the SI (metric) system.
ILLUMINATED SIGN — Any sign which has characters, letters, figures,
designs or outline illuminated by electric lights or luminous tubes, or LED
(light-emitting diode) technology as a part of the sign proper.
INTERNALLY ILLUMINATED SIGN — A sign characterized by the use of
artificial light projecting through its surface(s).
MULTIFACED SIGN — A sign containing three or more faces.
NONCONFORMING SIGN — A sign that was legally installed by permit in
conformance with all municipal sign regulations and ordinances in effect at
the time of its installation, but which no longer complies with subsequently
enacted laws and ordinances having jurisdiction relative to the sign.
ON-PREMISES SIGN — A sign erected and maintained for the purposes of
the display of commercial or noncommercial messages appurtenant to the
use of products sold on, or the sale or lease of the property on which it is
displayed.
OFF-PREMISES SIGN — A permanent sign erected, maintained, or used in
the outdoor environment for the purpose of the display of commercial or
noncommercial messages not appurtenant to the use of, products sold on,
or the sale or lease of, the property on which it is displayed.
PORTABLE SIGN — Any sign not permanently attached to the ground and
that can be removed without the use of tools.
PROJECTING SIGN — A sign other than a wall sign that is attached to or
projects from a building face or wall or from a structure whose primary
purpose is other than the support of a sign.
PYLON SIGN — See "freestanding sign."
ROOF SIGN — A sign mounted on the main roof portion of a building or on
the uppermost edge of a parapet wall of a building and which is wholly or
partially supported by such building. Signs mounted on mansard facades,
pent eaves, and architectural projections such as canopies or marquees
shall not be considered to be a roof sign.
§ 101-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-33
1:797
SIDEWALK SIGN — A portable sign located on private property in front of
the business it advertises.
SIGN — Any device visible from a public place whose essential purpose
and design are to convey either a commercial or noncommercial message
by means of graphic presentation or alphabetic or pictorial symbols or
representations.
SIGN AREA — The area upon which the lettering, illustration or display is
presented, included within the frame or edge of a sign, including the frame.
Where the sign has no such frame or edge, the area shall be computed
as specified in Attachments 6, 7 and 8.185 The area of any double-sided or
V-shaped sign shall be the area of the largest sign face only. The area of
a sphere shall be computed as the area of a circle. The area of all other
multiple-sided signs shall be computed as 50% of the sum of the area of all
faces of the sign.
TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign intended to display either commercial or
noncommercial messages only displayed for a brief permitted time frame.
Portable signs or any sign not permanently embedded in the ground, or
not permanently affixed to a building or sign structure that is permanently
embedded in the ground, are considered temporary signs.
WALL SIGN — A sign that is in any manner affixed to any exterior wall of
a building or structure and that projects not more than 18 inches from the
building or structure wall. Signs affixed to architectural projections that are
parallel to the facade are also wall signs.
WAYFINDING SIGNS — A sign specifically design to provide directional or
destination information.
WINDOW SIGN — A sign affixed to the surface of a window with its message
intended to be visible to the exterior environment.
§ 101-34. Sign permit application, issuance and fees; exceptions.
A. No sign shall be erected, altered, located or relocated within the
municipality except upon application and the issuance of a permit as
hereinafter provided.
(1) Application for a permit for residential signs. Permits shall not be
required for a permitted conforming sign for premises used for
single-family residential purposes. Applications for a permit for a
sign for multifamily residential/attached residential use shall be
made, in writing, to the Zoning Officer and presented with the
appropriate filing fee. Such application shall be sufficient to
describe the premises and location at which the sign is to be
affixed, together with a rendering of the sign, inclusive of its
dimensions, design and color. There shall be provided a statement
as to the means by which said sign shall be constructed.
185. Editor's Note: Attachments 6, 7 and 8 are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 101-33 PARK RIDGE CODE § 101-34
1:798
(2) Application for a permit for nonresidential signs. Any sign
associated with a change in occupancy or ownership requires an
application for a sign permit. Application for a permit for a
permitted nonresidential sign conforming to the regulations set
forth herein shall be made, in writing, to the Zoning Officer, except
applications for a freestanding sign shall be submitted to the
approving authority. Such application shall be sufficient to describe
the site and location at which the sign is to be affixed and shall
include, at minimum, the following.
(a) The name and address of the applicant.
(b) The name and address of the owner of the premises.
(c) A statement indicating the owner's consent to the application if
the applicant is other than the owner.
(d) A rendering, to scale, of the sign, reflecting its composition,
colors, dimensions, elevation from grade level and lighting; the
address of the premises; specification and location of all
existing signs; the sight distances, in the case of freestanding
signs, with relation to accessways to the premises on which
such sign is to be located and adjacent premises; the
information to be stated on the sign; the method by which said
sign shall be secured; and any landscaping which exists or is
proposed in the proximity of the sign.
(3) Application for a permit for a sign which does not comply with the
provisions of this article, or which is part of a site plan, including
any nonconforming signs associated with a change in occupancy or
ownership, shall be submitted to the appropriate approving
authority. Such application shall be in writing and, upon notice and
a public hearing where the same is required by law, submitted at
least 21 days before the next meeting preceding the succeeding
public meeting date of the appropriate authority, together with a
filing fee as hereinafter set forth. Such application shall be in
triplicate and accompanied by no less than 15 sketch plats, in the
case of an application for a freestanding sign, and 15 building
elevations where the application is for other than a freestanding
sign, each of which shall be drawn to scale and reflect the sign
location and designation. In addition, on such drawing or separate
sheet, the information set forth in § 101-34A shall be provided.
B. Issuance of permit.
(1) A permit shall be issued by the Zoning Officer for signs complying
with the provisions of this article, or upon the favorable action of
the approving authority for signs requiring variances, subject to
any other applicable governmental regulations, or as otherwise
provided herein.
§ 101-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-34
1:799
(2) A permit for the replacement of an existing sign may be issued by
the Zoning Officer without the necessity of Board approval only
upon satisfaction of all of the following conditions:
(a) There is no physical alteration or expansion to the existing sign
beyond the limits permitted herein.
(b) The sign conforms in all respects to the ordinance provisions
specified herein.
(c) No other signage is proposed to be added to the premises
beyond that which is permitted herein.
(3) The applicant shall notify the Zoning Officer for a final inspection
within five days following the installation of the sign.
(4) Nothing herein shall be deemed to eliminate the need for an
applicant to secure building, electrical or other municipal permits
for sign construction.
C. Exceptions. The provisions and regulations of this section shall not
apply to the following signs, as regulated herein:
(1) Bulletin boards or signs not over 16 square feet in area for public,
charitable or religious institutions when same are located on the
premises of said institutions.
(2) A sign identifying the architect, engineer or contractor, when
placed upon a work site under construction, only after a building
permit for the construction has been issued. Said sign shall not
exceed 16 square feet in area, provided that the sign is set back at
least 15 feet from any property line, and further provided that same
are removed within 24 hours after the final certificate of occupancy
is issued.
(3) Memorial signs or tablets and date of building construction when
cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of bronze or
other incombustible materials.
(4) Traffic or other municipal signs, legal notices, railroad crossing
signs, danger signs and such temporary, emergency or
nonadvertising signs or signs of any governmental agency deemed
necessary to the public welfare.
(5) Flags of the United States, State of New Jersey or other
governmental or quasi-public agencies, provided that the following
requirements are met:
(a) The maximum height of a freestanding flagpole shall be 40
feet, provided that flagpoles on roofs shall be no more than 15
feet above the rooftop on which it is situated.
(b) One freestanding flagpole shall be permitted per lot.
§ 101-34 PARK RIDGE CODE § 101-34
1:800
§ 101-35. General sign regulations.
The following regulations apply to signs in all zoning districts in the
municipality:
(c) All freestanding flagpoles shall be located no closer to the
property line than a distance equal to the height of the
flagpole. In addition, flagpoles located in the front yard shall
not be closer to the street than the rear half of the required
front yard setback.
(6) Holiday decorations and lights on residential premises.
(7) Signs erected to control the movement of traffic on a premises,
provided that these signs shall provide traffic directions only and
shall not be used for any advertising purpose. These signs shall not
exceed four square feet in area and shall have been approved by
the appropriate approving agency.
(8) Election or political signs, provided that said signs are placed
entirely on private property and do not exceed 16 square feet in
area.
D. Fees. Every applicant, before being granted a permit hereunder, shall
pay to the Borough of Park Ridge the permit fee for each such sign or
other advertising structure regulated by this chapter as established in
the current schedule of fees for the Borough of Park Ridge.
A. Any sign not specifically permitted is hereby prohibited. In addition, the
following signs are specifically prohibited: signs attached to a tree,
utility pole or fence.
B. No roof signs shall be permitted, nor shall any portion of a sign extend
or project above the highest elevation of the wall to which it is attached.
C. No sign shall be, in whole or part, moving mobile or revolving.
D. No sign shall be erected so as to interfere with the movement of
vehicular or pedestrian traffic. This includes the prohibition of signs
located in ADA required pathways and vehicular sight triangles.
E. There are no restrictions on the number of colors permitted on one
sign.
F. Paper or banner window signs are not permitted, except if temporary.
G. All animated signs which are environmentally or mechanically activated
are prohibited.
§ 101-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-36
1:801
§ 101-36. Sign regulations for specific uses.
All signs shall comply with the regulations set forth in 101 Attachment 6,186
annexed hereto and made part hereof. Additionally, signs for the following
uses must also comply with the regulations below:
§ 101-37. Nonconforming signs.
A. Institutional uses. Signs associated with houses of worship, hospitals,
nursing homes, continuing-care facilities, schools or other similar
public or semipublic uses, as permitted by this chapter, may be erected
with the following provisions:
(1) One freestanding sign for each public street frontage shall be
permitted.
(2) Freestanding signs shall be a maximum 12 square feet with a
maximum height of eight feet, measured in accordance with
associated diagrams.
(3) The minimum setback required is 1/2 of the minimum required
building setback for the zone in which the use is located.
B. Residential district. Signs for residential land uses shall comply with
the following regulations:
(1) Professional nameplates not exceeding two square feet in area for
lawful occupants of the premises under this chapter.
(2) Signs for multifamily developments shall be an identification sign
only, limited to the name of the development or project on site.
C. Upper level commercial uses. In zones where commercial uses are
permitted and located above the first floor of a building commercial
uses are permitted to have window signs. The subject sign must comply
with the window sign regulations set forth for that district.
D. A-frame/sidewalk signs. Portable sidewalk signs are permitted, in
accordance with 101 Attachment 6,187 on private property during
business hours of the associated business. These signs must not block
ADA accessible routes or vehicle site triangles.
A. Any sign existing at the time of the passage of this article and which
violates any provisions thereof shall be deemed a nonconforming use
and may be continued, maintained and repaired upon the present
premises or location; provided, however, that such sign was lawful
under any prior ordinance. Any nonconforming sign, which is
associated with a change in occupancy or ownership, shall necessitate
an application to the approving authority. Any sign unlawful under any
prior ordinance shall remain unlawful unless it complies with the
186. Editor's Note: 101 Attachment 6 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
187. Editor's Note: 101 Attachment 6 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 101-36 PARK RIDGE CODE § 101-37
1:802
§ 101-38. Temporary signs.
Temporary signs for such events as grand openings, sales, fairs, bazaars,
auctions and similar special activities shall comply with the following:
§ 101-39. Illuminated signs.
No sign shall be an illuminated sign except as provided herein.
provisions of this article and there is issued by the Construction Official
a sign erection permit.
B. Any sign which has been damaged to the extent that the cost of repairs
shall exceed 50% of the current value of said sign shall be deemed as
destroyed, and the owner thereof shall not be permitted to erect or
restore said sign except in accordance with this article.
A. All temporary signage, except as specifically exempted under this
article, shall require a permit. Said permit shall be issued by the Zoning
Officer and shall be valid for a period not to exceed 30 days from the
issuance thereof and may be renewed for a period of 30 days not to
exceed 60 days in total.
B. Signs associated with a one-day event shall not be permitted to be
posted more than 31 days prior to the date of the event and shall be
removed not more than 10 days after the date of such activity.
C. Streamers of flags or pennants and banners shall be permitted as
temporary signs for commercial uses.
A. Illuminated signs may use internal light sources, LED (light-emitting
diode) and neon technology, and external light fixtures. All light sources
shall be designed to minimize glare.
B. No sign shall be illuminated externally by more than one floodlight per
surface of said sign. Such lighting shall be at grade and properly
directed and shielded so as not to produce glare or offensive light off
the property.
C. Illuminated tubing outlining roofs, doors windows or wall edges of a
building are prohibited.
D. No sign shall be artificially illuminated after 11:00 p.m. or before 7:00
a.m. unless said premises are occupied and attended.
E. Light sources shall not be visible from outside the sign, and the light
from the light source shall be diffused to eliminate hot spots.
F. Exterior lighting must be placed or designed to focus all illumination on
a building or sign. Gooseneck lighting as a device to focus illumination
is specifically permitted.
§ 101-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-39
1:803
§ 101-40. through § 101-41. (Reserved)
G. LED illuminated wall and freestanding signs that comply with the
regulations set forth in this chapter are permitted; provided, however,
that they are not permitted to be animated as defined in § 101-33 of this
chapter.
H. LED illuminated window signs are permitted and are permitted to be
animated as long as they are not flashing, as defined in the "animated
sign" definition.
I. LED changeable signs for pricing are permitted as long as they comply
with all applicable regulations for signs as set forth in the Borough
Code.
J. Internally illuminated monuments are prohibited in all residential
districts and the RP District.
§ 101-39 PARK RIDGE CODE § 101-40
1:804
ARTICLE XI
Affordable Housing188
§ 101-42. Zoning regulations.
A. Zoning districts established. For the purposes of this chapter, four new
zone districts are hereby created, as are set forth on the attached
Zoning Map which is incorporated herein by reference.189 These zones
are identified as follows: [Amended 9-13-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-19;
10-10-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-22]
Zone Designation Zone Description
AH-1 Affordable Housing District - 1
AH-2 Affordable Housing District - 2
AH-3 Affordable Housing District - 3
AHR-10 Detached Single-Family Residential
B. Inclusionary development set aside. [Amended 9-13-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-19]
(1) A total of 20% of the total number of dwelling units in a
development in the AH and AHR-10 Districts shall be set aside for
low- and moderate-income households, in accordance with the
provisions of this article and subject to the alternative development
provisions in § 101-45A.
(2) All new residential development occurring in the Affordable
Housing Overlay Zone (AH-3) shall be required to provide
affordable housing at the ratio of at least one affordable housing
unit for every eight market-rate residential units proposed. [Added
10-10-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-22]
C. Permitted uses.
(1) In the AH-1, AH-2 and AH-3 Zones, a building may be erected or
used and a lot may be used or occupied for the following purposes:
[Amended 10-10-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-22]
(a) Principal permitted uses: townhouses, garden apartments and
multifamily residential dwelling units.
(b) Accessory uses: off-street parking, recreation facilities, fences
and walls, signs and other customary accessory uses and
buildings which are clearly incidental to the principal use and
building.
188. Editor's Note: This article, originally adopted 3-13-1990 as Ord. No. 90-4, was expressly
saved from repeal and incorporated as part of this chapter 6-12-1990 by Ord. No. 90-9.
189. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 101-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-42
1:805
§ 101-43. Area and bulk requirements in the AH-1 and AH-2 Zones.
(2) In the R-10 Zone, a building may be erected or used and a lot may
be used or occupied for the following purposes:
(a) Principal permitted use: single-family detached dwelling.
(b) Accessory uses: off-street parking, recreation facilities, fences
and walls, signs and other customary accessory uses and
buildings which are clearly incidental to the principal use and
building.
A. The following standards and bulk regulations shall apply to permitted
uses in the AH-1 District:
(1) Density. The maximum gross residential density for townhouses,
garden apartments and multifamily developments shall be 12
dwelling units per acre.
(2) Buffer area.
(a) A minimum twenty-five-foot buffer shall be provided from all
external lot lines, except that portion which fronts on an
external street. Such buffer shall be kept in its natural state
where wooded, and when its natural vegetation is sparse or
nonexistent, the landowner may be required to provide a yearround
visual screen as determined to be appropriate by the
approving authority.
(b) No principal or accessory use or structure, including, without
limitation, off-street parking and loading areas, shall be
permitted within the required buffer area; but the approving
authority may, upon a finding of reasons thereof, permit a
portion of a buffer area to be used for utility easements or
streets to ensure access to or from adjacent property.
(c) Required buffer areas shall be included for the purposes of
computing compliance with open space requirements and may
be conveyed to unit owners as part of common elements, but in
no case shall a buffer area be utilized for any active
recreational or other active use.
(3) Area, yard and bulk requirements for the AH-1 and AH-2 Zones.
(a) The following area, yard and bulk requirements applicable
shall apply to permitted uses in the AH-1 and AH-2 Zones:
[1] Minimum lot area: two acres.
[2] Minimum lot width: 100 feet.
[3] Minimum front yard: 50 feet.
[4] Minimum side yards: 25 feet.
§ 101-42 PARK RIDGE CODE § 101-43
1:806
[5] Minimum rear yard: 25 feet.
[6] Minimum distance between buildings:
[a] Front-to-front units: 60 feet.
[b] Back-to-back units: 60 feet.
[c] Front-to-back units: 60 feet.
[d] Front-to-side units: 45 feet.
[e] Side-to-side units: 30 feet.
[f] Side-to-back units: 30 feet.
[7] Minimum internal road setback: 25 feet.
[8] Maximum building height: 2 1/2 stories; 35 feet.
[9] Maximum building coverage: 20%.
[10] Maximum impervious coverage: 50%.
(b) Buildings shall not exceed 160 feet in length.
(c) Each residential development shall contain a minimum of 25%
of its total land area in open space.
(4) Recreation space. Recreation and sitting areas shall be provided at
a ratio of 200 square feet per dwelling unit.
(5) Parking requirements. There shall be at least two off-street parking
spaces per dwelling unit for all uses in the AH Zones.
B. The following standards and bulk regulations shall apply to permitted
uses in the AH-2 District:
(1) Density. [Amended 12-26-1991 by Ord. No. 91-18]
(a) The maximum number of dwelling units permitted in the AH-2
Zone shall be 120 dwellings. In recognition of the area's
environmental constraints and the need to accommodate
required buffers around wetlands which encompass property
within this zone and surrounding area, this article shall also
regulate a net density by permitting a net density of up to 20
units per acre, provided that the permitted increase in net
density of up to 20 units per acre shall be imposed only on the
site's upland acreage, exclusive of any upland acreage
required to accommodate buffers associated with wetlands,
and only insofar as it ensures the provision of 12 low- and
moderate-income dwelling units based on a twenty-percent
set-aside of the total number of units.
§ 101-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-43
1:807
(b) The calculation of net density for the purpose of this section
shall be as follows: Net density equals gross acreage minus
wetlands and associated adjacent required buffer area for
which no development right can be obtained from the
governmental agency or entity having jurisdiction. For
purposes of computing net density, "development rights"
means the ability to utilize acreage for development and
construction purposes.
(2) Buffer area.
(a) A minimum buffer area of at least 100 feet shall be provided
from all external lot lines, except that portion which fronts
upon an external street. Such buffer area shall be kept in its
natural state where wooded, and when natural vegetation is
sparse or nonexistent, the landowner may be required to
provide a year-round visual screen as determined by the
approving authority.
(b) Notwithstanding the general standards set forth herein, the
approving authority, upon specific findings or particular
circumstances relating to configuration, natural vegetation or
the lack of the same, soil conditions, drainage or other similar
site characteristics or where said proposed development is
compatible with existing development, may increase the
required buffer area to 150 feet or may permit the reduction of
said buffer area to 75 feet.
(c) No principal or accessory use or structure, including, without
limitation, off-street parking and loading areas, shall be
permitted within the required buffer area; but the approving
authority may, upon a finding of reasons thereof, permit a
portion of a buffer area to be used for utility easements or
streets to ensure access to or from adjacent property.
(d) Required buffer areas shall be included for the purposes of
computing compliance with open space requirements and may
be conveyed to unit owners as part of common elements, but in
no case shall a buffer area be utilized for any active
recreational use.
C. The following standards and bulk regulations shall apply to permitted
uses in the AH-3 District: [Added 10-10-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-22]
(1) Density. The maximum gross residential density for townhouses,
garden apartments and multifamily developments shall be
permitted at a density of 20 dwelling units per acre.
(2) Buffer area.
§ 101-43 PARK RIDGE CODE § 101-43
1:808
§ 101-44. Area and bulk requirements for the AHR-10 Zone.
[Amended 9-13-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-19]
The following area and bulk requirements shall apply to permitted uses in
the AHR-10 Zone:
(a) A maximum ten-foot buffer shall be provided from all external
lot lines. Such buffer shall provide year-round visual screen as
determined to be appropriate by the approving authority.
(b) No principal structure shall be permitted within the buffer
areas; however, the approving authority may, upon finding of
reasons thereof, permit a portion of buffer area to be used for
accessory uses such as off-street parking or for utility
easements.
(3) All developments in the Affordable Housing Overlay Zone AH-3
shall comply with § 101-58.7.
(4) Area and bulk yard requirements: See chart below.
Requirement AH-3
Minimum lot area (square feet) 15,000
Minimum lot width (feet) 75
Minimum lot depth (feet) 100
Minimum building setback (feet)
Front yard 10
Rear yard 10
Side yard (each) 10
Maximum lot coverage
Building 35%
Impervious surface 60%
Maximum building height (feet) 40
(a) Maximum permitted length of a facade of a building not to
exceed 100 feet unless an offset of a minimum five feet in depth
is proposed after every 50 feet.
(b) Parking requirements shall be as per RSIS standards as stated
in N.J.A.C. 5:21-4.14(b) and Table 4.4.
A. Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet.
B. Minimum lot width: 100 feet.
C. Minimum front yard: 25 feet.
D. Minimum side yards: 20 feet.
§ 101-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-44
1:809
§ 101-45. Participation in regional contribution agreement (RCA);
alternative development provisions.
§ 101-46. Affordability controls. [Amended 12-10-1996 by Ord. No.
96-20; 10-10-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-22; 10-10-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-23]
All affordability controls for affordable housing in Park Ridge are now
established by ordinance entitled "Fair Share Ordinance" for the Borough of
Park Ridge.
E. Minimum rear yard: 30 feet.
F. Maximum building height: 2 1/2 stories; 35 feet.
G. Maximum building coverage: 25%.
H. Maximum impervious coverage: 45%.
A. At the discretion of the developer, the developer can be released from
the obligation of having to construct lower-income units on-site upon
payment of a fee for each required unit in accordance with the
limitations set forth in the Council on Affordable Housing regulations.
This fee is to be used for the purposes of funding the transfer of the
lower-income units to a receiving municipality through the Borough's
participation in a regional contribution agreement (RCA). At the time
that a developer invokes this provision, the Borough shall submit the
necessary filings with the Council on Affordable Housing to enable
participation in an RCA. If, however, a satisfactory RCA cannot be
arranged, the developer will be obligated to construct the lower-income
units on-site.
B. The above referenced fee shall be determined during the proceedings
arranging the RCA with a receiving municipality. The applicant shall be
obligated to pay a per-unit fee equivalent to the price per transferred
lower-income unit agreed upon between the Borough and the receiving
municipality which is the party to the RCA.
A. Low- and moderate-income units: All of Park Ridge's new construction
or inclusionary component will be divided equally between low- and
moderate-income households.
B. Affordability distribution:
(1) Except for inclusionary developments constructed pursuant to lowincome
tax credit regulations.
(a) At least 1/2 of all units within inclusionary development will be
affordable to low-income households; and
(b) At least 1/2 of all rental units will be affordable to low-income
households.
§ 101-44 PARK RIDGE CODE § 101-46
1:810
(2) In each affordable development, at least 50% of the restricted units
within each bedroom distribution shall be low-income units and the
remainder may be moderate-income units.
C. Bedroom split:
(1) Affordable developments that are not age-restricted will be
structured in conjunction with realistic market demands so that:
(a) The combination of efficiency and one-bedroom units is no
greater than 20% of the total low- and moderate-income units;
(b) At least 30% of all low- and moderate-income units are twobedroom
units; and
(c) At least 20% of all low- and moderate-income units are threebedroom
units.
(2) Low- and moderate-income units restricted to senior citizens may
utilize a modified bedroom distribution. At a minimum, the number
of bedrooms shall equal the number of senior citizen low- and
moderate-income units within the development. The standard can
be met by creating all one-bedroom units or by creating a twobedroom
unit for each efficiency unit.
D. Maximum rents and sales prices:
(1) The following criteria, in conjunction with realistic market
information shall be used in determining maximum rents and sale
prices:
(a) Studio units shall be affordable to one-person households;
(b) One-bedroom units shall be affordable to 1.5-person
households;
(c) Two-bedroom units shall be affordable to three-person
households; and
(d) Three-bedroom units shall be affordable to 4.5-person
households.
(2) Median income by household size shall be established by a regional
weighted average of the uncapped Section 8 income limits
published by HUD.
(3) The maximum rent for affordable units within each affordable
development shall be affordable to households earning no more
than 60% of median income. The average rent for low- and
moderate-income units must be affordable to households earning
no more than 52% of median income. The developers and/or
municipal sponsors of restricted rental units shall establish at least
one rent for each bedroom type for both low-income and moderateincome
units, provided that at least 10% of all low- and moderate-
§ 101-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-46
1:811
income units shall be affordable to households earning no more
than 35% of median income.
(4) The maximum sales price of restricted ownership units within each
affordable development shall be affordable to households earning
not more than 70% of median income. Each affordable
development must achieve an affordability average of 55% for
restricted-ownership units. Moderate-income ownership units must
be available for at least three different prices for each bedroom
type, and low-income ownership units must be available for at least
two different prices for each bedroom type.
(5) Low-income units will be reserved for households with a gross
household income less than or equal to 50% of the median income
approved by COAH; moderate-income units will be reserved for
households with a gross household income less than 80% of the
median income approved by COAH.
(6) Low- and moderate-income units shall utilize the same heating
source as market units.
E. Rental units. For rental units, developers and/or municipal sponsors
shall:
(1) Establish at least one rent for each bedroom type for both lowincome
and moderate-income units, provided that at least 10% of
all low-income and moderate-income units shall be affordable to
households earning no more than 35% of median income.
(2) The initial rent, including an allowance for utilities, shall be
established so as not to exceed 30% of the gross monthly income of
the appropriate household size. The allowance for utilities shall be
consistent with the utility allowance published by DCA for its
Section 8 program.
F. Sales units.
(1) The initial price of a low- and moderate-income owner-occupied
single-family housing unit shall be established so that the monthly
carrying costs of the unit, including principal and interest (based
on a mortgage loan equal to 95% of the purchase price and the
Federal Reserve H.15 rate of interest), taxes, homeowner and
private mortgage insurance and condominium or homeowner
association fees do not exceed 28% of the eligible monthly income
of an appropriate household size as determined under N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.4; provided, however, that the price shall be subject to the
affordable average requirement of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3.
(2) The maximum resale price for a restricted ownership unit, if the
resale occurs prior to the one-year anniversary of the date on which
title to the unit was first transferred to a certified household, is the
initial purchase price. If the resale occurs on or after such
§ 101-46 PARK RIDGE CODE § 101-46
1:812
anniversary date, the maximum resale price shall be consistent
with the regional income limits most recently published by COAH
and calculated pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:94-7.2(b).
(3) The master deeds of affordable developments shall provide no
distinction between the condominium or homeowner association
fees and special assessments paid by low- and moderate-income
purchasers and those paid by market purchasers. Notwithstanding
the foregoing sentence, condominium units subject to a municipal
ordinance adopted before October 1, 2001, which provides for
condominium or homeowner association fees and/or assessments
different from those provided for in this subsection shall have such
fees and assessments governed by said ordinance.
(4) The Borough of Park Ridge will follow the general provisions
concerning control periods for ownership units as per N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.5.
(5) Municipal, state, nonprofit and seller options regarding 95/5 sales
units will be consistent with of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.20. Municipal
rejection of repayment option for 95/5 units will be consistent with
of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.25.
(6) The continued application of options to create, rehabilitate, or
maintain 95/5 units will be consistent with of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.26.
(7) Eligible capital improvements prior to the expiration of controls on
sale units will be consistent with of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.9.
G. Phasing. In zoning for inclusionary developments, the following is
required:
(1) Low- moderate-income units will be built in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:94-4.4(f):
Percentage of Market Rate
Units Completed
Minimum Percentage of Lowand
Moderate-Income Units
Completed
25 0
25+ 1 unit 10
50 50
(2) A design of inclusionary developments that integrates low- and
moderate-income units with market units is encouraged.
H. Affordability controls for newly constructed units. To provide
assurances that low- and moderate-income units are created with
controls on affordability over time and that low- and moderate-income
households occupy these units, Park Ridge will designate an
administrative agency or municipal authority with the responsibility of
ensuring affordability of sales and rental units over time. The
§ 101-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-46
1:813
administrative agency or municipal authority will be responsible for
those activities detailed in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.14.
(1) In addition, the administrative or municipal authority will be
responsible for utilizing the verification and certification
procedures outlined in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.16 in placing households in
low- and moderate-income units;
(2) Newly constructed low- and moderate-income sales units will
remain affordable to low- and moderate-income households for at
least 30 years. The administrative or municipal authority will
require all conveyances of newly constructed units to contain the
deed restriction and mortgage lien adopted by COAH and referred
to as Appendixes A, D, E, F, G, H, I, J, K, L, M, N, O, P, Q, found in
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26, as applicable;
(3) Housing units created through the conversion of a nonresidential
structure will be considered a new housing unit and will be subject
to thirty-year controls on affordability. The administrative agency
or municipal authority will require an appropriate deed restriction
and mortgage lien subject to COAH's approval; and
(4) Costs and expenses arising out of the implementation of activities
provided under this chapter whether performed by the municipality
or an administrative agency shall be the sole responsibility of the
individual developer(s) constructing units governed by this chapter.
I. Affordability controls for rehabilitated units. Regarding rehabilitated
units:
(1) Rehabilitated owner-occupied single-family housing units that are
improved to code standard will be subject to affordability controls
for at least 10 years; and
(2) Rehabilitated renter-occupied housing units that are improved to
code standard will be subject to affordability controls for at least 10
years.
J. Affordability controls for newly constructed rental units. Newly
constructed low- and moderate-income rental units will remain
affordable to low- and moderate-income households for at least 30
years. The administrative agency or municipal authority will require an
appropriate deed restriction and mortgage lien adopted by COAH and
referred to as Appendix E in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.
K. Cost generative standards. Section 14(b) of the Fair Housing Act,
N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq., incorporates the need to eliminate
unnecessary cost-generating features from Park Ridge's land use
ordinances. Accordingly, Park Ridge will eliminate development
standards that are not essential to protect the public welfare and to
expedite or fast track municipal approvals/denials on inclusionary
§ 101-46 PARK RIDGE CODE § 101-46
1:814
§ 101-47. Affirmative marketing within inclusionary development.
[Amended 12-10-1996 by Ord. No. 96-20]
development applications. The Borough will adhere to the components
of N.J.A.C. 5:94-8.1-8.3.
A. The Borough of Park Ridge has a fair share obligation of 47 units, of
which four units will be rehabilitated. This chapter will apply to all
developments that contain proposed low- and moderate-income units
that are listed below and any future developments that may occur:
(1) Hawthorne East (Block 1401, Lot 1).
(2) Hawthorne West (Block 1401, Lots 4, 5 and 6).
(3) Park/Willet (Block 1505, Lots 2 and 4).
(4) Bear's Nest (Block 206, Lots 1 through 10; 13 through 19).
(5) Wampum Road (Block 1602, Lot 5).
(6) Pascack Road (Block 1203, Lots 13 and 29).
B. The affirmative marketing plan is a regional marketing strategy
designed to attract buyers and/or renters of all majority and minority
groups, regardless of sex, age or number of children, to housing units
which are being marketed by a developer/sponsor, municipality and/or
designated administrative agency of affordable housing. The plan will
address the requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:93-11. In addition, the plan
prohibits discrimination in the sale, rental, financing or other services
related to housing on the basis of race, color, sex, religion. handicap,
age, familial status/size or national origin. The Borough of Park Ridge is
in the housing region consisting of Bergen, Passaic, Hudson and Sussex
Counties. The affirmative marketing program is a continuing program
and will meet the following requirements:
(1) All newspaper articles, announcements and requests for
applications for low- and moderate-income units will appear in the
following newspapers/publications: The Record.
(2) The primary marketing will take the form of at least one press
release sent to the above publications and a paid display
advertisement in each of the above newspapers. Additional
advertising and publicity will be on an as-needed basis.
(3) The advertisement will include a description of the street address
of units, direction to housing units, number of bedrooms per unit,
range of prices/rents, size of units, income information and location
of applications, including business hours and where/how
applications may be obtained.
(4) All newspaper articles, announcements and requests for
applications for low- and moderate-income housing will appear in
§ 101-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-47
1:815
publications such as the Community Life weekly newspaper,
religious publications and organizational newsletters within the
region. Regional radio and/or cable television station(s) will also be
used.
(5) The following is the location of applications, brochure(s), sign(s)
and/or poster(s) used as part of the affirmative marketing program,
including specific employment centers within the region: posting of
notices in the Borough Hall and delivery of notices to the municipal
clerks of all municipalities in the region.
(6) The following is a listing of community contact persons and/or
organizations in Park Ridge that will administer the program and
will aid in the affirmative marketing program with particular
emphasis on contacts that will reach out to groups that are least
likely to apply for housing within the region: land use
administrator, County Housing Office and houses of worship.
(7) Quarterly flyers and applications will be sent to each of the
following agencies for publication in their journals and for
circulation among their members: Board of Realtors in Bergen,
Hudson, Passaic and Sussex Counties.
(8) Applications will be mailed to prospective applicants upon request.
(9) Additionally, quarterly informational circulars and applications will
be sent to the chief administrative employees of each of the
following agencies in the counties within Park Ridge's region:
Welfare or Social Service Board, Rental Assistance Office (local
office of DCA), Office on Aging, libraries and housing agency or
authority in each of the counties within Park Ridge's housing
region.
(10) A random selection method will be used to select occupants of lowand
moderate-income housing.
(11) (Reserved)190
(12) Households who live or work in the COAH-established housing
region may be given preference for sales and rental units
constructed within that housing region. Applicants living outside
the housing region will have an equal opportunity for units after
regional applicants have been initially serviced. The Borough of
Park Ridge intends to comply with N.J.A.C. 5:93-11.7.
(13) All developers of low- and moderate-income housing units will be
required to assist in the marketing of the affordable units in their
respective developments.
190. Editor's Note: Original Subsection B(11), concerning the responsibilities of the Land Use
Administrator for the affirmative marketing program, was repealed 3-11-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-05. See now Art. XIA of this chapter.
§ 101-47 PARK RIDGE CODE § 101-47
1:816
§ 101-48. Map changes.
The Zoning Map of the Borough of Park Ridge is hereby amended to reflect
the changes as set forth in this article and the Zoning Map, which is
attached hereto and made a part hereof.192
(14) The marketing program will commence at least 120 days before the
issuance of either temporary or permanent certificates of
occupancy. The marketing program will continue until all low- and
moderate-income housing units are initially occupied and for as
long as affordable units are deed restricted and occupancy or
reoccupancy of units continues to be necessary.191
191. Editor's Note: Original Subsection B(15), regarding monitoring and reporting
requirements, which immediately followed, was repealed 3-11-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-05.
See now Art. XIA of this chapter.
192. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 101-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-48
1:817

ARTICLE XIA
Administration of Affordable Housing Program
[Added 3-11-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-05]
§ 101-48.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to create the administrative mechanisms
needed for the execution of the Borough of Park Ridge responsibility to
assist in the provision of affordable housing pursuant to the Fair Housing
Act of 1985.193
§ 101-48.2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — The entity responsible for administering the
affordability controls of some or all units in the affordable housing program
for the Borough of Park Ridge to ensure that the restricted units under
administration are affirmatively marketed and sold or rented, as applicable,
only to low- and moderate-income households.
MUNICIPAL HOUSING LIAISON — The employee charged by the governing
body with the responsibility for oversight and administration of the
affordable housing program for of the Borough of Park Ridge.
§ 101-48.3. Establishment of position; compensation; powers and
duties.
A. Establishment of position of Municipal Housing Liaison. There is hereby
established the position of Municipal Housing Liaison for the Borough
of Park Ridge.
B. Subject to the approval of the Council on Affordable Housing (COAH),
the Municipal Housing Liaison shall be appointed by the governing
body and may be a full- or part-time municipal employee.
C. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for oversight and
administration of the affordable housing program for the Borough of
Park Ridge, including the following responsibilities which may not be
contracted out, exclusive of Subsection C(6) which may be contracted
out:
(1) Serving as the Borough of Park Ridge primary point of contact for
all inquiries from the state, affordable housing providers,
administrative agents, and interested households;
(2) Monitoring the status of all restricted units in the Borough of Park
Ridge Fair Share Plan;
193. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.
§ 101-48.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-48.3
1:819
(3) Compiling, verifying, and submitting annual reports as required by
COAH;
(4) Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and
administrative agents, as applicable;
(5) Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring, and affirmative marketing as
offered or approved by COAH;
(6) If applicable, serving as the administrative agent for some or all of
the restricted units in the Borough of Park Ridge as described in
Subsection F below.
D. Subject to approval by COAH, the Borough of Park Ridge may contract
with or authorize a consultant, authority, government or any agency
charged by the governing body, which entity shall have the
responsibility of administering the affordable housing program of the
Borough of Park Ridge, except for those responsibilities which may not
be contracted out pursuant to Subsection C above. If the Borough of
Park Ridge contracts with another entity to administer all or any part of
the affordable housing program, including the affordability controls and
affirmative marketing plan, the Municipal Housing Liaison shall
supervise the contracting administrative agent.
E. There shall be no compensation for the Municipal Housing Liaison.
F. Administrative powers and duties assigned to the Municipal Housing
Liaison shall be all of the tasks set forth in this subsection for the
Borough of Park Ridge except for any or all of those tasks to be
performed for the affordable housing unit at Quail Run Park Ridge, NJ.
(1) Affirmative marketing.
(a) Conducting an outreach process to insure affirmative
marketing of affordable housing units in accordance with the
affirmative marketing plan of the Borough of Park Ridge and
the provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15; and
(b) Providing counseling or contracting to provide counseling
services to low- and moderate-income applicants on subjects
such as budgeting, credit issues, mortgage qualification, rental
lease requirements, and landlord/tenant law.
(2) Household certification.
(a) Soliciting, scheduling, conducting and following up on
interviews with interested households;
(b) Conducting interviews and obtaining sufficient documentation
of gross income and assets upon which to base a determination
of income eligibility for a low- or moderate-income unit;
§ 101-48.3 PARK RIDGE CODE § 101-48.3
1:820
(c) Providing written notification to each applicant as to the
determination of eligibility or noneligibility;
(d) Requiring that all certified applicants for restricted units
execute a certificate substantially in the form, as applicable, of
either the ownership or rental certificates set forth in
Appendixes J and K of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.;
(e) Creating and maintaining a referral list of eligible applicant
households living in the housing region and eligible applicant
households with members working in the housing region
where the units are located; and
(f) Employing the random selection process as provided in the
affirmative marketing plan of the Borough of Park Ridge when
referring households for certification to affordable units.
(3) Affordability controls.
(a) Furnishing to attorneys or closing agents forms of deed
restrictions and mortgages for recording at the time of
conveyance of title of each restricted unit;
(b) Creating and maintaining a file on each restricted unit for its
control period, including the recorded deed with restrictions,
recorded mortgage and note, as appropriate;
(c) Ensuring that the removal of the deed restrictions and
cancellation of the mortgage note are effectuated and properly
filed with the appropriate County's register of deeds or County
Clerk's office after the termination of the affordability controls
for each restricted unit;
(d) Communicating with lenders regarding foreclosures; and
(e) Ensuring the issuance of continuing certificates of occupancy
or certifications pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.10.
(4) Resale and rental.
(a) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information between owners and the
administrative agent regarding the availability of restricted
units for resale or rental; and
(b) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information to low- and moderate-income
households regarding the availability of restricted units for
resale or rerental.
(5) Processing request from unit owners.
§ 101-48.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-48.3
1:821
(a) Reviewing and approving requests from owners of restricted
units who wish to take out home equity loans or refinance
during the term of their ownership;
(b) Reviewing and approving requests to increase sales prices
from owners of restricted units who wish to make capital
improvements to the units that would affect the selling price,
such authorizations to be limited to those improvements
resulting in additional bedrooms or bathrooms and the cost of
central air-conditioning systems; and
(c) Processing requests and making determinations on requests
by owners of restricted units for hardship waivers.
(6) Enforcement.
(a) Securing annually lists of all affordable housing units for which
tax bills are mailed to absentee owners and notifying all such
owners that they must either move back to their unit or sell it;
(b) Securing from all developers and sponsors of restricted units,
at the earliest point of contact in the processing of the project
or development, written acknowledgement of the requirement
that no restricted unit can be offered, or in any other way
committed, to any person, other than a household duly
certified to the unit by the administrative agent;
(c) The posting annually in all rental properties, including twofamily
homes, of a notice as to the maximum permitted rent
together with the telephone number of the administrative
agent where complaints of excess rent can be made;
(d) Sending annual mailings to all owners of affordable dwelling
units, reminding them of the notices and requirements outlined
in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.18(d)4;
(e) Establishing a program for diverting unlawful rent payments to
the municipality's affordable housing trust fund or other
appropriate municipal fund approved by the DCA;
(f) Creating and publishing a written operating manual, as
approved by COAH, setting forth procedures for administering
such affordability controls; and
(g) Providing annual reports to COAH as required.
(7) The administrative agent shall have authority to take all actions
necessary and appropriate to carry out its responsibilities
hereunder.
§ 101-48.3 PARK RIDGE CODE § 101-48.3
1:822
ARTICLE XII
Administration and Enforcement
§ 101-49. Enforcement.
A. The administrative officer, for the purpose of the enforcement of this
chapter, shall be the Zoning Officer, who is hereby given the duty, power
and authority to respectively enforce the provisions of this chapter
under the applicable powers and authority as provided by law. The
Zoning Officer shall examine all applications under his or her
jurisdiction and shall approve all required inspections to ensure
compliance with this chapter. [Amended 12-26-1991 by Ord. No.
91-18]
B. The Zoning Officer shall administer and enforce the provisions of this
chapter and, in cooperation with the Construction Code Official and the
Borough Engineer, shall enforce the provisions of Chapter 87,
Subdivision and Site Plan Review, Chapter 50, Construction Codes,
Uniform, and all other applicable laws. In no case shall a permit be
granted for the construction, reconstruction or alteration of any
building or for the occupancy thereof where the proposed construction,
reconstruction, alteration or use thereof would be in violation of any
provision of this chapter, except upon written order of the Board of
Adjustment or Planning Board, as the case may be, granting approval of
a variance from this chapter. [Amended 12-26-1991 by Ord. No.
91-18]
C. The Zoning Officer or the duly authorized agents of the Zoning Officer
may cause any buildings, plans or premises to be inspected and
examined and may order, in writing, the remedying of any conditions
found to exist in violation of any provisions of this chapter.
D. The Zoning Officer or the duly authorized agents of the Zoning Officer
shall have the right, consistent with law, in the execution of the duties
authorized herein, to enter any building or premises during the
daytime.
E. Zoning fees. [Added 12-23-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-17]
(1) A zoning fee in the amount of $50 shall be charged for all additions
to any property, decks, patios, fences, sheds, cabanas, aboveground
and in-ground pools, retaining walls, driveways, walks and
entrance platforms and any other item which may require zoning
approval prior to the issuance of a construction permit.
(2) New construction. A zoning fee in the amount of $100 shall be
charged for all new construction of any type in the Borough of Park
Ridge which may require zoning approval prior to the issuance of a
construction permit.
§ 101-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-49
1:823
§ 101-50. Building permits.
(3) Payment of zoning fees. The zoning fees shall be paid at the time
the application is submitted for approval and review by the Zoning
Officer.
A. Purpose. To ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter and
Chapter 50, Construction Codes, Uniform, no persons shall erect, alter
or convert any structure or building or part thereof or alter or expand
the use of any land subsequent to the adoption of this chapter until a
building permit has been issued by the Construction Official.
B. Application for permit.
(1) Every application for a building permit shall be accompanied by
building plans and a property survey, in duplicate, showing:
(a) The actual shape and dimensions of the lot to be built upon.
(b) The exact location, size and height of the buildings and
accessory buildings existing.
(c) The distance to the property within which the building or
structure is to be erected or altered. [Amended 12-26-1991
by Ord. No. 91-18]
(d) The existing or intended use of each building or part of a
building.
(e) The number of families or housekeeping units the building is
designed to accommodate.
(f) The number and location of off-street parking spaces and offstreet
loading areas.
(g) Such other information with regard to the lot and neighboring
lots as may be necessary to determine and provide for the
enforcement of this chapter.
(2) One copy of the plans shall be returned to the owner when they
have been approved by the Construction Official, together with
such permit as may be granted.
C. Issuance of permit. It shall be the duty of the Construction Official to
issue a building permit, provided that the Zoning Officer is satisfied that
the structure, building and proposed use conform to all requirements of
this chapter and that all other reviews and actions, if any, called for in
this chapter or any other Borough ordinances have been complied with
and all necessary approvals secured therefor. All building permits shall
be issued in duplicate, and one copy shall be kept conspicuously on the
premises affected and protected from the weather whenever
construction work is being performed thereon. No owner, contractor,
workman or other person shall perform any building operations of any
§ 101-49 PARK RIDGE CODE § 101-50
1:824
§ 101-51. Certificate of occupancy. [Amended 6-26-1990 by Ord. No.
90-11; 12-11-1990 by Ord. No. 90-11A; 5-14-1992 by Ord. No. 92-15]
kind unless a building permit covering such operation has been
displayed as required by this chapter, nor shall anyone perform building
operations of any kind after notification of the revocation of said
building permit.
D. All dimensions shown on the plan referred to in Subsection B above,
relating to the location and size of the lot to be built upon, shall be
based on an actual survey. The lot and the location of the building
thereon shall be staked out on the ground before construction is
started.
E. Denial of permit. When the Zoning Officer is not satisfied that the
applicant's proposed development shall meet the provisions of this
chapter or of any other applicable ordinance of the Borough or any
other law, the Zoning Officer shall deny issuance of the building permit.
Said denial shall be prepared in writing, in duplicate, outlining in detail
the reasons for such action; and a copy shall be submitted to the
applicant for a building permit.
F. Revocation of permit. If it appears, at any time, to the Zoning Officer or
the duly authorized agents of the Zoning Officer, that the application or
accompanying plan is in any respect false or misleading or that work is
being done on the premises differing from that called for in the
applications filed under existing laws or ordinances, the Zoning Officer
may forthwith revoke the building permit. Said notice of revocation
shall be prepared in writing, in duplicate, outlining in detail the basis or
determination for said revocation; and a copy shall be submitted to the
holder of said building permit. Upon notice of revocation of the building
permit, it shall be the duty of the person holding the same to surrender
it and all copies thereof to said Zoning Officer. After the building permit
has been revoked, the Zoning Officer may, before issuing a new building
permit, require the applicant to file guaranties in favor of the Borough
of Park Ridge with sufficient surety, conditioned for compliance with
this chapter and all laws and ordinances then in force, and in sum
sufficient to cover the cost of removing the building or structure if it
does not so comply.
A. Certificate of occupancy required.
(1) Change of occupancy required. Continued certificates of occupancy
are required upon the change of ownership of all real property in
the Borough of Park Ridge. It shall be the responsibility of the
Zoning Officer of the Borough of Park Ridge to receive and review
applications for continued certificates of occupancy. The Zoning
Officer, after his review of the application and determination from
the records of the Borough of Park Ridge that the existing use is a
permitted use as set forth, shall issue the continued certificate of
§ 101-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-51
1:825
§ 101-52. Planning Board review of applications and appeals.
§ 101-53. Violations and penalties.
occupancy. The Borough of Park Ridge shall charge a fee of $25 for
such application.
(2) Change of tenancy of commercial and office usages.
(a) Continued certificates of occupancy are required upon a
change of tenancy of commercial and office usages in the
Borough of Park Ridge. It shall be the responsibility of the
Zoning Officer to receive and review such applications. The
review shall include, but not be limited to, a description of the
proposed use, the hours of operation, the number of
employees, the parking requirements, the nature of deliveries
or shipments, etc. The fee for a certificate of occupancy under
this section is $25. This fee shall be waived if permits are
required by the Construction Code Officer.
(b) A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued for a change in
tenancy until the new tenant has registered with the Fire
Prevention Bureau and has met the requirements of the New
Jersey Uniform Fire Code.
B. Denial of certificate. In the event that the Zoning Officer denies
issuance of a certificate of occupancy, said denial shall be prepared in
writing, outlining in detail the basis of determination for said denial. A
copy of the denial shall be forwarded to the applicant for the certificate
of occupancy. The appeal of a denial is to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
C. Record to be kept. A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept
on file by the Zoning Officer, and copies shall be furnished to any person
having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building in question. A
quarterly report of the certificates of occupancy applied for and issued
shall be filed with the Borough Administrator.
A. Referral from Board of Adjustment. The Board of Adjustment may refer
to the Planning Board any application or appeal for its report.
B. Report to Board of Adjustment. The Planning Board shall report its
findings to the Board of Adjustment within 35 days of receipt or
request. Such report shall state all recommended conditions and
modifications and the reasons for recommending approval or
disapproval.
C. Criteria for review. The Planning Board, upon referral, shall review
such applications to ensure conformance with the intent of the Master
Plan and Official Map, where they exist, Chapter 87, Subdivision and
Site Plan Review, and this chapter.
§ 101-51 PARK RIDGE CODE § 101-53
1:826
A. Complaints of violations. Any person may file a complaint if there is any
reason to believe that a violation of this chapter exists. All such
complaints must be in writing and shall be filed with the Zoning Officer,
who shall properly record such complaint and immediately investigate.
B. Procedures for abatement of violations.
(1) In case any building or structure is erected, constructed,
reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained or any
building, structure or land is used in violation of this chapter or of
any ordinance or regulation made under authority conferred
hereby, the Zoning Officer or other proper official, in addition to
other remedies, may institute any appropriate legal action or
proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use;
to restrain, correct or abate such violation; to prevent the
occupancy of said building, structure or land; or to prevent any
illegal act, conduct, business or use about such premises.
(2) A violation of any of these terms of this chapter shall be abated
immediately or within as reasonable a time as may be determined
after written notice has been served, either by mail or personal
service.
C. Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine not exceeding
$1,000 for each offense or imprisonment not exceeding 90 days, or
both, in the discretion of the court imposing sentence pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:49-5. Each day that a violation occurs or is committed shall
constitute a separate offense. In addition, the certificate of occupancy
may be rescinded after an appropriate hearing before the Zoning
Officer upon 10 days' notice to the owner and occupant of the property.
§ 101-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-53
1:827

ARTICLE XIII
B-3 Mixed Business Zone
[Added 7-14-1992 by Ord. No. 92-20]
§ 101-54. Purpose and intent.
The purpose and intent of the B-3 Mixed Business Zone District is to
encourage the redevelopment of the properties included in the district in a
manner which is consistent with and in furtherance of the Borough of Park
Ridge Redevelopment Plan Master Plan Element. The intent of the district is
to encourage a comprehensive, coordinated approach to the redevelopment
of this area, incorporating a unified design approach with shared parking
and loading, unified and integrated landscaping and architectural features,
common driveways to minimize access points, coordinated lighting and
related benefits of a planned development concept. Furthermore, it is the
purpose and intent of this district to allow for mixed-use development
which incorporates retail and service commercial uses, offices and light
manufacturing uses, as well as additional uses as prescribed herein, which
may be built piecemeal without construction of the entire business center
under the condition that each building component will be located in
accordance with an overall Borough redevelopment plan so that the final
product will be a properly designed commercial business center, whether
built all at once or piecemeal.
§ 101-55. Zoning district established.
§ 101-56. Use provisions.
A. For the purposes of this chapter, a new zone district entitled "B-3 Mixed
Business District" is hereby created, as delineated on the
accompanying map.194
B. The B-3 District encompasses the following properties, as identified on
Borough Tax Maps: Block 1405, Lots 2 through 9.
A. A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for
the following purposes:
(1) Principal permitted uses: retail trade and service commercial
establishments, excluding auto sales and restaurants; business and
professional offices; banks and financial institutions; light
manufacturing uses, subject to Subsection B below; apartments
over retail stores, subject to Subsection C below.
(2) Accessory uses: off-street parking and loading facilities; signs,
accessory storage within a wholly enclosed permanent structure
for materials; goods and supplies intended for sale or consumption
on the premises; fences.
194. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 101-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-56
1:829
§ 101-57. Area and bulk requirements.
(3) Conditional uses: essential services, subject to § 101-22A.
B. Light manufacturing uses.
(1) Light manufacturing uses, for the purposes of this article, shall
include and be limited to the following: assembly or packaging of
products from previously prepared materials; manufacture,
assembly and/or packaging of electronic components, instruments
and precision tools; printers; and tool, the and pattern making.
(2) Light manufacturing uses shall be permitted in the rear portion of
the B-3 District, in a building which is set back 170 feet from
Kinderkamack Road and is situated behind a building designed for
retail trade and service commercial use, in a manner generally
consistent with the scheme depicted in the Redevelopment Plan
Master Plan Element. The development of retail trade and service
commercial establishments shall occur prior to or simultaneously
with the development/construction of any adjoining light
manufacturing activity, in a form substantially consistent with the
aforementioned redevelopment plan for the district.
(3) Retail uses shall not be permitted in the building which is
designated for occupancy by light manufacturing uses, as noted in
the aforementioned redevelopment plan and in Subsection B(2)
herein.
C. Apartments above retail commercial uses. Multifamily dwellings shall
be permitted in the B-3 District, provided that they are limited to a
location above the first story of the structure which is devoted to the
following permitted uses: retail trade and service commercial uses;
business and professional offices. Apartments shall not be permitted in
the building which is designated for occupancy by light manufacturing
uses, as noted in the redevelopment plan.
A. The entire redevelopment district should be developed in general
accord with the schematic plan set forth in the Borough of Park Ridge
Redevelopment Plan Master Plan Element and should be consistent
with and in furtherance of the purposes and intent of this article. The
following general regulations shall apply:
(1) Minimum front yard: 70 feet.
(2) Minimum side yards: 30 feet.
(3) Minimum rear yard: 35 feet.
(4) Minimum front yard landscaped island: eight feet.
(5) Minimum side yard (north) landscaped island: eight feet.
(6) Minimum rear yard landscaped island: eight feet.
§ 101-56 PARK RIDGE CODE § 101-57
1:830
§ 101-58. Supplemental requirements.
Number of buildings and uses on a lot. Multiple buildings and uses shall be
permitted on a lot in the B-3 Zone, irrespective of any regulations to the
contrary which are set forth elsewhere in this chapter.
(7) Maximum building height: two stories; 30 feet.
(8) Maximum building coverage: 35%.
B. Individual sections of the redevelopment district may be developed
piecemeal, provided that they are in general accord with the schematic
plan set forth in the aforementioned redevelopment plan and are
consistent with and in furtherance of the purpose and intent of this
article. The following regulations shall apply to individual sections
proposed for redevelopment:
(1) Minimum lot area: one acre.
(2) Minimum lot width: 140 feet.
(3) Minimum lot depth: 250 feet.
(4) Minimum front yard: 70 feet.
(5) Minimum side yard: zero feet. Buildings shall maintain a zero side
yard relative to those lot lines which are internal to the B-3 Zone. A
minimum thirty-foot setback shall be provided along those side
yard lines which represent the perimeter of the B-3 Zone.
(6) Minimum rear yard: 35 feet.
(7) Maximum building height: two stories; 30 feet.
§ 101-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-58
1:831

ARTICLE XIIIA
(Reserved)195
§ 101-58.1. through § 101-58.12. (Reserved)
195. Editor's Note: Former Art. XIIIA, RD-1 and RD-2 Redevelopment Zones, added 1-27-1998
by Ord. No. 98-1, as amended 9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-11, was repealed at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 101-58.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-58.1
1:833

ARTICLE XIIIB
RP Residential/Professional Office Zone
[Added 9-13-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-19; amended in its entirety
8-23-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-025]
§ 101-58.13. Zone established.
A. Residential/Professional Office Zone (RP).
(1) Principal permitted uses. The principal permitted uses allowed in
this district shall include single-family detached dwellings;
municipal buildings and facilities; and community residences.
(2) Conditional uses.
(a) Professional office use which comply with the following
conditions:
[1] The existing principal structure (existing, as of date of the
adoption of this article) must be retained.
[2] Buildings being used for professional office use must front
on Park Avenue.
[3] Vehicular access must be from Park Avenue.
[4] Parking shall not be permitted in the front yard; all parking
shall be to the rear of the existing structures.
[5] A buffer area of minimally 25 feet shall be required from
the rear property line along Storms Avenue, and no access/
egress from Storms Avenue shall be permitted. A minimum
twenty-five-foot buffer shall also be provided along the
sidelines of Lots 3, 4 and 6 where such lot lines abut
adjoining residences. A minimum buffer of 10 feet shall be
required from all other property lines abutting adjoining
residences, with the exception of driveways providing
access from Park Avenue.
(b) Mixed professional office/residential uses, which comply to the
following conditions:
[1] The existing principal structure (existing, as of date of the
adoption of this article) must be retained.
[2] Properties being used for mixed use must front on Park
Avenue.
[3] Apartments must be located above the first floor of the
structure.
[4] Vehicular access must be from Park Avenue.
§ 101-58.13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-58.13
1:835
[5] Parking shall not be permitted in the front yard; all parking
shall be to the rear of the existing structures.
[6] A buffer area of minimally 25 feet shall be required from
the rear property line along Storms Avenue, and no access/
egress from Storms Avenue shall be permitted. A minimum
twenty-five-foot buffer shall also be provided along the
side lines of Lots 3, 4 and 6 where such lines abut
adjoining residences. A minimum buffer of 10 feet shall be
required from all other property lines abutting adjoining
residences, with the exception of driveways providing
access from Park Avenue.
(3) Accessory uses. The permitted accessory uses allowed in this
district shall include private garages, subject to § 101-21C
regulations; swimming pools and tennis courts, subject to
§ 101-21D regulations; garden houses, sheds and playhouses;
fences and walls, subject to § 101-21E regulations; signs, subject to
§ 101-21F regulations; off-street parking, subject to § 101-62
regulations; and office of resident professionals, subject to
§ 101-21G regulations.
(4) Area and bulk regulations:
Regulation
RP
Single-Family
RP
Non- residential
Uses
Minimum lot area
(square feet)
10,000 15,000
Minimum lot width (feet) 100 100
Minimum lot depth (feet) 100 150
Minimum front yard
(feet)
25 30
Minimum side yard (feet) 20 20
Minimum rear yard
(feet)
30 30
Maximum building
height (feet)
35 35
Maximum impervious
coverage
45% 60%
Maximum floor area
ratio
20% 30%
§ 101-58.13 PARK RIDGE CODE § 101-58.13
1:836
ARTICLE XIIIC
NB Neighborhood Business Zone
[Added 5-25-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-17]
§ 101-58.14. Purpose and intent.
The purpose and intent of the NB Neighborhood Business Zone District is
to encourage the redevelopment of the properties included in the district in
a manner which is consistent with and in furtherance of the 2009 Borough
of Park Ridge Comprehensive Master Plan. The intent of the district is
to encourage a more pedestrian-oriented commercial district through the
incorporation of enhanced building facades, increased landscaping and
street furniture, and improved off-street parking configurations, including
shared parking arrangements and reduced curb cuts along rights-of-way.
Furthermore, it is the purpose and intent of this district to allow for mixeduse
development which incorporates a variety of retail and service
commercial uses as well as office uses at ground level, with office and
residential uses above the ground floor.
§ 101-58.15. Permitted principal uses. [Amended 9-13-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011-026]
The following uses shall be permitted in the NB Neighborhood Business
District. No use not specifically listed hereinbelow shall be permitted within
the district:
A. Retail stores.
B. Personal service establishments.
C. Eating and drinking establishments.
D. Instructional studio spaces, including dance, artist, martial art, music
and related studios.
E. Museums, art galleries and libraries.
F. Child-care facilities, designed in accordance with § 101-20G.
G. Veterinary hospitals, designed in accordance with § 101-20K.
H. Professional, financial and medical offices, either at grade or above
other principal permitted uses set forth in Subsections A through G
above.
I. Multifamily residential dwellings above at-grade retail or other
principal permitted uses set forth in Subsections A through H above.
J. Places of worship in accordance with § 101-20A.
K. Notwithstanding the provisions above, all residential units along
Broadway that exist as of the date of this article shall be deemed a
§ 101-58.14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-58.15
1:837
§ 101-58.16. Permitted accessory uses.
The following accessory uses shall be permitted in the NB Neighborhood
Business District:
§ 101-58.17. Permitted conditional uses.
The following conditional uses shall be permitted in the NB Neighborhood
Business District:
conforming use and shall have all rights to expand and enlarge
consistent with the R-10 Zoning District regulations.
L. Notwithstanding the provisions above, all multifamily residential units
located along Park Avenue that exist as of the date of this article shall
be deemed a conforming use and have all rights to expand and enlarge
consistent with the R-10 district regulations as long as the existing
structure remains in place and the architectural integrity of the
building is not compromised.
A. Off-street parking and loading. Off-street parking shall be designed in
accordance with § 101-58.24, and off-street loading shall be designed in
accordance with § 87-44.
B. Outdoor cafes associated with and on the same lot as indoor eating
facilities such as coffee shops, restaurants, ice cream parlors, bakeries
and cafes. Outdoor cafes shall be designed in accordance with
§ 101-20J.
C. Fences and walls, designed in accordance with § 101-21E.
D. Signs, designed in accordance with Article X of Chapter 101 of the
Borough Code. [Amended 5-27-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-010]
A. Parking structures, in accordance with the following conditions:
[Amended 9-13-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-026]
(1) The lot shall have a minimum lot area of 0.75 acres.
(2) The outside perimeter of the parking structure shall be developed
with principal permitted uses, as set forth at § 101-58.15, where the
structure is adjacent to a public right-of-way.
(3) The parking structure shall be subject to the area and bulk
requirements set forth at § 101-58.19, except that the following
height limitations shall govern:
(a) No parking structure shall exceed a height of two levels or 20
feet; or
(b) Shall comply with the second floor requirement set forth in
Subsection A(5) below.
§ 101-58.15 PARK RIDGE CODE § 101-58.17
1:838
§ 101-58.18. Prohibited uses. [Amended 9-13-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-026]
Any use or structure other than those permitted in §§ 101-58.15 through
101-58.17 are prohibited. In addition, and notwithstanding the above, the
following uses shall be specifically prohibited in the NB Neighborhood
Business District:
§ 101-58.19. Area and bulk requirements. [Amended 7-27-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-28]
(4) Ground floor retail required. All parking structures shall have retail
uses on the ground floor in front of the structure if it fronts on any
of the following main commercial streets: Park Avenue, Broadway,
Kinderkamack Road, Madison Street, and Market Street. The
ground floor retail space must occupy the ground floor space in
front of the parking structure along 65% of the length of the
structure along the roadway.
(5) Second floor requirement. All parking structures that exceed 20
feet in height shall have a second floor above the retail component
required in Subsection A(4) above. The second floor may be
occupied by any permitted use other than retail uses. In no case
shall the structure or building exceed the maximum permitted
height in the zone district.
(6) The parking structure shall be subject to additional design
requirements set forth at § 101-58.24D.
A. Drive-up or drive-through windows in connection with any business.
B. Bars or taverns not associated with a restaurant.
C. Cabarets and dance clubs.
D. Adult entertainment uses.
E. Animal kennels, boarding or shelters.
F. Storage, temporary housing, and/or maintenance of vegetative waste.
A. The following area and bulk regulations shall apply to all uses permitted
in the NB Neighborhood Business District: [Amended 9-13-2011 by
Ord. No. 2011-026]
Regulation Requirement
Requirement for
Development Bonus
Minimum lot area
(square feet)
10,000a 50,000
Minimum lot width (feet) 50 200
§ 101-58.17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-58.19
1:839
Regulation Requirement
Requirement for
Development Bonus
Minimum street frontage
(feet)
— 200
Minimum lot depth (feet) — 100
Minimum front yard
(feet)
Park Avenue 10 10
Broadway 10 10
Kinderkamack Road 10 10
Other streets 20 20
Maximum front yard
(feet)
Park Avenue 20 20
Broadway 20 20
Other streets — 40
Minimum side yard (feet) — 30
Minimum rear yard (feet) — -
Maximum building
height (feet)
35b 40
Maximum building
coverage
40% 85%
Maximum impervious
coverage
75% 90%
Maximum floor area ratio 0.60 .70
Minimum distance
between buildings on
same lot (feet)
15 -
NOTES:
a In order to encourage the assemblage of small properties, a density
bonus shall be provided to developers of larger properties.
Specifically, for every additional 10,000 square feet of lot area over
the minimum, the property may be developed with an additional
0.10 floor area ratio over the maximum, not to exceed a total floor
area ratio of 1.0.
b Subject to additional regulations detailed in § 101-58.21C.
B. In order to encourage the assemblage of small properties, a density
bonus shall be provided to developers of larger properties. Specifically,
for every additional 10,000 square feet of lot area over the minimum,
§ 101-58.19 PARK RIDGE CODE § 101-58.19
1:840
§ 101-58.20. Supplemental regulations.
The following supplemental regulations shall apply to all uses permitted in
the NB Neighborhood Business District:
the property may be developed with an additional 0.10 floor area ratio
over the maximum, not to exceed a total floor area ratio of 1.0.
C. In order to encourage the architectural details as detailed in
§ 101-58.21, an increase in the permitted floor area shall be provided.
Specifically, if a building design complies with § 101-58.21A, the
property may be developed with an additional 0.05 floor area ratio over
the maximum, not to exceed a total floor area ratio of 1.0.
D. In order to encourage sustainable design and more green space as
detailed in § 101-58.22, an increase in the permitted floor area shall be
provided. Specifically, if a building design complies with § 101-58.22,
the property may be developed with an additional 0.05 floor area ratio
over the maximum, not to exceed a total floor area ratio of 1.0.
E. In addition to the maximum building height regulation identified in
§ 101-58.19A, all buildings are also subject to additional regulations
detailed in § 101-58.21C.
F. Green roof requirement. Structures which provide a minimum 20% of
the roof area constructed as an extensive green roof shall be permitted
to count this area as the pervious area when calculating the impervious
coverage on site. [Added 9-13-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-026]
A. Number of buildings and uses on a lot. Multiple buildings and uses shall
be permitted on a lot in the NB Zone, irrespective of any regulations to
the contrary which are set forth elsewhere in this chapter.
B. Affordable housing. All residential development and/or redevelopment
shall include, at a minimum, 20% of the total number of units on site as
deed restricted affordable housing units for very-low-, low- and
moderate-income families.
C. Public open space and trails. Public open space and trails shall be
provided in the NB Neighborhood Business Zone District in a manner
that implements the goals and objectives of the Borough of Park Ridge
Open Space Plan Element and the Borough's Vision Plan, where
deemed appropriate by the Board. Where required, trails and open
space shall be designed in accordance with the following:
(1) Trails shall be designed to be ADA accessible and shall be clear and
unobstructed by either natural or man-made intrusions such as
trees, bushes, ground cover, signs, fences or any other such
obstructions.
(2) The trail beds shall be constructed of pervious material such as
gravel, wood chips, granular stone or other similar material.
§ 101-58.19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-58.20
1:841
§ 101-58.21. Architectural guidelines.
Unless otherwise regulated herein, deviations from the following standards
shall not be considered variances, but shall be considered deviations from
Chapter 87, Subdivision and Site Plan Review, and shall therefore require
design waivers:
(3) All trailway lands and associated setbacks that are required in this
subsection shall be permanently restricted from future subdivision
and development. Under no circumstances shall any development
be permitted in the open space at any time, except for trail
construction and maintenance.
A. Facade design.
(1) Horizontal articulation between floors. Each facade should be
designed to have a delineated floor line between street level and
upper floors. This delineation can be in the form of a masonry belt
course, a concrete lintel or a cornice line delineated by wood
detailing.
(2) Vertical articulation. Each building facade facing a public right-ofway
must have elements of vertical articulation comprised of
columns, piers, recessed windows or entry designs, overhangs,
ornamental projection of the molding, different exterior materials
or wall colors, or recessed portions of the main surface of the wall
itself. The vertical articulations shall be designed in accordance
with the following:
(a) Each vertical articulation must be a maximum of 30 feet apart.
(b) Each vertical articulation must be a minimum of one-foot deep.
(c) Each vertical projection noted above may extend into the
required front yard a maximum of two feet in depth.
(3) Fenestration.
(a) At least 30% of the first floor building frontage shall be clear
window glass permitting a view of the buildings' interior. This
percentage shall be calculated within the area of the building
facade that is located between three and 10 feet above
sidewalk level.
§ 101-58.20 PARK RIDGE CODE § 101-58.21
1:842
(b) A minimum of 40% of the front door shall consist of glass in
order to maximize the visibility of the store interior.
(c) Bulkheads shall have a maximum height of three feet and must
be comprised of the same architectural detailing, materials
and colors as the windows.
(d) Recessed entries are encouraged to create additional design
articulation and amenity, improved pedestrian element and
provide shelter for sidewalk patrons.
(e) Orientation. All primary facades shall be oriented toward the
public right-of-way so as to provide a continuous, varied and
attractive landscape.
B. Materials. Exterior building materials shall be classified as either
primary, secondary or accent materials. The facade must be designed in
accordance with the following:
(1) Primary materials shall cover at least 60% of the facade of the
building.
(2) Secondary materials shall cover not more than 40% of the facade.
(3) Earth-toned materials and wall colors are encouraged.
C. Rooflines/building height.
§ 101-58.21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-58.21
1:843
(1) The top of all buildings must be capped by a cornice or sloping roof
element.
(2) An additional five feet in height for ornamentation such as parapets
and cornices is permitted. This additional height is only permitted
along a maximum of 66% of the facade to encourage a varying
roofline.
(3) In addition to Subsection C(2) above, for each portion of a building
that provides cornices and similar appurtenances for ornamental
purposes, such elements may not be more than 30 feet in length
each.
(4) All roof-mounted equipment, such as HVAC units, shall be screened
from public view by use of parapet walls.
D. Awnings and canopies.196 [Amended 5-27-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-010]
(1) Buildings with multiple storefronts: All awnings or canopies shall
be designed of compatible material and shall be uniform in color,
shape and design.
(2) Awnings and canopies shall be designed with a minimum vertical
clearance of seven feet six inches and shall not extend more than
six feet from the face of the building; provided, however, that a sign
196. Editor's Note: See also the Awning Section Illustration, which is included at the end of
this chapter.
§ 101-58.21 PARK RIDGE CODE § 101-58.21
1:844
§ 101-58.22. Streetscape design requirements.
Unless otherwise regulated herein, deviations from the following standards
shall not be considered variances, but shall be considered deviations from
Chapter 87, Subdivision and Site Plan Review, and shall therefore require
design waivers:
hanging from an awning or canopy shall have a minimum vertical
clearance of seven feet.
(3) A maximum number of four colors, inclusive of black and white, are
permitted.
(4) No awning shall be erected or maintained so as to obstruct access
to any fire escape, window or door.
(5) Awnings and canopies are permitted to encroach within the front
yard setback, but shall project no closer than three feet from the
curbline.197
A. Sidewalks.
(1) Along all public rights-of-way, there shall be provided a minimum
sidewalk width of five feet and a landscaped buffer with a minimum
width of five feet. The landscaped buffer shall be situated between
the sidewalk and the curbline.
(2) A combination of perennials, shrubs and street trees are required
in proposed landscaped buffers.
(3) Streetscape amenities such as benches shall be incorporated as
part of the landscaped buffer design.
B. Frontage buffers.
(1) Frontage buffers shall be provided between all buildings and all
sidewalks/landscaped areas required per Subsection A(1) above,
where additional front yard setback width is required per
§ 101-58.19.
(2) Frontage buffers shall not contain parking or loading areas;
however, driveways to rear yard parking and loading areas are
permitted.
(3) Frontage buffers shall be shown on the landscape plan and shall be
designed in accordance with the following:
(a) Frontage buffers shall be planted with a mixture of deciduous
and evergreen trees, shrubs, grasses and perennials, and
incorporated with berms, boulders or mounds, or combinations
thereof, so as to enhance the appearance of the site.
197. Editor's Note: Former Subsection E, Signage, was repealed 5-27-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-010.
§ 101-58.21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-58.22
1:845
§ 101-58.23. Site design requirements.
Unless otherwise regulated herein, deviations from the following standards
shall not be considered variances, but shall be considered deviations from
Chapter 87, Subdivision and Site Plan Review, and shall therefore require
design waivers:
(b) In addition to required street trees, frontage buffers shall
require a minimum of 10 shrubs for every 30 feet of frontage.
(c) Frontage buffers may not interfere with traffic sight distances
and shall not preclude a driver's view of retail stores or signs
on a commercial site of such view, as determined by the
Planning Board.
C. Street trees. Street trees shall be provided along all public rights-ofway
in accordance with the following standards:
(1) Street trees should be located at a distance of 40 feet on center.
The exact spacing and planting location shall be evaluated on a
site-specific basis and adjusted to reflect the location of buildings
to minimize potential obstruction and visibility impacts on wall
business signage.
(2) Trees shall have a minimum caliper size of three inches at time of
planting.
A. Landscaping.
(1) General requirements:
(a) A landscape plan shall be required for each site. Each design
shall incorporate three or more of the following: trees, shrubs,
hedges, ground covers and/or grasses as part of the overall
landscape plan.
(b) Automatic irrigation systems are mandatory components of
said plan and shall include water conserving features such as
rain sensors and drip irrigation for planting beds.
(c) Perennial and annual flower beds shall be incorporated into the
plan.
(2) Parking area landscaping:
(a) Parking areas with less than 10 spaces shall be screened from
the street with landscaping, but no interior parking lot
landscaping is required. The street screening shall comply with
the general requirements in Subsection A(1) above.
(b) Parking areas with 10 or more spaces shall be screened from
the street with landscaping, and interior lot landscaping shall
be required in accordance with the following:
§ 101-58.22 PARK RIDGE CODE § 101-58.23
1:846
[1] Each parking row shall include a curbed landscaped island
with at least one shade tree and shrub plantings.
[2] A minimum of three shrubs for every parking space shall
be planted along the perimeter of the parking spaces.
[3] One shade tree shall be provided for every 10 parking
spaces.
[4] Street trees shall be provided along all rights-of-way at a
distance of 40 feet on center.
(3) Recommended plant materials. Plant materials shall be subject to
the Borough's streetscape plan, although substitutions are
permissible subject to Board approval. Water conservation
practices should be considered for all planting areas, such as:
minimizing large expanses of turf, incorporating native species
wherever possible, choosing species based on solar exposure, etc.
(4) Seasonal planting. Areas for seasonal planting shall be
incorporated into the planting design. Consideration should be
given to the installation of raised planters to separate areas on site,
to screen views and to add aesthetic interest. The maintenance of
the planters shall be by the property owner or designee and shall
include soil additives for water retention and time-release
fertilizers.
B. Lighting.
(1) General requirements:
(a) The Borough standard lighting fixture, or other lighting fixture
as approved by the Borough Council, shall be utilized along all
public rights-of-way and in all pedestrian areas, such as
walkways and plazas.
(b) All outdoor lights shall be decorative fixtures not exceeding 12
feet in height.
(c) The maximum lighting intensity (footcandle) at any point on
the subject property line shall not exceed 0.5 footcandle.
(d) All lights shall utilize color-corrected lamps. The use of
fluorescent or mercury vapor lighting is prohibited. Use of
minimum-high-pressure sodium lighting is encouraged, or as
approved by the Borough Council.
(e) The maximum permitted wattage of fixtures is limited to 250
watts.
(2) Lighting standards. The required lighting levels (in footcandles) for
properties in the district shall be as determined in the table below:
§ 101-58.23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-58.23
1:847
§ 101-58.24. Off-street parking requirements.
The following off-street parking regulations shall apply to all uses permitted
in the NB Neighborhood Business District:
Requirement
Minimum
Footcandles
Average
Footcandles
Uniformity
Ratio
Parking areas 0.5 1.0 4:1
Pedestrian areas 1.0 1.5 4:1
Access
driveways
1.0 2.0
(3) Storefront and facade lighting:
(a) Lighting should be directed toward the storefront and should
be shielded and recessed to prevent spillage.
(b) Wall-mounted lights shall not be located higher than the
second floor.
(c) No lighting is permitted on the roof structure of a building.
(d) The use of floodlights is prohibited.
C. Recycling. All development in the NB Neighborhood Business District
shall adhere to the Borough's existing solid waste recycling regulations,
as set forth in Chapter 64, Article II, of the municipal ordinances.
D. Sustainable design. To the extent feasible, all development and
redevelopment should be compatible with the principles of the U.S.
Green Building Council's Leadership in Energy and Environmental
Design for Neighborhood Development (LEED ND). Developers are
encouraged to incorporate a number of sustainable features into their
buildings and sites, including pervious paving materials, green
architecture, reuse of existing structures, indigenous landscaping, gray
water reuse, solar energy use and LEED (Leadership in Energy and
Environmental Design) certification.
A. Number of parking spaces.
(1) The minimum number of off-street parking spaces required shall be
calculated in accordance with the following table. These standards
are specifically designed to address the particular features and the
characteristics of this district and are not meant to be applied to
other zone districts within the Borough of Park Ridge.
§ 101-58.23 PARK RIDGE CODE § 101-58.24
1:848
Land Use Requirement
Retail and service commercial
uses
1 space per 300 square feet of
floor area
Business and professional offices 1 space per 325 square feet of
floor area
Medical and dental offices 1 space per 325 square feet of
floor area
Eating and drinking
establishments
1 space for each 3.5 seats
Residences in mixed-use
buildings
Per RSIS requirements
Dance, martial arts and similar
studios
1 space per 300 square feet of
floor area
Galleries 1 space per 300 square feet of
floor area
Child-care centers Per § 101-20G(3)
Public/governmental/
institutional uses
To be determined by approving
body
(2) Shared parking. Parking requirements may be reduced, at the
discretion of the approving body, to account for shared parking
among uses. Reductions for shared parking should be consistent
with New Jersey Transit's publication "Planning for Transit-
Friendly Land Use," which recommends a reduction of 5% to 25%
for office uses, a reduction of 10% to 15% for other nonresidential
uses and a reduction of 25% to 30% for residential uses. A parking
study shall be submitted by the applicant demonstrating that there
will not be a substantial conflict in the peak hours of parking
demand for the uses for which shared parking is proposed.
B. Parking area design.
(1) Location. Front and side yard parking shall be prohibited. Offstreet
parking spaces shall be limited to rear yards only. If,
however, shared parking is being provided on a different lot from
the building itself, such off-street parking shall be provided within
1,400 feet of the entrance of the use or structure. In such case, a
legal agreement ensuring that the parking will be available shall be
approved by the approving board's attorney, and such agreement
shall remain in effect as long as at least one of the uses exists.
(2) Setback. Parking spaces shall be set back a minimum of five feet
from side and rear lot lines. Where parking abuts a single-family
residential zone, the minimum setback shall be 10 feet. A landscape
buffer shall be provided adjacent to the property line shared with
the single-family residential zone.
§ 101-58.24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-58.24
1:849
(3) Parking stall size. All parking spaces shall be nine feet by 18 feet in
dimension, except as required elsewhere in the Borough
development ordinances for parking for the handicapped. If said
parking space immediately abuts green space, the space can be
reduced to 17 feet in depth if a two-foot overhang above the green
space is provided. [Amended 7-27-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-28]
(4) Access drives. Access drives onto Park Avenue and Broadway are
discouraged and should be minimized where possible.
(5) Shared parking arrangements. The use of combined driveway
access and parking areas is encouraged. All designs for shared
parking arrangements shall include a provision for drive
connections, including necessary access easements, between
adjoining lots.
(6) Parking area landscaping details: See § 101-58.23A(2).
(7) Other. Notwithstanding the provisions above, all parking facilities
shall be designed in accordance with Chapter 87, Subdivision and
Site Plan Review.
C. Bicycle parking.
(1) Bicycle parking facilities, including racks, lockers or another
adequate method, shall be provided at the minimum rate of one
bicycle rack space for every 10 automobile spaces. Lots with less
than 10 spaces shall provide a minimum of one bicycle space.
(2) Bicycle parking facilities shall provide a safe environment for the
user, particularly with respect to lighting and automobile
circulation.
D. Parking structure design. [Amended 9-13-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-026]
(1) Pedestrian walkways. Adequate pedestrian walkways shall be
required from any parking structure to a public right-of-way. The
walkways must be a minimum of four feet wide and provide a
landscaped area immediately adjacent. The landscaped area shall
be a minimum of three feet in width.
(2) Landscape requirements. Parking structures shall be landscaped in
accordance with and to the same extent as the overall landscape
plan for the principal use and building the parking structure shall
serve. All facades of the parking structure which do not have a
retail use on the ground floor shall be adequately screened with
landscaping that is minimally eight feet in width.
(3) Signage. Adequate signage shall be located within the parking
structure to direct motorists to stairwells, elevators, parking and
exits. Signs at exit points shall indicate the street name(s) to which
the exit driveway(s) leads.
§ 101-58.24 PARK RIDGE CODE § 101-58.24
1:850
(4) Parking layout:
(a) The following aisle widths and parking space angles shall
apply:
Angle of Parking Space
(degrees)
Minimum Aisle Width
(feet)
45 to 60 18
61 to 75 22
90 24
(b) Parking layouts using ninety-degree parking spaces shall be
designed for two-way travel. Parking layouts using less than
ninety-degree parking spaces shall be for one-way travel only,
clearly marked and signed as such.
(c) Parking layouts with less than forty-five-degree parking spaces
are not permitted.
(5) Parking stall size. All parking spaces shall be nine feet by 18 feet in
dimension, except as required elsewhere in the Borough
development ordinances for parking for the handicapped.
(6) Lighting. The interior of parking structures shall be adequately
lighted during both day and night times.
(7) Design guidelines. The following design guidelines shall apply to all
parking structures, unless, after due consideration of plans,
testimony or other evidence, the approving body waives strict
compliance with the requirements of this subsection in order to
promote the purposes of this article and flexibility in design.
(a) Parking structures shall be so designed as to minimize blank
concrete facades through the use of innovative architectural
detail. The design of the exterior of any exposed portion of a
parking structure shall be compatible in materials, spacing of
solids and voids and design of the principal structure to the
extent that the parking facility is clearly identified with such
principal structure.
(b) Stairwells and elevator shafts shall be designed such that
activities may be observed within them from at least one
vantage point on the outside of the parking structure or else
continuous aural monitoring of such areas by security
personnel shall be required.
§ 101-58.24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-58.24
1:851

ARTICLE XIV
Amendments; Interpretation
§ 101-59. Governing body may amend.
All amendments to this chapter and to the Zoning Map, which forms a part
hereof,198 shall be adopted in accordance with the provisions of New Jersey
law.
§ 101-60. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and the application of the provisions of this chapter,
they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of
health, safety, morals and general welfare. It is not intended to interfere
with or abrogate or annul other rules, regulations or ordinances, provided
that where this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this
chapter shall apply.
198. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 101-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-60
1:853

ARTICLE XV
Landscaping and Buffers; Off-Street Parking
[Added 9-13-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-19]
§ 101-61. Landscaping of parking and loading areas.
A. General requirements.
(1) All shade trees shall have a minimum caliper of 2 inches to 2 1/2
inches.
(2) All evergreen trees shall have a minimum height of six feet.
(3) Plantings shall be protected from impact by motor vehicles and
from the negative effects of road salt and snowplowing.
(4) The choice of plant materials to be used in parking and loading
areas shall consider the ultimate growth characteristics of the
plantings. Hardy, low-maintenance plants which are normally free
from destructive insect or disease problems shall be used.
(5) Landscaping shall not cast excessive shade on adjacent properties,
interfere with existing vegetation, interfere with light fixtures or
interfere with adequate sight distance for vehicles or pedestrians.
B. Perimeter plantings.
(1) Parking areas with more than 30 spaces shall provide at least one
shade tree within the perimeter of the parking area for every 15
parking spaces.
(2) Parking areas with at least five spaces shall be screened from the
street with landscaping, including, at a minimum, one evergreen
plant for every five spaces in the parking area.
C. Interior parking area plantings.
(1) Parking areas shall be separated by curbed, landscaped center
islands at least 10 feet in width between every six rows (i.e., three
double bays) of parking spaces.
(2) Each landscaped center island should include one shade tree for
every five spaces that are adjacent to the island and a minimum of
three shrubs for every space adjacent to the island.
(3) Widths of islands and planting areas shall be sufficient to
accommodate the ultimate growth of any plantings in parking and
loading areas, but in any case no less than five feet in width.
(4) Where landscaped center islands are not provided, landscaped end
islands shall be provided at the end of each parking row.
(5) Each landscape end island shall include a minimum of two shade
trees and three shrubs.
§ 101-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-62
1:855
§ 101-62. Off-street parking requirements.
A. Number of parking spaces required. The number of off-street parking
spaces required shall be as set forth in Table X-1. If determination of the
number of required parking spaces results in a fractional space, the
fraction shall require one additional parking space.
B. Location of parking spaces. The approving authority shall approve the
location of all proposed parking spaces on the site and shall take into
consideration the size and topography of the site, visibility from the site
to the adjoining street as well as within the parking area, conditions of
safety relating to the movement of people and vehicles and the
elimination of nuisance factors, including glare, noise, dust and other
similar considerations. Off-street parking shall not be located in a
required front yard. No off-street parking area shall be located closer
than five feet from any side or rear lot line. These conditions shall apply
to all surface and above-grade parking facilities. All parking facilities
shall not be located closer than 25 feet from any two intersecting
streets or within the sight triangle of any driveway and the street rightof-
way. All parking and design shall be in conformance with residential
site improvement standards.
Table X-1
Off-Street Parking Requirements
Use Required Parking Spaces
Automobile service stations 4 for each bay, plus 1 for each
employee on the maximum shift
Banks and savings institutions 1 for each 300 feet of floor area or 8
for each teller window, whichever is
greater
Bowling lanes (alleys) 5 for each lane
Churches and other places or
worship
1 for each 200 square feet of floor
area, but not less than 1 for every 4
seats
Community buildings, social
halls and places of public
assembly
1 for every 3 seats, except where a
specific amount of seating is
undetermined, then 1 shall be
required for each 150 square feet of
assemblage area
Continuing-care facilities 0.6 for each 1 bed of any type
Funeral homes and
mortuaries
15 for each parlor or slumber room
Garden apartments 1 1/2 for each dwelling unit, plus 1 for
each 6 dwellings for visitor parking
§ 101-62 PARK RIDGE CODE § 101-62
1:856
Table X-1
Off-Street Parking Requirements
Use Required Parking Spaces
Hospitals and convalescent
homes
1 for each 2 beds, plus 1 for each staff
member, plus 1 for each employee on
the peak shift
Hotels and motels 2 for each bedroom or suite
Housing for the handicapped 1/2 for each dwelling unit, plus 1 for
each 6 dwelling units for visitor
parking
Industrial and manufacturing
uses
1 for each 1,000 square feet of floor
area
Laboratories and research
uses
1 for every 300 square feet of floor
area
Medical or dental clinics or
offices
1 for every 165 square feet of floor
area
Mixed uses In the same building, shall be
calculated as the sum of the individual
uses, unless an applicant can
demonstrate to the approving
authority that the parking
characteristics of the individual uses
are such that the total needs of the
development are less than the sum of
the parts and the number of spaces to
be provided will satisfy the lesser need
Offices, other than medical or
dental
1 for every 250 square feet of floor
area
Residential dwellings As per residential site improvement
standards N.J.A.C. 5:21-4.14, of which
one space must be enclosed by a
garage
Restaurants, including fastfood
1 for every 3 seats and 1 for every
employee in the maximum work shift
Retail stores and personal
service establishments (not
including new or used car
sales or restaurants)
1 for every 200 square feet of floor
space
Schools, elementary 1 per staff member
Schools, high school 1 per staff member, plus 1 for every 20
students
Theaters 1 for every 3 seats
§ 101-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-62
1:857
§ 101-63. Landscaping and buffer areas.
Table X-1
Off-Street Parking Requirements
Use Required Parking Spaces
Other uses not provided
herein
To be determined by approving
authority
The existence of the standards in Table X-1 is not intended to imply
that any of the uses are permitted pursuant to this chapter.
A. Landscaping. A landscape plan shall be submitted with each site plan
application. The plan shall identify existing and proposed trees, shrubs,
bushes, plant materials, ground cover and natural features such as
boulders and rock outcroppings.
(1) Any part or portion of the site which is not used for buildings,
accessory structures, loading or parking spaces or aisles, sidewalks
and designated storage areas, and which does not contain existing
vegetation to remain, shall be landscaped in accordance with an
overall landscape planting plan, as approved by the approving
authority.
(2) Natural wooded areas shall be preserved to the greatest extent
possible. Existing vegetation that is to be retained shall be shown
on the plan.
(3) All landscaped portions of the site shall be maintained adequately
throughout the year.
B. Protection of existing vegetation.
(1) Existing vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent
practicable. Vegetation to be preserved shall be shown on the plans
submitted to the Board for any development approval.
(2) Snow fence or silt fence is to remain installed until all construction
is completed.
(3) Cut or fill near existing trees to be preserved shall require the
installation of tree wells or retaining walls, as appropriate, to
maintain the existing grade above the roots of the tree.
C. Buffers.
(1) Buffers, including fences, landscaping, berms and mounds, shall be
utilized to minimize any adverse impacts or nuisances from the site
to adjacent areas and shall be provided:
(a) Along property lines, shielding various uses from one another.
§ 101-62 PARK RIDGE CODE § 101-63
1:858
(b) Where interior roads or driveways run parallel with roadways
exterior to the site.
(c) Where parking areas abut other properties.
(d) In areas of refuse storage areas, loading and unloading areas
and outdoor storage areas deemed appropriate by approving
authority.
(e) As windbreak areas.
(f) To shield areas from deleterious noise or other adverse
conditions.
(g) Where the approving authority deems necessary to minimize
adverse impacts to adjacent properties.
(2) Buffer areas shall be designed in accordance with the following
criteria:
(a) Buffer widths shall be sufficient to accommodate the ultimate
growth of any plantings in the buffer, but in any case no less
than 10 feet in width.
(b) Where nonresidential uses abut residential uses or zones in the
B-2 Zone District, a twenty-five-foot buffer is required, and in
the ORL Zone, a one-hundred-foot buffer is required.
Evergreen trees and shrubs used in a buffer shall be at least six
feet high at the time of planting, and shall be maintained at
above six feet in height. If plantings are combined with a berm,
the combined height of plantings must be at least six feet at the
time of planting.
(c) Shade trees shall have a minimum caliper of 2 inches to 2 1/2
inches at the time of planting.
(d) At minimum, the buffer shall include eight shrubs for every 10
linear feet of buffer, one ornamental tree for every 30 linear
feet of buffer, supplemented by ground cover and perennial
plantings.
(e) Trees and shrubs used in a buffer shall be spaced to
accommodate normal plant growth without overcrowding and
to provide a complete visual screen within three years of
planting. If necessary to achieve the above intent, double or
triple staggered rows of plantings shall be provided.
(f) The choice of plant materials to be used in a buffer shall
consider the ultimate growth characteristics of the plantings.
Hardy, low-maintenance plants, which are normally free from
insect or disease problems, shall be used. Plants which tend to
lose their lower branches as they mature shall not be used or
§ 101-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-63
1:859
they shall be supplemented with other plants to provide a
sufficient screen.
(g) Buffers shall be protected from impact by motor vehicles and
from the negative effects of road salt and snow-plowing.
§ 101-63 PARK RIDGE CODE § 101-63
1:860
ARTICLE XVI
Steep Slopes
[Added 9-12-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-014]
§ 101-64. Definitions.
The following definitions are applicable to this article:
CRITICAL SLOPE AREA — Land where the grade is 15% or greater.
DISTURBANCE — Any alteration or change to the natural terrain (including
soil and vegetation). This term includes any activity involving the grading or
filling of a site but does not include restoration or stabilization of an existing
condition.
EMBANKMENT — An elevated deposit of soil, rock or other materials either
constructed or natural.
GRADE — The percent of rise or descent of a sloping surface. For example,
a grade of 15% corresponds to a fifteen-foot vertical change in elevation for
every 100 feet of horizontal distance. (Refer to accompanying slope diagram
for further clarification.)199
GROUND COVER — Grasses or other vegetation used in the stabilization of
soils.
RETAINING WALL — A structure constructed and erected between lands
of different elevations to protect structures and/or to prevent erosion and
which is minimally four feet in height.
SLOPE — The deviation of a surface from the horizontal, usually expressed
in percent.
§ 101-65. Steep slope identification and review criteria.
All applications for minor and major subdivision or site plan approval, or for
a permit for construction, grading or clearing of any lot, except for a permit
to construct upon premises of a one single-family dwelling and except as
otherwise provided in the definition of "disturbance" herein or exempted in
this chapter, shall be evaluated for the presence of critical slope areas.
A. Slope categories. The applicant shall prepare and submit a slope
analysis for the entire site (including proposed roadways and common
areas), and each proposed or existing lot. The property shall be
evaluated to determine the presence of critical slope areas in the
following categories:
199. Editor's Note: Said slope diagram is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 101-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-65
1:861
§ 101-66. Development in steep slope areas.
Table 1
Slope Analysis Categories
Slope Category Percent Grade
1 15% but less than 20%
2 20% but less than 25%
3 25% or greater
B. Slope analysis. The slope categories shall be identified on a plan drawn
at a scale as required by the Borough's site plan or subdivision
submission requirements. It shall show the existing and proposed
topographic contours at two-foot intervals and delineate the categories
of critical slope areas as shown in Table 1 above. Existing contours shall
be shown for a minimum distance of 25 feet beyond the property
boundaries.
C. Additional information required. The analysis provided by the applicant
shall contain the following additional information:
(1) It shall delineate and quantify those areas proposed for
disturbance. The applicant shall provide a table showing the
calculation of disturbed area in square feet and as a percent of the
lot area, for each proposed lot.
(2) It shall identify soil types present on the property, with specific
reference to highly erodible soils as identified by the United States
Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service.
(3) Details on how the proposed construction will minimize adverse
impacts upon existing natural features of the lot shall be provided.
(4) Plans and specifications for any retaining walls, steps, fences or
other protective structures shall be provided.
A. Maximum disturbed area.
(1) No buildings, improvements or structures, including roads,
driveways or parking areas, shall be constructed, nor shall any
displacement of soil or removal of vegetation occur within critical
slope areas, except in accordance with the following schedule
provided below in Table 2:
§ 101-65 PARK RIDGE CODE § 101-66
1:862
Table 2
Permitted Levels of Disturbance in Critical Slope Areas
Area
Slope
Category Percent Grade
Maximum
Disturbed
Slope 1 15% but less than
20%
50% of area in
Category 1
Slope 2 20% but less than
25%
45% of area in
Category 2
Slope 3 25% or greater 35% of area in
Category 3
(2) For a subdivision proposal, calculation of disturbed area is based
on each individual lot, not the entire tract as a whole. Common
areas are also subject to the maximum disturbed area. Roadways
are exempt from the above limits of disturbed area but are subject
to the maximum permitted grade provisions of the Residential Site
Improvement Standards.
B. Limit of disturbance. A limit of disturbance line shall be established, in
accordance with the definition of "disturbance area" of this chapter, to
preserve existing vegetation on each proposed lot.
C. Variance required. Disturbance of steep slopes in an amount greater
than indicated in Subsection A able shall require a variance.
D. Performance standards. The Borough Engineer, when reviewing an
application to disturb slopes which are subject to the provisions of this
article or when reviewing an application for variance relief from the
requirements of this chapter, shall submit a report to the Planning
Board or Board of Adjustment for each application. The Planning Board
or Board of Adjustment shall be guided by, but not limited to, the
following performance standards:
(1) The applicant shall demonstrate that the disturbance of the steep
slope area is necessary for the proposed development of the subject
tract or lot and that such development is otherwise in accordance
with the applicable ordinance provisions of the Borough of Park
Ridge.
(2) The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed development
has utilized the noncritical areas of the tract to the extent
reasonably practicable and that an attempt has been made to
minimize the disturbance of the steep slope areas by limiting
development to either isolated areas of steep slopes and/or to those
slopes with relatively less of a steep grade.
(3) The applicant shall demonstrate that appropriate revegetation and
landscaping of the disturbed steep slope areas has been provided
to adequately stabilize the slopes and enhance the attractiveness of
§ 101-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-66
1:863
§ 101-67. Permit; application.
the site, all in accordance with accepted soil conservation and
stormwater management techniques as promulgated by the Bergen
County Soil Conservation District and the Borough Engineer.
(4) The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed disturbance of
the steep slope area minimizes the impairment of the visual quality
of the site and protects the higher elevations along hillsides, ridges,
and mountaintops which create visual amenities.
(5) The applicant also shall demonstrate that:
(a) The geologic disturbance, including blasting, cutting, or
excavating, resulting from the development of any steep slope
area will be satisfactorily mitigated; and
(b) The cost of providing and maintaining public facilities and
services to those areas where critical steep slope areas may be
disturbed will not be substantially increased as a result of such
disturbance.
E. Exceptions. Irrespective of the above regulations, an applicant may
regrade a steep slope area, provided that in no event shall the applicant
disturb or regrade more than 500 square feet of the tract to be
developed. The Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment may
allow the disturbance and development of small isolated pockets of
steep slopes, provided that the disturbance does not exceed 500 square
feet.
A. Permit. No owner or person shall cause, allow, permit any development
that would be subject to the provisions of this chapter without first
obtaining a steep slope permit therefor as in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
B. Applications. Applications for steep slope permits shall be filed with the
Borough Building Department and the Borough Engineer, who shall
determine whether an application requires a steep slope permit.
C. Prior to the review of an application for a steep slope permit, the
Borough Engineer shall make an inspection of the site from which, to
which or upon which the site is to be disturbed and shall make such
engineering studies as may be required to determine the effect of the
disturbance of soil at the location as it relates to:
(1) Soil erosion by water and wind.
(2) Surface and subsurface water drainage and sanitary and septic
disposal systems.
(3) Soil fertility.
(4) Lateral support of abutting streets and lands.
§ 101-66 PARK RIDGE CODE § 101-67
1:864
(5) Public health and safety.
(6) Such other factors as may bear upon or relate to the coordinated,
adjusted and harmonious physical and aesthetic development of
the Borough.
D. The Borough Engineer shall also inspect the aforesaid site to determine
whether stakes should be placed on each corner thereof and whether
grade stakes should be placed at the existing elevation points
designated on the topographical map.
E. Upon completion of all inspections, the Borough Engineer shall make a
report of such inspection and studies to the Construction Code Official,
which report shall include such conditions that the Borough Engineer
deems should be included in any steep slope permit.
F. Permits for steep slope permits shall be issued by the Building
Department and shall include such conditions as the Borough Engineer
deems appropriate and necessary.
G. Form and content of application. Application for a steep slope permit
shall be filed in duplicate with the Borough Engineer. The application
shall include the following:
(1) The applicant's name and address.
(2) The description of the lands in question.
(3) The name and address of the owner of the lands.
(4) The purpose or reason for the steep slope permit and whether it
will be done in connection with an application to the Planning
Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment and, if so, the filing date of
the application.
(5) The kind and quantity in cubic yards of soil to be disturbed and, if
required, proof of compliance with the Borough Steep Slope
Ordinance.
(6) An application for a steep slope permit shall be accompanied by an
original, together with one copy, of a topographical map of the lot
upon which the proposed operations are to be conducted and of all
surrounding lands within 25 feet of the perimeter of said lot. The
map shall be prepared and certified by a licensed professional
engineer or a licensed surveyor, at a scale of not less than one inch
to 40 feet and shall be keyed to the United States Coast and
Geodetic Survey datum when NJDEP so requires. Said map shall,
both as to the lot and all surrounding land, show the following:
(a) The dimensions of the lot, and the lot and block numbers of the
lot and of each lot in the surrounding lands as shown on the Tax
Assessment Map of the Borough.
§ 101-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-67
1:865
§ 101-68. Appeals.
(b) The existing elevations of all lands, to be shown at five-foot
contour intervals for slopes in excess of 15% and at two-foot
contour intervals for lands of lesser slope.
(c) The existing elevations of all buildings, structures, streets,
streams, bodies of water and watercourses, natural or
artificial.
(d) All existing surface and subsurface water drainage conditions
and provisions therefor.
(e) All wooded areas and all trees having a diameter of six inches
or more at the base.
(f) The proposed final elevations at each point where existing
elevations shown on said map are to be changed as a result of
completion of the proposed work.
(g) Proposed slopes and lateral supports at the limits of the area
upon completion of the operations.
(h) Proposed provisions and facilities for surface water drainage
and, where applicable, channels of any streams, bodies of
water and watercourses, natural or artificial, including
detailed cross sections showing proposed channel widths, bank
slopes and method of erosion control thereof.
(i) Such other pertinent data as the Borough Engineer may
require.
H. Permit fee.
(1) The fee for a permit under this chapter shall accompany the
application. Such fee shall be as follows: $200.
(2) In addition to the fee set forth in Subsection H(1) above, each
applicant for a steep slope permit shall pay an additional fee of
$200 to the Land Use Office of the Borough of Park Ridge.
A. The Planning Board is hereby designated as the referral agency for any
appeal of a determination of the Borough Engineer in relation to a steep
slope permit not otherwise part of an application for development
schedule to be heard before the Zoning Board of Adjustment. In the
event an applicant wishes to appeal the determination of the Borough
Engineer, the applicant, upon notice of said determination, may file an
appeal to the Planning Board by filing an application with the Secretary
of the Planning Board on such forms as are prescribed and supplied by
the Planning Board. The appeal shall consist of all materials required
for an application. The applicant shall file one original and 12 copies of
all application materials. Should the applicant have a pending
application for development scheduled to be heard before the Zoning
§ 101-67 PARK RIDGE CODE § 101-68
1:866
Board of Adjustment, said Board shall be authorized to review any
appeal. Within 60 days after receipt of an appeal, the Planning Board,
or Zoning Board of Adjustment if applicable, shall complete its review
and consideration of the appeal and render its decision in writing to the
Borough Engineer, who shall grant or refuse the permit in accordance
with the decision.
B. An applicant filing an appeal shall be entitled to request a public
hearing in front of the Board hearing the applicant's appeal. In the
event a public hearing is requested, the applicant shall provide notice
to the owners of all properties within 200 feet of the perimeter of the lot
that is the subject of the appeal.
§ 101-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-68
1:867
Part III, Board of Health Legislation
Chapter 103
GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adoption of Code by Mayor and Council — See
Ch. 1, Article I.
§ 101-68 PARK RIDGE CODE § 101-68
1:868
ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code by Board of Health
[Adopted 8-14-1974]
§ 103-1. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the Board of Health of the
Borough of Park Ridge of a general and permanent nature, as revised,
codified and consolidated into chapters and sections by General Code
Publishers Corp. and consisting of Chapters 103 through 115, are hereby
approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as the "Code of the Borough of
Park Ridge" hereinafter known and referred to as the "Code."
§ 103-2. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances of the Board of Health enacted prior to the
enactment of this Code, except such ordinances as are expressly saved from
repeal or continued in force and effect hereinafter.
§ 103-3. When effective.
All provisions of this ordinance and the Code shall be in full force and effect
upon final passage and publication as required by law.
§ 103-4. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Secretary of the Board of Health and shall remain there for use and
examination by the public until final action is taken on this ordinance; and,
if this ordinance shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to as provided
by law, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the
Secretary of the Board of Health to be made available to persons desiring
to examine the same during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 103-5. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the Board of
Health to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Borough of Park
Ridge" shall be understood and intended to include such additions and
amendments. Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the
Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided
hereunder, inserted in the loose leaf book containing the said Code, as
amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 103-6. Publication; filing.
The Secretary of the Board of Health, pursuant to law, shall cause to be
published in the manner required, a copy of this adopting ordinance in a
§ 103-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-6
1:869
newspaper of general circulation in the borough. Sufficient copies of the
Code shall be maintained in the office of the Secretary for inspection by
the public at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and
publication of this adopting ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of
the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered
to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 103-7. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Secretary, or someone authorized and directed by
him, to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the Code
required to be filed in his office for the use of the public. All changes in said
Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective date of this
codification, which shall be adopted specifically as part of the Code, shall,
when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until such changes
or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code book, at which
time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 103-8. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code, or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the Board of
Health to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this
ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to a fine of not less than $5 nor
more than $500.
§ 103-9. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part
thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not
be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other section or
parts thereof.
§ 103-10. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 103-11. Repeal of ordinances.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature, adopted by the Board of
Health and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance and not
contained in the Code, are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this
adopting ordinance, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 103-6 PARK RIDGE CODE § 103-12
1:870
§ 103-12. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 103-11 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal.
§ 103-13. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
A. Any ordinance of the Board of Health adopted subsequent to June 18,
1969.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance, or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision, or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending,
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property, or any lawful contract or obligation.
G. Any provisions of an ordinance or resolution of the Board of Health
creating employments, positions or offices and fixing duties therefor
which are not provided in the Code hereby adopted and which are not in
conflict or inconsistent therewith.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances of the Board of Health for
adoption and revision as part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4,
certain grammatical changes and other minor changes were made in
one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the Board of Health
that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the
ordinances so changed had been previously formally amended to read
as such.
B. In addition, the following changes, amendments or revisions are made
herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance.
(Chapter and section number references are to the ordinances as they
have been renumbered and appear in the Code.200)
(1) In Chapter 109, Fees, § 109-1, Schedule of fees, is amended by the
deletion therefrom of original Subsection F, providing for a fee for
200. Editor's Note: Said chapters have been further amended since the 1974 adoption of the
Board of Health legislation.
§ 103-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-13
1:871
site inspection and annual registration of swimming pools, and the
deletion of Subsection K, providing for a fee for a scavenger service
license.
(2) In Chapter 115, Plumbing, original Section 1, Subsection B(1),
providing for an amendment to Section 9.1.3(a) of the Standard
Plumbing Code of New Jersey, is deleted in its entirety.
C. In the following sections, the penalty provisions have been amended by
providing that violators shall, upon conviction, be punished by a penalty
of not less than $2 nor more than $500 in the discretion of the court
before which a conviction may be had. (Chapter and section number
references are to the ordinances as they have been renumbered and
appear in the Code.)
(1) Section 105-6, Subsection A [formerly Section 6 of an ordinance
adopted 6-1-1954].201
(2) Section 105-10 [formerly Section 4 of an ordinance adopted
6-1-1954].
(3) Section 112-4 [formerly Section 4 of an ordinance adopted
9-18-1963].
(4) Section 115-5 [formerly Section 5 of an ordinance adopted
3-20-1968].202
201. Editor's Note: Original Ch. 105, Cesspools and Septic Tanks, as amended, was repealed
5-12-1992 by Ord. No. 92-14.
202. Editor's Note: Original Ch. 115, Plumbing, as amended, was superseded by the enactment
of the State Uniform Construction Code Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.) and the
promulgation of the state plumbing subcode pursuant to that Act.
§ 103-13 PARK RIDGE CODE § 103-13
1:872
Chapter 104
ANIMALS AND WATERFOWL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dogs, cats and other animals — See Ch. 52.
§ 103-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-13
1:873

ARTICLE I
Migratory Waterfowl
[Adopted 5-14-1992 by Ord. No. 92-1; amended in its entirety
9-24-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-025]
§ 104-1. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and their
derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in the
text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
FEED — To give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any edible
material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing.
MIGRATORY WATERFOWL — Includes those species of birds commonly
known as "swans," "geese" and "ducks" and any other waterfowl falling
under the jurisdiction of the United States Fish and Wildlife Services.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
DEER — White-tailed deer (Obocoileus Virginianus).
WILDLIFE — All animals neither human nor domesticated, including but not
limited to, deer, raccoons, pigeons, skunk, and groundhogs.
WILD OR STRAY ANIMALS — Any animal not licensed to a Park Ridge
resident or otherwise owned and cared for in accordance with Chapter 52
of the Borough of Park Ridge Revised General Ordinances.
§ 104-2. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful to:
A. Feed any migratory waterfowl, wildlife, wild or stray animals on public
or private property in the Borough of Park Ridge.
B. Create any condition which results in a congregation of migratory
waterfowl, wildlife, wild or stray animals on public or private property
which:
(1) Results in an accumulation of feces or droppings;
(2) Results in damages to flora, fauna, or public property or safety or
welfare;
(3) Results in a threat or nuisance to the public health, safety or
welfare; or
§ 104-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 104-2
1:875
§ 104-3. Signs.
§ 104-4. Enforcement; removal of waterfowl and wildlife.
(4) Results in a threat to the health, safety, or welfare of said migratory
waterfowl or wildlife.
C. No person shall feed, in any public park or on any other property owned
or operated by the Borough of Park Ridge, any wildlife, excluding
confined wildlife (for example, wildlife confined in zoos, parks or
rehabilitation centers, or unconfined wildlife at environmental
education centers), including but not limited to:
(1) Giving, placing, exposing, depositing, distributing or scattering any
edible material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing
wildlife. Feeding does not include baiting in the legal taking of fish
and/or game.
A. When so directed by the Health Officer, and at the property owner's
expense, signs not less than 18 inches by 24 inches in size, bearing the
words "Feeding of Waterfowl and Wildlife Prohibited," together with
any qualifications, shall be conspicuously pasted by the owner of the
property. This article shall not pertain to residential properties.
B. Defacing, tampering with or damaging such signs when posted shall
constitute a violation of this article.
A. This article shall be enforced by the Health Department and Police
Department through the Borough of Park Ridge.
B. Whenever the Health Officer or police become aware that migratory
waterfowl, wildlife, wild or stray animals are being fed in violation of
this article, they may issue a summons which shall be answerable
before the Municipal Magistrate.
C. Whenever the Health Officer becomes aware that a congregation or
congestion of migratory waterfowl, wildlife, wild or stray animals exists
on public property, he or it may direct the Police Department to
disburse or remove them by any lawful means. However, before such
dispersal or removal takes place, the Police Department shall receive
direct authorization from the Borough Administrator or the Mayor and
Council and, with his or its advice and consent, determine the
appropriate method, considering first the health, safety and welfare of
the citizens of Park Ridge and second, the health, safety and welfare of
the migratory waterfowl, wildlife, wild or stray animals.
D. Whenever the Health Officer in his or its sound discretion determines
that waterfowl, wildlife, wild or stray animals shall be dispersed by
scare tactics or noise tactics, they may enlist the assistance for the
implementation of the plan from the Police Department and/or Public
Works Department or from any responsible citizen or citizens. This
subsection shall not be construed to authorize any private citizen to
§ 104-2 PARK RIDGE CODE § 104-4
1:876
§ 104-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person who is found guilty of violating any section of this article shall
be punished by a fine of up to $1,000 and/or 90 days' imprisonment, to be
determined at the discretion of the Municipal Court.
§ 104-6. Exemptions.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit property owners from
maintaining enclosed, elevated bird feeders which do not create a public
health risk or unsanitary conditions.
discharge any firearm or to use any device which launches a projectile
of any type. It shall be used in a reasonable way respecting the rights
of surrounding houses from excessive noise level.
E. The Health Officer shall apply for and secure all permits necessary by
law before dispersing or removing migratory waterfowl, wildlife, wild
or stray animals.
§ 104-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 104-6
1:877
Chapter 105
(RESERVED)
[Original Ch. 105, Cesspools and Septic Tanks, Art. I, Licenses for
Builders and Scavengers, adopted 6-1-1954, as amended; and Art.
II, Site Inspection and Approval, adopted 6-1-1954, as amended, was
repealed 5-12-1992 by Ord. No. 92-14.]
Chapter 109
FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Carnivals, circuses and shows — See Ch. 49.
Hawkers, peddlers and solicitors — See Ch.
67.
Licensing — See Ch. 75.
Food handler training — See Ch. 110.
§ 109-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGRICULTURAL FARM STANDS — Any fixed or mobile retail food
establishment which is engaged in the sale of raw agricultural products but
may include, as a minor portion of the operation, the sale of factory sealed
or prepackaged food products that do not normally require refrigeration.
FOOD — Any raw, cooked or processed edible substance, beverage or
ingredient used or intended for use or for sale in whole or in part for human
consumption.
FOOD PROCESSING ESTABLISHMENT — A commercial establishment in
which food is processed and packaged for human consumption.
HEALTH AUTHORITY — The properly appointed agent of the local Board of
Health to act in the enforcement of its' ordinances and sanitary laws of the
state.
MOBILE RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT — Any movable restaurant, truck, van,
trailer, cart, bicycle or other movable unit, including hand-carried portable
containers in or on which food or beverage is transported.
RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — Any fixed or mobile restaurant, coffee
shop, cafeteria, short-order cafe, luncheonette, grill, tearoom, sandwich
shop, snack/juice bar, soda fountain, tavern, bar, cocktail lounge, nightclub,
roadside stand, industrial feeding establishment, private, public or
nonprofit organization or institution serving food, catering kitchen,
commissary, box lunch establishment, retail bakery, bagelry, meat market,
delicatessen, grocery store, public food market or similar place in which
food or drink is prepared for retail sale or for service on the premises
§ 104-6 PARK RIDGE CODE § 109-1
1:878
or elsewhere; and in any other retail eating or drinking establishment or
operation where food is served, handled or provided for the public with or
without charge.
TEMPORARY FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — Any retail establishment which
operates at a fixed location for a temporary period of time in connection
with a fair, carnival, circus, public exhibition or similar transitory gathering,
including church suppers, picnics or similar organizational meetings,
mobile retail food establishments, as well as agricultural markets.
§ 109-2. License required.
§ 109-3. License fees; late fees; exemptions. [Amended 3-18-2004
by Ord. No. 2004-1; 11-16-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-1]
A. No person, persons or body corporations shall process, manufacture,
have, warehouse, offer for sale or sell articles of food or drink within the
limits of the Borough of Park Ridge without having first obtained a
license or permit from the Board of Health of the Borough of Park
Ridge.
A. An establishment which fails to obtain a renewal of an establishment
license in the month of December in any calendar year for previously
licensed establishments and/or fails to obtain a retail food license
before a new establishment opens for business shall pay a late fee of
$25 for all licenses valued at $99 and below; $50 for each license valued
at $100 and above; and $200 for each license valued at $200 and above.
Late fees and/or fines shall be paid administratively to the Park Ridge
Board of Health.
B. The following businesses and enterprises conducted within the
Borough of Park Ridge shall be required to secure a license to operate
and shall pay the appropriate fee as set forth: [Amended 7-26-2011
by Ord. No. 2011-023; 7-26-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-016;
9-27-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-016A]
Type of Establishment Annual License and
Renewal Fee
Supermarket (under 50,000 square
feet)
$750
Supermarket (over 50,000 square
feet)
$1,000
Prepackaged candy counter $75
Miscellaneous retail food
establishment
$250
Bakery $300
Convenience food store $350
Delicatessen $300
§ 109-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 109-3
1:879
Type of Establishment Annual License and
Renewal Fee
Mobile concession
Food $175
Ice cream $100
Restaurant
Seating capacity 1 through 50 $350
Seating capacity over 50 $600
Rooming or boarding house $200
Cattle and horses $100
Pet shop/dog grooming $125
Nursery school/day-care center $200
Nursery school/day-care center/camp
that prepares and serves food
$250
Hotel/motel
1 to 50 rooms $400
Over 50 rooms $1,200
Swimming pool, indoor/year-round
use
$300
Swimming pool, outdoor/seasonal use $250
Skilled nursing home $750
Assisted-living facility $750
Group home $200
Vending machines, per location
First machine $50
Each additional $25
Temporary retail food establishments
1 to 3 days $75
4 to 7 days $100
Agricultural market/farmstand $250
Truck dispensing dairy products,
retail
$50
Registrar fees:
Marriage license/domestic
partnership/civil union
State fee $25
Borough fee $3
Burial permits $5
§ 109-3 PARK RIDGE CODE § 109-3
1:880
§ 109-4. Enforcement; violations and penalties. [Amended
11-16-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-1]
Chapter 110
FOOD HANDLER TRAINING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Retail food establishments — See Ch. 117.
§ 110-1. Training program.
The Health Officer shall conduct a food handlers' training program once a
year. Additional courses for specific violators or complaints may be required
by a food establishment at the direction or order of the Board of Health.
All courses given by the Health Officer shall be in compliance with the New
Jersey Department of Health guidelines for food handler course training
programs.
Type of Establishment Annual License and
Renewal Fee
Transcript of vital statistics,
per copy
$10
Inspection, license or license renewal
not specifically set forth in this
chapter
$10
Note: Fees will be waived for nonprofit organizations.
C. As provided in § 75-6B of the Code of the Borough of Park Ridge,
charitable, religious, civic, educational and nonprofit corporations,
associations and institutions shall be exempt from the payment of
licensing fees; provided, however, that said organization shall be
inspected and meet all the requirements of the Board of Health.
[Amended 7-26-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-016; 9-27-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-016A]
A. This chapter shall be enforced by the Health Officer or the delegated
representative.
B. Any person, persons or body corporation or anyone required to have a
license as set forth in § 109-2 failing to have a license or permit shall be
in violation of this chapter and shall be subject to a fine of not more than
$300 nor less than $50 for each day the violation exists. Fines shall be
paid administratively to the Board of Health.
§ 109-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-2
1:881
§ 110-2. Trained personnel required; records; duration of
certification.
§ 110-3. Number of trained personnel required per establishment.
Establishments shall provide personnel to an approved food handler course
training program in the following manner:
§ 110-4. Biweekly self-inspection. [Added 12-8-2005203]
A. All retail food establishments are required to maintain in their employ
at least the specified number of personnel who have attended an
approved course of instruction for food handler training. Owners and
managers shall notify the Health Department when they are no longer
in compliance with the required number of course attendees.
B. Records are to be kept of those who have attended approved courses.
C. Duration of certification shall be two years from date of course
completion.
A. Takeout and miscellaneous establishments: one person per shift.
B. Restaurants of 49 seats and below: one person per shift.
C. Restaurants of 50 seats and above: two persons per shift.
D. Supermarkets: one store manager and one person from each
department per shift.
E. Hotels/motels: two persons from each food-handling department or
restaurant per shift.
A. The following retail food establishments shall be required to conduct
biweekly self-inspections of the establishment on forms which are
designed, approved and provided by the Borough of Park Ridge Board
of Health. The establishments are as follows:
(1) Supermarkets.
(2) Miscellaneous retail food establishments.
(3) Bakeries.
(4) Convenience food stores.
(5) Delicatessens.
(6) Restaurants of any capacity.
B. Responsibility for biweekly self-inspections. The owner, highest ranking
manager, supervisor, crew chief or supervising individual actively
203. Editor's Note: This ordinance added this section as § 110-4. Consequently, former §§ 110-4
and 110-5 were redesignated as §§ 110-5 and 110-6, respectively.
§ 110-2 PARK RIDGE CODE § 110-4
1:882
§ 110-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-8-2005]
Any establishment not in compliance with any provision of this chapter shall
be subject to the following fines per offense:
§ 110-6. Suspension of licenses.
The Board of Health may suspend the retail food establish license of any
person convicted of violation of this chapter for a period not more than
three days, pursuant to the authority of the Board of Health to license and
regulate food establishments as provided by N.J.S.A. 26:3-31c.
Chapter 112
NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Health — See Ch. 17.
Dogs and other animals — See Ch. 52.
Housing standards — See Ch. 70.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 80.
Abandoned or junked vehicles — See Ch. 96.
involved in the daily operation of the food establishment shall conduct
the biweekly self-inspection of the establishment and shall fully
complete the self-inspection report for the establishment. All
deficiencies noted in the report shall be corrected immediately.
A. First offense: $50.
B. Second offense: $100.
C. Third and each consecutive offense: $200.
§ 110-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-6
1:883

Part 1
[AGdeonpetreadl S9t-a1n8d-1a9r6d3s]
ARTICLE I
Adoption
§ 112-1. Adoption of standards.
A code defining and prohibiting certain matters, things, conditions or acts,
and each of them, as a nuisance; prohibiting certain noises or sounds;
requiring the proper heating of apartments; prohibiting lease or rental
of certain buildings; prohibiting spitting in or upon public buildings,
conveyances or sidewalks; authorizing the inspection of premises by an
enforcing official; providing for the removal or abatement of certain
nuisances and recovery of expenses incurred by the Board of Health in
removing or abating such nuisances; and prescribing penalties for
violations, is hereby established pursuant to Chapter 188, Laws of 1950.204
A copy of said code is annexed hereto and made a part hereof without the
inclusion of the text thereof herein.
§ 112-2. Title.
Said code established and adopted by this Part 1 is described and commonly
known as the "Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey (1953)."
§ 112-3. Copies on file.
Three copies of said Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey (1953)
have been placed on file in the office of the Secretary of this local Board of
Health upon the introduction of this Part 1 and will remain on file there for
use and examination by the public.
§ 112-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-14-1974]
Any person who violates or neglects to comply with any provision of this
Part 1 or code established herein or notice issued pursuant thereto shall,
upon conviction thereof, be liable to a penalty of not less than $2 nor more
than $500 for each violation.
204. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 et seq.
§ 112-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-4
1:885

Part 2
[AdHopetaetdin1g0, -R1e9f-r2i0g0e0raBtiyonO rAdn. dN Voe. r2m0i0n0-2]
ARTICLE II
Heating in Dwellings and Other Buildings
§ 112-5. Duty to provide heat.
It shall be the duty of every person who shall have contracted or shall
be otherwise bound or legally obligated to heat or to furnish heat for any
building, part of any building, apartment or space occupied as a home or
place of residence of one or more persons, or as a business establishment
where one or more persons are employed, to so heat or to so furnish heat
to every occupied portion of such building, so that minimum temperature
of 68° F. is maintained therein at all times; provided, however, that the
provisions of this section shall not apply to buildings or parts thereof
used and occupied for trades, business or occupations where high or low
temperatures are essential for the business or occupation.
§ 112-6. Duty of person in control of heating apparatus.
For the purpose of this article, wherever any building or part thereof so
concerned is heated by means of a furnace, boiler or other apparatus under
the control of the owner, agent or lessor, occupant, said owner, agent or
lessor shall be deemed to have contracted, undertaken or bound himself or
herself to furnish heat in accordance with the provisions of this article.
§ 112-7. Times when duty to provide heat is in effect.
With respect to the obligation or duty to furnish heat to or in a building,
apartment or portion thereof, occupied as a home or place of residence,
the term "at all times," as used in this article, shall mean the time between
the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. from September 15 to May 15.
With respect to the obligation or duty to furnish heat to a building or
portion thereof used and occupied as a business establishment, the term
"at all times," as used in this article, shall mean the usual working hours
established and maintained in said building or portion thereof so involved.
§ 112-8. Contract to provide heat; evidence.
The term "contracted," as used in this article, shall be taken to mean and
include an obligation arising by a written, verbal or implied contract; and
the presence of heating outlets, radiators, risers or returns in any hall
or apartment, subdivision of a house, shall be prima facie evidence of an
implied contract.
§ 112-9. Minimum temperature.
At no time, however, shall the minimum temperature be permitted to fall
below 65° F. in any building, apartment, part of any building or apartment
or other space wherein or wherefor there shall be any obligation to furnish
§ 112-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-9
1:887
heat. It shall be the duty of every person who shall have such obligation to
so furnish such heat, to so maintain the same in accordance with this and
all other sections of this article.
§ 112-9 PARK RIDGE CODE § 112-9
1:888
ARTICLE III
Hot Water
§ 112-10. Duty to supply hot water.
In all buildings occupied for residential purposes by two or more families,
and when the owner thereof shall have agreed to supply hot water, sufficient
hot water, at least at 140° F., shall at all times be supplied.
§ 112-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-10
1:889

ARTICLE IV
Refrigeration
§ 112-11. Duty to provide refrigeration facilities.
In all buildings occupied as a residence by two or more families, and
when the owner or lessor thereof shall have agreed to supply refrigeration
facilities, he shall be and is hereby required to supply and maintain such
refrigeration facilities at all times and in such manner as may be necessary
for the proper and wholesome preservation of foodstuffs.
§ 112-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-11
1:891

ARTICLE V
Vermin
§ 112-12. Vermin infestation.
No owner or other person in charge or control of any tenement or any
other building shall permit any building or part thereof to be occupied or
inhabited if the same is unfit for human occupation by reason of its being
infested with vermin.
§ 112-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-12
1:893
Chapter 115
(RESERVED)
[Original Ch. 115, Plumbing, adopted by the Board of Health
3-20-1968, as amended, was superseded by the enactment of the
State Uniform Construction Code Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.)
and the promulgation of the state plumbing subcode pursuant to
that Act. For regulations providing for the enforcement of said Act,
see Ch. 50, Construction Codes, Uniform.]
Chapter 116
(RESERVED)
[Original Ch. 116, Plumbing Inspector, adopted 3-11-1975 by Ord.
No. 75-1, was repealed 5-12-1992 by Ord. No. 92-14.]
Chapter 117
RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Health — See Ch. 17.
Licensing — See Ch. 75, Art. I.
Fees — See Ch. 109.
Food handler training — See Ch. 110.
§ 117-1. Ratings; summons.
A. Any retail food establishment which receives an unsatisfactory rating
from the appropriate official inspecting the premises shall immediately
cease from serving any food or similar products until the licensee has
received a satisfactory rating from the inspector conducting such
inspections.
B. Any retail food establishment which receives two conditional
satisfactory ratings within any twelve-month period shall have its owner
or manager appear at the next meeting of the Park Ridge Board of
Health to show cause why its license shall not be suspended for failing
to operate its premises in accordance with Chapter 12 of the New
Jersey Sanitary Code. The conditional satisfactory rating shall be
posted in the premises for such time as the Board of Health and/or
inspector believes it is necessary for the preservation of the public
health and safety. In addition, its owner or manager must take and
satisfactorily complete the next available eighteen-hour food managers'
certification course.
C. In addition to the remedies stated above, the inspector conducting the
inspections shall cause appropriate summons to be issued for the
§ 112-12 PARK RIDGE CODE § 117-1
1:894
§ 117-2. Specific remedies for repealed failure to pass salad testing
requirements.
Salad samples taken by an inspector from any retail food establishment
will be subject to the following remedies should they fail to pass certified
testing.
Chapter 121
SWIMMING POOLS, PUBLIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Swimming pools — See Ch. 88.
violation of Chapter 12 of the New Jersey Sanitary Code, the ordinances
of the Borough of Park Ridge and applicable statutes of the State of
New Jersey.
A. First substandard sample(s). Results will be communicated to
management. The inspector will review possible ways in which any
contamination took place, suggest corrective actions and take a second
sample.
B. Second substantial sample(s). Results will be communicated to
management. The inspector will observe the salad-making process and
take samples at each step in order to pinpoint incorrect procedures and
direct corrective actions.
C. Third substandard sample(s). Any retail food establishment whose
salads fail to pass three successive tests will be prohibited from making
such salads on the premises. (Purchases of salads from state-licensed
wholesalers is permitted, but such salads are subject to the same
testing requirements as those prepared on the premises.) In addition,
the following remedies shall be imposed:
(1) The owner or manager shall be required to submit to the inspector
a written plan of action for correcting the problem. Such plan must
include training of all deli personnel in proper, salad-making
procedures and correction of any possible refrigeration problems
within a designated time frame.
(2) The owner or manager shall, at his/her own expense, have the
failed salad(s) tested for six consecutive weeks. Such tests will be
conducted at a state certified lab on the first Monday of each week,
and the results will be sent to the designated health authority.
(3) Salad making and sale may be resumed after two successive test
results are found to meet standards.
§ 117-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 121-1
1:895
§ 121-1. Adoption of standards.
The code entitled the "Swimming Pool Code of New Jersey, 1970," approved
by the State Department of Health of New Jersey, is hereby adopted by
the Board of Health of the Borough of Park Ridge in its entirety, under the
authority of N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 to 3-69.6, inclusive.
§ 121-2. Printing of standards.
The printing of said code in book form is hereby authorized, and a copy of
said printed code is annexed hereto and made a part hereof by reference
thereto, as though set forth at length in this chapter.
§ 121-3. Copies on file.
Three copies of said code have been placed on file in the office of the
Secretary of the Board of Health, pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
26:3-69.2, for use and examination by the public so long as this chapter
shall remain in effect.
§ 121-4. Enforcement.
§ 121-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person or entity who violates any provision of the code hereby adopted
shall be subject to a fine of not less than $5 nor more than $500, for the
first offense, and for subsequent offenses shall be subject to such penalties
as are provided in the New Jersey statutes.
§ 121-6. Jurisdiction in recovery of penalties.
The Municipal Court of the Borough of Park Ridge shall have jurisdiction
over proceedings to enforce and collect any penalty imposed because of the
violation of any provision of said code. The proceeding shall be summary
and in accordance with the Penalty Enforcement Law (N.J.S.A. 2A:58-1 et
seq.)205. Process shall issue at the suit of the Board of Health or the Regional
A. The provisions of this chapter and the code hereby adopted shall be
enforced by the health officers of the Borough of Park Ridge or of the
Regional Health Commission of which the Board of Health of the
Borough of Park Ridge is a member, participant or contracting party, as
the case may be.
B. In the event that the Board of Health of the Borough of Park Ridge
severs its aforesaid relationship with the Regional Health Commission
and it has no health officer of its own, such enforcement shall be by
such person or entity as shall be designated by the Board of Health,
pursuant to the guidelines, rules and regulations of the State Board of
Health.
205. Editor's Note: Said law was repealed by L.1999, c. 274.
§ 121-1 PARK RIDGE CODE § 121-6
1:896
Health Commission and shall be either in the nature of a summons or a
warrant.
Chapter 123
TOBACCO
§ 121-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 121-6
1:897

ARTICLE I
Sale to Minors
[Adopted 12-8-1994 by Ord. No. 94-1]
§ 123-1. Unlawful acts.
It shall be unlawful to sell tobacco to a person under 18 years of age.
§ 123-2. Sign requirements.
The following six-inch-by-eight-inch sign shall be posted in a conspicuous
place near each cash register in all retail establishments which sell tobacco
products:
SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO MINORS UNDER AGE 18
PROHIBITED BY LAW.
Legal proof of age must be shown. A person who sells or offers to sell a
tobacco product to a person under 18 years of age may be prosecuted in
accordance with state and local ordinances.
§ 123-3. Identification required.
It shall be unlawful for a tobacco retailer to sell or permit to be sold tobacco
to any individual without requesting and examining identification from the
purchaser positively establishing the purchaser's age as 18 years or greater,
unless the seller has some other conclusive basis for determining that the
buyer is over the age of 18 years.
§ 123-4. Tobacco vending machines.
§ 123-5. Removal of tobacco vending machines and self-service
cigarette displays.
All tobacco vending machines and self-service cigarette displays are made
unlawful by the terms of this article and shall be removed within 30 days
from the effective date of this article.
§ 123-6. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BAR — Any place licensed by the State of New Jersey to primarily sell
at retail beer, wine, mixed spirit drink and spirits for consumption on the
premises.
A. It shall be unlawful to offer for sale or to sell tobacco through a tobacco
vending machine in the Borough of Park Ridge.
B. Self-service cigarette displays are prohibited in all retail
establishments.
§ 123-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 123-6
1:899
HEALTH COMMISSION — The combined Boards of Health for the Borough
of Park Ridge.
HEALTH DEPARTMENT — The Park Ridge Board of Health, and may be
referred to herein as the "Department."
HEALTH OFFICER — The Administrative Officer of the Borough of Park
Ridge and/or his or her authorized representative.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, cooperative, association,
corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee or any
other legal entity.
TAVERN — Any place licensed by the State of New Jersey to primarily sell
at retail beer, wine, mixed spirit drink and spirits for consumption on the
premises.
TOBACCO — Any product made from the tobacco plant for the purpose
of smoking, chewing, inhaling and other personal use, including cigars,
chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff and cigarettes in any form.
TOBACCO RETAILER — Any person or entity that operates a store, stand,
booth, concession or place at which sales of tobacco are made to purchasers
for consumption or use, and shall also mean a person or entity that owns,
operates or uses a vending machine and/or a vending machine location.
VENDING MACHINE — Any automated self-service device which, upon
insertion of money, tokens or any other form of payment, dispenses
cigarette or other tobacco products.
VENDING MACHINE LOCATION — The room, enclosure, space or area
where a tobacco vending machine is installed and operated.
§ 123-7. Enforcement.
A. Whenever the Health Officer or his/her designee reasonably believes
that there exists a violation of this article, he/she may issue a summons
and complaint not later than 90 days after discovery of the alleged
violation. The complaint shall be written and shall state with reasonable
particularity the nature of the violation, including reference to the
section of this article alleged to have been violated. The complaint shall
be delivered or sent by certified mail to the alleged violator.
B. The Health Officer or his designee, or any other person charged with
enforcement of this article, after giving proper identification, may
inspect any matter, thing, premises, place, person, record, vehicle,
incident or event as necessary.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to molest, willfully oppose, verbally
abuse or otherwise obstruct the Health Officer or his designee, who
may request the assistance of the Park Ridge Police Department or
other police agency or peace officer when necessary to execute his or
her official duty in a manner prescribe by law.
D. Citizens may bring complaints against violators of this article.
§ 123-6 PARK RIDGE CODE § 123-8
1:900
§ 123-8. Construal.
This article shall be liberally construed for the protection of the health,
safety and welfare of the people of the Borough of Park Ridge.
§ 123-9. Violations and penalties.
A. Unless otherwise provided by law, statute or ordinance, any person
violating any of the portions of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, pay a penalty of not less than $100 nor more than $500 for each
offense. Complaint shall be made in the Municipal Courts of the
Borough of Park Ridge or before such other judicial officer having
authority under the laws of the State of New Jersey.
B. Each sale of tobacco to a minor shall constitute a separate violation.
C. The Health Commission may suspend the retail food establishment
license of any person convicted of violation of this article for a period of
not more that three days, pursuant to the authority of the Health
Commission to license and regulate food establishments as provided by
N.J.S.A. 26:3-31c.
§ 123-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 123-9
1:901
Appendix
Chapter A126
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Street openings and excavations — See Ch.
85.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 86.
§ A126-1. Purpose.
The Borough of Park Ridge hereby grants to Micro Cable Communications,
Inc., doing business as U.A. Columbia Cablevision of New Jersey, its
nonexclusive consent to place in, upon, along, across, above, over and under
the highways, streets, alleys, sidewalks, public ways and public places in
the Borough poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and
other television conductors and fixtures necessary for the maintenance
and operation in the Borough of a cable television system and cable
communications system. Construction and operation pursuant to this
consent is conditioned upon prior approval of the Board of Public Utilities.
§ A126-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. Such meaning
or definition of terms is supplemental to those definitions of the Federal
Communications Commission, FCC Rules and Regulations, 47 CFR 76.1 et
seq., and the Cable Communications Policy Act, 47 U.S.C § 521 et seq., as
amended, and the Cable Television Act, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq., and shall in
no way be construed to broaden, alter or conflict with the federal or state
definitions.
COMPANY — The grantee of rights under this ordinance, known as "U.A.
Columbia Cablevision of New Jersey."
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Park Ridge, County of Bergen, in the
State of New Jersey.
§ A126-3. Statement of findings.
A public hearing concerning the consent herein granted to the company
was held after proper public notice pursuant to the terms and conditions
of the Act. The hearing having been held as above stated and the hearing
having been fully open to the public and the Borough having received at
the hearing all comments regarding the qualifications of the company to
receive this consent, the Borough hereby finds the company possesses the
necessary legal, technical, character, financial and other qualifications and
§ 123-9 PARK RIDGE CODE § A126-3
1:902
that the company's operation and construction arrangements are adequate
and feasible.
§ A126-4. Duration.
The consent herein granted shall expire in 10 years from the date of the
expiration of the original certificate of approval as issued by the Board
of Public Utilities, subject to the company's performing the services,
construction and payment of all required fees.
§ A126-5. Expiration and renewal.
If the company seeks a successive consent, it shall, prior to the expiration
of this consent, apply for a municipal consent and certificate of approval
in accordance with the Cable Television Act, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-11 and 16,
and applicable state and federal rules and regulations. The company shall
also petition the Board for a certificate of approval authorizing continued
operation during the period following expiration of the consent granted
herein and until such a time that a decision is made by the municipal
governing body relative to the renewal of said consent.
§ A126-6. Franchise fee.
Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act, the company shall, during
each year of operation under the consent granted herein, pay to the
Borough 2% of the gross revenues from all recurring charges in the nature
of subscription fees paid by subscribers to its cable television reception
service in the municipality or any amount permitted by the New Jersey
Cable Television Act or otherwise allowed by law. In the event that the
franchise fee is increased by law or practice, then the company shall
increase the amount paid to the Borough equal to the increase. This
requirement shall continue throughout the term of this franchise.
§ A126-7. Construction timetable.
The company shall be required to complete any proposed construction
within the service area described in the application. The timetable as
presented in the application incorporated herein has been determined to be
reasonable by the Borough, provided that the company installs a fiber optic
trunk line from the receiving station in Wayne to a subhead to be located in
the north-central part of Bergen County, reduces the number of amplifiers
feeding the Borough to a maximum of 20; all of the signal improvement,
including the fiber optic trunk line and the reduction of amplifiers, shall be
done by not later than December 31, 1993; and the channel capacity shall
be increased from the present 36 channels to 50 or more channels.
§ A126-8. Extension of service.
The company shall be required to proffer service along any public rightof-
way to any person's residence or business located in those areas of the
§ A126-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A126-8
1:903
franchise territory described herein, in accordance with the proposal for the
provision of services as described in the application.
§ A126-9. Construction requirements.
§ A126-10. Installation of individual subscribers.
The company shall provide installation to any person's residence or
business as described in its application.
§ A126-11. Territory.
The consent granted herein to the company shall apply to the entirety of the
Borough of Park Ridge and any property hereafter annexed thereto.
§ A126-12. Local office.
During the term of this franchise and any renewal thereof, the company
shall maintain a local business office or agent within a ten-mile radius
of the Municipal Building or the Borough of Park Ridge in the State of
New Jersey for the purpose of receiving, investigating and resolving all
complaints regarding the quality of service, equipment malfunctions and
similar matters. Such local business office shall be open during normal
A. Restoration. In the event that the company or its agents shall disturb
any pavement, street surfaces, sidewalks, driveways or other surfaces
in the natural topography, the company shall, at its sole expense,
restore and replace such places or things so disturbed in as good
condition as existed prior to the commencement of said work.
B. Relocation.
(1) If at any time during the period of this consent the Borough shall
alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other way or place,
the company, upon reasonable written notice by the Borough, shall
remove, relay and relocate its equipment, at the expense of the
company.
(2) The company shall temporarily move or remove appropriate parts
of its facilities to allow moving of buildings or machinery or in other
similar circumstances. The expense shall be borne by the party
requesting such action, except when requested by the Borough, in
which case the company shall bear the cost.
C. Removal or trimming of trees. During the exercise of its rights and
privileges under this franchise, the company shall have the authority,
upon reasonable written notice to the Borough, to trim trees upon and
overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks and public places of the Borough
so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with
the wires and cables of the company. Such trimming shall be only to the
extent necessary to maintain proper clearance for the company's
facilities.
§ A126-8 PARK RIDGE CODE § A126-12
1:904
business hours, and in no event less than 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday, and shall be accessible by a toll-free phone number during
that time period.
§ A126-13. Municipal complaint officer.
The Borough Administrator is hereby designated as the municipal complaint
officer to receive and act on written complaints by subscribers to cable
television reception and/or service provided pursuant to this franchise. The
municipal complaint officer shall notify the company within two working
days of the receipt of all written complaints, and the company shall respond
to said complaints within two working days thereafter. The municipal
complaint officer shall prepare and file with the governing body of the
municipality and with the company a report of the disposition of each
complaint within one week after filing of the complaint with the complaint
officer.
§ A126-14. Performance bonds.
During the life of the franchise, the company shall post corporate surety to
the Borough, which bond shall be in the amount of $25,000, to insure the
faithful performance of all undertakings of the company as represented in
its application for municipal consent incorporated herein.
§ A126-15. Reception services.
The Borough, having determined that the rates for all services, except
second set changes, proposed in the application for cable television
reception service are reasonable, approves them as presented. The monthly
service charge of $4 with converter or $3 without converter for a second
television set is not reasonable. This charge is disapproved by the Borough
and not an approved rate change. The company shall not charge for any
service when there has been more than two continuous hours' outage
of service in any one day. In addition, for each educational and public
library facility, the company shall provide one initial outlet free of charge.
Installation of all other outlets beyond the first shall be on a cost-plus-labor
basis. The company shall provide free service during continuation of the
connection, and there shall be no disconnect or reconnect charges. The
education and governmental channels are to be provided free.
§ A126-16. Basic service.
The basic service includes those channels which the company is required to
carry by FCC rules and any channel which the company carries without a
separate or additional charge.
§ A126-17. Two-way services.
In the event that the Borough determines that it is necessary and feasible
for it to contract with the company for the purposes of providing two-way
service and procures prior Federal Communications Commission approval
§ A126-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A126-17
1:905
based on a showing of need, the company shall be required to apply for
all necessary governmental approvals and authorizations to enter into and
establish the terms and conditions of such contract. All costs for such
application shall be borne by the Borough.
§ A126-18. Interconnection.
In the event that the Borough determines that it is necessary and feasible
for it to contract with the company for the purposes of providing
interconnection services, the Borough may apply for all authorizations
required by law, state and federal, for approval to enter into and establish
the terms and conditions of such contract. All costs for such application
shall be borne by the Borough.
§ A126-19. Equipment and personnel.
The municipality finds that the equipment and/or personnel to be provided
by the company for public, education or governmental use as provided in
the application of the company for municipal consent is reasonable with the
improvements or construction as required by § A126-7.
§ A126-20. Emergency uses.
The company shall be required to have the capability at the head end to
override the audio portion of the system in order to permit the broadcasting
of emergency messages by the municipality. The company shall in no way
be held liable for any injury suffered by the municipality or any other
person during an emergency, if for any reason the municipality is unable
to make full use of the cable television system as contemplated herein. The
municipality shall also establish reasonable procedures for such uses.
§ A126-21. Liability insurance.
The company agrees to maintain and keep in full force and effect at its sole
expense, at all times during the term of this consent, sufficient insurance
insuring the Borough and the company against all liability for death,
personal injury, property damage or other liability arising out of the
company's construction and operation of its CATV system. Such insurance
coverage shall be not less than $1,000,000 for bodily injury or death and
not less than $25,000 for property damage. The company shall file with
the Borough Clerk proper evidence of such coverage and shall notify the
Borough of Park Ridge of any changes in coverage, cancellation or
nonrenewal. The company shall not cancel or change the coverage without
first giving the Borough of Park Ridge 10 days' advance notice.
§ A126-22. Incorporation of the application.
Any portion of the application which is in conflict with the provisions of the
Cable Television Act, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq., the Cable Communications
Policy Act, 47 U.S.C. § 521 et seq., and/or FCC Rules and Regulations, 76.1
§ A126-17 PARK RIDGE CODE § A126-22
1:906
et seq., as amended, is not to be construed as effective under the terms of
this ordinance.
§ A126-23. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court
of federal or state agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be
deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and such holding
shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.
§ A126-24. Revocation of franchise.
The revocation of a franchise is permissible only upon petition by the
Borough to and approved by the Board of Public Utilities pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47. The Borough shall have the right to petition for such
revocation for any alleged violation of the terms of this ordinance by the
company.
§ A126-25. Comparable services and rates.
The company specifically consents that when it offers or provides any type
of rate reduction, free service or installation to any other subscriber or
potential subscriber in any other municipality in its system, these same
reductions, free service or installation shall be offered to the subscribers in
the Borough. The company specifically consents to offer to the subscribers
in the Borough any and all additional channels, program or viewing
opportunity it offers, provides or will offer or provide to any other
subscriber in any other municipality.
§ A126-26. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect upon publication of notice of final passage
and approval thereof as required by law.
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of Legislation
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2004-1 1-16-2004 Administrative
organization amendment
Ch. 2
2004-2 5-11-2004 Dogs Ch. 52, Art. I
§ A126-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:907
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2004-3 6-8-2004 Animal Cruelty
Investigator
Ch. 23, Art. I
2004-4 6-8-2004 Migratory waterfowl Ch. 104, Art. I
BOH
2004-1
3-18-2004 Fees amendment Ch. 109
2004-10 9-14-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 101
2004-11 9-14-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 101
2005-1 3-8-2005 Uniform construction
codes amendment
Ch. 50
2005-7 5-10-2005 Soil removal amendment Ch. 84
2005-11 7-12-2005 Uniform construction
codes amendment
Ch. 50
2005-12 9-13-2005 Littering amendment Ch. 64, Art. III
2005-13 9-13-2005 Migratory waterfowl
amendment
Ch. 104, Art. I
2005-14 9-13-2005 Sewers amendment Ch. 81A
2005-15 9-13-2005 Dogs amendment Ch. 52, Art. I
2005-16 9-13-2005 Flood hazard control
amendment
Ch. 61
2005-17 9-13-2005 Parks and recreation
areas: general regulations
amendment
Ch. 77A, Art. I
2005-18 9-13-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 97
2005-19 9-13-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 101
2005-20 9-13-2005 Davies Field Ch. 77A, Art. II
2005-23 9-27-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 97
BOH 12-8-2005 Food handler training
amendment
Ch. 110
2005-26 12-13-2005 Stormwater management Ch. 84A
2005-28 12-13-2005 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 26
2005-29 12-13-2005 Fire prevention:
enforcement and
administration amendment
Ch. 60, Art. II
2005-30 12-13-2005 Administrative
organization amendment
Ch. 2
2006-1 1-24-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 101
§ DL-1 PARK RIDGE CODE § DL-1
1:908
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2006-8 5-9-2006 Electricity Ch. 56
2006-9 7-11-2006 Licensing amendment Ch. 75
2006-10 7-11-2006 Subdivision and site plan
review amendment
Ch. 87
2006-11 7-11-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 101
2006-12 6-13-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 101
2006-15 8-8-2006 Administrative
organization amendment
Ch. 2
2006-22 10-10-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 101
2006-23 10-10-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 101
BOH
2006-1
11-16-2006 Fees amendment Ch. 109
2006-25 12-26-2006 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 26
2007-1 3-13-2007 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 40
2007-2 3-13-2007 Development fees
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2009-22
2007-4 3-13-2007 Hawthorne Street Parking
Lot amendment
Ch. 76, Art. I
2007-5 9-11-2007 Housing Task Force Ch. 18
2007-6 9-11-2007 Rental unit registration Ch. 81
2007-8 4-10-2007 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 60
2007-11 5-8-2007 Parks and recreation
areas: smoking
Ch. 77A, Art. III
2007-14 7-10-2007 Licensing amendment
(temporary storage
containers)
Ch. 75, Art. IV
2007-15 7-10-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 101
2007-16 8-14-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 97
2007-17 8-14-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 101
2007-18 7-10-2007 Uniform construction
codes amendment
Ch. 50
2007-19 7-10-2007 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 80
2007-25 11-27-2007 Electric rates Ch. 55A
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:909
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2008-02 3-11-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 101
2008-03 3-11-2008 Municipal parking lots:
Hawthorne Street lot
amendment
Ch. 76, Art. I
2008-04 3-11-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 97
2008-05 3-11-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 101
2008-09 6-10-2008 Defense and
indemnification
amendment
Ch. 10
2008-13 9-9-2008 Development fees
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2009-22
2008-16 12-23-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 101
2008-17 12-23-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 101
2008-18 12-23-2008 Municipal parking lots:
commuter parking lots
amendment
Ch. 76, Art. I
2009-01 2-10-2009 Municipal Pool
Commission amendment
Ch. 28
2009-03 5-12-2009 Garbage, rubbish and
trash: recycling
amendment
Ch. 64, Art. II
2009-04 2-24-2009 Uniform construction
codes amendment
Ch. 50
2009-05 2-24-2009 Outdoor furnaces Ch. 63
2009-07 3-24-2009 Parks and recreation areas Ch. 77A
2009-08 3-24-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 101
2009-09 3-24-2009 Licensing amendment
(donation clothing bins)
Ch. 75
2009-12 5-26-2009 Municipal Pool
Commission amendment
Ch. 28
2009-13 5-26-2009 Parks and recreation areas
amendment
Ch. 77A
2009-14 5-26-2009 Peace and good order;
parental responsibility
amendment
Ch. 78
2009-15 6-23-2009 Licensing amendment Ch. 75
2009-17 8-11-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 97
§ DL-1 PARK RIDGE CODE § DL-1
1:910
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2009-18 8-11-2009 Uniform construction
codes amendment
Ch. 50
2009-19 11-10-2009 Administrative
organization amendment
Ch. 2
2009-22 11-10-2009 Development fees Ch. 51
2009-23 11-10-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 101
2009-24 12-22-2009 Administrative
organization amendment
Ch. 2
2009-25 12-22-2009 Recycling amendment Ch. 64, Art. II
2009-26 12-22-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 97
2010-03 2-2-2010 Dogs amendment; cats
amendment
Ch. 52, Arts. I
and II
2010-04 3-15-2010 Administrative
organization amendment
Ch. 2
2010-05 3-15-2010 Garbage, rubbish and
trash: general provisions
amendment
Ch. 64, Art. I
2010-07 3-15-2010 Garbage, rubbish and
trash: refuse containers
and dumpsters
Ch. 64, Art. IV
2010-10 4-13-2010 Municipal Pool
Commission amendment
Ch. 28
2010-11 4-27-2010 Subdivision and site plan
review amendment
Ch. 87
2010-17 5-25-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 101
2010-19 5-25-2010 Massage and somatic
therapy businesses
amendment
Ch. 75C
2010-20 6-22-2010 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 26
2010-22 6-22-2010 Fireworks and firework
displays repealer
Ch. 59, Art. II
2010-23 6-22-2010 Peace and good order;
parental responsibility
amendment
Ch. 78
2010-27 7-27-2010 Commuter parking lots
amendment
Ch. 76, Art. I
2010-28 7-27-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 101
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:911
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2010-29 7-27-2010 Electric Department tariff
for net metering
installations
Ch. 55B
2010-34 10-26-2010 Rental registration
amendment
Ch. 81
2010-35 11-9-2010 Claims approval and
payment amendment
Ch. 6
2010-36 11-23-2010 Bicycles and motorcycles
amendment
Ch. 45
2010-38 11-23-2010 Towing amendment Ch. 92
2010-39
2010-40 12-28-2010 Massage and somatic
therapy businesses
amendment
Ch. 75C
2010-41 12-28-2010 Sewers amendment Ch. 81A
2010-42 12-28-2010 Soil removal amendment Ch. 84
2011-001 2-22-2011 Fire Department: Length
of Service Awards
Program
Ch. 14, Art. III
2011-002 2-22-2011 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 40
2011-004 3-8-2011 Commuter parking lots
amendment
Ch. 76, Art. I
2011-005 3-8-2011 Garbage, rubbish and
trash: recycling
amendment
Ch. 64, Art. II
2011-006 3-22-2011 Administrative
organization amendment;
Pascack Joint Municipal
Court
Chs. 2; 8
2011-009 4-12-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 101
2011-010 4-12-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 101
2011-011 4-12-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 101
2011-013 4-26-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 101
2011-014 4-26-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 101
2011-015 4-26-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 101
2011-016 5-10-2011 Garbage, rubbish and
trash: recycling
amendment
Ch. 64, Art. II
§ DL-1 PARK RIDGE CODE § DL-1
1:912
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2011-017 6-14-2011 Sewers amendment Ch. 81A
2011-018 6-14-2011 Administrative
organization amendment
Ch. 2
2011-019 6-14-2011 Claims approval and
payment amendment
Ch. 6
2011-023 7-26-2011 Fees amendment Ch. 109
2011-025 8-23-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 101
2011-026 9-13-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 101
2011-027 10-11-2011 Electric rates amendment Ch. 55A
2011-028 10-11-2011 Commuter parking lots
amendment
Ch. 76, Art. I
2011-032 11-14-2011 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 80
2011-034 11-29-2011 Fire Department: creation
of department amendment
Ch. 14, Art. I
2011-035 11-29-2011 Subdivision and site plan
review amendment; zoning
amendment
Chs. 87; 101
2011-036 12-13-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 97
2011-037 12-27-2011 Administrative
organization amendment
Ch. 2
2012-001 2-14-2012 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 40
2012-002 2-14-2012 Municipal Pool
Commission amendment
Ch. 28
2012-014 9-11-2012 Officers and employees:
crossing guards
Ch. 23, Art. II
2012-015 9-11-2012 Water rates Ch. 98, Art. II
2012-017 12-11-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 101
2013-004 3-26-2013 Adoption of Code by
Mayor and Council
Ch. 1, Art. I
2013-006 4-9-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 97
2013-010 7-23-2013 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 40
2013-011 9-10-2013 Parks and recreation areas
amendment
Ch. 77A
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:913
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2013-012 9-10-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 97
2013-013 10-22-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 97
2013-014 12-10-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 97
2014-001 2-11-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 101
2014-002 2-11-2014 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 74
2014-005A 3-11-2014 Electric rates amendment Ch. 55A
2014-006 2-25-2014 Water: payments and
deposits
Ch. 98, Art. III
2014-007 3-11-2014 Commuter parking lots
amendment
Ch. 76, Art. I
2014-010 5-27-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 101
2014-013 6-24-2014 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 60
2014-024 10-28-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 97
2014-025 11-25-2014 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 80
2014-026 12-19-2014 Municipal parking lots:
commuter parking lots
amendment
Ch. 76, Art. I
2015-008 4-28-2015 Uniform construction
codes amendment
Ch. 50
2015-013 9-8-2015 Electric rates amendment Ch. 55A
2016-001 1-26-2016 Water rates amendment Ch. 98, Art. II
2016-003 2-9-2016 Soil movement
amendment
Ch. 84
2016-004A 4-26-2016 Streets and sidewalks:
removal of snow, ice and
debris amendment
Ch. 86, Art. I
2016-009A 7-26-2016 Hawkers, peddlers and
solicitors amendment
Ch. 67
2016-016 7-26-2016 Fees amendment Ch. 109
2016-016A 9-27-2016 Fees amendment Ch. 109
§ DL-1 PARK RIDGE CODE § DL-1
1:914
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2016-017 7-26-2016 Dogs, cats and other
animals: puppy and kitten
mills
Ch. 52, Art. IV
2016-020 9-27-2016 Dogs, cats and other
animals: dogs amendment
Ch. 52, Art. I
2017-001 1-24-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 97
2017-005 5-23-2017 Dogs, cats and other
animals: dogs amendment
Ch. 52, Art. I
2017-006 5-23-2017 Parks and recreation areas
amendment
Ch. 77A
2017-009 6-13-2017 Water rates amendment Ch. 98, Art II
2017-011 7-11-2017 Credit card payments for
municipal fees
Ch. 57, Art. I
2017-012 7-11-2017 Sewers amendment Ch. 81A
2017-013 8-8-2017 Sewers amendment Ch. 81A
2017-014 9-12-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 101
2017-019 12-26-2017 Water: water rates
amendment
Ch. 98, Art. II
2017-015 9-27-2017 Alcoholic Beverages
Amendment
Ch. 40
2018-001 3-13-2018 Licensing Amendment Ch. 75
2018-004 3-27-2018 Property Maintenance
Amendment
Ch. 80
2018-006 4-10-2018 Construction Codes,
Uniform Amendment
Ch. 50
2018-007 4-10-2018 Rental Unit Registration
Amendment
Ch. 81
2018-008 5-22-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Pending
Codification
2018-011 6-26-2018 Electric Service
Regulations Amendment
Ch. 56
2018-013 7-24-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 97
2018-015 9-25-2018 Peddlers and Solicitors Ch. 67
2018-017 10-23-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 101
2019-003 2-26-2019 Water Amendment Ch. 98
2019-010 4-9-2019 Bond NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:915
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2019-011 4-9-2019 Subdivision and Site Plan
Review: On-Tract
Improvements Amendment
Ch. 87, Art. XI
2019-012 4-23-2019 Exceed Budget; Cap Bank NCM
2019-013 4-23-2019 Police Department
Amendment
Ch. 26
2019-019 8-13-2019 Flood Hazard Control
Amendment
Ch. 61
2019-020 8-13-2019 Animals and Waterfowl:
Migratory Waterfowl
Amendment
Ch. 104, Art. I
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
2019-021 9-10-2019 Appropriation NCM 26
2019-022 9-10-2019 Appropriation NCM 26
2019-023 9-10-2019 Appropriation NCM 26
2019-024 9-10-2019 Acceptance of
Property
NCM 26
2019-025 9-24-2019 Animals and
Waterfowl:
Migratory Waterfowl
Amendment
Ch. 104,
Art. I
26
2019-026 11-12-2019 Appropriation NCM 27
2019-027 11-12-2019 Appropriation NCM 27
2019-028 12-10-2019 Appropriation NCM 27
2019-029 12-10-2019 Salaries NCM 27
2019-030 12-30-2019 Water: Water Rates
Amendment
Ch. 98, Art.
II
27
2020-001 3-24-2020 Street Openings and
Excavations
Amendment
Ch. 85 27
§ DL-1 PARK RIDGE CODE § DL-1
1:916

ZONING
101 Attachment 2
Borough of Park Ridge
Schedule IV-2
Area, Yard and Bulk Requirements
[Amended 12-26-1991 by Ord. No. 91-18; 7-11-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-8; 5-28-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-8; 9-13-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-19; 3-11-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-02;
11-10-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-23; 4-12-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-011; 4-26-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-013; 4-26-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-015; 8-23-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-025; 12-11-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-017; 8-10-2021 by Ord. No. 2021-018; 8-10-2021
by Ord. No. 2021-019; 8-10-2021 by Ord. No. 2021-020]
Zone
Minimum Lot
Area
(square feet)
Minimum Lot
Width
(feet)
Minimum Street
Frontage
(feet)
Minimum Lot
Depth
(feet)
Minimum Front
Yard
(feet)
Minimum Side
Yard Each
(feet)
Maximum
Dwelling Width
(percent of
lot width)
Minimum Rear
Yard
(feet)
Maximum
Building Height
(feet)
Maximum
Building
Coverage
(percent)
Maximum
Impervious
Coverage
(percent)
Maximum Floor
Area Ratio
Maximum Gross
Floor Area
(square feet)
R-40 40,000 150 113 175 50 35 60 60 32 12 25 20%1
9,200
1
R-20 20,000 110 83 160 40 22 60 50 32 18 40 22%1
4,800
R-20A7
20,000 120 70 140 30 15 60 50 32 18 40 30% 7,000
R-15 15,000 100 75 150 30 18 65 45 32 20 35 25%1
4,250
R-10 10,000 85 75 120 25 15 65 35 32 20 40 30%1
3,333
1
R-HH 175,000 75 56 200 50 25 — 50 20 18 50 — —
R-T 435,600 300 225 400 — See § 101-20D — 35 20 50 — —
R-GAI 87,120 200 225 200 50 25 50 50 35 182
50 — —
R-GAII 217,800 200 150 200 25 25 50 30 35 25 70 — —
AH-13
87,120 100 — — 50 25 — 25 35 20 50 — —
AH-28
87,120 100 — — 40 75 — 20 58 25 55 — —
AH-4 See § 101-48.7A
B-1 10,000 100 75 100 20 15 30 30 35 25 80 — —
B-2 40,000 150 113 200 20 25 50 40 35 40 75 40 —
RP4
10,000 100 — 100 25 20 — 30 35 — 45 20 —
NB5
10,000 50 — — Minimum = 10 along Park;
10 along Broadway;
10 along Kinderkamack;
20 along other streets
Maximum = 20 along Park;
20 along Broadway;
none along other streets
— — — 35 40 75 60 —
NB6
50,000 200 200 100 Minimum = 10 along Park;
10 along Broadway;
10 along Kinderkamack;
20 along other streets
Maximum = 20 along Park;
20 along Broadway;
40 along other streets
30 — — 40 85 90 70 —
ORL 435,600 300 225 400 100 60 120 100 40 20 65 — —
Redevelopme
nt Area
Overlay
Zone
See § 101-57
NOTES:
1 A density bonus shall be provided to developers who incorporate certain architectural details and/or green building strategies into their development as established in § 101-19.
2 Subject to additional regulations detailed in § 101-20E(3)(e).
3 Subject to additional regulations detailed in Article XI.
4 Area, yard and bulk regulations tailored for conditional uses are set forth in § 101-58.13.
5 Subject to additional regulations detailed in Article XIIIC.
6 Subject to the site having a minimum lot area of 50,000 square feet in area.
7 Subject to additional regulations detailed in Article XIIID.
8
 Subject to additional regulations detailed in Article XIA.
101 Attachment 2:1 Supp 33, Nov 2021