Borough Code
Chapter BAO
BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE
Chapter B1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Editor's Note: This Chapter 1 to be adopted as 1 of the Princeton
Code. This 1 adopted by Ord. No. 2014-7 supersedes prior Code 1
containing Ord. Nos. 91-14, 2001-3, 2006-4.
§ 1-1. How Code Designated and Cited. [Ord. No. 2014-7 Exh. A]
This Chapter and the following chapters constitute and shall be designated
as the "Code of Princeton, New Jersey, 2013," and may be so cited.
§ 1-2. Rules of Construction. [Ord. No. 2014-7 Exh. A]
In the construction of this Code and of all other Princeton ordinances,
words and phrases shall be read and construed with their context and
shall, unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the governing body
or unless another or different meaning is expressly indicated, be given
their generally accepted meaning according to the approved usage of the
language. Technical words and phrases and words and phrases having a
special or accepted meaning in the law shall be construed in accordance
with such technical or special and accepted meaning.
In such construction, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings herein given:
CODE — The words "the Code" or "this Code" shall mean the Code of
Princeton, New Jersey 2013.
COMPUTATION OF TIME — Whenever a notice is required to be given or
an act to be done a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be
had, the day on which such notice is given or such act is done shall not be
counted in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to
be had shall be counted.
COUNCIL OR MAYOR AND COUNCIL — The words "council" or "mayor and
council" shall mean the council or mayor and council of Princeton.
COUNTY — The words "county," "the county" or "this county" shall mean
the County of Mercer.
GENDER — Words importing gender shall apply to females as well as
to males, and to bodies corporate, partnerships, limited partnerships and
associations, foreign and domestic, as well as to individuals.
BAO:1
GOVERNING BODY — Governing Body shall mean the council, unless the
context requires the meaning mayor and council.
MONTH — The word "month" shall refer to a calendar month.
MUNICIPALITY — The word "municipality" shall mean Princeton, a
municipal corporation of the State of New Jersey.1
NUMBER — Words used in the singular number shall include the plural, and
words used in the plural number shall include the singular number.
OATH — The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation
where an affirmation may be substituted for an oath. In such cases the
words "swear" and "sworn" shall be construed to be equivalent to the words
"affirm" and "affirmed."
OFFICER OR OFFICIAL IN TITLE — The words "officer" or "official," and
the title of an officer or official, shall be construed as if the words "of
Princeton" followed them.
OFFICER; SUBORDINATE OFFICER; EMPLOYEE — The following
definitions apply only in connection with the procedures set forth in Chapter
2 of this Code which specifically address the appointment, hiring,
promotion, discipline, suspension or discharge (as applicable) of
subordinate officers and employees of the municipality: the word "officer"
shall apply only to the mayor and council members; the term "subordinate
officer" shall apply to (a) the holder of an office created or recognized
by state law, including but not limited to the administrator, attorney,
prosecutor, public defender, construction official, subcode officials and
engineer, and (b) the holder of an office established by the council who is
responsible for performing a permanent municipal function; and the word
"employee" shall mean a person employed directly by Princeton.
OWNER — The word "owner" shall include any part owner, joint owner,
tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the
entirety, of the whole or of a part of a building or land.
PERSON — The word "person" shall include corporations, companies, clubs,
societies, firms, partnerships, associations, organizations and any other
group or entity acting as a unit, as well as an individual.
PRECEDING; FOLLOWING — The words "preceding" and "following" shall
mean next before and next after, respectively.
PRINCETON — The word "Princeton" shall mean Princeton, a municipal
corporation of the State of New Jersey, in Mercer County, New Jersey.
SHALL; MAY — The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is
permissive.
SIDEWALK — The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street
between the curb line and the adjacent property line, intended for the use
of pedestrians.
1. Editor's Note: The municipality was formed on January 1, 2013, in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40A:60-1 et seq.
§ 1-2 PRINCETON CODE § 1-2
BAO:2
STATE — The words "state," "the state" or "this state" shall mean the State
of New Jersey.
STREET — The word "street" shall mean and include public highways,
roads, avenues, courts, public lanes, alleys and sidewalks.
TENANT OR OCCUPANT — The words "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a
building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or part of
such building or land, whether alone or with others.
TENSE — Words used in the past or present tense include the future, as
well as the past and present.
WEEK — The word "week" shall mean a calendar week.
WRITING; WRITTEN — The words "writing" and "written" shall include
printing and any other mode of representing words, letters and figures.
§ 1-3. Provisions Considered as Continuations of Existing
Ordinances. [Ord. No. 2014-7 Exh. A]
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same in
substance as those of ordinances existing at the time of the effective date
of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new
enactments.
§ 1-4. Catchlines of Sections. [Ord. No. 2014-7 Exh. A]
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code are intended as mere
catch-words to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed
or taken to be titles of such sections, neither as any part of the section, nor,
unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such
sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.
§ 1-5. Severability of Parts of Code. [Ord. No. 2014-7 Exh. A]
Each section of this Code is hereby declared to be a separate section, and
the determination of any section or part thereof to be void shall not affect
the validity of any other section or part thereof.
§ 1-6. General Penalty; Continuing Violations; Repeat Violations;
other Penalties. [Ord. No. 2014-7 Exh. A]
(a) General Penalty. Whenever in this Code, or in any other ordinance or
resolution or in any rule, regulation or order promulgated pursuant to
this Code or other ordinance of the municipality, any act which is
prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or
misdemeanor, or whenever in such Code or in such other ordinance,
rule, regulation, resolution or order, the doing of any act is required or
the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or an offense (and
where no specific penalty is provided therefor), the violation of any such
provision of this Code or of any other ordinance, rule, regulation,
resolution or order, or of any rule, regulation or order promulgated
§ 1-2 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 1-6
BAO:3
pursuant to this Code, shall be punished by one or more of the
following, unless specifically exempted from these penalties as
provided in the ordinances: a fine not exceeding $2,000; imprisonment
for a period not to exceed 90 days; or performance of community
service for a period not exceeding 90 days.
(b) Repeat Violations. Any person who is convicted of violating this Code or
any other ordinance or resolution or any other rule, regulation or order
promulgated pursuant to this Code or other ordinance within one year
of the date of a previous violation of the same provision, and who was
fined for that previous violation, shall be sentenced by the court to an
additional fine as a repeat offender. The additional fine imposed by the
court upon a person for a repeated offense shall be neither less than the
minimum nor more than the maximum fine fixed for a violation of the
provision, but shall be in addition to but calculated separately from the
fine imposed for the current violation of the provision.
(c) Alternate Penalties under Certain Circumstances. Whenever any
provision of the New Jersey Revised Statutes limits the authority of the
municipality to punish the violation of any particular provision of this
Code or other ordinance, rule, regulation, resolution or order
promulgated pursuant thereto to a fine of less amount than that
provided in this section, imprisonment for a shorter term than that
provided in this section or community service for a shorter term than
that provided in this section, then the violation of such particular
provision of this Code or other ordinance, rule, regulation, resolution or
order shall be punished by the imposition of not more than the
maximum fine, imprisonment and/or community service so authorized.
(d) Minimum Penalty. The council may prescribe in any particular
ordinance that for violation of that ordinance a minimum penalty shall
be imposed which shall consist of a fine fixed at an amount not
exceeding $100.
(e) Continuing Violations. Each day any violation of this Code or any other
ordinance, rule, regulation, resolution or order promulgated pursuant
thereto shall continue or shall have continued shall constitute a
separate offense, unless otherwise provided in the subject Code,
ordinance, rule, regulation, resolution or order. Any person convicted of
violating this Code or any ordinance or resolution or any other rule,
regulation or order promulgated pursuant to this Code or other
ordinance, and who is in default of the payment of any fine imposed for
the violations may, in the court's discretion, be imprisoned for a term
not exceeding 90 days or be required to perform community service for
a period not exceeding 90 days.
§ 1-6 PRINCETON CODE § 1-6
BAO:4
Chapter B2
ADMINISTRATION
Editor's Note: Sections 2-1A.1 through 2-7.7 to be adopted in the
Princeton Code. Prior Code Chapter 2 Articles I through III
containing Sections 2-1 through 2-50 replaced by Ord. No. 2014-8.
§ 1-6 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 1-6
BAO:5

ARTICLE I
Municipal Governing Body
§ 2-1A.1. Mayor and Council. [Ord. No. 2014-8]
The mayor is the executive head of the municipal government, and the
council is the legislative body of the municipal government.
§ 2-1A.2. Powers and Duties. [Ord. No. 2014-8]
The mayor and council shall have such powers and duties as prescribed in
N.J.S.A. 40A:60-1 et seq. and in the general laws of the State of New Jersey.
§ 2-1A.1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-1A.2
BAO:7

ARTICLE II
Municipal Departments And Offices
§ 2-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-1A.2
BAO:9

DIVISION 1
Department of Administration and Finance
§ 2-1. Department Created. [Ord. No. 2014-8]
There is hereby created a Department of Administration and Finance, the
department head of which shall be the Municipal Administrator.
§ 2-1.1. Administrator; Residency. [Ord. No. 2014-8]
The administrator shall be required to be a resident of Princeton; provided,
however, that the council may waive this requirement if it determines, by
resolution, that it is appropriate under the then current circumstances and
is in the best interests of Princeton.
§ 2-1.2. Appointment; Service at Pleasure of Council. [Ord. No.
2014-8]
The administrator shall be appointed by the mayor, with the advice and
consent of the council, and shall serve at the pleasure of the council.
§ 2-1.3. Removal from Office. [Ord. No. 2014-8]
The administrator may be removed by a 2/3 vote of the full council
membership. The resolution of removal shall become effective three months
after its adoption by the council. The council may provide that the resolution
shall have immediate effect, provided, however, that council shall cause
to be paid to the administrator forthwith any unpaid balance of the
administrator's salary and the salary for the next three calendar months
following adoption of the resolution.
§ 2-1.4. Authority to Hold other Appointive Office. [Ord. No. 2014-8]
The administrator shall devote full time to the duties of the office; except
that nothing herein shall prevent the appointment of the administrator to
any other appointive office in the municipality and the fulfillment of the
duties thereof.
§ 2-1.5. Compensation. [Ord. No. 2014-8]
The administrator shall receive such compensation as shall be prescribed
by the council in the annual salary ordinance.
§ 2-1.6. Powers and Duties. [Ord. No. 2014-8]
The administrator shall, under the supervision and control of the mayor and
council, to the extent not prohibited by law:
(a) Be responsible for the proper and efficient administration of all
municipal business, except those duties and responsibilities conferred
upon other officials by state statutes, other applicable laws, rules and
§ 2-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-1.6
BAO:11
regulations promulgated by state and county agencies, judicial
authority or ordinances of the municipality. The administrator may
delegate to the deputy administrator, or any department head or other
Princeton employee such powers as the administrator may deem
necessary for efficient administration. The administrator shall retain
responsibility for all such work performed by others;
(b) Serve as the municipality's personnel officer, maintain sound personnel
practices and policies, maintain appropriate records of all subordinate
officers and employees, and have the authority to hire, promote,
discipline, suspend or discharge any employee, provided that to the
extent those employees are covered by applicable state statutes, rules
and regulations, or another provision of this Code, they shall be hired,
promoted, disciplined, suspended or discharged in a manner consistent
with such statutes, rules, regulations and/or this Code. As required by
law, the mayor shall nominate, and with the advice and consent of the
council, appoint all subordinate officers (unless another procedure is
specified by state law). The administrator shall be responsible for the
operation and staffing of all departments and offices within the
municipality, and all department heads and subordinate officers shall
report to the administrator;
(c) Assign responsibility for departmental action and coordinate
interdepartmental operations;
(d) Prepare the proposed annual municipal budget, by requiring and
receiving appropriation requests from the heads of departments and
reviewing such requests, transmitting a tentative budget and
consulting with the mayor and council with respect thereto and
submitting on or before the submittal date mandated by the state, the
administrator's final recommendations in the form required by state
law for municipal budgets, appending thereto a detailed analysis of the
various items of expenditure and preliminary revenues and such
explanatory comment or statement as may be desirable;
(e) Administer the budget after its adoption and implement the work
programs contained therein, and enforce the financial procedures and
policies of the municipality and its departments;
(f) Execute and enforce the laws of the state and ordinances and
resolutions of the municipality, except where authority is granted to
others by statutes or ordinances; see that all of the terms and
conditions imposed in favor of the municipality or its inhabitants in any
statute, public utility franchise, performance bond, or other contractual
undertaking are fulfilled;
(g) Keep the mayor and council informed as to the conduct of municipal
affairs as well as the condition of municipal finances and make such
recommendations to the mayor and council as the administrator deems
necessary and advisable;
§ 2-1.6 PRINCETON CODE § 2-1.6
BAO:12
(h) Attend all regular and special meetings of the council or mayor and
council, except where excused therefrom by the council, and, if
directed, other meetings and events requiring attendance of a
representative of Princeton;
(i) Recommend to the mayor and council the employment of professional
service consultants to perform work and render advice;
(j) Negotiate contracts in accordance with law, in consultation with the
municipal attorney as needed, oversee the performance and faithful
execution of such contracts, except insofar as such duties are expressly
imposed upon some other municipal officer or official by statute or
ordinance, and make recommendations to the council regarding
contract awards;
(k) Review and recommend all bills and vouchers for payment prior to final
approval by the council;
(l) Maintain a continuing review and analysis of budget operations, work
programs, and costs of municipal services;
(m) At the request of the council, study and analyze the duties and
responsibilities of any appointed official, employee, or department, and
submit a written report relating thereto to the council for such further
action as the council may deem advisable;
(n) Study, recommend, implement and enforce procedures and policies of
the municipality and in its departments for receipt, dissemination and
collation of, and for responses to, communications and information;
(o) Oversee all purchasing activity of the municipality with authority as its
contracting agent to prepare public advertising for bids and quotations
as required by law and to review bids for the purchase of materials,
supplies and services on behalf of the municipality in accordance with
the provisions of the state statutes and sound purchasing practices;
and, in compliance with the requirements of the New Jersey Local
Public Contracts Law (N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.) make or recommend
awards of contracts in the name of the municipality for the various
agencies, boards, departments and other offices of the municipality.
The administrator is specifically authorized to make awards of
contracts, without public advertising for bids, when the cost or price of
any contract in the aggregate does not exceed in a contract year the
maximum bid threshold in effect pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:11-3a., as may
be amended. If the administrator or designee is a Qualified Purchasing
Agent, by resolution the council may increase the bid threshold up to
the adjusted maximum amount permitted by the Legislature by N.J.S.A.
40A:11-3c., as may be amended.
The administrator or designee shall keep an account of all purchases
and may, from time to time, or when directed, issue rules and
regulations governing the requisition and purchase of all municipal
§ 2-1.6 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-1.6
BAO:13
§ 2-1.7. Deputy Administrator; Appointment; Compensation; Duties.
[Ord. No. 2014-8]
The administrator may appoint a deputy administrator whose compensation
shall be fixed by the annual salary ordinance. The deputy administrator
shall have a general knowledge of all aspects of municipal government and
be qualified to serve as administrator. The deputy administrator shall have
such other duties as may be delegated or assigned by the administrator.
The deputy administrator may simultaneously hold another position with
Princeton.
supplies and equipment. For purposes of this section, during the
absence, disqualification or disability of the administrator, the deputy
administrator or other qualified designee, selected by the mayor or
administrator, as appropriate under the circumstances, shall act in
place of the administrator on a temporary basis.
To the extent authorized by law, the administrator may delegate some
or all of the purchasing obligations set forth in this subsection (o)
and below in subsection (p) to a purchasing agent, in which case said
purchasing agent shall report to the Chief Financial Officer; and
(p) Oversee all emergency purchases. A contract may be negotiated or
awarded without public advertising for bids and bidding therefor,
notwithstanding that the contract price will exceed the bid threshold,
when an emergency affecting the public health, safety or welfare
requires the immediate delivery of goods or the performance of
services, provided that the awarding of such contracts is made in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:11-6 and rules promulgated thereunder, as
may be amended, and this subsection.
The official in charge of the department wherein the emergency
occurred shall notify the administrator of the need for the performance
of a contract, the nature of the emergency, the time of its occurrence
and the need for invoking these emergency purchase procedures. If the
administrator is satisfied that an emergency exists, the administrator or
designee shall be authorized to award a contract or contracts for such
purposes as may be necessary to respond to the emergent needs. The
notification shall be reduced to writing and filed with the administrator.
The administrator shall inform the mayor and council of the emergency
and need for an emergency contract as soon as possible. The
administrator shall see that the matter is placed on the agenda for
discussion and/or action at the next or following meeting of the
governing body.
Upon the furnishing of such goods or services, in accordance with the
terms of the contract, the contractor furnishing such goods or services
shall be entitled to be paid therefor and the governing body shall be
obligated for said payment, and the governing body shall take such
action as shall be required to provide for payment of the contract price.
§ 2-1.6 PRINCETON CODE § 2-1.7
BAO:14
DIVISION 2
Municipal Attorney
§ 2-2. Creation of Office; Appointment; Qualifications; Term;
Compensation; Residency. [Ord. No. 2014-8]
There shall be a municipal attorney for the municipality, in but not of the
Department of Administration and Finance, who need not be a resident of
the municipality, who shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and
consent of the council for the term of one year, commencing on January
1 of the year of appointment. Said appointment shall be memorialized
in a professional services resolution and agreement in accordance with
the requirements of the New Jersey Local Public Contracts Law (N.J.S.A.
40A:11-1 et seq.). The municipal attorney shall be qualified and licensed as
an attorney-at-law of the State of New Jersey in good standing, and shall
receive such compensation as is established in the aforesaid professional
services resolution and agreement, a portion of which, if appropriate, may
be provided for by the council in the annual salary ordinance.
§ 2-2.1. Duties. [Ord. No. 2014-8]
The municipal attorney shall perform all duties of a legal nature pertaining
to the office of an attorney representing a municipal corporation, except in
particular cases where for special reasons another attorney is employed.
§ 2-2 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-2.1
BAO:15

DIVISION 3
Municipal Prosecutor; Municipal Public Defender
§ 2-3. Offices Created. [Ord. No. 2014-8]
The municipal prosecutor and municipal public defender shall be in but not
of the Department of Administration and Finance.
§ 2-3.1. Municipal Prosecutor; Appointment. [Ord. No. 2014-8]
There shall be a municipal prosecutor, who shall be appointed by the
mayor with the advice and consent of the council for the term of one year
from the date of appointment. Said appointment shall be memorialized
in a professional services resolution and agreement in accordance with
the requirements of the New Jersey Local Public Contracts Law (N.J.S.A.
40A:11-1 et seq.). The municipal prosecutor shall be qualified and licensed
as an attorney-at-law of the State of New Jersey in good standing. The
prosecutor shall receive such compensation as is established in the
aforesaid professional services resolution and agreement, a portion of
which, if appropriate, may be provided for by the council in the annual
salary ordinance. The compensation of municipal prosecutors, including
additional prosecutors, shall be in lieu of any and all other fees; provided,
however that when a municipal prosecutor is assigned to prosecute a
de novo appeal in the Superior Court, the prosecutor shall be entitled
to additional compensation unless the municipality expressly provides
otherwise at the same time as the adoption of the aforesaid professional
services resolution. The duties of the prosecutor shall be as follows:
§ 2-3.1.1. Additional Prosecutors. [Ord. No. 2014-8]
(a) Participate in and prosecute all cases when necessary or practical in the
municipal court, including all criminal and quasi-criminal complaints;
and all complaints by municipal officials, inspectors and directors, in
conjunction with the municipal attorney, when appropriate; and
(b) Have the power and authority, to the extent not inconsistent with any
statute of the State of New Jersey or applicable municipal ordinances,
to settle, compromise, downgrade or dismiss any complaints when, in
the prosecutor's judgment, the best interests of the municipality will be
served.
(a) In accordance with applicable laws, ordinances and resolutions, the
mayor may appoint additional municipal prosecutors as necessary to
administer justice in a timely and effective manner in municipal court.
Such appointments shall be made in accordance with N.J.S.A. 2B:25-4
and shall be for a term of one year from the date of appointment and
may continue pending reappointment or appointment of a successor.
Said appointments shall be memorialized in professional services
resolution(s) and agreement(s) in accordance with the requirements of
the New Jersey Local Public Contracts Law (N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.).
§ 2-3 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-3.1.1
BAO:17
§ 2-3.2. Municipal Public Defender.
§ 2-3.2.1. Appointment. [Ord. No. 2014-8]
There shall be a municipal public defender who shall be appointed by the
mayor, with the advice and consent of the council. The mayor may appoint
such additional public defenders as may be determined to be necessary. In
such case, the mayor shall appoint one of the public defenders as "chief
public defender," in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 2B:24-3. Said
appointments shall be memorialized in professional services resolution(s)
and agreement(s) in accordance with the requirements of the New Jersey
Local Public Contracts Law (N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.).
§ 2-3.2.2. Qualifications. [Ord. No. 2014-8]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 2B:24-4, the public defender
and any additional (deputy) public defenders shall be qualified as
attorney(s)-at-law of the State of New Jersey in good standing and shall
represent those defendants appearing in municipal court who are
determined by the court to be indigent and whose representation is
assigned to the public defender by the court.
§ 2-3.2.3. Term. [Ord. No. 2014-8]
The public defender(s) shall be appointed for a term of one year from
the date of appointment and may continue to serve in office pending
reappointment or appointment of a successor.
§ 2-3.2.4. Compensation. [Ord. No. 2014-8]
The public defender(s) shall be compensated as set forth in the aforesaid
professional services resolution(s) and agreement(s), a portion of which,
if appropriate, may be provided for by the council in the annual salary
ordinance.
§ 2-3.2.5. Chief Public Defender. [Ord. No. 2014-8]
The chief public defender shall have all of the duties provided by N.J.S.A.
2B:24-6 in the representation of indigent defendants in proceedings over
which the Princeton Municipal Court has jurisdiction and shall have
authority over any deputy public defenders that may be appointed with
respect to the performance of their duties.
(b) If the municipal court has two or more municipal prosecutors there
shall be a "chief municipal prosecutor" who shall be appointed by the
mayor. The chief municipal prosecutor shall have authority over other
prosecutors serving that court with respect to the performance of their
duties.
§ 2-3.1.1 PRINCETON CODE § 2-3.2.6
BAO:18
§ 2-3.2.6. Deputy Public Defenders. [Ord. No. 2014-8]
Deputy public defenders shall serve in the absence or disqualification of the
chief public defender or when assigned by the chief public defender.
§ 2-3.2.7. Representation of Private Clients. [Ord. No. 2014-8]
Municipal public defenders may represent private clients in the municipal
court and before municipal agencies, subject to the Rules of Court
Governing the Conduct of Lawyers, Judges and Court Personnel.
§ 2-3.2.8. Application for Representation by the Public Defender.
[Ord. No. 2014-8]
A person applying for representation by the public defender shall pay an
application fee of $200. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 2B:24-17 and with
guidelines promulgated by the New Jersey Supreme Court, the municipal
court may waive any required application fee, in whole or in part, only if the
court determines, in its discretion, upon a clear and convincing showing by
the applicant that the application fee represents an unreasonable burden
on the person seeking representation. The municipal court may permit a
person to pay the application fee over a specific period of time not to exceed
four months.
§ 2-3.2.9. Eligibility for Services. [Ord. No. 2014-8]
Eligibility for services of the public defender shall be determined by the
municipal court on the basis of the need of the defendant. Need shall
be measured as provided by law and in accordance with the guidelines
promulgated by the New Jersey Supreme Court. In the event that a
determination of eligibility cannot be made before the time when the first
services are to be rendered, or if an initial determination is found to be
erroneous, the municipal court shall refer the defendant to the public
defender provisionally, and if subsequently it is determined that the
defendant is ineligible the municipal court shall inform the defendant, and
the defendant shall be obliged to engage his own counsel and to reimburse
the municipality for the cost of the services rendered to that time.
§ 2-3.2.10. Investigation of Financial Status. [Ord. No. 2014-8]
The municipal court shall undertake an investigation of the financial status
of each defendant seeking representation and shall have the authority
to require a defendant to execute and deliver written requests or
authorizations required under applicable law to provide the court with
access to records of public or private sources, otherwise confidential, as
may be of aid in evaluating eligibility. As provided by law, the court is
authorized to obtain information from any public record, office of the state,
or any subdivision or agency thereof on request and without payment of fees
ordinarily required by law.
§ 2-3.2.6 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-3.2.11
BAO:19
§ 2-3.2.11. Financial Obligations of Parents or Guardians. [Ord. No.
2014-8]
As provided by N.J.S.A. 2B:24-11, whenever a person entitled to
representation by a public defender pursuant to said act, is under the age of
18 years, the eligibility for services shall be determined on the basis of the
financial circumstances of the individual and the financial circumstances of
the individual's parents or legal guardians.
§ 2-3.2.12. Reimbursement. [Ord. No. 2014-8]
As provided by N.J.S.A. 2B:24-12, if the defendant has or reasonably expects
to have means to meet some part, though not all, of the cost of the services
rendered, the defendant shall be required to reimburse the municipality and
the municipality shall have a lien on any property to which the defendant
shall have or acquire an interest for the amount equal to the reasonable
value of the services rendered to a defendant pursuant to this act as
calculated at the same rate as the office of the public defender bills clients
at that time.
§ 2-3.2.13. Collection and Settlement of Claims. [Ord. No. 2014-8]
The municipal attorney may do all things necessary to collect any money
due to the municipality by way of reimbursement for services rendered
by a public defender. The municipal attorney may enter into arrangements
with any state or county agency to handle collections on a cost basis.
The municipal attorney shall have all of the remedies and proceedings
available for collection which are available for or upon the recovery of a
judgment in a civil action and shall also be permitted to collect counsel
fees and costs from the defendant. The municipal attorney is authorized
to compromise and settle any claims for services performed whenever
the financial circumstances of the person receiving the services are such
that, in the judgment of the municipal attorney, the best interest of the
municipality will be served by compromise and settlement.
§ 2-3.2.14. Establishment of Fund. [Ord. No. 2014-8]
Funds collected from the application fee shall be deposited in a dedicated
fund administered by the chief financial officer of the municipality. The
fund shall be used exclusively to meet the costs incurred in providing the
services of a public defender including, when required, expert and lay
person investigation and testimony.
§ 2-3.2.11 PRINCETON CODE § 2-3.2.14
BAO:20
DIVISION 4
Office of Municipal Clerk
§ 2-4. Municipal Clerk - Office Created. [Ord. No. 2014-8]
The office of municipal clerk of Princeton is hereby created in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40A:9-133 through 135, in the Department of Administration
and Finance.
§ 2-4.1. Same - Appointment; Term; Vacancy. [Ord. No. 2014-8]
The clerk shall be appointed by the council for a term of three years. For
the purposes of tenure, the term of the municipal clerk shall be deemed to
have begun as of the actual date upon which a person serving as municipal
clerk is appointed. In the event of a vacancy in the office of municipal clerk,
an appointment shall be made for a new term and not for the unexpired
term. A reappointment of an incumbent municipal clerk made within 60
days following the expiration of the prior term shall not be considered to be
a new appointment and the effective date of the reappointment shall date
back to the date of expiration of the initial term of the appointment. The
council shall appoint a person to a three-year term as municipal clerk within
six months after the previous municipal clerk has resigned or the office
has otherwise become vacant. Should the office of municipal clerk become
vacant, the council may appoint a person to serve as acting municipal clerk
for a period of not more than six months.
§ 2-4.2. Same - Powers and Duties. [Ord. No. 2014-8]
The municipal clerk shall have the following powers and duties:
(a) Act as secretary of the municipal corporation and custodian of the
municipal seal and of all minutes, books, deeds, bonds, contracts, and
archival records of the municipal corporation. The council may,
however, provide by ordinance that any other specific officer shall have
custody of any specific other class of record;
(b) Act as secretary to the governing body, prepare meeting agendas at the
discretion of the council, be present at all meetings of the council, keep
a journal of the proceedings of every meeting, retain the original copies
of all ordinances and resolutions, and record the minutes of every
meeting;
(c) Serve as the chief administrative officer in all elections held in the
municipality, subject to the requirements of Title 19 of the Revised
Statutes;
(d) Serve as chief registrar of voters in the municipality, subject to the
requirements of Title 19 of the Revised Statutes;
(e) Serve as the administrative officer responsible for the acceptance of
applications for licenses and permits and the issuance of licenses and
§ 2-4 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-4.2
BAO:21
§ 2-4.3. Same - Compensation. [Ord. No. 2014-8]
The municipal clerk shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed by
council in the annual salary ordinance.
§ 2-4.4. Deputy Municipal Clerk - Office Created. [Ord. No. 2014-8]
The office of deputy clerk of the municipality is hereby created.
§ 2-4.5. Same - Appointment; Term; Vacancy. [Ord. No. 2014-8]
The deputy clerk shall be appointed by the council for a term of one year,
calculated from the first day of January of the year in which the deputy
clerk is appointed, and shall serve after the expiration of such term until
a successor shall be appointed and shall qualify. Any vacancy in said office
occurring other than by expiration of term shall be filled in like manner, but
for the unexpired term only.
§ 2-4.6. Same - Powers and Duties. [Ord. No. 2014-8]
The deputy clerk shall have all of the powers and duties of the clerk during
absence or disability of the latter and shall also have such other powers
and duties as shall be prescribed from time to time by the clerk or by the
council.
§ 2-4.7. Same - Compensation. [Ord. No. 2014-8]
The deputy clerk shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed by the
council in the annual salary ordinance.
§ 2-4.8. Assistant to the Municipal Clerk. [Ord. No. 2014-8]
The administrator may appoint an Assistant to the Municipal Clerk, who
shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed by the council in the
annual salary ordinance. Said assistant shall be certified to perform the
duties of the municipal clerk pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-133.2. and may
simultaneously hold another position with Princeton.
§ 2-4.9. Defense and Indemnification. [Ord. No. 2014-8]
Princeton shall provide the clerk, deputy clerk and assistant to the clerk
(if one is appointed) with defense and indemnification of any action or
permits, except where statute or municipal ordinance has delegated
that responsibility to some other municipal officer;
(f) Serve as coordinator and records manager responsible for
implementing local archives and records retention programs as
mandated pursuant to Title 47 of the Revised Statutes; and
(g) Perform such other duties as are now or hereafter imposed by statute,
regulation or by municipal ordinance or regulation.
§ 2-4.2 PRINCETON CODE § 2-4.9
BAO:22
legal proceeding arising out of and directly related to the clerk's, deputy
clerk's or assistant to the clerk's lawful exercise of authority in furtherance
of their official duties pursuant to this Code and in accordance with the
requirements and procedures set forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:9-134.1.
§ 2-4.10. Clerk, Deputy Clerk; Assistant to the Clerk; Temporary
Designee. [Ord. No. 2014-8]
During the absence or disability of both the clerk and the deputy clerk,
the assistant to the clerk shall be appointed by the council or the clerk, as
appropriate, in which case the assistant shall have all of the powers and
duties of the clerk. In the absence or disability of all three, a temporary
designee may be appointed by the council or the clerk, as appropriate,
which designee shall have all of the powers and duties of the clerk, provided
that said designee is certified to perform said duties pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:9-133.2.
§ 2-4.9 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-4.10
BAO:23

DIVISION 5
Division of Finance
§ 2-5. Division Created. [Ord. No. 2014-8]
There is hereby established a Division of Finance, in the Department of
Administration and Finance.
§ 2-5.1. Director of Finance - Appointment; Compensation. [Ord.
No. 2014-8]
The administrator may appoint a director of finance to serve as the head
of this division and who shall report to the administrator through the
deputy administrator. If appointed, the director of finance shall supervise
and oversee the chief financial officer, tax collector, tax assessor, human
resources manager, chief information officer, and other employees in the
Division, except as to functions for which such officers or employees have
specific authority granted by New Jersey statute or regulation or this Code.
The director of finance shall receive such compensation as is determined
by the council in the annual salary ordinance. The director of finance may
simultaneously hold another position in Princeton, and shall be qualified as
provided in N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.2 et seq.
§ 2-5.2. Chief Financial Officer. [Ord. No. 2014-8]
A chief financial officer shall be appointed by the council pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.10. In the event there is no director of finance appointed,
the chief financial officer shall serve as the head of the division of finance.
The chief financial officer shall be a person qualified as provided in the
above-referenced statute. The annual compensation for said officer shall be
as established by the council in the annual salary ordinance.
§ 2-5.3. Same - Approval and Payment of Claims. [Ord. No. 2014-8]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:5-17, the chief financial officer is hereby authorized
to approve and pay claims once same have been audited and found correct
in accordance with the following provisions:
(a) The chief financial officer is hereby designated an approval officer with
the title of certifying and approval officer;
(b) As approval officer, the chief financial officer shall prepare
certifications as required by N.J.S.A. 40A:5-16(b); ascertain the
existence of proper and sufficient appropriations for the payments to be
made and determine that there is legal authority for the payments,
evidenced by the action of the purchasing agent in respect to the goods
or services ordered and the incurring of the expense thereafter;
(c) As approval officer, the chief financial officer shall prescribe the
procedure for approving and certifying to the proper municipal officer
claims for payments and drawing the checks therefor;
§ 2-5 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-5.3
BAO:25
§ 2-5.4. Tax Collector. [Ord. No. 2014-8]
The office of tax collector is hereby established, in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40A:9-141 et seq. Performance of the tax collector's official duties shall be
subject to the oversight and requirements of the Director of the Division
of Local Government Services. Performance as a subordinate officer of
the municipality shall be in accordance with the municipality's personnel
policies, and as may be directed by the director of finance or administrator.
§ 2-5.5. Same - Appointment; Qualifications; Term; Vacancy. [Ord.
No. 2014-8]
The tax collector shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and
consent of the council, for a term of four years from the first day of January
next following the appointment. Any person appointed or reappointed as
tax collector shall hold a valid tax collector certificate issued in accordance
with law. Vacancies other than due to expiration of term shall be filled by
appointment for the unexpired term.
§ 2-5.6. Same - Office Hours. [Ord. No. 2014-8]
The council may, by resolution, set appropriate hours of operation of the tax
collector's office and the working hours of the tax collector, commensurate
with the compensation paid to the tax collector, and all personnel assigned
to the tax collector's office.
(d) As approval officer, the chief financial officer shall establish a
procedure for certifying approved claims to the council by continuing to
present to council a bill list which shall be presented to council for
approval;
(e) In addition to the approval of said claims, the chief financial officer shall
be authorized to pay said claims once audited and found correct by
drawing a check on the proper municipal account, signed by the mayor,
the municipal clerk and the said chief financial officer. Prior to paying
any claim, however, the chief financial officer shall contact either the
mayor or council president to receive authorization to issue a check to
pay a claim;
(f) The chief financial officer shall maintain general books of account of all
claims that have been approved and paid as required by the provisions
of the New Jersey Local Fiscal Affairs Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:5-1 et seq.; and
(g) The chief financial officer shall provide certifications and financial and
account information as may be required by the administrator or
designee in connection with purchase of goods and services, in order to
comply with the New Jersey Local Public Contracts Law and Rules, and
other relevant laws.
§ 2-5.3 PRINCETON CODE § 2-5.7
BAO:26
§ 2-5.7. Deputy Tax Collector. [Ord. No. 2014-8]
The position of deputy collector of the municipality is hereby created.
§ 2-5.8. Same - Appointment; Duties. [Ord. No. 2014-8]
A deputy tax collector shall be appointed by the administrator. The person
who shall serve as the deputy tax collector shall perform all duties imposed
by law upon and act in the place of the tax collector during the temporary
absence or disability of the tax collector and shall perform such other duties
as shall be assigned to such person by the tax collector.
§ 2-5.9. Same - Qualifications. [Ord. No. 2014-8]
The qualifications required for a deputy collector shall be determined by
the tax collector and the director of finance based on the needs of the
municipality.
§ 2-5.10. Compensation. [Ord. No. 2014-8]
The tax collector, deputy tax collector and other subordinate personnel shall
be compensated in accordance with the annual salary ordinance.
§ 2-5.11. Municipal Tax Assessor; Office Established; Compensation.
[Ord. No. 2014-8]
The office of municipal tax assessor is hereby established and shall be
maintained for the purpose of assessing real and personal property for
taxation within the municipality, in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:9-146 et
seq. Such office shall consist of a tax assessor, deputy tax assessor, and such
subordinate personnel as may be deemed necessary and proper to perform
the assessment function in accordance with law. The tax assessor, deputy
tax assessor and other subordinate personnel shall be compensated as set
forth in the annual salary ordinance.
§ 2-5.12. Appointment; Qualifications; Term; Duties. [Ord. No.
2014-8]
The mayor, with the advice and consent of the council, shall appoint the tax
assessor, who shall hold office for a term of four years from the first day
of July next following the appointment. At the time of appointment, the tax
assessor must hold a valid tax assessor certificate as required by law. The
assessor shall have the duty of assessing property for the purpose of general
taxation. The mayor, with the advice and consent of the council, may appoint
a deputy tax assessor, who shall serve at the pleasure of the council. At the
time of appointment, the deputy tax assessor must hold a valid tax assessor
certificate as required by law.
§ 2-5.7 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-5.13
BAO:27
§ 2-5.13. Office Hours. [Ord. No. 2014-8]
The council may, by resolution, set the total number of weekly hours of
operation of the tax assessor's office, and the total number of weekly work
hours (but not the specific work hours) of the tax assessor, commensurate
with the compensation paid to the tax assessor.
§ 2-5.13 PRINCETON CODE § 2-5.13
BAO:28
DIVISION 6
Department of Engineering
§ 2-6. Department Created. [Ord. No. 2014-8]
A department of engineering is hereby created, the department head of
which shall be the director of engineering, who shall report to the
administrator except as to the functions for which the engineer has specific
authority granted by statute or ordinance. The director of engineering may
also be referred to as the municipal engineer or engineer.
§ 2-6.1. Qualifications; Appointment; Term; Vacancy. [Ord. No.
2014-8]
The engineer shall be a person qualified and licensed to practice
professional engineering in the state and such person shall possess the
scientific engineering skill that is necessary to qualify such person to
personally perform the duties of the office. Such person shall be appointed
by the mayor with the advice and consent of the council for a term of three
years as the council shall designate, computed from January 1 of the year
in which appointed. Any vacancy in such office occurring other than by
expiration of term shall be filled by the mayor with the advice and consent
of the council for the unexpired portion of the term.
§ 2-6.2. Duties. [Ord. No. 2014-8]
The engineer shall perform or supervise all duties of an engineering nature
pertaining to the office of an engineer of a municipal corporation, except
in particular cases where for special reasons another engineer is employed,
and shall also have such powers and duties as are conferred or imposed
by law or ordinance or as otherwise specified by the council. The engineer,
subject to the oversight of the administrator, shall have full charge and
management of the employees of the office and of the property belonging or
assigned to the engineering department.
Including but not limited to the following, the municipal engineer shall:
(a) Have charge of and be responsible for all municipal engineering for
Princeton, including but not limited to land use engineering,
construction engineering and management, design engineering and
developer compliance;
(b) Have charge of and be responsible for all surveying of streets and shall
keep records thereof;
(c) Have charge of all municipal maps, plans, specifications and
engineering data, except such of these as may, by law or by resolution
of the council, be required to be filed in places other than the
engineering department;
§ 2-6 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-6.2
BAO:29
§ 2-6.3. Records and Reports. [Ord. No. 2014-8]
The engineer shall submit a report to the administrator each month as
to the progress of the work under the engineer's control; and at the end
of each year shall submit an annual summary of the work done by the
department of engineering.
§ 2-6.4. Compensation. [Ord. No. 2014-8]
The engineer shall receive such salary or compensation as shall be fixed and
determined by the council in the annual salary ordinance.
§ 2-6.5. Acting Engineer. [Ord. No. 2014-8]
In case of the absence or disability of the municipal engineer, the
administrator may designate an assistant engineer or other qualified person
as acting municipal engineer, and the acting municipal engineer shall have
and perform all the powers and duties of the municipal engineer when
acting in that capacity.
§ 2-6.6. Engineering Assistants - Employment; Compensation. [Ord.
No. 2014-8]
The engineer is hereby authorized to recommend for employment qualified
assistants who, when approved by the administrator, shall enter upon their
duties as assigned by the engineer and shall receive such compensation
as may be determined by the administrator subject to the annual salary
ordinance. Such assistants shall include but not be limited to a construction
engineer, design engineer and land use engineer.
§ 2-6.7. Same - Delegation of Powers and Duties. [Ord. No. 2014-8]
The engineer is hereby authorized and empowered to delegate to assistants
such of the powers and duties delegated or imposed upon the engineer by
this Code or as, in the engineer's judgment, they are qualified to undertake
and capable of performing in the best interests of the municipality, and
(d) Be responsible for filing all plans and specifications submitted by public
utility companies and make, from time to time, revisions in the
municipal maps that relate to underground utility lines;
(e) Have charge of plans and specifications and select materials, hire
contractors or labor, and supervise all construction work done by or for
the municipality, except when otherwise provided for by law or by the
council, and subject to the limitations of the New Jersey Local Public
Contracts Law;
(f) To the extent permitted by law, oversee the work of the subcode
officials, zoning officer and the municipal inspectors; and
(g) Have charge of the work of the planning department and supervise the
work of the planner.
§ 2-6.2 PRINCETON CODE § 2-6.7
BAO:30
such assistants are hereby authorized and empowered to have and perform
such powers and duties so delegated to them, under the supervision and
direction of the engineer. The engineer shall retain responsibility for all
such work performed by others.
§ 2-6.7 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-6.7
BAO:31

DIVISION 7
Department of Infrastructure and Operations
§ 2-7. Department of Infrastructure and Operations.
§ 2-7.1. Department Created. [Ord. No. 2014-8]
A department of infrastructure and operations is hereby created, the
department head of which shall the director of infrastructure and
operations.
§ 2-7.2. Appointment; Qualifications; Compensation. [Ord. No.
2014-8]
The director of infrastructure and operations shall be appointed by the
mayor with the advice and consent of the council. The director shall be
qualified and have the necessary experience to manage all aspects and
divisions of said department and shall be compensated as provided by the
council in the annual salary ordinance.
§ 2-7.3. Duties. [Ord. No. 2014-8]
The duties and powers of the director of infrastructure and operations shall
include supervisory responsibility for:
§ 2-7.4. Division of public works created. [Ord. No. 2014-8]
In the department of infrastructure and operations, a division of public
works is hereby created. There shall be a superintendent of public works
as supervisor of this division, and except as to any functions for which
the superintendent has specific authority granted by law or ordinance, the
superintendent shall report to the director of infrastructure and operations.
(a) The oversight and efficient operation of the Princeton sanitary and
storm sewer systems;
(b) The oversight and operation of the municipal garage, downtown
parking and supervision of all maintenance and repair work on all cars,
trucks, vehicles, mechanical equipment and tools owned by the
municipality, except as otherwise provided by the council;
(c) The condition of all streets, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, catch basins and
street drains required to be cleaned, constructed, maintained or
repaired by the municipality;
(d) The condition of all buildings and open space owned or controlled by
Princeton; and
(e) Municipal trash and organic waste collections, municipal recycling and
all municipal trees, shrubs and plants.
§ 2-7 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-7.5
BAO:33
§ 2-7.5. Appointment; qualifications; compensation. [Ord. No.
2014-8]
The superintendent shall be appointed by the administrator and shall be
compensated as provided by the council in the annual salary ordinance.
The superintendent shall have the necessary experience and qualifications
to oversee the division of public works and manage and supervise the
care and maintenance of Princeton's roads, streets and sidewalks and their
appurtenances, municipal parking, municipal vehicles, municipal property
and open space, and municipal recycling.
§ 2-7.6. Duties. [Ord. No. 2014-8]
The duties of the superintendent shall include but not be limited to the
following:
§ 2-7.7. Division of Sewer Operations Created. [Ord. No. 2014-8]
In the department of infrastructure and operations, a division of sewer
operations is hereby created. Said division shall have the obligation to
ensure the efficient operation of the Princeton sanitary and storm sewer
systems, as well as their upkeep, maintenance and repair. The director of
infrastructure and operations shall serve as director of said division and
may delegate some or all of his or her duties thereunder.
(a) Operation of the municipal garage and supervision of all maintenance
and repair work on all cars, trucks, vehicles, mechanical equipment and
tools owned by the municipality, except as otherwise provided by the
council;
(b) Responsibility for the cleaning, construction, maintenance and repair of
all streets, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, catch basins and street drains
required to be cleaned, constructed, maintained or repaired by the
municipality;
(c) Responsibility for the making of, or causing to be made, routine
inspections of all buildings owned or controlled by Princeton and
supervision of municipal employees and others in making such repairs
as may be directed by the director of infrastructure and operations. The
superintendent shall inspect and certify as to the satisfactory
completion of such repairs;
(d) Responsibility for all municipal recycling, management of downtown
parking and municipal trees, shrubs and plants; and
(e) Management and supervision of the employees of the division of public
works.
§ 2-7.5 PRINCETON CODE § 2-7.7
BAO:34
DIVISION 8
Department of Emergency and Safety Services
§ 2-8. Department of Emergency and Safety Services.
§ 2-8.1. Department Created. [Ord. No. 2017-55 § 1]
A department of emergency and safety services is hereby created, the
department head of which shall be the director of emergency and safety
services.
§ 2-8.2. Appointment of Department Director; Qualifications;
Compensation. [Ord. No. 2017-55 § 1]
The director of emergency and safety services shall be appointed by the
mayor with the advice and consent of the council. The director shall be
qualified and have the necessary experience to manage all aspects of said
department and shall be compensated as provided by the council in the
annual salary ordinance.
§ 2-8.3. Duties. [Ord. No. 2017-55 § 1]
The director of emergency and safety services shall be responsible for the
office of emergency management, bureau of fire safety, housing inspection
bureau, Princeton fire department, safety compliance for Princeton and
liaison with emergency medical services. The director of emergency and
safety services shall be responsible for the following as set forth in the
position's job description:
(a) Princeton Fire Safety Inspection Unit and Housing Unit. Oversee the
annual development and maintenance of a work plan for the operations
of the bureau including personnel, equipment and facilities. Manage
the fire official and housing inspection manager to ensure compliance
regarding regulations consistent with nationally recognized good
practice and enforcement of New Jersey Uniform Fire Code and local
Fire Code ordinances, the New Jersey Housing Code and Local Housing
Code ordinances.
(b) Emergency Management. Responsible for coordination of services and
planning with the local emergency services, police department, health
department, public schools, colleges and universities and community
groups.
(c) Manage fire department operations including oversight of the budget,
maintenance programs, purchasing, records management, grant
programs, training and supervision of fire line officers and
responsibility for the overall management of fire department
administration and operations.
§ 2-8 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-8.3
BAO:35
§ 2-9. through § 2-25.8. (Reserved) [Reserved by Ord. No. 2014-8]
(d) Responsible for overseeing the employee safety committee and
coordinating safety compliance with all municipal departments. Act as
the safety representative for Princeton on the joint insurance fund.
(e) Other related work as assigned by the Princeton administrator.
§ 2-8.3 PRINCETON CODE § 2-9
BAO:36
ARTICLE III
[Reserved( BRyesOerrdve. dN)o. 2014-8]
§ 2-26. through § 2-50. (Reserved) [Reserved by Ord. No. 2014-8]
§ 2-26 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-26
BAO:37

ARTICLE IV
Administrative Policies
DIVISION 1
Restriction on Payment of Insurance Claims For Fire Damage
§ 2-51. Payment of Fire Insurance Claims Prior to Payment of Taxes
and Assessments Prohibited. [Ord. No. 80-13, § 1]
No insurance company authorized to issue fire insurance policies in the
State of New Jersey shall pay any claim in excess of $2,500 for fire damages
to real property located within the borough, unless or until all taxes,
assessments and other municipal liens or charges due and payable
appearing on the official certificate of search shall have been paid either
by the owner of such property or by the insurance company as provided in
section 3 of P.L. 1978, c. 184; or the municipality submits to the insurance
company a copy of a resolution adopted pursuant to section 4 of P.L. 1978,
c. 184.
§ 2-52. Alteration of Official Certificate of Search. [Ord. No. 80-13,
§ 2]
The official certificate of search may, from time to time, be altered, by
the bonded official responsible for preparing such certificates, in order to
cancel any error or omissions or to add any municipal liens or related
charges due and payable subsequent to the preparation of the official
certificate.
§ 2-53. Appeal on Lien or Charge; Insurance Company to Withhold
Percentage of Amount of Lien; Investment of Withheld Monies.
[Ord. No. 80-13, § 3]
In the event an appeal is taken on the amount of any lien or charge, other
than an appeal on the assessed valuation of real property pursuant to R.S.
54:3-21, the insurance company shall withhold 75% of the full amount of
lien or charge being contested pending termination of all proceedings, at
which time such monies and all interest accruing thereon at a rate paid
on interest bearing accounts in banking institutions or savings and loan
associations in the State of New Jersey, shall be disbursed in accordance
with a final order or judgment of the court.
§ 2-54. Borough Claim to be Paramount; Exception for Holder of
Mortgage. [Ord. No. 80-13, § 4]
Any claim on behalf of the borough made in accordance with the provisions
of this section and P.L. 1978, c. 184 shall be paramount to any other claims
on the proceeds of the fire insurance policy, except the claim of a holder of
a mortgage on the fire damaged property, where the fire insurance policy
at the time of the loss listed the mortgagee as a named insured, in which
event the claim of the mortgagee to the proceeds shall be paramount to
§ 2-51 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-54
BAO:39
the municipal lien only to the extent of the amount due and payable to the
mortgagee under the mortgage contract.
§ 2-55. Applicability. [Ord. No. 80-13, § 5]
All fire insurance policies covering property within the borough, issued or
renewed after the adoption of this section and the filing of a copy of this
section with the State Commissioner of Insurance shall be subject to the
provisions of this section.
§ 2-54 PRINCETON CODE § 2-55
BAO:40
DIVISION 2
Miscellaneous Administrative Fees and Policies
§ 2-56. Maps — Fee. [Ord. No. 82-1, § 1]
The borough clerk shall sell copies of the official zoning map of the borough
adopted pursuant to section 17A-124 as well as copies of the street map of
the borough for a fee of $1 per map.
§ 2-57. Notary Public — Fee. [Ord. No. 82-8, § 1]
There shall be a fee of $1 each time a borough employee notarizes a
document.
§ 2-58. Photocopies — Fee. [Ord. No. 82-8, § 1; Ord. No. 2008-13,
§ I]
The borough shall charge for photocopies of documents as stated in Section
2-95.
§ 2-58.1. Registrar of Vital Statistics Documents — Fee. [Ord. No.
89-8; Ord. No. 2008-13, § I]
The fee for documents produced by the register or vital statistics, the
Princeton Regional Health Commission and the Regional Health
Department shall be as follows:
Certified Copies of Births,
Marriages & Deaths
$25
Additional copies on Certified Paper
(Corrections)
$25
Certification of Vital Records
(informational purposes only)
$15
Corrections $50
§ 2-58.2. Interlocal Services Agreement Regarding Fire Protection
Services. [Ord. No. 93-31, § I]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:8A-1, the Interlocal Services Act,
the Borough of Princeton hereby consents to enter into an interlocal
services agreement with the Township of Princeton, which will provide that
the fire protection services shall be provided by the Borough of Princeton to
the Township of Princeton. A copy of said interlocal services agreement is
annexed to this section and its terms are incorporated by reference herein.2
2. Editor's Note: The agreement referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
borough clerk attached to Ordinance No. 93-31.
§ 2-56 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-58.3
BAO:41
§ 2-58.3. Access to Maps or Digital Files — Fee. [Ord. No. 94-11, § I;
Ord. No. 2008-13, § I]
Copies of maps of various locations in the Borough of Princeton, shall be
available at the fee of $15 for one paper copy and $50 for a mylar print.
Copies of any digital file, including topographic or planimetric maps, tax
maps or other digitally formatted documents, shall be available at the fee of
$500 per file. Each digital sheet shall constitute a separate file. No charge
shall be made to review the maps or digital files. Request for access and/or
copies shall be made through the appropriate form which shall provide for
a full release from the user to the borough in connection with user's review
and usage of the maps or digital files and which shall be available at the
office of the borough engineer.
§ 2-58.4. Smoking Prohibited in Borough Hall. [Ord. 94-17, § I]
Smoking shall be prohibited in borough hall and in the Suzanne Patterson
Center.
§ 2-58.3 PRINCETON CODE § 2-58.4
BAO:42
DIVISION 3
Payment of Bills and Claims
§ 2-59. Use of Borough Vouchers. [Ord. No. 82-31, § 1]
Any person presenting a bill or claim for payment to the borough shall
present same certified to be correct on vouchers to be supplied by the
borough as required by law.
§ 2-60. Same — Verification. [Ord. No. 82-31, § 1; Ord. No. 2001-12,
§ I]
All bills and claims presented for payment shall be submitted on vouchers
to the borough administrator, or in said administrator's absence to the
assistant borough administrator or comptroller. For the purposes of this
section of the Code, the borough administrator and in his absence the
assistant borough administrator or comptroller are hereby designated the
certifying and approving officer as required by N.J.S.A. 40A:5-17(a)(1). It
shall be the responsibility of said certifying and approving officer to verify
that all vouchers submitted do comply with the requirements of state law
and applicable borough ordinances as to content and form; to determine by
certification of a department head or designated officer having knowledge
of the fact that the materials have been received and/or services rendered
to the borough and to ascertain the existence of proper and sufficient
appropriations for the payment to be made of the voucher and to determine
that there is legal authority for said payment to be made as required by law.
§ 2-61. Same — Processing of Voucher. [Ord. No. 82-31, § 1]
Not later than two working days prior to each regular meeting of the mayor
and council, the borough administrator shall submit to the borough clerk
a list of all vouchers to be presented for approval to the governing body
at said regular meeting. A copy of said list shall be made available to each
member of council at least one working day prior to said meeting.
§ 2-62. Same — Council Action. [Ord. No. 82-31, § 1]
At the regular meeting of mayor and council, a motion shall be made to
approve the payment of all vouchers which have been approved for payment
as provided for in sections 2-60 and 2-61 of the Code. The mayor and
council shall vote either in the affirmative or negative as to the entire list
of bills as presented. If a member of the mayor and council is opposed to
payment of one or more vouchers contained on said list, said member shall
vote affirmatively to approve the vouchers contained on said list to which
said member has no objection. If a specific voucher is not approved by a
majority of the mayor and council, said voucher shall not be paid but shall
be referred back to the borough administrator for such further action as
may be directed by the mayor and council.
§ 2-59 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-63
BAO:43
§ 2-63. Same — Payment by Treasurer. [Ord. No. 82-31, § 1]
After action by the mayor and council as provided for in section 2-62
of the Code, the borough clerk shall certify as to which vouchers have
been approved for payment. The borough clerk shall then forward the
voucher to the borough treasurer who shall forthwith prepare the necessary
checks for payment of the vouchers. The checks shall be signed by the
mayor and borough clerk and thereafter countersigned by the treasurer. All
signatures may be affixed to said checks via signature stamp. The borough
administrator shall be responsible for instituting the necessary safeguards
in order to protect the aforementioned signature stamps. After the borough
treasurer prepares the checks for payment, the borough treasurer shall
make a record of said checks in the ledgers maintained by him for this
purpose and thereafter mail or otherwise distribute the checks to the
claimants as set forth on the vouchers.
§ 2-64. Same — Recording of Bills Approved for Payment. [Ord. No.
82-31, § 1]
It shall be the duty of the borough clerk to record in the official minutes
of the mayor and council as to the formal action taken by said mayor
and council to approve the vouchers presented for payment. A list of said
vouchers approved for payment shall be certified by the borough clerk and
made available for public inspection by said clerk as required by law.
§ 2-65. Same — Payroll Vouchers. [Ord. No. 82-31, § 1]
Payroll vouchers shall be prepared and submitted to the mayor and council
for approval by the borough administrator. Said vouchers shall be submitted
to the mayor and council for approval at the next regularly scheduled
meeting of said mayor and council following their submission.
§ 2-63 PRINCETON CODE § 2-65
BAO:44
ARTICLE V
Agencies, Boards, Commissions And Committees
§ 2-66. Municipal Court of Princeton.
See now Ordinance No. 2014-11 §§ 2, 4 and Chapter 12 of the Princeton
Township Code.
§ 2-67. Housing Authority. [Ord. No. 2012-19]
§ 2-68. Environmental Commission.
See now Ordinance No. 2014-17 § 3 and this Code Chapter 12.
§ 2-69. Human Services Commission. [Ord. No. 2012-19]
(a) There is hereby established a housing authority consisting of seven
members. Five members shall be appointed by the governing body, one
by the mayor, and one by the Commissioner of Community Affairs. The
members shall serve for terms of five years and until their respective
successors have been appointed and qualified; except that of the five
members first appointed by the governing body one shall be appointed
for a term of one year, one for a term of two years, one for a term of
three years, one for a term of four years and one for a term of five years.
Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as the original
appointments were made, but for the unexpired term.
(b) No more than one member of the housing authority may be an officer or
employee of the appointing municipality. A certificate of the
appointment or reappointment of any member shall be filed with the
clerk of the municipality and that certificate shall be conclusive
evidence of the due and proper appointment of that member. A member
of an authority shall receive no compensation for his services, but shall
be entitled to reimbursement for actual expenses necessarily incurred
in the discharge of the duties of membership, including travel expenses.
The powers of the authority shall be vested in the members thereof in
office from time to time. Four members shall constitute a quorum of the
authority for the purpose of conducting its business and exercising its
powers and all other purposes. Action may be taken by the authority
upon the affirmative vote of the majority, but not less than four of
the members present, unless in any case the bylaws of the authority
shall require a larger number. The authority shall select a chairperson
and a vicechairperson from among its members, and shall employ an
executive director, who shall be its secretary.
(a) There is hereby established a Human Services Commission consisting
of nine members and one non-voting liaison from the governing body.
On the initial appointment to the commission, three members shall be
appointed for a one-year term; three members shall be appointed for a
§ 2-66 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-69
BAO:45
§ 2-70. Princeton Public Library.
See now Ordinance No. 2014-16 §§ 2 and 3 and Chapter 18, Libraries, of the
Princeton Code.
§ 2-71. Board of Health. [Ord. No. 2012-19]
§ 2-72. Planning Board. [Ord. No. 2012-19]
two-year term; and three members shall be appointed for a three-year
term. All reappointments shall be for a term of three years.
(b) Five members shall serve as a subcommittee of the commission and
serve as the local assistance board.
(a) There is hereby established a Board of Health consisting of seven
members, who shall be appointed by the mayor and council. On the
initial appointment to the board, two members shall be appointed for
one year, two members shall be appointed for two years, and three
members shall be appointed for three years. All reappointments shall
be for a term of three years. The mayor and council also will appoint
two alternates who shall hold office for a term of two years, except that
the terms of the alternate members first appointed shall be two years
for Alternate No. 1 and one year for Alternate No. 2. A vacancy
occurring otherwise than by the expiration of term shall be filled by the
appointing authority for the unexpired term only. The alternates will be
designated as "Alternate 1" and "Alternate 2", respectively, at the time
of appointment.
(b) An alternate member shall not be permitted to act on any matter in
which he has either directly or indirectly any personal or financial
interest. An alternate member may, after public hearing if requested, be
removed by the governing body for cause.
(c) An alternate member may participate in discussions of the proceedings
but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular
member. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular member
may vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a choice
must be made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1
shall vote first.
A. There is hereby established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. in
Princeton a Planning Board of nine members consisting of the following
four classes:
(1) Class I: The Mayor, or the Mayor's designee in the absence of the
Mayor.
(2) Class II: one of the officials of the municipality other than a member
of the governing body to be appointed by the Mayor; provided that
if there is a member of the Environmental Commission who is also a
member of the Planning Board as required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 he
§ 2-69 PRINCETON CODE § 2-72
BAO:46
shall be deemed to be the Class II Planning Board member if there
is both a member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment and a member
of the Board of Education among the Class IV members.
(3) Class III: a member of the governing body to be appointed by it.
(4) Class IV: six other citizens of the municipality to be appointed by
the Mayor. The members of Class IV shall hold no other municipal
office, except that one member may be a member of the Board of
Adjustment and one may be a member of the Board of Education. A
member of the Environmental Commission who is also a member of
the Planning Board as required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 shall be a Class
IV Planning Board member unless there be among the Class IV
members of the Planning Board both a member of the Zoning Board
of Adjustment and a member of the Board of Education, in which
case the member of the Environmental Commission shall be
deemed to be the Class II member of the Planning Board.
B. Alternates: In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23.1, there are hereby
created two alternate memberships to the Princeton Planning Board.
Alternate members shall be appointed by the appointing authority for
Class IV members and shall meet the qualifications for Class IV
members of the nine-member Planning Board. Alternate members shall
be designated at the time of appointment by the Mayor as "Alternate
No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2." The terms of the alternate members shall
be for two years, except that the terms of the alternate members shall
be such that the term of not more than one alternate member shall
expire in any one year; provided, however, that in no instance shall the
terms of the alternate members first appointed exceed two years. A
vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled
by the appointing authority for the unexpired term only.
(1) No alternate member shall be permitted to act on any matter in
which he has either directly or indirectly any personal or financial
interest. An alternate member may, after public hearing if he
requests one, be removed by the governing body for cause.
(2) Alternate members may participate in discussions of the
proceedings but may not vote except in the absence or
disqualification of a regular member of any class. A vote shall not
be delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead of an
alternate member. In the event that a choice must be made as to
which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote.
(3) All regular and alternate members except the Class II member shall
be residents of Princeton.
(4) Except as otherwise permitted class IV members and alternate
members shall hold no other municipal office. For purposes of this
section membership on a municipal board or commission whose
function is advisory in nature, and the establishment of which is
§ 2-72 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-72
BAO:47
discretionary and not required by statute, shall not be considered
the holding of municipal office.
(a) When any hearing before the planning board shall carry over to
two or more meetings, a member or alternate member of the
board who was absent for one or more of the meetings, who is
otherwise eligible to vote, shall be eligible to vote on the
matter upon which the hearing was conducted,
notwithstanding his or her absence from one or more of the
meetings; provided, however, that such member has available
a transcript or recording of the meeting from which he or she
was absent and certifies, in writing, to the board that he or she
has read such transcript or listened to such recording.
(b) Members of the planning board shall serve without
compensation, but may be reimbursed for expenses authorized
in advance and incurred in the performance of their duties.
(c) No member shall be permitted to act on any matter in which he
or she has, directly or indirectly, any personal or financial
interest.
(d) Except for members exempted by statute from this
requirement, any person who serves as a member or alternate
member of the planning board shall be required to complete an
approved basic course in land-use law and planning within 18
months of his or her appointment.
C. Terms.
(1) The term of the member composing Class I shall correspond with
the Mayor's official tenure or if the member is the Mayor's designee
in the absence of the Mayor, the designee shall serve at the
pleasure of the Mayor during the Mayor's official tenure. The terms
of the members composing Class II and Class III shall be for one
year or terminate at the completion of their respective terms of
office, whichever occurs first.
(2) The terms of all Class IV members first appointed pursuant to this
chapter shall be so determined that to the greatest practicable
extent, the expiration of such term shall be evenly distributed over
the first four years after their appointment as determined by
resolution of the Township Council; provided, however, that no
term of any member shall exceed four years and further provided
that nothing herein shall affect the term of any present member of
the Planning Board, all of whom shall continue in office until the
completion of the term for which they were appointed. Thereafter,
all Class IV members shall be appointed for terms of four years
except as otherwise herein provided. All terms shall run from
January 1 of the year in which the appointment was made.
§ 2-72 PRINCETON CODE § 2-72
BAO:48
§ 2-73. Site Plan Review Advisory Board. [Ord. No. 2012-19]
An advisory committee to be known as the site plan review advisory board
(SPRAB) is hereby created for purpose of reviewing site plans and making
recommendation in regard thereto. It shall consist of eight regular members
and two alternate members. Six of the regular members and the two
alternate members shall be appointed by the mayor. Two of the regular
members shall be appointed by the environmental commission from among
its members each to serve for a term of one year. The term of office of
(3) The term of any alternate member shall be two years, and their
terms shall be staggered.
(4) Removal from Office. Any member including an alternate member
of the planning board, other than the class I member may be
removed by the council for cause, after a public hearing, if he or
she requests one.
(5) Vacancies. If a vacancy in any class of the planning board shall
occur other than by expiration of the term, it shall be filled by
appointment, as provided herein, for the unexpired term.
D. Organization of the Board.
(1) The planning board shall elect a chairman and vice chairman from
the members of Class IV, select a secretary who may or may not be
a member or alternate member of the planning board or a
municipal employee, and create and fill such other offices as
established by ordinance. An alternate member shall not serve as
chairman or vice chairman of the planning board.
(2) The planning board may annually appoint, fix the compensation of
or agree upon the rate of compensation of the planning board
attorney, who shall be an attorney other than the township
attorney.
E. Members of board of adjustment serving as temporary members of the
planning board.
(1) If the planning board lacks a quorum because any of its regular or
alternate members is prohibited by subsection b of section 14 of
P.L. 1975, c.291 (C.40:55D-23) or section 13 of P.L. 1979, c.216
(C.40:55D-23.1) from acting on a matter due to the member's
personal or financial interests therein, regular members of the
board of adjustment shall be called upon to serve, for that matter
only, as temporary members of the planning board in order of
seniority of continuous service to the board of adjustment until
there are the minimum number of members necessary to constitute
a quorum to act upon the matter without any personal or financial
interest therein, whether direct or indirect. If a choice has to be
made between regular members of equal seniority, the chairman of
the board of adjustment shall make the choice.
§ 2-72 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-73
BAO:49
the other regular members of the site plan review advisory board shall
be four years, and the term of office of the alternate members shall be
two years. The terms of office shall be computed from the first day of
January of the year of each appointment. Of the first regular members
appointed by the mayor, one shall be for a term of one year, two for a
term of two years, one for a term of three years, and two for a term of
four years. Of the first appointments of alternate members, one shall be
for a term of one year and one for a term of two years. At the time of
their appointments, alternate members shall be designated as "Alternate
No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2." Vacancies in regular or alternate membership
shall be filled in the same manner as appointments are made, and those
occurring other than by expiration of term shall be filled for the unexpired
term only. Members shall serve after the expiration of their terms until
their successors shall be appointed and qualified. Insofar as practicable,
appointees shall be architects, landscape architects, planners, engineers
or other persons qualified in site planning or sustainable design or
environmental design or protection. Alternate members may participate in
discussions of the proceedings but may not vote except in the absence or
disqualification of a regular member. A vote shall not be delayed in order
that a regular member may vote instead of an alternate member. In the
event that a choice must be made as to which alternate member is to vote,
Alternate No. 1 shall vote first.
§ 2-74. (Reserved)
Reserved by Ord. No. 2016-13 § 3. See Princeton Township Code Chapter
5A.1 for Construction Board of Appeals provisions.
§ 2-75. Historic Preservation Review Commission. [Ord. No.
2012-19]
Historic Preservation Commission Established. An agency to be known as
the historic preservation commission is hereby established. The commission
shall consist of seven regular members and two alternate members who
shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the
governing body.
(1) At least one member of the Historic Preservation Commission shall
belong to each of the following classes:
CLASS A - A person who is knowledgeable in building design and
construction or architectural history and who may reside outside the
municipality; and
CLASS B - At least one person who is knowledgeable or with a
demonstrated interest in local history and who may reside outside the
municipality.
CLASS C - Those regular members who are not designated as Class A
or B. Class C members shall be the citizens of the municipality who
shall hold no other office, position or employment in the municipality
§ 2-73 PRINCETON CODE § 2-75
BAO:50
except for membership on the planning board or board of adjustment.
If possible, Class C members shall be knowledgeable in local history,
history of landscape design, archaeology, architectural history, or
building design. At least one of the regular members shall, if possible,
be an owner of a residence within a historic preservation district. At
least one of the Class A or B members shall, if possible, be a member of
the site plan review advisory board. Alternate members shall meet the
qualifications of Class C members.
(2) Alternate members shall meet the qualifications of Class C members.
The mayor with the advice of the governing body shall appoint all
members of the Historic Preservation Commission and shall designate
at the time of appointment the regular members by class and the
alternate members as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2". Of the
regular members first appointed, one shall have a term of one year, one
shall have a term of two years, one shall have a term of three years, and
four shall have a term of four years; and, in the case of alternate
members, Alternate No. 2 shall have a term of one year and Alternate
No. 1 shall have a term of two years. Thereafter, the term of a regular
member shall be four years, and the term of an alternate member shall
be two years. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of term
shall be filled for the unexpired term only in the same manner as the
initial appointment subject to the continuing requirements concerning
the appointment of members. Notwithstanding any other provision
herein, the term of any member common to the historic preservation
commission and the planning board shall be for the terms of
membership on the planning board; and the term of any member
common to the historic preservation commission and the board of
adjustment shall be for the term of membership on the board of
adjustment.
(3) The historic preservation commission shall elect a chair and vice chair
from its members and select a municipal employee for a secretary who
would work for the Commission.
(4) Alternate members may participate in discussions of the proceedings,
but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular
member. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular member
may vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a choice
must be made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1
shall vote.
(5) No member shall be permitted to act on any matter in which he has,
either directly or indirectly, any personal or financial interest.
(6) A member may, after public hearing if he or she requests it, be removed
by the governing body for cause including but not limited to failure to
attend regular Commission meetings.
(7) Members shall serve without compensation but may, within budgetary
limitations, be reimbursed for authorized expenses incurred.
§ 2-75 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-75
BAO:51
§ 2-76. Zoning Board of Adjustment. [Ord. No. 2012-19]
(8) The governing body shall appoint annually one of its members as liaison
to the commission. Said liaison shall not be considered a member of the
commission and shall not vote on commission matters.
A. Zoning board of adjustment established; composition; terms, vacancies;
disqualification of members; alternate members. The zoning board of
adjustment is hereby established pursuant to the Municipal Land Use
Law as the board of adjustment for the municipality.
(1) The board shall consist of seven regular members and two
alternate members.
(2) Regular members shall be appointed by the governing body for
terms of four years each, computed from January 1 of the year of
their appointment; except that full terms of regular members filled
for the first time under this chapter shall be so fixed (for four or less
years) and so arranged that, to the greatest practicable extent, the
expiration of all terms of regular members will be distributed
evenly over the first four years after the initial appointment under
this chapter.
(3) Alternate members shall also be appointed by the governing body,
and their terms shall be two years each, computed from January 1
of the year of their appointment, except that of the appointments to
alternate membership first made under this chapter, one shall be
for a term of one year.
(4) A vacancy occurring in either type of membership otherwise than
by expiration of term shall be filled for the unexpired term only.
(5) No regular or alternate member may hold any elective office or
position under the municipality nor shall any member be permitted
to act on any matter in which he has, directly or indirectly, any
personal or financial interest.
(6) Alternate members shall be designated by the governing body at
the time of their appointment as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate
No. 2."
(7) Alternate members may participate in discussions of the
proceedings but may not vote except in the absence or
disqualification of a regular member. A vote shall not be delayed in
order that a regular member may vote instead of an alternate
member. In the event that a choice must be made as to which
alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote.
B. Officers. The board of adjustment shall elect a chair and a vice-chair
from among its members and shall also select a secretary, who may but
need not be a member of the board.
§ 2-75 PRINCETON CODE § 2-77
BAO:52
§ 2-77. Corner House Board.
See now Ordinance No. 2014-13 §§ 2, 3 and Chapter 27A of the Princeton
Borough Code.
§ 2-78. (Reserved) [Reserved by Ord. No. 2015-45 § 2]
§ 2-79. (Reserved) [Reserved by Ord. No. 2014-41]
§ 2-80. Bicycle Advisory Committee. [Ord. No. 2012-19; Ord. No.
2016-14 § 1; Ord. No. 2019-5]
There is hereby established a Bicycle Advisory Committee consisting of
seven regular members. There shall also be one non-voting liaison from the
school district and one non-voting liaison from the engineering department.
The regular members shall be appointed to three-year terms except that
the initial appointment shall be staggered so that no more than two terms
expire each year.
The responsibilities and authority of the Committee shall be as dictated by
the Council from time to time, as may be necessary.
§ 2-81. Sewer Operating Committee. [Ord. No. 2012-19]
There is hereby established a Sewer Operating Committee consisting of two
regular members, at least one of which with civil engineering or municipal
waste experience, and two voting liaison members from the governing body.
Of the two regular members, initially one shall be appointed for two years
and one shall be appointed for three years. Thereafter, each appointment
shall be for a term of three years. The liaison representatives shall be
appointed annually by the governing body and serve a one-year term.
§ 2-82. Affordable Housing Board. [Ord. No. 2012-19]
(a) Formation; Composition; Terms, Vacancies; Compensation.
(1) There is hereby established an Affordable Housing Board
consisting of seven regular and up to two alternate members. At
least one regular member shall be a member of the governing body
and may be the mayor.
(2) The term of the member of the governing body shall correspond to
his or her official tenure. The terms of the remaining regular and
alternate members shall be three years, computed from the first
day of January of the year of appointment, provided that the terms
of such members are staggered so that no more than two terms
expire each year. If a vacancy occurs among such members, it shall
be filled for the unexpired term only. Members shall serve after the
expiration of their terms until their successors have been appointed
and qualified.
§ 2-77 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-82
BAO:53
§ 2-83. Shade Tree Commission.
See now Ordinance No. 2014-26 §§ 1, 2 and Chapter 22 of the Princeton
Township Code.
§ 2-84. Citizens' Finance Advisory Committee. [Ord. No. 2012-19;
Ord. No. 2018-1]
Alternate members shall be designated at the time of appointment
as "alternate number 1" and "alternate number 2". Alternate
members may participate in discussions of the proceedings
involving the board but may not vote except in the absence or
disqualification of a regular member. Alternates shall be counted
for purposes of establishing a quorum for the board. In the event
that a choice must be made as to which alternate member is to
vote, alternate number 1 shall vote.
(3) All members shall serve without salary, but may be paid expenses
incurred in the performance of duties.
(b) Officers. The board shall elect a chairperson and a vice-chairperson
from among its members. Their terms of office shall be one year, and
they shall be eligible for reelection. The board shall also elect a
secretary, who may but need not be a member of the board, and it may
create and fill such other offices as it shall determine.
(a) There is hereby established a Citizens' Finance Advisory Committee
consisting of six members and a minimum of one non-voting liaison
from the Governing Body. Appropriate municipal staff as designated by
the Administrator shall be assigned to attend meetings of the
Committee.
(b) The members should have, but are not required to have, experience in
one of the following disciplines: accounting, business administration,
finance, corporate financial planning, marketing research, marketing,
economics or computer science.
(c) Members shall serve for a term of three years computed from January 1
of the year of their appointment, except that terms filled for the first
time shall be so fixed (for three years or less) and arranged so that, to
the greatest practicable extent, no more than two members' terms shall
expire in the same year.
(d) A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of a term shall be
filled for the unexpired term only.
(e) The members shall serve without compensation.
(f) The Mayor is hereby authorized and empowered to adjust the terms of
the current members of the citizens finance advisory committee as
needed to ensure that no more than two members' terms shall expire in
the same year.
§ 2-82 PRINCETON CODE § 2-85
BAO:54
§ 2-85. Flood and Storm Water Commission. [Ord. No. 2012-19]
There is hereby established a Flood and Storm Water Commission
consisting of seven members, including one member of the Environmental
Commission and one member from the governing body. There shall also be a
non-voting liaison from the Engineering Department. The regular members
shall be appointed to three-year terms except that the initial appointments
shall be staggered so that no more than three regular member terms expire
each year.
§ 2-86. (Reserved) [Ord. No. 2012-19; reserved by Ord. No. 2017-2]
§ 2-87. Public Safety Committee. [Ord. No. 2012-19]
There is hereby established a Public Safety Committee consisting of four
members, including the mayor and administrator, both ex officio, and two
members of the governing body. The terms of the appointed members shall
expire on the first day of January next following their appointments, but
they shall serve after the expiration of their terms until their successors
shall have been appointed and qualified. Any vacancy in any of the
appointive offices shall be filled in like manner, but for the unexpired term
only. One of the appointed members shall be designated as the police
commissioner, and in that capacity such member shall be the chairperson
of the public safety committee. The public safety committee shall have the
powers and duties prescribed by law.
§ 2-88. Complete Streets Committee. [Ord. No. 2012-19; Ord. No.
2016-14 § 2; Ord. No. 2017-28]
There is hereby established a Complete Streets Committee consisting of
nine regular members who are residents. The Complete Streets Committee
shall consist of a chairperson and vice-chairperson; three members at large;
two members of the Bicycle Advisory Committee; and two members of the
Public Transit Advisory Committee. Of the regular members first appointed,
two shall have a term of one year, three shall have a term of two years
and four shall have a term of three years; thereafter, the term of a regular
member shall be three years. A majority of the committee shall constitute
a quorum for the conduct of business. All members of the committee shall
serve after the expiration of their terms and until their successors shall be
appointed and qualified. Vacancies occurring other than by expiration of
term shall be filled for the unexpired term only. Members shall be removed
for cause upon written charges after hearing. Members shall serve without
compensation, but shall be entitled to reimbursement within budgetary
limitations for reasonable and necessary expenses incurred by them in the
performance of their duties.
In addition to the regular membership, there shall also be non-voting
liaisons from Council, the Traffic Safety Committee, the Police Department,
the Planning Board and Princeton University.
§ 2-85 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-88
BAO:55
The Committee shall meet at least four times per year. The responsibilities
and authority of the Committee shall be as dictated by the Council from time
to time, as may be necessary.
§ 2-89. Animal Control Advisory Committee. [Ord. No. 2012-19]
There is hereby established an Animal Control Advisory Committee
consisting of two residents ("citizen members"), at least one of whom has
expertise in animal biology or control; the Animal Control Officer; the
Administrator or his or her designee; and a non-voting liaison from the
governing body. The citizen members shall be appointed for three-year
terms except that the initial appointments shall be for a two-year term and
a three-year term.
§ 2-90. Rental Housing Board. [Ord. No. 2012-19]
§ 2-90A. Youth Advisory Committee. [Ord. No. 2016-06]
(a) The Rental Housing Board shall consist of seven regular members who
shall be residents of the municipality holding no other municipal office
or employment. Of the regular members first appointed, one shall have
a term of one year, two shall have a term of two years and four shall
have a term of three years. Thereafter, the term of a regular member
shall be three years. Two regular members shall be tenants, two regular
members shall be landlords who own dwelling units in the municipality
and three regular members shall be neither a tenant nor landlord. A
majority of the board shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of
business provided at least one landlord member and one tenant
member are present.
(b) All members shall serve after the expiration of their terms until their
successors shall be appointed and qualified. Vacancies occurring other
than by expiration of term shall be filled for the unexpired term only.
Members may be removed for cause upon written charges and after
hearing. Members shall serve without compensation but shall be
entitled to reimbursement, within budgetary limitations, for reasonable
and necessary expenses incurred by them in the performance of their
duties.
(a) Established. There is hereby established a Youth Advisory Committee.
(b) Membership; Terms of Office; Ex-Officio Members. The Youth Advisory
Committee shall consist of 12 students and up to five adult liaisons
appointed in accordance herewith on or before June 1 of each year. The
Mayor shall appoint, with the advice and consent of Council, the
student members of the Committee from a list of qualified applicants
who have submitted an application. Student members must be
residents of the municipality and must be high school students entering
grades nine through 12 in the fall of the same year. Every effort will be
made to appoint a diverse group of students and to evenly distribute
appointments geographically. Members shall serve four-year terms or
§ 2-88 PRINCETON CODE § 2-90A
BAO:56
§ 2-90B. Public Transit Advisory Committee. [Ord. No. 2016-14 § 3;
Ord. No. 2019-3 § 1]
There is hereby established a Public Transit Advisory Committee. The
Committee shall consist of five regular members, up to two alternative
members, and such non-voting liaisons consisting of staff, representatives
from Princeton University and the Greater Mercer Transportation
Management Association, and other resource persons, as may be
until graduation, whichever comes first. If any member shall fail to
attend two consecutive meetings, or more than half of the meetings
in one academic year without just cause, then said member shall be
replaced by the Mayor. Notwithstanding any provision of this section,
all members shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor and Council.
The Mayor, with the advice and consent of Council, shall appoint one
elected official as a non-voting liaison. The Administrator shall appoint
two staff members as non-voting liaisons, including at least one staff
member from the Department of Health, Youth, and Community
Services. The Chief of Police shall appoint one officer from the Safe
Neighborhoods Unit as a non-voting liaison. There may also be one nonvoting
liaison from the Princeton Public Schools.
(c) Organization; Meetings; Quorum; Votes.
(1) The Youth Advisory Committee shall meet for the purpose of
organization in August of each year. The Youth Advisory Committee
shall elect its own officers who shall include a chair, vice-chair, and
secretary.
(2) The Youth Advisory Committee is a public body and shall meet once
to twice a month, August through June. A special meeting may be
called by the chair, vice-chair or three members of the Youth
Advisory Committee. Minutes shall be kept by the secretary and
filed with the Municipal Clerk.
(3) A quorum shall consist of more than 50% of the student members
currently appointed plus one adult member.
(d) Duties. The duties of the Youth Advisory Committee shall be to advise
the Mayor and Council in issues of interest to youth. This may include
recommending policies and sponsoring educational, informational, and/
or social events for youth.
(e) Authority. The Youth Advisory Committee has no special authority.
(f) Reports. The Youth Advisory Committee shall prepare and present an
annual report to the Mayor and Council between June 1 and August 1 of
each year. The report shall include accomplishments of the past school
year and goals for the next academic year. Additional special reports
and recommendations may be made to the Mayor and Council as the
need arises in the judgment of the Youth Advisory Committee or at the
specific request of the Mayor and Council.
§ 2-90A BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-90B
BAO:57
appropriate. The purpose of the Public Transit Advisory Committee is to
work cooperatively with Princeton University, the Greater Mercer
Transportation Association and other transit development resources to
study and make recommendations for improvements in transit services in
Princeton.
Regular and alternate members shall be appointed to three-year terms
except that the initial appointment shall be staggered so that no more than
two terms of regular members expire each year.
Alternate members shall be designated at the time of appointment as
"alternate number 1" and "alternate number 2". Alternate members may
participate in discussions of the proceedings involving the Committee but
may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member.
Alternates shall be counted for purposes of establishing a quorum for the
Committee. In the event that a choice must be made as to which alternate
member is to vote, alternate number 1 shall vote.
The responsibilities and authority of the Committee shall be as dictated by
the Council from time to time, as may be necessary.
§ 2-90C. Civil Rights Commission. [Ord. No. 2016-38; Ord. No.
2019-4]
(a) Established. There is hereby established a Civil Rights Commission.
(b) Membership; Terms of Office; Ex-officio Members. The Commission
shall consist of nine members appointed by the Mayor with the advice
and consent of the Council, all of whom shall be residents of Princeton.
Every effort will be made to appoint a diverse group of residents to
ensure to the greatest extent practicable that all segments of
Princeton's population are represented. In addition, members shall
have prior experience in advancing the objectives of the Civil Rights
Commission as expressed in this chapter, including but not limited to
experience with assisting resolve complaints by persons claiming to be
aggrieved by discrimination. On the initial formation of the
Commission, three members shall be appointed for a one-year term,
three members shall be appointed for a two-year term, and three
members shall be appointed for a three-year term. All appointments or
reappointments thereafter shall be for a three-year term. The Mayor,
with the advice and consent of Council, shall appoint annually one of its
members to serve as liaison to the Commission, but said liaison shall
not be considered a member of the Commission and shall not vote on
Commission matters.
(c) Organization; Meetings; Quorum; Votes.
(1) The Commission shall hold an initial organization meeting within
30 days of the date on which the Commission members are first
appointed, and shall meet thereafter for the purpose of
organization in January of each year. The Commission shall elect its
§ 2-90B PRINCETON CODE § 2-90C
BAO:58
own officers, which shall include a chair, vice-chair, and secretary.
At its first meeting each year, it shall also appoint its members to
serve on Subcommittees authorized herein.
(2) The Commission shall be deemed a public body and shall meet at
least once per month. A special meeting may be called by the chair,
vice-chair or three members of the Commission. Minutes shall be
kept by the secretary and filed with the Municipal Clerk.
(3) A quorum shall consist of a majority of the authorized members of
the Commission.
(d) Objectives; Duties and Responsibilities.
(1) The objectives of the Commission shall be to:
a. Work cooperatively among people and groups to aid in the
elimination discrimination between people based on ascribed
characteristics including but not limited to: race, creed, color,
national origin, ancestry, age, marital status, civil union status,
domestic partnership status, affectional or sexual orientation,
genetic information, pregnancy, sex, gender identity or
expression, disability or atypical hereditary cellular or blood
trait of any individual, or because of the liability for service in
the Armed Forces of the United States or the nationality of any
individual.
b. Develop community education programs that foster open and
effective dialogues about race relations.
c. Recommend ways and means of initiating and improving
municipal programs for coordination of community efforts to
address problems involving tensions in the community.
d. Make recommendations to Princeton Mayor and Council for
the development of policies, procedures and programs that will
aid in the prevention and elimination of all types of
discrimination in Princeton.
e. The Commission shall refer all Princeton officers and
employees to the Affirmative Action Officer to initially counsel
and investigate all complaints of discrimination involving such
officers and/or employees in accordance with Princeton's
policies and procedures.
(2) To achieve these objectives, the Commission shall:
a. Develop mutual understanding and respect among all racial,
religious, cultural and ethnic groups in Princeton and work to
prevent discriminatory practices against such groups.
b. Aid in seeing that no person is deprived of equal services in
this Municipality by reason of discrimination on account of
§ 2-90C BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-90C
BAO:59
race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry, age, marital status,
civil union status, domestic partnership status, affectional or
sexual orientation, genetic information, pregnancy, sex, gender
identity or expression, disability or atypical hereditary cellular
or blood trait of any individual, or because of the liability
for service in the Armed Forces of the United States or the
nationality of any individual.
c. Take an active role in promoting and protecting civil rights by
either initiating community dialogues and/or collaborating
with other organizations to co-sponsor relevant programs and
events.
d. Formulate, develop and disseminate programs of community
information, education materials and reports which will assist
in the elimination of prejudice, intolerance, intergroup tension
and discrimination or which promote goodwill and result in
better human relations.
e. Assist community groups and various fraternal, services and
benevolent organizations in the promotion of education
campaigns devoted to the elimination of groups prejudices,
racial or neighborhood tensions, intolerance and
discrimination.
f. Offer to the public voluntary, non-binding conflict resolution
("VNCR"). The goal of VNCR shall be to enable the Commission
to assist in the expeditious, informal resolution of complaints
by any person claiming to be aggrieved by discrimination.
VNCR shall be conducted as set forth below:
1. Any commissioner who wishes to participate in VNCR
sessions may do so following training by the New Jersey
State Division of Civil Rights. At least two trained
Commissioners shall participate in every VNCR session.
The Commission chair may select groups of two or three
Commissioners each who shall participate together in
VNCR sessions.
2. A VNCR session is designed to be a facilitated dialog at
which participants are able to reach a mutually agreedupon
remedy or resolution to the matter. The remedy or
resolution may include, but shall not be limited to, an
acknowledgment and apology and/or a commitment to
change procedures to prevent future incidents.
3. To the extent permitted by law, VNCR sessions shall be
undertaken in a confidential and private manner.
4. The Commission may suspend or terminate a VNCR
session or process for any given matter if the session/
process cannot be concluded as intended under the
§ 2-90C PRINCETON CODE § 2-90C
BAO:60
provisions of this subparagraph (2)f., in which case the
commission shall provide the parties with alternative
options.
5. If the parties are unable to expeditiously resolve a matter
that was subject to VNCR, then the parties may agree to
have the matter referred to outside mediation. In such a
case the Commission will offer the parties with a list of
volunteer certified mediators who will be available at no
cost to the parties.
6. Notwithstanding the provisions of this subparagraph (2)f.,
at all times the person claiming discrimination retains the
right to pursue a formal claim with the State Division of
Civil Rights or any court of competent jurisdiction. Any
pending VNCR involving that person shall automatically
terminate if the person pursues either complaint
procedures.
7. VNCR sessions shall also be conducted in accordance with
any other guidelines, policies and procedures established
by the Mayor and Council.
(e) Authority. The Commission shall have no special authority.
(f) Reports. The Commission shall prepare and present an annual report of
the Commission's activities to the Mayor and Council between January
1 and March 1 of each year. The Commission may submit additional
reports and recommendations to the Mayor and Council concerning
problems relating to discrimination, racial tension, and other human
relations concerns as the need arises in the judgment of the
Commission or at the specific request of the Mayor and Council. Copies
of all such reports and recommendations shall be filed with the
Department of Human Services and with the Princeton Clerk.
§ 2-90C BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-90C
BAO:61

ARTICLE VI
Miscellaneous Fees
§ 2-91. Marriage and Civil Union Ceremonies. [Ord. No. 2018-17]
§ 2-92. (Reserved) [Reserved by Ord. No. 2015-41 § 5]
§ 2-93. (Reserved) [Reserved by Ord. No. 2015-44 § 4]
§ 2-94. Fire Safety Permit Fees. [Ord. No. 2012-21]
The permit fees shall be those set forth in the Uniform Fire Code, N.J.A.C.
5:71-2.3(b)(4) and N.J.A.C. 5:71-2.8(b):
Type I $100
Type II $200
Type III $350
Type IV $600
Inspection Fees for non-life hazard uses
Under 500 square feet $100
500-999 square feet $125
1,000-4,999 square feet $275
5,000-10,000 square feet $350
10,001-20,000 square feet $520
20,001-50,000 square feet $572
50,0001-100,000 square feet $624
(a) Persons seeking to be married or joined in civil union by the Mayor of
Princeton or, in the Mayor's absence or unavailability, the Council
President, shall remit a fee of $50 for Princeton residents and $200 for
non-Princeton residents. This fee shall be in addition to statutory
license and other fees required by law.
(b) The fee shall be payable to the Municipality of Princeton. All fees
collected shall be deposited in Princeton's current fund, to be used
solely for the Human Services Emergency Fund. No portion of the fee
shall be disbursed to the Mayor or Council President, whether as
compensation or as reimbursement for expenses.
(c) No other honorarium for the performance of a marriage or civil union
ceremony shall be solicited. Any honorarium that is voluntarily
tendered may be accepted by Princeton and deposited in the general
fund, to be used in the same manner as the fees set forth in subsection
2-91(b) above, or may be rejected and returned in the sole discretion of
the Mayor or Council President performing the ceremony.
§ 2-91 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-94
BAO:63
*An additional $75 for each additional 50,000 square feet or parts thereof
above 100,000 square feet will be added to cover the expense of
performing the fire safety inspection.
One and two story parking decks will be charged a flat fee of $55 per
deck. Three or more multiple story parking decks will be charged a flat
fee $110 per deck.
Inspection Fees for multifamily, rooming and boarding houses (non-life
hazard uses)
2 to 5 units $30 per unit
6 to 19 units $40 per unit
20 or more units $50 per unit
Miscellaneous Fees under N.J.A.C. 5:71 et seq.
Variance review fee $50
Fire code status fee $35
Failure to register non-life hazard $250
§ 2-95. Government and Police Records Fees. [Ord. No. 2012-21]
(a) Fee Schedule. The fees for copies of government records shall be:
Black and white photocopies of
records in 8.5" x 11"
$0.05 per page
Black and white photocopies of
records in 8.5" x 14" and 11" x
17"
$0.07 per page
Color photocopies Actual costs of duplication as
charged to the municipality
Maps:
24" x 36" tax and other maps $0.50 per page
36" x 36" tax and other maps $0.70 per page
36" x 44" street maps $0.85 per page
8.5" x 11", 8.5" x 14" or Fees per page in accordance with
subsection (a)(1) with subsection
(a)(1)
11" x 17" maps
Full set of tax maps (24" x 36") $95
Full set of tax maps (11" x 17") $23.75
Tax map overlays: Fees per page in accordance with
subsection (a)(4)
§ 2-94 PRINCETON CODE § 2-95
BAO:64
Individual print out of tax map
overlay
Including topographical
information
$7 per acre
Topographical maps (24" x 36"
sheets)
$7 per acre
Land Use Code Book $175 plus supplements
General Ordinances Code Book $250 plus supplements
Land Use Code Book Supplements Fees per page in accordance with
subsection (a)(1)
General Ordinances Code
Supplements
Fees per page in accordance with
subsection (a)(1)
Master Plan Actual costs of duplication as
charged to the municipality
Audiotapes $1.25 per tape
CDs/DVDs $1 per cd/dvd
Duplicate Tax Bill (carbon copy) $5
Duplicate Tax Sales Certificate $100
Police department records
Videotapes/Digital Records $8
Audiotapes $15
Certified copy of docket entry $5
MDT transcripts $8
Photographs Actual costs of duplication as
charged to the municipality
All other records Actual costs of duplication as
charged to the municipality
(b) Postage. Postage costs will be added to fees for copies of records
requested to be mailed and will be determined at the time of the
request.
(c) Miscellaneous charges for nongovernment records.
Police department
Good conduct letters $10
Special events permit $25
Firearms identification card $5
Permit to purchase firearm $2
State firearms fee $25
§ 2-95 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-95
BAO:65
§ 2-96. Housing Inspection Fees. [Ord. No. 2012-21]
Certificate of Compliance
Structures (1 or 2 dwelling units) $175 per unit
Multiple dwelling structures (3 or
more units)
$175 per unit
Reinspections
First reinspection $100 per unit
Second reinspection $150 per unit
Third and subsequent reinspections $250 per unit
§ 2-97. (Reserved) [Ord. No. 2012-21; repealed by Ord. No. 218-12]
§ 2-98. Peddler, Solicitor, Transient Merchant License.
See now Ordinance No. 2014-12 §§ 3, 4 and Princeton Township Code
Section 2-125.
§ 2-99. Street and Sidewalk Opening and Occupation Fees. [Ord.
No. 2012-21; Ord. No. 2018-12]
Application Fee - When No Road
Closure Required
$100
Application Fee — When Road
Closure Required
$200
Municipal Restoration Fee $7 per square foot (min. charge
$400)
§ 2-100. Taxicabs and Other Vehicles for Hire. [Ord. No. 2012-21]
Taxicab license $50
Livery license $35
Police department
Mental health search fee $15
Temporary parking permit $4
Fingerprinting for resident $10
DWI discovery $25
All other discovery $15
Returned check (NSF, Stop
Payment, etc.)
$25
§ 2-95 PRINCETON CODE § 2-100
BAO:66
Taxicab or livery license issued to
holder of license
$15
All other licenses $25
Duplicate license $10
§ 2-101. Land Use Application and Escrow Fees. [Ord. No. 2012-21]
Fee Plus Escrow Account
Accessory structure $60 $0
Additions $200 $0
One- or two-family
dwelling
$500 $0
Conditional Use $375 $1,000
Section 10B-20(c)
zoning relief
$200 per variance
except for 1 and 2
family dwellings which
shall be $150 for all
variances sought
$750
Subdivision concept
review
$400 $100 per lot for first 10
lots; $75 per lot
thereafter, minimum
deposit of $2,500
Preliminary subdivision
approval
$500 plus $25/lot $3,000 plus $100/lot
Site plan concept
review
$400 $100/1,000 square feet
or part thereof building
construction. Minimum
deposit of $2,500
Preliminary major site
plan approval involving
a related application
for preliminary major
subdivision approval
and/or preliminary
cluster approval
(subject to an
additional fee as
required by Township
Code 10B-216)
$500 $200 per acre or part
thereof and $25 per
dwelling. Minimum
deposit of $3,000
§ 2-100 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-101
BAO:67
Fee Plus Escrow Account
Preliminary site plan
approval not involving
a related application
for preliminary major
subdivision approval
and/or preliminary
cluster approval.
$25 per 1,000 square
feet or part thereof of
building construction
$25 per 1,000 square
feet or part thereof of
building construction
Minimum deposit
$4,000
Final site plan
approval, major
$500 $2,500 (plus $0.10/
square feet over 1,000
square feet)
Request for zone
change
$1,500 $2,500
Use/Certification
inquiries
$100 $0
§ 2-102. Credit Card Convenience Fees. [Ord. No. 2014-7 §§ 1, 3, 4
and Exh. B]
Whenever a credit card shall be used to make payment for a municipal
tax, service, fee or penalty, the municipality shall be authorized to collect
a convenience fee to defray the cost of transactional fees charged or
chargeable to the municipality by a bank or credit card company pursuant
to a third-party merchant services agreement in connection with the
processing of the credit card payment, as indicated below. Prior to
processing the credit card payment, the municipality shall disclose to the
credit card user the actual amount of the transactional fee to be charged.
The transactional fee to be charged to a credit card user shall be the actual
fee charged or chargeable to the municipality for that transaction, as set
forth in its third-party merchant services agreement, which includes the
following:
(a) A fixed percentage of the amount of the transaction; and
(b) A minimum fee assessed for the transaction, if any.
§ 2-101 PRINCETON CODE § 2-102
BAO:68
Chapter B3
ADVERTISING AND SIGNS
As to attachment of signs, etc., to trees, see § 33-22 of this Code. As to
zoning regulations as to signs, see §§ 17A-367 to 17A-372.
§ 2-102 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-102
BAO:69

ARTICLE I
In General
§ 3-1. Placing of Advertising Sign on Tree, Post, Sidewalk or Utility
Pole. [R.O. 1964, § 67.1.]
No person shall place or cause to be placed on any post, tree, fence,
sidewalk, telegraph pole, telephone pole or electric light pole in the streets
of the borough any advertising sign of any description, except on boards
provided for that purpose and duly authorized by the mayor and council of
the borough.
For state law as to authority of borough to prevent or regulate the erection
and construction of signs, see R.S., § 40:67-1.
§ 3-1.1. Placing of banners in, over or upon any street or avenue.
[Ord. No. 89-36, § I]
No person shall place or cause to be placed any banner in, over or upon any
street or avenue of the borough, unless the person makes application to the
borough clerk and such application is duly authorized by resolution by the
mayor and council of the borough.
§ 3-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-1.1
BAO:71

ARTICLE II
Handbills3
For state law as to unauthorized placing of circulars or advertisements
in newspapers or periodicals, see R.S., § 2A:1, 70-77. As to printing and
distribution of circulars, handbills, etc., relative to elections, see R.S.,
§ 19:34-38.1.
§ 3-2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2005-21, § I]
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
HANDBILL DISTRIBUTOR — Any person engaged in the business for hire
or gain of distributing handbills, other than newspapers distributed to
the subscribers thereof, and any person receiving compensation for the
distribution of such handbills.
NEWSPAPER — Any newspaper of general circulation and any newspaper
duly entered with the Post Office Department of the United States in
accordance with federal statute or regulation, and any newspaper filed and
recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law, and any
periodical or current magazine regularly published with not less than four
issues per year and sold to the public.
PRIVATE PREMISES — Any dwelling, house, building or other structure
designed or used, either wholly or in part, for private residential purposes,
whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant,
and shall include the yard, grounds, walks, driveways, porches, mailbox and
approaches belonging to and appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building
or other structure.
PUBLIC PLACE — All streets, avenues, lanes, alleys or other public ways
and all parks, plazas, squares, grounds and buildings.
§ 3-3. Distribution in Public Places Generally. [Ord. No. 2005-21,
§ I]
It shall be unlawful to throw, scatter or cast any handbill in or upon any
public place within this borough.
§ 3-4. Distribution on Uninhabited or Vacant Private Premises.
[Ord. No. 2005-21, § I]
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, scatter or cast any handbill in
or upon any private premises.
3. Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of R.O. 1964, §§ 39-1. — 39.12.
§ 3-2 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-5
BAO:73
§ 3-5. Distribution on Posted Property. [Ord. No. 2005-21, § I]
It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw,
scatter or cast any handbill upon any premises, if requested by anyone
therein not to do so, or if there is placed on such premises in a conspicuous
position near the entrance a sign bearing the words "No Trespassing," "No
Peddlers or Agents," "No Advertising" or any other similar notice.
As to soliciting on posted premises, see § 25-17 of this Code.
§ 3-6. Provisions Pertaining to Hucksters, Transient Merchants,
etc., not Affected. [Ord. No. 2005-21, § I]
This article shall not be deemed to repeal, amend or modify any provision
prohibiting, regulating door-to-door commercial solicitations or regulating
or licensing hucksters, hawkers, peddlers, transient merchants, itinerant
vendors or any person using the public streets or places for any private
business or enterprise or for commercial sales not covered herein.
§ 3-7. Mail and Newspaper Deliveries Unaffected. [Ord. No.
2005-21, § I]
The provisions of this article shall not be deemed to apply to the distribution
of mail by the United States or to newspapers as defined in this article.
§ 3-8. Persons Making Deliveries in Regular Course of Business not
Affected. [Ord. No. 2005-21, § I]
This article shall not affect any person engaged in the delivery in the regular
course of business of goods, wares, merchandise, articles or things to the
premises of persons ordering or otherwise to receive the same.
§ 3-9. through § 3-13. (Reserved)
§ 3-5 PRINCETON CODE § 3-9
BAO:74
ARTICLE III
Regulated Banners
§ 3-14. Definition Regulated Banner. [Ord. No. 89-36, § II]
A piece of material on which a sign, name, slogan, goal or headline is
displayed within a public right of way.
§ 3-15. Application to Place Regulated Banner. [Ord. No. 89-36, § II]
Any person desiring to place a banner over a public right of way within
the Borough of Princeton, must make an application to the borough clerk
accompanied by a refundable deposit of $100. The deposit would be
refunded upon timely removal of the banner by the applicant.
§ 3-16. Removal of Banner. [Ord. No. 89-36, § II]
The approved banner must be removed within 24 hours after its use.
§ 3-17. Failure of Applicant to Remove Banner. [Ord. No. 89-36, § II]
The failure of the applicant to remove the banner within 24 hours will
result in the forfeiture of the $100 deposit; otherwise the applicant will
be refunded $100. In the event the applicant fails to remove the banner,
the borough will use the deposit for expenses associated in removing it. In
addition, such banners will be held by the borough for 30 days and then
disposed of. An applicant failing to remove a banner will not be permitted
to display any banner for the succeeding two years.
§ 3-14 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-17
BAO:75
Chapter B4
(RESERVED)
See Princeton Township Code Chapter 3, Alcoholic Beverages
Chapter B5
(RESERVED)
See Princeton Township Code Chapter 4, Amusements.
Chapter B6
ANIMAL CONTROL
§ 3-17 PRINCETON CODE § 3-17
BAO:76
ARTICLE I
Dog Licensing
§ 6-1. License for Individual Dogs; Requirements; Fees. [Ord. No.
2015-44 Exh. A]
(a) (1) Any person who owns, keeps or harbors a dog within Princeton,
that has attained the age of seven months or that possesses a set of
permanent teeth shall annually in the month of February apply for
and procure from the municipal clerk a license and official metal
registration tag for each such dog and shall place upon such dog a
collar or harness with the registration tag securely fastened
thereto; provided, that in the event such a dog shall be newlyacquired,
or in the event that after acquisition a dog shall attain the
age of seven months or develop a set of permanent teeth, the initial
application for license and registration tag shall be made within 10
days after such acquisition, age attainment or development of
teeth, as the case may be.
(2) The fee for a license for each dog shall be $20 (i.e. the municipal
license fee plus a state surcharge of $0.20, and $1 for each oneyear
registration tag). For each annual renewal, the fees for the
license and registration tag shall be the same as for the original
license and tag. The licenses, registration tags and renewals
thereof all shall expire and become invalid at midnight on the last
day of February of the succeeding year. If an initial or renewal
application is not made in accordance with the time limits set forth
in this subsection, in Section 6-1(a)(1) above, or in Sections 6-1(f)
and (g) below, or within 31 days thereafter, there shall also be an
administrative fee of $1 for each month or fraction of a month that
has elapsed between the expiration of the applicable time limit and
the making of the application.
(3) No license required for the owning and keeping of dogs, by virtue
of any law of the state or any provision of this Code or other
Princeton ordinance, shall be issued to any person unless a
certificate issued by a duly licensed veterinarian is presented to the
clerk, showing that such dog has been inoculated with a rabies
vaccine as required by N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.2a.
(b) In addition to the license fee referred to in subsection (a)(2) an
additional fee of $3 shall be paid by a person applying for the license
with respect to any dog of reproductive age that has not had its
reproductive capacity permanently altered through sterilization. Any
person claiming to be exempt from such fee shall provide a copy of a
veterinarian's certification of neutering.
(c) The additional fee collected pursuant to Section 6-1(b) and the state
surcharge collected pursuant to subsection (a)(2) will be forwarded by
the clerk's office to the state treasurer in accordance with New Jersey
law.
§ 6-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 6-1
BAO:77
§ 6-2. Violations; Penalties. [Ord. No. 2015-44 Exh. A]
Any person who violates or who fails or refuses to comply with the specific
requirements set forth in Section 6-1 shall be subject to the following
penalties:
(d) Only one license and registration tag per dog shall be required in any
licensing year for any dog owner.
(e) Princeton shall charge the sum of $1 for a duplicate license with
registration tag.
(f) Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into Princeton any
dog licensed for the current year in another jurisdiction, other than
another municipality of New Jersey, and bearing a valid registration
tag, and shall keep such dog or permit such dog to be kept within
Princeton for a period of more than 90 days shall, immediately apply for
a license and registration tag for each such dog, unless such dog is
validly licensed under a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound license
issued according to law.
(g) Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into Princeton from
another jurisdiction, including another municipality of New Jersey, any
unlicensed dog and shall keep such dog or permit such dog to be kept
within Princeton for a period of more than 10 days shall immediately
apply for a license and registration tag for each such dog unless such
dog is validly licensed under a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound
license issued according to law.
(h) Only one license and registration tag shall be required in any licensing
year for any dog owned in New Jersey, and such license and tag issued
by another New Jersey municipality shall be accepted by Princeton, in
accordance with applicable law.
(i) Any person holding a license under N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.8 to operate a
kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall not be required to secure
individual licenses for dogs that are both owned by said licensee and
kept at the establishments.
(j) No person, except a municipal officer in the performance of the officer's
duties shall remove a registration tag from the collar of any dog without
the consent of the owner, nor shall any person attach a registration tag
to a dog for which it was not issued.
(a) For the first offense: $50; and
(b) For second and subsequent offenses: not less than $50, nor more than
$250.
§ 6-1 PRINCETON CODE § 6-2
BAO:78
ARTICLE II
Dogs and Cats; Rabies Control
§ 6-3. Canine Rabies Vaccinations Required. [Ord. No. 2015-44 Exh.
A]
§ 6-4. Free Vaccination of Dogs May Be Provided by Health Officer;
Adoption of Rules and Regulations by Health Officer. [Ord. No.
2015-44 Exh. A]
The health officer is hereby authorized and empowered to provide free
vaccination of dogs at a suitable clinic and place designated by the health
officer to be conducted by a New Jersey licensed veterinarian. The health
officer is hereby further authorized and empowered to make and adopt
such rules and regulations, not inconsistent or in conflict with the terms
and provisions of this chapter, as the health officer may deem proper and
necessary for the enforcement of this chapter.
§ 6-5. Feline Rabies Vaccinations Required. [Ord. No. 2015-44 Exh.
A]
(a) No person shall own, possess, harbor or have in custody in the
municipality any dog that has attained the age of seven months, unless
such dog has been inoculated with a rabies vaccine by a duly licensed
veterinarian in a manner consistent with the method specified in
N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.2a.
(b) Proof of vaccination shall be produced by any person owning, keeping,
or maintaining or harboring a dog, upon request of the animal control
officer or other person authorized by Princeton.
(a) Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following words and
phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this
subsection (a).
CAT — Any member of the domestic feline species, male, female or
altered, including feral cats that are part of an approved Trap-Neuter-
Release Program.
CAT OF VACCINATION AGE — Any cat that has attained the age of four
months, or weighs three pounds or more.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a cat, shall include
every person having a right of property or custody of such a cat and
every person who has such cat in his/her keeping or who harbors or
maintains a cat or knowingly permits a cat to remain on or about any
premises occupied by, owned by, maintained by or under the control
of that person, or any person providing the cat with food for a period
exceeding 10 days.
(b) Rabies Vaccination Requirements for Cats.
§ 6-3 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 6-5
BAO:79
§ 6-6. Violations; Penalties. [Ord. No. 2015-44 Exh. A]
Any person who violates or fails or refuses to comply with this article shall
be subject to the following penalties:
(1) Vaccination Requirement. No person shall own, keep, harbor or
maintain any cat of vaccination age within Princeton unless such
cat is vaccinated as required herein. The provisions of this section
do not apply to cats held in a cattery, or those held by state or
federally licensed research facility or a veterinary establishment
where cats are received or kept for diagnostic, medical, surgical or
other treatments, or licensed animal shelters, pounds, kennels or
pet shops.
(2) Vaccination. All cats shall be vaccinated against rabies by a
licensed veterinarian in accordance with the standards for same
adopted by the State of New Jersey.
(3) Vaccination Certificate. A certificate of vaccination shall be issued
by the licensed veterinarian to the owner of each cat vaccinated, on
a form recommended by the State of New Jersey. A copy of the
certificate shall be provided to the animal control officer within 30
days after its issuance. An official vaccination tag is recommended
to be issued by the veterinarian and should bear the year of
issuance.
(4) Newly Acquired Cats. The owner of any newly acquired cat of
vaccination age, or of any which attains vaccination age, shall have
such cat vaccinated within 10 days after such acquisition or age
attainment in the absence of proof of prior inoculation.
(c) Proof of Vaccination of Cats. Proof of vaccination shall be produced by
any person owning, keeping, or maintaining or harboring a cat, upon
request of the animal control officer or other person authorized by
Princeton.
(a) For the first offense: $50; and
(b) For second and subsequent offenses: not less than $50, nor more than
$250.
§ 6-5 PRINCETON CODE § 6-6
BAO:80
ARTICLE III
Authority Over Dogs and Other Animals
§ 6-7. Certified Animal Control Officer. [Ord. No. 2015-44 Exh. A]
§ 6-8. Taking into Custody and Impounding Dogs or Other Animals;
Grounds; Notice of Seizure; Time to Hold Prior to Adoption,
Destruction, Relocation or Sterilization; Boarding Costs; Transfer of
Ownership; Experimentation Prohibited; Penalty; Reporting of
Rabid Animals. [Ord. No. 2015-44 Exh. A]
(a) The position of certified animal control officer (also referred to in this
chapter as "animal control officer") heretofore created is continued as
defined in N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.16a et seq., and the provisions of this
chapter. The certified animal control officer shall be appointed by the
council in consultation with the health officer and chief of police. Any
vacancy in the position shall be filled by the council in consultation with
the health officer and chief of police. The certified animal control officer
shall receive such compensation as shall be determined by the council
in the annual salary ordinance.
(b) The certified animal control officer shall have the power and authority
within Princeton to:
(1) Enforce all laws or ordinances enacted for the protection of
animals, including, but not limited to, animal control, animal
welfare and animal cruelty laws of the state and ordinances of
Princeton;
(2) Investigate and sign complaints concerning any violation of an
animal control, animal welfare or animal cruelty law of the state or
ordinances of Princeton;
(3) Act as an officer for the detection, apprehension and arrest of
offenders against the animal control, animal welfare and animal
cruelty laws of the state and of the ordinances of Princeton, in
cooperation with the Princeton police department or other duly
authorized individual or agency; and
(4) Perform such duties relating to the position of certified animal
control officer as may be from time to time prescribed by
ordinance, by law or by direction of the council or its designee.
(a) The animal control officer shall take into custody and impound any
animal, to thereafter be offered for adoption or euthanized as provided
in this section:
(1) Any dog off the premises of the owner or of the person charged
with the care of the dog, which is reasonably believed to be a stray
dog;
§ 6-7 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 6-8
BAO:81
(2) Any dog off the premises of the owner or the person charged with
the care of the dog without a current registration tag on its collar
or elsewhere;
(3) Any female dog in season off the premises of the owner or the
person charged with the care of the dog;
(4) Any dog or other animal which is suspected to be rabid; or
(5) Any dog or other animal off the premises of the owner or the person
charged with its care that is reported to, or observed by, the animal
control officer to be ill, injured, or creating a threat to public
health, safety, or welfare, or otherwise interfering with the
enjoyment of property.
(b) If an animal taken into custody and impounded pursuant to subsection
(a) of this section has a collar or harness with identification of the name
and address of any person, or has a registration tag, or has a microchip
with an identification number that can be traced to the owner or person
charged with the care of the animal, or the owner or the person charged
with the care of the animal is otherwise known, the animal control
officer shall attempt to ascertain the name and address of the owner or
the person charged with the care of the animal, and attempt to contact
the person by phone, or in person at the last known place of residence.
If no contact is made within 24 hours the animal control officer shall as
soon thereafter as practicable serve to the identified person a notice in
writing that the animal has been seized and will be liable to be offered
for adoption or euthanized if not claimed within seven days after the
service of the notice.
(c) A notice required pursuant to this section may be served as follows:
(1) By delivering it to the person on whom it is to be served, or by
leaving it at the person's usual or last known place of residence or
the address given on the collar, harness, or microchip
identification; or
(2) By mailing the notice to that person at the person's usual or last
known place of residence, or to the address given on the collar,
harness or microchip identification.
(d) A shelter, pound, or kennel operating as a shelter or pound receiving an
animal from the animal control officer pursuant to subsection (a) of this
section or from any other individual, group, or organization, shall hold
the animal for at least seven days before offering it for adoption, or
euthanizing, relocating, or sterilizing the animal, except if:
(1) The animal is surrendered voluntarily by its owner to the shelter,
pound, or kennel operating as a shelter or pound, the animal shall
be offered for adoption for at least seven days before euthanizing it;
or may be transferred to an animal rescue organization facility or a
foster home prior to offering it for adoption if such a transfer is
§ 6-8 PRINCETON CODE § 6-8
BAO:82
determined to be in the best interest of the animal by the shelter,
pound, or kennel operating as a shelter or pound; or
(2) The animal is suspected of being rabid then it shall be immediately
reported to the executive officer of the board of health, to the
health officer and to the New Jersey State Department of Health,
and shall be quarantined, observed, and otherwise handled and
dealt with as appropriate for an animal suspected of being rabid or
as required by the State Department of Health for such animals.
(e) No shelter, pound, or kennel operating as a shelter or pound receiving
an animal impounded or seized by the certified animal control officer
may transfer the animal to an animal rescue organization facility or a
foster home until the shelter, pound, or kennel operating as a shelter or
pound has held the animal for at least seven days.
(f) If the owner or the person charged with the care of the animal seeks to
claim it within seven days, or after the seven days have elapsed but
before the animal has been adopted or euthanized, the shelter, pound,
or kennel operating as a shelter or pound:
(1) Shall, in the case of a cat or dog, release it to the owner or person
charged with its care, provided the owner or person charged with
the care of the animal provides proof of ownership, which may
include a valid cat or dog license, registration, rabies inoculation
certificate, or documentation from the owner's veterinarian that
the cat or dog has received regular care from that veterinarian;
(2) May, in the case of a cat or dog, charge the cost of sterilizing the cat
or dog, only if the owner requests such sterilizing when claiming it;
and
(3) May require the owner or person charged with the care of the
animal to pay all the animal's expenses while in the care of the
shelter, pound, or kennel operating as a shelter or pound, not to
exceed $24 per day for food and shelter, plus the cost of emergency
veterinary care or of any additional care requested by the owner.
(g) If the animal remains unclaimed, is not claimed due to the failure of the
owner or other person to comply with the requirements of this section,
or is not adopted after seven days after the date on which notice is
served in accordance with subsections (b) and (c) of this section or, if no
notice can be served, not less than seven days after the date on which
the animal was impounded, the impounded animal may be placed in a
foster home, transferred to another shelter, pound, kennel operating as
a shelter or pound, or animal rescue organization facility, or euthanized
in a manner causing as little pain as possible and consistent with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:22-19.
(h) At the time of adoption, the right of ownership in the animal shall
transfer to the new owner. No dog or other animal taken into custody,
impounded, sent or otherwise brought to a shelter, pound, or kennel
§ 6-8 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 6-8
BAO:83
operating as a shelter or pound shall be sold or otherwise be made
available for the purpose of experimentation.
(i) When the animal control officer takes into custody and impounds, or
causes to be taken into custody and impounded, an animal, the animal
control officer may place the animal in the custody of, or cause the
animal to be placed in the custody of, only a licensed shelter, pound, or
kennel operating as a shelter or pound. The animal control officer may
not place the animal in the custody of, or cause the animal to be placed
in the custody of, any animal rescue organization facility, foster home,
or other unlicensed facility. However, the licensed shelter, pound, or
kennel operating as a shelter or pound may place the animal in an
animal rescue organization facility, foster home, or other unlicensed
facility if necessary pursuant to subsection (d) or (g) of this section.
(j) Notwithstanding the provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.30 and 4:19-15.31 to
the contrary, no cat or dog being transferred between shelters, pounds
or kennels operating as shelters or pounds, or being transferred to an
animal rescue organization facility or placed in a foster home, shall be
required to be sterilized prior to that transfer.
§ 6-8 PRINCETON CODE § 6-8
BAO:84
ARTICLE IV
Conduct of Dogs and Other Animals; Duties of Owner or Custodian
§ 6-9. Dogs and Other Animals; Noise. [Ord. No. 2015-44 Exh. A]
No person who owns, keeps or harbors any animal, including but not
limited to dogs and birds, shall allow such animal to cause frequent or long
continued noise so as to disturb the comfort or repose of any persons in
the vicinity, in violation of the provisions of Section 21-2(e) of Chapter 21
of this Code, entitled "Loud, Continuous or Excessive Noise," and shall be
subject to the penalties set forth in that chapter. The animal control officer,
in addition to the other personnel authorized in Section 21-6 of Chapter 21,
is entitled to enforce and bring complaints for violation of Section 21-2(e).
§ 6-10. Restraint of Dogs and Other Domestic Animals; Public
Property, Parks and Plazas; Private Property and Public School
Property; Damage to Property; Injury to Persons. [Ord. No. 2015-44
Exh. A]
(a) The following provisions shall apply with reference to the restraint of
dogs and other animals, except to the extent otherwise provided by law:
(1) No person who owns, keeps or harbors any dog or other domestic
animal shall suffer or permit such animal to be out-of-doors,
including in municipal parks, recreation and reservation areas, or
on any public property unless accompanied by and under the
control of its owner or other responsible person and on a leash of
not more than eight feet. No person who owns, keeps or harbors
any dog or other domestic animal shall suffer or permit such animal
to be in or upon any private property without the consent of the
owner of such property; or on any public school property without
the permission of the authority having jurisdiction over such
property.
(2) Dogs, cats and other domestic animals shall not be permitted in
John Street Public Park, Mary Moss Playground, Potts Park,
Barbara Boggs Sigmund Playground, Maggie's Playground, the
Pine Street Park Playground; or in any public plaza as defined in
Section 16-15 of this Code, entitled "Public Plazas."
(b) No person who owns, keeps or harbors any animal, including but not
limited to dogs, shall allow it to chase any motorized or non-motorized
vehicle including but not limited to bicycles, skateboards, or scooters,
upon any public street or to damage any lawn or shrubbery or flowers
or grounds of any person or to cause any damage to the property of any
person or to cause injury to any person other than the person who
owns, keeps or harbors the animal.
§ 6-9 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 6-11
BAO:85
§ 6-11. Removal of Dog Waste and Other Animal and Fowl Waste
Required. [Ord. No. 2015-44 Exh. A]
No person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of any dog or other
animal or fowl shall allow such dog, animal or fowl to soil, defile, defecate
on any common thoroughfare, sidewalk, passageway, bypath, play area,
park, including a dog park or municipal park, recreation or reservation
area, or any place where people congregate or walk, or upon any public
property whatsoever, or upon any private property without the prior
permission of the owner of said property, except if the person who owns,
harbors, keeps or is in charge of such dog or other animal or fowl shall
immediately remove all feces deposited by such dog or other animal or
fowl and dispose of it by placing it in a bag to be sealed or by an equally
sanitary method and removing it from the property. This Section 6-11
supplements subsection 16-6(c)2 of the Princeton Township Code, within
Section 16-6 entitled "Prohibited uses of the Princeton parks and recreation
areas; general regulations and restrictions."
§ 6-12. Violations; Penalties. [Ord. No. 2015-44 Exh. A]
§ 6-13. Cats Running at Large. [Ord. No. 2015-44 Exh. A]
The animal control officer or designee is authorized and empowered to take
into custody and impound or cause to be taken into custody and impound
any cat observed that is in or upon any vacant, abandoned, or uninhabited
premises. Every cat so taken into custody shall be forthwith delivered to
a shelter, pound or licensed veterinarian having facilities for its detention.
Thereafter, notice with respect to such cat shall be given in the manner
provided under Sections 6-8(b), (c) and (d) for dogs taken into custody.
§ 6-14. Going onto Premises to Seize Dogs or Cats. [Ord. No.
2015-44 Exh. A]
Any officer or agent authorized or empowered to perform any duty under
this chapter is hereby authorized to go upon any premises to take into
custody for impounding any dog or cat or any other domestic animal or any
(a) Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of Sections 6-10(a) or
6-11 shall be subject to the following penalties:
(1) For a first offense: $50; and
(2) For second and subsequent offenses: not less than $100 nor more
than $1,000.
(b) Any person who shall violate Section 6-10(b) shall be subject to the
following penalties:
(1) For the first offense not less than $100; and
(2) For the second and subsequent offenses not less than $250 nor
more than $1,500.
§ 6-11 PRINCETON CODE § 6-14
BAO:86
wild animal believed to be a risk to public health or safety that said officer
or agent may lawfully take into custody and impound when in immediate
pursuit of such animal, except upon the premises of the owner of the animal
if such owner is present and forbids the same.
§ 6-14 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 6-14
BAO:87

ARTICLE V
Menacing Dogs
§ 6-15. Menacing Dogs. [Ord. No. 2015-44 Exh. A]
The keeping, control and disposition of a menacing dog within the limits of
Princeton shall be in accordance with the provisions of this article.
§ 6-16. Findings to Declare Dog Menacing. [Ord. No. 2015-44 Exh.
A]
Notwithstanding the provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 et seq., the animal
control officer on behalf of Princeton is authorized to declare a dog
menacing whenever the animal control officer has reasonable cause to
believe that the dog possesses one or more of the traits set forth in
subsections (a) through (g) below. In making the determination that a dog
is or is not menacing, the following evidence shall be considered:
§ 6-17. Violations; Penalties. [Ord. No. 2015-44 Exh. A]
Any person owning, harboring or in custody of a dog that is declared by the
animal control officer to be a menacing dog is in violation of this article of
this chapter and shall be subject to the following:
(a) Whether the dog approached any person in a dangerous or terrorizing
manner, or in an apparent attitude of attack, without provocation.
(b) Whether the dog has a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to
attack when unprovoked, to cause injury or to otherwise endanger the
safety of human beings, dogs or other animals.
(c) Whether the dog exhibits any characteristics of aggressive or
unpredictable temperamental behavior in the presence of human
beings, dogs or other animals.
(d) The manner in which the dog had been maintained by its owner or
custodian.
(e) Whether the dog snaps, or manifests a disposition to snap or bite.
(f) The size of the dog and the nature and extent of possible injuries the
dog could inflict.
(g) The presence or absence of any provocation.
(a) For the first offense: a penalty of $100; and/or such remedial action as
may be recommended by the animal control officer and authorized by
the court, including but not limited to a hold harmless provision and the
purchase of liability insurance as described in Section 6-18 below.
(b) For second and subsequent offenses: a penalty of not less than $100 nor
more than $1,000, or as otherwise ordered by the court.
§ 6-15 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 6-18
BAO:89
§ 6-18. Requirement for Liability Insurance; Hold Harmless. [Ord.
No. 2015-44 Exh. A]
In accordance with Section 6-17(a) above any person owning, harboring or
in custody of a dog that is declared by the animal control officer to be a
menacing dog may be required to hold Princeton harmless from any legal
expenses or fees the municipality may incur in defending against any claim
brought against Princeton for any injuries or damages caused thereafter by
the dog, and to provide proof to the animal control officer that said person
has purchased liability insurance as follows:
Liability insurance in a minimum amount of $100,000 to cover any damage
or injury caused by the dog to any person or property. It may be separate
from any other homeowner policy and shall name the municipality of
Princeton as an additional insured party for the purpose of notification by
the insurance company of any cancellation, termination or expiration of the
policy, and to cover potential claims against Princeton for damage that may
be caused by the dog to any person or property.
§ 6-18 PRINCETON CODE § 6-18
BAO:90
ARTICLE VI
Vicious and Potentially Dangerous Dogs
§ 6-19. Controlling Law. [Ord. No. 2015-44 Exh. A]
The keeping, control and disposition of vicious and potentially dangerous
dogs within the limits of Princeton shall be in accordance with the
provisions the "Vicious and Potentially Dangerous Dog Act," N.J.S.A. 4:19-17
through 4:19-37, as may from time to time be amended ("Act"). The terms
"vicious dog" and "potentially dangerous dog" shall mean any dog or dog
hybrid declared vicious or potentially dangerous in accordance with the
provisions of the Act cited above in this section.
The requirements and information provided in Sections 6-19 through 6-26
of this article reflect certain specific and pertinent provisions of the Act.
The full text of the Act, N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 through 4:19-37, is available online
at www.princetonnj.gov/health. Additionally, printed copies are available at
the Princeton Department of Health.
§ 6-20. Seizure and Impoundment of Dog by Animal Control Officer;
Grounds. [Ord. No. 2015-44 Exh. A]
§ 6-21. Notice of Seizure and Impoundment; Determination of
Identity of Owner(s); Notice of Hearing; Return of Statement by
Owner; Destruction of Dog. [Ord. No. 2015-44 Exh. A]
(a) In addition to the authority of the animal control officer to impound a
dog pursuant to Section 6-8 of this chapter, the animal control officer
shall seize and impound a dog when the officer has reasonable cause to
believe that the dog:
(1) Attacked a person and caused death or serious bodily injury as
defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1(b) to that person;
(2) Caused bodily injury as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1(a) to a person
during an unprovoked attack and poses a serious threat of harm to
persons or domestic animals;
(3) Engaged in dog fighting activities as described in N.J.S.A. 4:22-24
and N.J.S.A. 4:22-26; or
(4) Has been trained, tormented, badgered, baited or encouraged to
engage in unprovoked attacks upon persons or domestic animals.
(b) The dog shall be impounded until the final disposition as to whether the
dog is vicious or potentially dangerous. Subject to the approval of the
municipal health officer, the dog may be impounded in a facility or other
structure, agreeable to the owner.
(a) The animal control officer shall notify the municipal court and the
health officer immediately that the animal control officer has seized and
impounded a dog pursuant to Section 6-20 of this article, or that the
§ 6-19 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 6-21
BAO:91
§ 6-22. Settlement Agreements. [Ord. No. 2015-44 Exh. A]
Notwithstanding any provision in N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 et seq., Princeton and
the owner of the dog may settle and dispose of the matter at any time in
such manner and according to such terms and conditions of an agreement,
subject to review and approval by the municipal attorney, as may be
mutually agreed upon including, but not limited to the following
requirements:
officer has reasonable cause to believe that a dog has killed another
domestic animal and that a hearing is required. The animal control
officer shall through a reasonable effort attempt to determine the
identity of the owner of any dog seized and impounded pursuant to
Section 6-20 of this article. If its owner cannot be identified within
seven days, that dog may be euthanized.
(b) The animal control officer shall, within three working days of the
determination of the identity of the owner of a dog seized and
impounded pursuant to Section 6-20, notify by certified mail, return
receipt requested, or in person at the last known place of residence the
owner concerning the seizure and impoundment, and that, if the owner
wishes, a hearing will be held to determine whether the impounded dog
is vicious or potentially dangerous. This notice shall also require that
the owner return within seven days, by certified mail or hand delivery, a
signed statement indicating whether he or she wishes the hearing to be
conducted or, if not, to relinquish ownership of the dog, in which case
the dog may be humanely euthanized. If the owner cannot be notified by
certified mail, return receipt requested, or refuses to sign for the
certified letter, or does not reply to the certified letter with a signed
statement within seven days of receipt, the dog may be humanely
euthanized.
(a) Liability insurance in a minimum amount of $100,000 to cover any
damage or injury to any person caused by the dog. The liability
insurance may be separate from any other homeowner policy and shall
name the municipality of Princeton as an additional insured party for
the purpose of notification by the insurance company of any
cancellation, termination or expiration of the policy, and to cover any
damage that may be caused by the dog to any person or property, and to
provide proof to the animal control officer that said person has
purchased liability insurance.
(b) That the owner of the dog shall hold Princeton harmless from any legal
expenses or fees the municipality may incur in defending against any
claim brought against Princeton for any action or inaction related to the
entry into such agreement, or for any injuries or damages caused
thereafter by the dog.
(c) Specification of the safety procedures to be used for handling and
restraining the dog and for registering, licensing and notifications.
§ 6-21 PRINCETON CODE § 6-22
BAO:92
§ 6-23. Finding to Declare Dog Vicious; Grounds. [Ord. No. 2015-44
Exh. A]
§ 6-24. Finding to Declare Dog Potentially Dangerous. [Ord. No.
2015-44 Exh. A]
(d) That the animal control officer or health officer may cancel the
agreement if it is reasonably determined by either that it is in the
interest of public health, safety and welfare to do so, and to take other
measures to protect the public health, safety and welfare, consistent
with this chapter and with N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 through 4:19-3.
(a) The municipal court shall declare the dog vicious if it finds by clear and
convincing evidence that the dog:
(1) Killed a person or caused serious bodily injury as defined in N.J.S.A.
2C:11-1(b) to a person; or
(2) Has engaged in dog fighting activities as described in N.J.S.A.
4:22-24 and N.J.S.A. 4:22-26.
(b) A dog shall not be declared vicious for inflicting death or serious bodily
injury as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1(b) upon a person if the dog was
provoked. Princeton shall bear the burden of proof to demonstrate that
the dog was not provoked.
(c) If the municipal court declares a dog to be vicious, and no appeal is
made of this ruling, the dog shall be euthanized in a humane and
expeditious manner, except that no dog may be euthanized during the
pendency of an appeal.
(d) The owner of a dog that has been determined by the court to be a
vicious dog shall be subject to all applicable requirements of N.J.S.A.
4:19-17 through 4:19-37.
(a) The municipal court shall declare a dog to be potentially dangerous if it
finds by clear and convincing evidence that the dog:
(1) Caused bodily injury as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1(a) to a person
during an unprovoked attack, and poses a serious threat of bodily
injury or death to a person;
(2) Severely injured or killed another domestic animal and either poses
a threat of serious bodily injury or death to a person or poses a
threat of death to another domestic animal; or
(3) Has been trained, tormented, badgered, baited or encouraged to
engage in unprovoked attacks upon persons or domestic animals.
(b) A dog shall not be declared potentially dangerous for:
(1) Causing bodily injury as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1(a) to a person if
the dog was provoked; or
§ 6-22 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 6-24
BAO:93
§ 6-25. Liability of Owner Regardless of Viciousness of Dog. [Ord.
No. 2015-44 Exh. A]
The owner of any dog that bites a person while such person is on or in a
public place, or lawfully on or in a private place, including the property of
the owner of the dog, shall be liable for such damages as may be suffered by
the person bitten, regardless of the former viciousness of such dog or the
owner's knowledge of such viciousness.
For the purpose of this section, a person is lawfully upon the private
property of such owner when that person is on the property in the
performance of any duty imposed upon that person by the laws of this state
or the laws or postal regulations of the United States, or when on such
property upon the invitation, express or implied, of the owner thereof.
§ 6-26. Inapplicability to Dogs Used for Law Enforcement Activities.
[Ord. No. 2015-44 Exh. A]
The provisions of this article shall not apply to dogs used for law
enforcement activities.
(2) Severely injuring or killing a domestic animal if the domestic
animal was the aggressor. For the purposes of subsection (b)(1) of
this section, Princeton shall bear the burden of proof to
demonstrate that the dog was not provoked.
(c) The owner of a dog that has been determined by the court to be a
potentially dangerous dog shall be subject to all applicable
requirements of N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 through 4:19-37.
§ 6-24 PRINCETON CODE § 6-26
BAO:94
ARTICLE VII
Wildlife
§ 6-27. Feeding of Deer and Other Wildlife Prohibited; Exception.
[Ord. No. 2015-44 Exh. A]
(a) Deer.
(1) Feeding of Deer Prohibited. No person shall purposely or
knowingly, as said terms are defined in Title 2C of the New Jersey
Revised Statutes, feed wild white-tailed deer (Odocoileus
virginianus) in said municipality, on lands either publicly or
privately owned. It shall be presumed that the person is purposely
or knowingly feeding deer unless the feed is placed on a platform
that is raised at least four feet off the ground and has a lip around
the edge of the platform, is placed on a platform that is raised at
least five feet off the ground, or is placed in a feeder whose opening
is sufficiently restricted so as to prevent deer from accessing the
feed. Nothing in this section shall apply to (a) any agent of the
municipality authorized to implement an alternative control
method set forth in any approved community based deer
management plan and possessing a special deer management
permit issued by the New Jersey Division of Fish and Wildlife in
accordance with the provisions of P.L. 2000, c.46, or (b) any hunter
engaging in baiting for the purpose of hunting pursuant to a valid
hunting license issued in accordance with the provisions of Title 23
of the New Jersey Revised Statutes.
(2) Contaminating, Destroying, or Interfering with Authorized Bait
Stations Prohibited. No person shall purposely or knowingly
contaminate, destroy, or interfere with, or purposely or knowingly
cause to be contaminated or destroyed, any ground-feeding station,
salt lick or other established mechanism to bait wild white-tail deer
in said municipality, provided such bait station is created or used
solely by (a) an agent of the municipality authorized to implement
an alternative control method set forth in any approved community
based deer management plan and possessing a special deer
management permit issued by the New Jersey Division of Fish and
Wildlife in accordance with the provisions of P.L. 2000, c.46, or (b)
any hunter engaging in baiting for the purpose of hunting pursuant
to a valid hunting license issued in accordance with the provisions
of Title 23 of the New Jersey Revised Statutes. The provisions of
this section shall apply on all lands located in Princeton either
publicly or privately owned.
(3) Penalties. Any person violating the provisions of Section 6-27(a)(1)
or (2) shall be subject to the general penalties provision of Section
1-6 of this Code.
(b) Other Wildlife.
§ 6-27 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 6-27
BAO:95
§ 6-28. Abuse of Birds Prohibited. [Ord. No. 2015-44 Exh. A]
It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot with gun or pistol, or entrap by
snares or any device whatsoever, or kill in any way for any purpose, any bird
of any kind within the limits of Princeton.
§ 6-29. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2015-44 Exh. A]
This article may be enforced by the health officer, police department and
animal control officer. Additionally, all animal control and wildlife provisions
included in Chapter 16 of the Princeton Township Code, entitled
"Recreation and Parks and Similar Public Places," may be enforced by the
health officer and animal control officer as well as by the police department.
§ 6-30. Violations; Penalties. [Ord. No. 2015-44 Exh. A]
Any person who shall violate any section of this article, except Section
6-27(a), shall be subject to the following penalties:
(1) In addition to the prohibition against feeding deer set forth in
subsection (a) above, no person shall purposely or knowingly feed,
cause to be fed, provide food or give, place, expose, deposit,
distribute or scatter any edible material with the intention of
feeding, attracting or enticing any other wildlife on privately owned
land in Princeton.
(2) This subsection (b) does not prohibit the feeding of birds on
privately owned land.
(a) For a first offense: $50; and
(b) For second and subsequent offenses: not less than $100 nor more than
$1,000.
§ 6-27 PRINCETON CODE § 6-30
BAO:96
ARTICLE VIII
General
§ 6-31. Interfering with Person Performing Duties Under This
Chapter 6. [Ord. No. 2015-44 Exh. A]
Any person who shall hinder, molest or interfere with the performance by
any person of any duty that person is authorized or empowered to perform
under this chapter shall be subject to the following penalty:
§ 6-32. Certain Penalties Under This Chapter 6. [Ord. No. 2015-44
Exh. A]
Any person who shall violate any section of this Chapter 6 or who shall fail
to comply with any lawful order of the animal control officer or health officer
issued under this chapter for which no specific penalty is provided, shall be
subject to the following penalties:
§ 6-33. Severability of Provisions of This Chapter 6. [Ord. No.
2015-44 Exh. A]
The provisions of this Chapter 6 are severable. If any such provision is
held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of federal or
state constitutional or statutory law, said provision is hereby repealed and
the decision of the court shall not affect or impair any of the remaining
provisions contained herein.
(a) For the first offense: $50; and
(b) For the second and subsequent offenses, $1,000, and/or up to 90 days of
community service and/or 90 days of imprisonment, as may be ordered
by the court.
(a) For a first offense: $50; and
(b) For second and subsequent offenses: not less than $1,000 nor more
than $1,000.
§ 6-31 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 6-33
BAO:97
Chapter B7
(RESERVED)
Chapter B8
BICYCLES AND MOTORIZED BICYCLES
For state law as to operation of bicycles, see R.S., §§ 39:4-10 to 39:4-14.2.
As to motor vehicles and traffic generally, see Ch. 19 of this Code.
§ 8-1. Definitions. [R.O. 1964, § 9.1; Ord. No. 76-3, § 2; Ord. No.
86-48, § 1; Ord. No. 94-25, § I]
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words or phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
BICYCLE — A device having two wheels with tires 20 inches or more
in diameter connected by a frame of metal or wood and arranged to be
propelled by human power. This definition does not apply to toy bicycles,
velocipedes or motorized bicycles.
MOTORIZED BICYCLE — A pedal bicycle having a helper motor
characterized in that the maximum piston displacement is less than 50 cc.
rated no more than 1.5 brake horsepower and capable of or designed for a
maximum speed of no more than 25 miles per hour.
ROADWAY — That portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily
used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder.
ROLLER SKATING — To glide or move along on a shoe, boot or frame
with wheels or blades for rolling along on pavement and hard floors. This
definition is intended to include inline skating.
SIDEWALK — That portion of a highway intended for the use of pedestrians,
between the curb line or the lateral line of a shoulder, or if none, the lateral
line of the roadway and the adjacent right-of-way line.
SKATEBOARD — A device having two or more wheels on which a person
can stand with one foot or two feet and can propel himself forward with one
foot or move down grade by force of gravity.
§ 8-2. Obedience to Traffic Control Devices. [R.O. 1964, § 9.2; Ord.
No. 94-25, § I]
Any person operating a bicycle, riding a skateboard or roller skating on
a sidewalk, shall obey the instructions of all official traffic control signs,
signals and other control devices applicable thereto, unless otherwise
directed by a police officer.
§ 8-3. Riding on Sidewalks — Generally. [R.O. 1964, § 9.3; Ord. No.
76-3, § 4; Ord. No. 86-48, § 2; Ord. No. 94-25, § I]
§ 6-33 PRINCETON CODE § 8-3
BAO:98
§ 8-4. Same — Sidewalks Where Bicycle Riding, Roller Skating and
the Operation of Skateboards is Prohibited. [R.O. 1964, § 9.4;
11-20-1974, § 1; Ord. No. 86-48, § 3; Ord. No. 94-25, § I; Ord. No.
2001-10; Ord. No. 2006-17, § I]
No person shall ride a bicycle, operate or ride a skateboard or roller skate
on the following sidewalks:
(a) Every person operating a bicycle, operating or riding a skateboard or
roller skating shall exercise due care when passing any person or
object.
(b) Persons riding bicycles, operating or riding skateboards or roller
skating shall proceed in single file.
(c) The operation of bicycles, skateboards and roller skates is prohibited on
any sidewalk surface which is covered in whole or in part with snow or
ice.
(d) No person shall operate a bicycle, operate or ride a skateboard or roller
skate at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the
conditions then existing.
(e) The operator of a bicycle, the operator or rider of a skateboard or roller
skater, emerging from an alley, driveway, or building shall upon
approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across an alley,
yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians and bicycles, skateboards and
roller skaters approaching on such sidewalk or sidewalk area.
(f) No person operating a bicycle, skateboard or roller skates on a
sidewalk shall carry any package, bundle or article which prevents the
rider from keeping two hands upon the handle bars, nor shall a person
riding a bicycle, skateboard or roller skating on a sidewalk carry any
packages, bundles or articles which interfere with front or rear vision,
extend beyond the width of the handle bars or overall length of the
bicycle, are excessive in weight, affect normal balance or impede the
mechanical operation of the bicycle, skateboard or roller skates.
(g) No person shall park a motorized bicycle on a sidewalk except in a rack
to support the same.
(h) Whenever any person is roller skating, riding a bicycle or riding a
skateboard on a sidewalk, such person shall give an audible signal
before overtaking or passing nearer than two feet to any pedestrian
thereon.
(a) North side of Nassau Street, between Bayard Lane and Maple Street.
(b) East and west sides of Bank Street.
(c) East and west sides of Chambers Street.
§ 8-3 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-4
BAO:99
§ 8-4.1. Operation of Motorized Bicycles on Sidewalks and Bicycle
Paths Prohibited. [Ord. No. 76-3, § 5]
No person shall operate a motorized bicycle on any sidewalk or on any path
or way designated as a bicycle route.
§ 8-4.2. Bicycle Riding, Roller Skating and Operation of
Skateboards Prohibited in Public Open Spaces. [Ord. No. 94-25, § I]
For the purposes of this chapter, public open space shall be defined as that
portion of private lands which have been made open to the public for their
use and enjoyment by the owner of said lands, in connection with zoning
approvals, dedication of said lands or similar means. Where the owner of
said lands has filed a written request with the borough, the provisions of
this chapter shall be made applicable to these public open spaces and the
provisions of this chapter, with the exception of that dealing with hours
of operation shall, in the discretion of the borough, be made applicable
thereto.
§ 8-5. Penalties. [R.O. 1964, § 9.5; Ord. No. 81-9, § 1]
(d) East and west sides of Palmer Square. West and east of Palmer Square
east; and both north and south sides of Palmer Square south.
(e) West side of Witherspoon Street between Nassau Street and Paul
Robeson Place; east side of Witherspoon Street between Nassau Street
and Wiggins Street.
(f) West side of South Tulane Street between Nassau Street and Spring
Street.
(g) West side of Van Deventer Avenue between Nassau Street and Spring
Street; east side of Van Deventer Avenue between Nassau Street and
Park Place.
(h) South side of Hulfish Street.
(i) North and south side of Spring Street.
(j) North side of Hulfish Street.
(a) Any person under the age of 17 years who violates any provisions of this
chapter may be, for the first offense, reprimanded in writing by the
police department, addressed to the parent or guardian of the offender,
stating the nature of the violation and a warning that a repetition of the
same or any other violation must be prevented by the parents or
guardian. On a subsequent offense, any such person under the age of 17
years may be further reprimanded or may be charged as a juvenile
delinquent by the police department.
§ 8-4 PRINCETON CODE § 8-5
BAO:100
Chapter B9
(RESERVED)
Chapter B9A
(RESERVED)
Editor's Note: For current Cable Television and Communication
System Franchise see Princeton Township Code Chapter 5AA.
(Ordinance No. 2016-35)
Chapter B9B
INTERLOCAL GOVERNMENT SERVICES AGREEMENT
BETWEEN THE TOWNSHIP OF PRINCETON AND THE
BOROUGH OF PRINCETON TO ESTABLISH A JOINT CABLE
TELEVISION COMMITTEE
[Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of
Ordinance No. 95-2.]
§ 9B-1. Establishment of Interlocal Governmental Services
Agreement. [Ord. No. 2006-05]
This agreement is established between the Township of Princeton and the
Borough of Princeton in order to jointly provide cable television related
services to the citizens of the two municipalities.
§ 9B-2. Establishment of Joint Princeton Cable Television
Committee; Membership. [Ord. No. 2006-05]
(b) Any person of the age of 17 years or over who violates any provision of
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in
section 1-6.
(a) There shall be established a "Joint Princeton Cable Television
Committee," the duties and powers of which shall be as herein stated.
The committee shall consist of 12 members, including residents of the
municipalities, five representing the borough and five representing the
township ("citizen representatives"). The governing body of each
municipality shall appoint the citizen representatives. The township
citizen representatives shall be appointed by a majority vote of the
township committee and the borough citizen representatives shall be
appointed by the mayor upon the advice and consent of borough
council.
(b) There shall also be one representative from the governing body of each
municipality to serve as a liaison between the committee and the
respective governing bodies ("liaison representatives"). The liaisons
shall be full members of the committee and be appointed as above in
§ 8-5 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9B-2
BAO:101
§ 9B-3. Election and powers of the chair; meetings subject to Open
Public Meetings Act. [Ord. No. 2006-05]
§ 9B-4. Powers and Duties of the Committee and Municipalities.
[Ord. No. 2006-05]
§ 9B-5. Subcommittees. [Ord. No. 2006-05]
There shall be at least two subcommittees of the committee, including:
the same manner as the citizen representatives. The mayors of either
municipality may serve as the liaison representatives.
(c) Of the five citizen representatives from each municipality, one shall
initially be appointed for one year, two shall be initially be appointed for
two years and two shall be appointed for three years. Thereafter, each
appointment shall be for a term of three years.
(d) The liaison representatives from each municipality shall be appointed
annually by the governing bodies and serve one-year terms.
(a) The committee shall meet as a committee of the whole on the second
Wednesday in January, or as soon thereafter as practicable, and at that
time select a chair. The chair shall serve for one year and shall be
eligible to be reappointed each year.
(b) The chair shall have the power to call meetings, appoint subcommittees
and make such routine administrative decisions as are necessary when
it would be impractical for the committee, or a subcommittee thereof, to
meet.
(c) All committee meetings shall be subject to the Open Public Meetings
Act, N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
(a) The committee shall annually select from among its members one
person to serve as an appointed trustee on the board of trustees of the
nonprofit corporation known as Princeton Community Television. The
member shall be chosen by a majority vote of all members. The
appointed trustee shall serve for one year and may be reappointed at
the discretion of the committee.
(b) The Borough of Princeton and Township of Princeton shall enter into an
annual contract with the board of trustees which will specify the
expenditure of any franchise or public funds. The board of trustees will
present an annual audit to the committee and the governing bodies of
both the borough and the township.
(a) A public access network subcommittee.
(b) A cable franchise subcommittee.
§ 9B-2 PRINCETON CODE § 9B-5
BAO:102
§ 9B-6. Powers and Duties of Subcommittees. [Ord. No. 2006-05]
§ 9B-7. Resolving Disputes Within the Committee. [Ord. No.
2006-05]
Any disputes shall be resolved by the majority vote of a quorum of the
committee. If a dispute prevents the committee from performing its
authorized functions, said dispute shall be resolved by majority vote of a
group consisting of the two governing body liaison representatives and the
cable committee chair.
§ 9B-8. Duration of Agreement. [Ord. No. 2006-05]
This agreement shall be in force until October 13, 2014, the date of the
expiration of the cable television franchise agreement.
§ 9B-9. Effective Date of Agreement. [Ord. No. 2006-05]
This agreement shall be enacted upon passage of an enabling ordinance by
the governing bodies of the borough and of the township.
§ 9B-10. Severability. [Ord. No. 2006-05]
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part of this act shall be
adjudged to be invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such
judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder therefor, but
shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, section or part
Each subcommittee shall consist of at least three citizen
representatives. The chair and the liaison representative shall be ex
officio members of all committees.
(a) The public access network subcommittee shall meet at least two times
each year with the Board of the Princeton Community Television to
review the operations of the public access channel (currently TV30). It
shall monitor the performance and expansion of the municipal
institutional network. As appropriate, it shall seek to encourage
coordination and cooperation among the community's six PEG stations
(currently channels 25-30) regarding matters of mutual interest, such
as, but not limited to, the broadcasting of emergency messages and
public service announcements.
(b) The cable franchise subcommittee shall meet at least three times each
year with the cable company, in accordance with the franchise
agreement. The committee shall make recommendations to the
borough and the township regarding continuation of the franchise,
survey residents when appropriate and hear complaints from residents
regarding the service offered by the franchise.
(c) The cable committee may appoint any other subcommittee as the need
arises.
§ 9B-5 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9B-10
BAO:103
thereof, directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall
have rendered.
§ 9B-11. Repealer. [Ord. No. 2006-05]
All ordinances or sections thereof in conflict with this chapter are hereby
repealed.
§ 9B-12. Effective Date of Chapter. [Ord. No. 2006-05]
This chapter shall take effect upon its final passage and publication as
provided by law, or upon the final adoption of the similar ordinance by the
Township of Princeton, whichever is later.
Chapter B10
(RESERVED)
Chapter B10A
CONSTRUCTION SITE MAINTENANCE
§ 10A-1. Purpose of Chapter and References. [Ord. No. 2016-12
Exh. A]
(a) The purpose of this chapter is to:
(1) Ensure that construction sites are maintained clean, safe, sanitary,
and free from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage; and the
activities on these construction sites are conducted so as to
eliminate unsafe or hazardous conditions that endanger the life or
health of the public;
(2) Promote sustainable goals and recycling of construction waste; and
(3) Prevent the accumulation of water or damage to any foundations on
the property with the construction site and the adjoining property.
Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to limit, restrict, or
supersede any requirements of the New Jersey Uniform Fire Safety
Code or the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code Act.
(b) References.
(1) Construction Code Enforcement-Chapter 5A.1 of the Princeton
Code.
(2) Noise-Construction Work-Section 21-2(i) of the Princeton Code.
(3) Sidewalks and Curbs-Section 28-3 of the "Code of the Borough of
Princeton, New Jersey, 1974," as may be amended.
§ 9B-10 PRINCETON CODE § 10A-1
BAO:104
§ 10A-2. Hours of Operation. [Ord. No. 2016-12 Exh. A]
§ 10A-3. General Site Standards. [Ord. No. 2016-12 Exh. A]
(4) International Construction Code.
(5) New Jersey Uniform Fire Safety Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192.
(6) Public Health Nuisance Code of the Princeton Board of Health.
(a) In accordance with Section 21-2(i) of the Princeton Code, normal hours
of operation for construction work on construction sites shall be
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays and between
8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Saturdays.
(b) Construction work outside the normal hours of operation shall require
the prior procurement of a permit from the engineer and/or
construction official, as required in accordance with the terms of
Section 21-2(i) of the Princeton Code.
(a) As used in this chapter, "construction site" and "site" shall refer to any
real property upon which any person proposes to or does engage in the
construction, reconstruction or demolition of any building, structure or
other improvement including landscaping located upon said real
property. A construction permit may or may not be required for such
work upon said property.
(b) Each construction site shall be maintained so as to prevent public
nuisances, including but not limited to the following:
(1) Attractive nuisance (shafts, basements, excavations and unsafe
fences or structures);
(2) Unsanitary sewerage or plumbing facilities;
(3) Circumstances capable of being a fire hazard, according to the
Uniform Fire Safety Act;
(4) Site littered with rubbish or garbage, or which has uncontrolled
growth of weeds;
(5) Structure or building in a state of dilapidation, deterioration, or
decay, or faulty construction, open, vacant or abandoned; and
(6) Excess dust on the site and adjacent properties.
(c) The exterior property areas of each construction site shall be
maintained according to the following requirements:
(1) All exterior property shall be maintained clean, safe, sanitary, and
free from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage. All property
shall be graded and maintained to prevent the accumulation of
stagnant water thereon, or within any structure located thereon.
§ 10A-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10A-3
BAO:105
(2) All sidewalks along the public right-of-way, walkways, driveways,
parking spaces and similar areas shall be kept in a proper state of
repair, and maintained free of hazardous conditions.
(3) All adjoining streets shall be kept clean at all times.
(4) If required by the Engineer, a stone tracking pad will be installed at
the construction site.
(5) All exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds or plant
growth in excess of 10 inches. All noxious weeds shall be
prohibited.
(6) All structures and exterior property shall be kept free from rat
infestation.
(7) Parking of contractors' vehicles must be done according to the
existing motor vehicle and parking laws and ordinances.
(d) The following precautions during building operations shall be
performed:
(1) Explosives, highly flammable and combustible substances, gases
and chemicals shall be stored in accordance with the storage and/
or permitting requirements of the Uniform Fire Safety Code.
(2) If directed by the Engineer and Construction Official, a security
fence shall be installed around the construction site. In addition:
a. For commercial construction sites, a temporary chain-link
fence, with a minimum height of eight feet, shall be
constructed and erected according to trade standards and of
adequate strength to resist wind pressures, and for purposes of
preventing unauthorized entry. The perimeter of the site must
be enclosed properly at the end of each work day, including
closure and locking of gated openings.
b. For residential construction sites, the engineer and
construction official shall specify the required security fence as
appropriate for a site.
c. Fences shall not block or prohibit access to fire hydrants or fire
department suppression system/standpipe system connections.
(3) If directed by the Engineer, a temporary sidewalk shall be used
when the ground is excavated under the public sidewalk, causing
the sidewalk to be impassable or unsafe for use; a minimum width
of four feet shall be used, or a protected walkway of equal width
shall be erected in the street. In cases where a temporary sidewalk
is not required, at the end of each work day the public sidewalk
shall be restored with an ADA-compliant surface.
§ 10A-3 PRINCETON CODE § 10A-3
BAO:106
(4) The entire construction site and adjoining areas shall be kept in a
safe and sanitary condition and free of accumulation of trash,
rubbish, nuts, bolts, small tools, equipment and all other unsafe or
hazardous conditions that endanger the life or health of the public.
Rubbish shall not be allowed to accumulate on the site and shall be
removed as quickly as conditions warrant, and shall be removed in
a manner which prevents injury or damage to persons, adjoining
properties, and public rights-of-way. Combustible rubbish shall not
be disposed of by burning.
(5) When a building has been demolished, the vacant lot shall be filled,
graded, and maintained in conformity to the established street
grades at curb levels. Backfilling of removed foundations shall
conform to the Uniform Construction Code Act.
(6) All materials and equipment required in construction operations
shall be stored and placed so as not to endanger the public, the
workers or adjoining property. To the extent reasonably possible,
all such materials and equipment shall be stored in the rear of the
property and/or behind existing structures.
(7) Materials or equipment shall not be stored within 10-feet of a
property line without the approval of the Engineer or Construction
Official. Materials or equipment shall not be stored on the street or
in the public right-of-way.
(8) Material and equipment shall not be placed or stored so as to
obstruct access to fire hydrants, standpipes, fire or police alarm
boxes, utility boxes, catch basins or manholes, nor shall they be
placed within 50 feet of a street intersection, or so placed as to
obstruct normal observation of traffic signals or to hinder the use of
public transit loading platforms.
(9) Material shall not be dropped by gravity or thrown outside the
exterior walls of a building during demolition or erection. Chutes
shall be provided for this purpose and any material which in its
removal will cause an excessive amount of dust shall be wet down
to prevent creation of a nuisance.
(10) During demolition of a structure, the structure shall be wet down
as necessary to prevent excess dust if determined to be necessary
in the judgment of the engineer or construction official.
(11) Provision shall be made to prevent the accumulation of water or
damage to any foundations on the property of the construction site
or adjoining property.
(12) Dust, sand blasts, or other harmful agents, when employed or
occurring in construction operations, shall be captured at the work
area to prevent their diffusion over adjoining property or streets.
All work done involving the removal of lead based paint must be in
compliance with all state and local regulations and requirements.
§ 10A-3 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10A-3
BAO:107
§ 10A-4. Construction Site Plans. [Ord. No. 2016-12 Exh. A]
§ 10A-5. Construction Debris, Dumpsters and Other Debris
Containers. [Ord. No. 2016-12 Exh. A]
(13) Adequate toilet facilities and drinking water shall be provided at
every construction site.
(a) Construction site plans identifying the proposed location upon a
construction site of all dumpsters, debris containers, construction
trailers, construction fences, silt fences, containment fences, tree
protection fences and portable toilets, and including the emergency
telephone contact numbers of all contractors proposing to do any work
upon the construction site shall be submitted to the development
enforcement officer concurrently with the application for construction
or demolition permits pertaining to the construction site.
(b) The contractor shall make every effort to recycle all construction debris
generated. Any proposed construction site plan shall include a written
demolition schedule which outlines the anticipated items and amounts
of construction debris generated and the recycling site destination.
(a) Each construction site shall be equipped with an adequate and suitable
receptacle or container (e.g. dumpster or roll-off container) for the
deposit of construction and demolition debris and other solid waste
generated as part of the construction process and shall be emptied at
periodic intervals at the discretion of the Engineer so as to prevent
overloading, escape of materials contained therein, and to prevent
obnoxious odors or nuisances of any type during the period of
construction, and not constitute a fire hazard.
(b) Whenever possible, a dumpster shall be located in the driveway of the
construction site. An alternate location on the site must be approved by
the Engineer or Construction Official.
(c) If a dumpster or roll-off container cannot be located on private property
due to driveway width or other property access constraints, and after
receiving a permit allowing occupation of right-of-way as set forth in
Chapter 28 of the "Code of the Borough of Princeton, New Jersey,
1974," as may be amended, a dumpster or roll-off container may be
placed at curbside on any street, road, or right-of-way. It shall be the
responsibility of the Engineer, in consultation with the Police
Department, to determine whether or not the dumpster may be located
curbside. Adequate steps must be taken to prevent debris and rubbish
from being blown into the street or right-of-way by the wind and
causing a public health nuisance. There shall be no dumpsters
permitted on the streets between December 1 and March 31, nor within
50 feet of any intersection.
(1) Upon approval of an application for occupation of right-of-way
submitted in accordance with Section 28-3 of the "Code of the
§ 10A-3 PRINCETON CODE § 10A-5
BAO:108
Borough of Princeton, New Jersey, 1974," as may be amended,
a permit shall be valid and remain in effect for a period of not
more than 10 calendar days. The initial permit may be renewed
by the Engineer upon the filing of a renewal application. In the
event of extenuating or unforeseeable circumstances requiring the
continued use of a dumpster or roll-off container, the applicant
must provide good reason as to why the permit should be renewed.
However, not more than two consecutive renewals of 10 days each
shall be issued to any applicant. Dumpster shall not be placed more
than two business days prior to start of construction or demolition
and shall not remain for more than two business days subsequent
to completion of such work or the expiration of the permit.
(2) See section 28-3.5 of the "Code of the Borough of Princeton, New
Jersey, 1974," as may be amended, for applicable permit fees.
(3) The permit holder shall purchase proper meter bags for the
occupation of any metered parking space(s) by the placement of
the dumpster or roll-off container.
(4) To warn the operators of vehicles and pedestrians of the presence
of a dumpster or roll-off container parked on or along any public
street, road or right-of-way, said container shall be equipped with
such warning devices as appropriate for the location, and as may
be directed by the Police Department.
(5) Planking or other wood sheeting of a minimum nominal thickness
of 1 1/2 is required to be placed under the wheels, or road contact
areas to protect the public roadway of right-of-way from damage. If
the dumpster has wheels, they must be chocked to prevent
movement.
(6) The contents of a dumpster or roll-off container placed on a
municipal street, road or right-of-way and/or on private property
shall not be allowed to overflow or deposit, spill or scatter debris in
the public right-of-way and/or private property, thereby creating a
nuisance or danger to the public's health, safety and welfare, or
constitute a fire hazard. The applicant and/or owner of a dumpster
or roll-off container located on a municipal street, road or right-ofway
found to be in violation of this provision shall subject to such
fines and penalties for littering as set forth by law or ordinance.
(7) Construction dumpsters shall at all times be kept in good repair
and shall be structurally sound and shall be constructed to stand
firmly upright. Dumpsters in the public street or public right-of-way
shall also be tarped during the night or if left unattended for more
than 24 hours.
(8) Upon removal of construction dumpster, the public right-of-way
shall be swept clean of all loose debris and restored to its former
condition in accordance with the standards of the division of public
works.
§ 10A-5 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10A-5
BAO:109
§ 10A-6. Portable Toilets. [Ord. No. 2016-12 Exh. A]
(9) Insurance shall be in accordance with the requirements set forth in
Section 28-3.2 of the "Code of the Borough of Princeton, New
Jersey, 1974," as may be amended.
(10) Failure by the applicant to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter, Title 39, motor vehicle statutes of the state, or any rules or
regulations promulgated by the municipality governing placement
of dumpsters or roll-off containers shall result in revocation of the
permit. Such revocation shall require the applicants to remove the
dumpster within 24 hours of notice by the Police Department that
the applicant is in violation of the chapter.
(d) Nothing contained within this chapter shall be interpreted or construed
as relieving any person or entity from the obligation of complying with
all other laws or ordinances regulating the disposal of solid waste and
recyclable materials or the provision of laws or ordinances related to
littering and public nuisance. The requirements of this chapter shall be
in addition to all such other requirements and are not intended in place
thereof.
(a) Any construction site that requires the disruption of water or sewer
service for a period of more than 72 hours, or where water or sewer
service has been disconnected for more than 72 hours, shall contain at
least one and not more than two portable toilets. To the extent
reasonably possible, the portable toilet(s) shall be located behind the
residence, building or other structure under construction. If the
portable toilet(s) cannot be so located, then they shall be located at
least 15 feet back from the right-of-way, located no more than 10 feet
from the front of any existing principal structure (on the construction
site) and located on the actual construction site itself, and not on the
street, public sidewalk or area designated for the sidewalk, or in the
public right-of-way. The portable toilet(s) shall not be placed within 10
feet of any property line, and the door opening shall face into the
construction site rather than toward any neighboring property. The
location of the portable toilet(s) shall comply with the distance and set
back requirements set forth in this subsection (a), unless, due to the
size or configuration of a property such compliance is not feasible in the
judgment of the Engineer or Construction Official.
(b) The portable toilets shall be serviced at regular intervals so as to
prevent any health hazard, any violation of the Public Health Nuisance
Code, including but not limited to, odors, and other obnoxious
conditions and nuisances of any type.
(c) In the case of construction related to existing condominiums or
multiple-unit structures, this provision may be waived by the
Construction Official upon presentation to the Construction Official of
written proof of access to toilet facilities on the construction site.
§ 10A-5 PRINCETON CODE § 10A-7
BAO:110
§ 10A-7. Construction Trailers and Storage Trailers. [Ord. No.
2016-12 Exh. A]
§ 10A-7A. Tree Protection and Tree Protection Zones. [Ord. No.
2016-34 § 2]
(a) Trailers commonly known as "construction trailers" containing tools,
materials or supplies for contractors, landscapers and workers shall be
parked immediately in front of or on the construction sites but only
during the period of actual construction and only during the period of
time when the particular contractor or worker utilizing the trailer is
actually engaged in working on the project. All such trailers shall be
removed at the end of each work day and may not be stored or parked
in the street. Storage trailers are not permitted in any municipal street
or right-of-way. If a construction trailer is parked on the street, it must
be parked so as to conform to the requirements of the New Jersey
Motor Vehicle Code, N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 et seq., and shall not be permitted
to be parked within 50 feet of an intersection.
(b) A zoning permit is required for use of a construction trailer or storage
trailer according to Section 17A-214 of the "Code of the Borough of
Princeton, New Jersey, 1974," as may be amended. All permitted
trailers shall be permitted to remain only during the period of actual
construction.
(a) The contractor shall ensure compliance with Chapter 22 of the
Princeton Township Code, entitled "Trees and Shrubs," on the site
during construction.
(b) In addition, the contractor shall be responsible for safe guarding areas
referred to in this section as "tree protection zones" on the site during
construction. The phrase "tree protection zone" is defined in section
22-2 of Chapter 22 of the Princeton Township Code, entitled "Trees and
Shrubs."
(c) No contractor shall be permitted to place or maintain, or cause to be
placed or maintained, in or upon a tree protection zone, any stone,
cement, sidewalk, mortar, building material, impervious material,
dumpster or roll-off container, construction or storage trailer, portable
toilet or other material, item or substance that shall impede or prevent
the free access of water, air or fertilizer to the roots of any tree. No
contractor shall disturb the soil within a tree protection zone.
(d) A contractor shall be required to use fencing to protect areas identified
as tree protection zones for every tree on site the removal or
destruction of which is regulated under Chapter 22 of the Princeton
Township Code and for which the contractor has not received a permit
allowing its removal or destruction.
§ 10A-7 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10A-7A
BAO:111
§ 10A-8. Enforcement; Penalties. [Ord. No. 2016-12 Exh. A]
Chapter B11
DISCRIMINATION
For state law as to discrimination generally, see R.S., § 10:5-1 et seq. As to
housing generally, see Ch. 16 of this Code.
§ 11-1. Statement of legislative findings and policy. [8-11-1970, § 1;
Ord. No. 81-46, § 1]
The governing body of the borough finds and declares that practices of
discrimination with respect to real property because of age, race, creed,
color, national origin, ancestry, marital status or sex are matters of concern
to the government of the borough and that such discrimination not only
threatens the rights and proper privileges of persons but menaces the
institutions and foundations of a free democratic society. It is the policy of
the borough that all persons shall have the opportunity to obtain all the
accommodations, advantages, facilities and privileges of real property in
the borough without such discrimination, subject only to conditions and
limitations applicable alike to all persons. In furtherance of that policy, this
chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of the borough for
the protection of the public health, safety and morals and for the promotion
of the general welfare.
§ 11-2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 8-11-70, § 2]
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
COMMISSION — The joint commission on civil rights created by the
borough and the Township of Princeton.
PERSON — One or more individuals, partnerships, associations,
organizations, cooperatives, corporations, legal representatives, trustees,
trustees in bankruptcy, receivers, fiduciaries and other legal entities.
REAL PROPERTY — Real estate, lands, tenements and hereditaments,
corporeal and incorporeal, and leaseholds.
(e) The fence required by this section shall be a four-foot tall wooden-slat
snow fence with five-strand metal wire installed with metal posts at
intervals of six feet.
(a) The Police Department, Engineer and Construction Official shall be
responsible for enforcement of this chapter.
(b) Any person, firm, corporation, or partnership who violates this chapter
or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to the penalties as set forth in Section 1-6 of this
Code.
§ 10A-7A PRINCETON CODE § 11-2
BAO:112
UNLAWFUL DISCRIMINATION — Only those unlawful practices and acts
specified in section 11-3.
§ 11-3. Discriminatory practices enumerated. [8-11-1970, § 3; Ord.
No. 81-46, § 2]
It shall be unlawful discrimination:
(a) For the owner, lessee, sublessee, assignee, or managing agent of, or
other person having the right of ownership or possession of, or the right
to sell, rent, lease, assign or sublease, any real property or part or
portion thereof, or any real estate broker or salesman, attorney,
auctioneer or court appointed fiduciary or agent, or any agent or
employee of any of these:
(1) To refuse to sell, rent, lease, assign or sublease, or otherwise to
deny to or withhold from any person any real property or part or
portion thereof because of the age, race, creed, color, national
origin, ancestry, marital status or sex of such person;
(2) To discriminate against any person because of the age, race, creed,
color or national origin, ancestry, marital status or sex of such
person in the terms, conditions or privileges of the sale, rental or
lease of any real property or part or portion thereof, or in the
furnishing of facilities or services in connection therewith; or
(3) To print, publish, circulate, issue, display, post or mail, or cause to
be printed, published, circulated, issued, displayed, posted or
mailed, any statement, advertisement, publication or sign, or to use
any form of application for the purchase, rental, lease, assignment
or sublease of any real property or part or portion thereof, or to
make any record or inquiry in connection with the prospective
purchase, rental, lease, assignment or sublease of any real
property or part or portion thereof, which expresses, directly or
indirectly, any limitation, specification or discrimination as to age,
race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry, marital status or sex or
any intent to make any such limitation, specification or
discrimination.
(b) For any person, bank, banking organization, mortgage company,
insurance company or other financial institution or lender to whom
application is made for financial assistance for the purchase,
acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair or maintenance of any
real property or part or portion thereof, or any agent or employee
thereof:
(1) To discriminate against any person because of the age, race, creed,
color, national origin, ancestry, marital status or sex of such person,
or of the prospective occupants or tenants of such real property or
part or portion thereof, in the granting, withholding, extending,
modifying or renewing, or in the fixing of rates, terms, conditions
§ 11-2 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-3
BAO:113
§ 11-4. Exceptions. [8-11-1970, § 4]
or provisions of any such financial assistance, or in the extension of
services in connection therewith; or
(2) To use any form of application for such financial assistance or to
make any record or inquiry in connection with applications for such
financial assistance which expresses, directly or indirectly, any
limitation, specification or discrimination as to age, race, creed,
color, national origin, ancestry, marital status or sex, or any intent
to make any such limitation, specification or discrimination.
(c) For any person to take reprisals against any person because he has
opposed any practices or acts forbidden under this chapter or because
he has filed a complaint, testified or assisted in any proceeding under
this chapter.
(d) For any person, to aid, abet, incite, compel or coerce the doing of any of
the acts forbidden under this chapter, or to attempt to do so.
For state law as to enforcement of laws against discrimination in public
housing and real property, see R.S., § 10:5-9.1.
(a) The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the rental: (1) Of a
single apartment or flat in a two-family dwelling, the other occupancy
unit of which is occupied by the owner as his residence or the
household of his family at the time of such rental; or (2) of a room to
another person by the owner or occupant of a one-family dwelling
occupied by him as his residence or the household of his family at the
time of such rental.
(b) Nothing herein contained shall be construed to bar any religious or
denominational institution or organization, or any organization
operated for charitable or educational purposes, which is operated,
supervised or controlled by or in connection with a religious
organization, in the sale, lease or rental of real property, from limiting
admission to or giving preference to persons of the same religion or
denomination or from making such selection as is calculated by such
organization to promote the religious principles for which it is
established or maintained.
(c) Nothing herein contained shall be construed to bar any person from
refusing to sell, rent, lease, assign or sublease any room, apartment or
flat in a dwelling or residential facility that is planned exclusively for
and occupied exclusively by individuals of one sex to any individual of
the opposite sex on the basis of sex, nor shall anything herein be
construed to bar any person from advertising or recording a
qualification as to sex for any room, apartment or flat in such a dwelling
or residential facility.
§ 11-3 PRINCETON CODE § 11-5
BAO:114
§ 11-5. Commission to Investigate and Decide Upon Complaints.
[8-11-1970, § 5]
§ 11-6. Municipal Court Actions Limited. [8-11-1970, § 6]
Any person may file a complaint for any violation of this chapter in the
municipal court in accordance with the practice therein, and this may
be done notwithstanding that a complaint for the same violation shall be
pending before the commission under this chapter. However, no person
shall be prosecuted, tried or punished in the municipal court for any
violation of this chapter, unless the complaint shall be filed in such court
within 90 days after the time of the violation complained of therein.
§ 11-7. Remedies Provided by Chapter Additional to Other
Remedies. [8-11-1970, § 8]
The remedies provided by this chapter shall be deemed in addition to, and
not exclusive of, any other remedies provided by law or by ordinance, except
as otherwise provided by law.
§ 11-8. Service Dogs in Retail Establishments.
(a) Any person claiming to be aggrieved by an unlawful discrimination as
specified in this chapter, may file a complaint with the commission
setting forth the name and address of the person alleged to have
committed the unlawful discrimination complained of, the particulars of
such unlawful discrimination and such other information as may be
required by the commission. This procedure may be followed
notwithstanding that a complaint for the same unlawful discrimination
shall be pending in the municipal court hereunder.
(b) The commission shall thereupon cause prompt investigation to be made
in connection therewith, and if it shall determine after such
investigation that probable cause exists for crediting the allegations of
the complaint, it shall immediately endeavor to eliminate the unlawful
discrimination complained of by conference, conciliation and
persuasion.
(c) No determination of the commission shall be used in any action in the
municipal court of the borough for violation of this chapter.
(d) No complaint shall be filed with the commission later than 30 days after
the date of the unlawful discrimination complained of therein, and the
commission shall complete its investigation and determination and its
procedures, if any, for elimination of the unlawful discrimination
complained of, within 60 days after the filing of the complaint.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any retail establishment doing business in the
Borough of Princeton to prohibit entry or service to any blind, deaf, or
handicapped person accompanied by a dog known and described as a
"seeing-eye dog," "hearing ear dog," "service dog" or "guide dog"
§ 11-5 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-8
BAO:115
§ 11-9. Unisex Restrooms. [Ord. No. 2019-26]
trained by a recognized training agency or school while such dog is in
the immediate custody of such person.
(b) All retail establishments doing business in the Borough of Princeton
which sell food or beverages for consumption on its premises or
otherwise shall post a notice clearly observable by each employee of the
establishment, stating, in effect, that: "It shall be unlawful for any retail
establishment doing business in the Borough of Princeton to prohibit
entry or service to any blind, deaf, or handicapped person accompanied
by a dog known and described as a "seeing-eye dog," "hearing ear dog,"
"service dog" or "guide dog" trained by a recognized training agency or
school while such dog is in the immediate custody of such person."
(c) Any person may file a complaint in the municipal court for any violation
of this ordinance. Any person who violates this ordinance shall be
subject to a fine in accord with the general penalty provisions of the
Code of the Borough of Princeton, New Jersey. Violation of any section
of this ordinance on any single day shall constitute a separate "offense."
(a) Statement of legislative findings and policy. The municipal Governing
Body finds and declares that practices of discrimination with respect to
the use of restroom facilities because of age, race, creed, color, national
origin, ancestry, marital status, sex or gender identity are matters of
concern and that such discrimination not only threatens the rights and
proper privileges of persons but menaces the institutions and
foundations of a free democratic society. It is the policy of the
municipality that all persons shall have the opportunity to use singleoccupancy
bathroom facilities without regard to age, race, creed, color,
national origin, ancestry, marital status, sex or gender identity. In
furtherance of that policy, this section 11-9 shall be deemed an exercise
of the police power of the municipality of Princeton for the protection of
the public health, safety and morals and for the promotion of the
general welfare.
(b) Definitions.
APPROPRIATE SIGNAGE — Means signage indicating that the
restroom is not restricted to a particular gender. Examples include, but
are not limited to, signs with the words "all-gender restroom," "genderneutral
restroom," or "unisex restroom," or signs that use images to
indicate that the restroom is accessible to all genders.
COVERED ENTITY — Means any business establishment (including
offices and office buildings), place of public accommodation, and
municipally- owned building or facility.
PLACE OF PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION — Includes, but is not limited
to, the following types of services or facilities: hotels or other
establishments providing lodging to transient guests; restaurants,
cafeterias, lunchrooms, lunch counters or other facilities principally
§ 11-8 PRINCETON CODE § 11-9
BAO:116
engaged in selling or offering for sale food for consumption on or
off the premises; public restrooms; motion picture houses, theatres,
concert halls, sports arenas, stadiums, or other places of exhibition
or entertainment; retail stores and establishments; transportation
carriers; barber shops and beauty shops; and bars, taverns or other
facilities engaged in selling or offering for sale alcoholic beverages for
consumption on the premises.
SINGLE-OCCUPANT RESTROOM OR SINGLE-OCCUPANCY
RESTROOM — Means any separate private toileting facility designed
for use by no more than one occupant at a time or for a family or those
needing assistance, with a locking mechanism controlled by the user
located on the inside of the door into the facility.
UNISEX RESTROOM — Means a toileting facility that is designated for
use by any person or, regardless of sex or gender identity.
(c) Requirements.
(1) Any covered entity or place of public accommodation with singleoccupancy
restrooms shall ensure that such restrooms are not
restricted to a specific sex or gender identity and shall use
appropriate signage to indicate such facilities are designated for
use by any person, regardless of sex or gender identity.
(2) For purposes of complying with the requirements of this section,
single-occupancy restrooms that are designated handicapped
accessible can also be identified as unisex with appropriate signage
for both designations.
(3) Nothing herein shall be construed as requiring the covered entity
or place of public accommodation to provide a single-occupancy
restroom or to make such restroom available to the public unless
otherwise required by law.
(d) Exception. A covered entity or place of public accommodation may
obtain a waiver from the requirements of this section if it documents in
writing to the construction official's satisfaction that compliance with
this section would violate or conflict with the State plumbing code or
other duly adopted State law.
(e) Applicability. The requirements of this section shall take effect
immediately, except that existing covered entities and places of public
accommodation shall have 180 days from the date of adoption of the
ordinance creating this section to comply with its requirements by
removing any existing signs on the exterior of single-occupant
restrooms that restrict use to a single gender and replacing said signs
with signs indicating use by anyone regardless of sex or gender identity.
(f) Enforcement.
(1) During any inspection of a business or place of public
accommodation by the municipal construction official, a building
§ 11-9 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-9
BAO:117
Chapter B11A
EMPLOYEES — DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION
§ 11A-1. Intent and Purpose. [Ord. No. 82-6, § 1]
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to provide for the defense of
actions against and the indemnification of public employees as permitted by
N.J.S.A. 59:10-1, et seq.
§ 11A-2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 82-6, § 1]
As used in this chapter:
EMPLOYEE — Any officer, employee or servant, whether or not
compensated or part-time, who is authorized to perform any act or service;
provided, however, that the term does not include an independent
contractor.
PUBLIC EMPLOYEE — Any employee or former employee of the borough.
§ 11A-3. Defense of Actions. [Ord. No. 82-6, § 1]
The borough shall provide for the defense of any action brought against
a public employee on account of any act or omission in the scope of his
employment, and this obligation shall extend to any cross-actions,
counterclaims or cross-complaint against such employee.
§ 11A-4. Exceptions. [Ord. No. 82-6, § 1]
The provisions of section 11A-3 shall not be applicable when the mayor and
council determines that:
inspector, code enforcement official, health officer, fire inspector,
or any other local official responsible for the enforcement of any of
Princeton's ordinance and lawfully on the premises, such inspector
or official may also inspect for compliance with this section.
(2) Upon receiving a complaint from a member of the public or
employee of a covered entity or place of public accommodation, a
member of the municipal construction staff shall inspect the
business establishment or public accommodation to determine
compliance with this section.
(g) Violations and Penalties. Any covered entity or place of public
accommodation that violates any provision of this section shall be
subject to the penalties prescribed in section 1-6 of this Code. Each day
that such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. Repeat
offenders, as that term is defined in Section 1-6, shall be subject to the
penalties set forth in that section.
(a) The act or omission was not within the scope of employment; or
§ 11-9 PRINCETON CODE § 11A-4
BAO:118
§ 11A-5. Methods of Providing Defense. [Ord. No. 82-6, § 1]
The borough may provide any defense required of it under this chapter
through an attorney from its own staff or by employing other counsel.
§ 11A-6. Borough Control Over Litigation. [Ord. No. 82-6, § 1]
Whenever the borough provides any defense required of it under this
chapter, the borough, through counsel, may assume exclusive control over
the representation of the public employee, and such employee shall
cooperate fully with the defense.
§ 11A-7. Indemnification. [Ord. No. 82-6, § 1]
In any case where the borough is required to provide a defense under this
chapter, the borough shall pay or shall reimburse the public employee for:
(b) The act or failure to act was because of actual fraud, willful misconduct
or actual malice; or
(c) The defense of the action or proceeding would create a conflict of
interest between the borough and the public employee; or
(d) The defense of the action or proceeding is provided for by an insurance
policy or policies, whether obtained by the borough or by any other
person; or
(e) The public employee failed to deliver to the borough administrator,
within 10 calendar days after the time he is served with any summons,
complaint, process, notice, demand or pleading, the original or a copy
of the same; or
(f) The public employee has failed to cooperate fully with the defense.
(a) Any bona fide settlement agreements entered into on behalf of the
employee; and
(b) Any judgments entered against the employee; and
(c) If the borough has failed to provide such required defense, all costs of
defending the action, including reasonable counsel fees and expenses,
together with cost of any appeal.
In addition, in any case where the borough would be required to
provide a defense under this chapter except for the fact that such
defense is provided for by insurance, the borough shall provide
indemnification as aforesaid, but only to the extent not covered by
insurance.
Nothing in this chapter shall authorize the borough to pay for punitive
or exemplary damages or damages resulting from the commission of a
crime.
§ 11A-4 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11A-7
BAO:119
Chapter B12
ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION
[Editor's Note: Sections 12-1 through 12-12 to be adopted in the
Princeton Code.]
§ 12-1. Established; Purpose; Name. [Ord. No. 2014-17]
There is hereby established pursuant N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 et seq. an
environmental commission of the municipality of Princeton for the
protection, development and use of natural resources, including water
resources, located within the territorial limits of Princeton, which shall be
known as the "Princeton Environmental Commission" and which shall be
governed by the provisions of the aforementioned law and this chapter.
§ 12-2. Composition; Officers; Qualifications; Service Without
Compensation. [Ord. No. 2014-17]
The commission shall consist of seven members who shall be appointed by
the mayor, after consultation with the council; one member shall also be
a member of the planning board, and all members shall be residents of
the municipality. The mayor shall designate one of the members to serve
as chairperson and presiding officer of the commission. All members of
the commission shall serve without compensation, but within budgetary
limitations, they may receive reimbursement for actual expenses
necessarily incurred in the performance of their duties.
§ 12-3. Terms of Office. [Ord. No. 2014-17]
The terms of office for the first commissioners shall be for one, two or three
years, as shall be designated by the mayor in making the appointments, so
that the terms of approximately 1/3 of the members will expire each year.
Their successors shall be appointed for terms of three years and until the
appointment and qualification of their successors.
§ 12-4. Removal From Office. [Ord. No. 2014-17]
The council may remove any member of the commission for cause, on
written charges served upon the member and after a hearing thereon at
which the member shall be entitled to be heard in person or by counsel.
§ 12-5. Vacancies. [Ord. No. 2014-17]
A vacancy on the commission occurring other than by expiration of a term
shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as an original
appointment.
§ 12-6. Alternates; Liaisons. [Ord. No. 2014-17; Ord. No. 2014-22]
The mayor, after consultation with the council, shall appoint not more than
two alternate members who shall be residents of the municipality. Alternate
§ 11A-7 PRINCETON CODE § 12-6
BAO:120
members shall be designated at the time of appointment by the mayor as
"Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2." The terms of the alternate members
shall be for two years, except that the terms of the alternate members first
appointed shall be two years for Alternate No. 1 and one year for Alternate
No. 2 so that the term of not more than one alternate member shall expire
in any one year. A vacancy occurring other than by expiration of term shall
be filled in the same manner as an original appointment, for the unexpired
term only.
An alternate member shall not be permitted to act on any matter in which
such member has either directly or indirectly any personal or financial
interest. An alternate member may, after a public hearing if requested, be
removed by the council for cause.
An alternate member may participate in discussions of the proceedings but
may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member.
A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead
of an alternate member. In the event that a choice must be made as to which
alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote first.
A council member may be designated as liaison with the commission. Such
designee may attend meetings and participate in deliberations of the
commission, but shall not have the right to vote on matters before the
commission.
The board of trustees of Sustainable Princeton may annually designate
one of its board members to serve on the commission. The Sustainable
Princeton member may attend meetings and participate in deliberations of
the commission, but shall not have the right to vote on matters before the
commission.
The board of health may annually designate one if its members to serve
on the commission. The board of health member may attend meetings and
participate in deliberations of the commission, but shall not have the right
to vote on matters before the commission.
§ 12-7. Powers and Duties Generally. [Ord. No. 2014-17]
a. The commission shall have power to study, and make recommendations
and provide advice concerning, open space preservation, water
resources and stormwater management, air pollution control,
sustainable building design and practices, alternative transportation,
recycling, composting, solid waste management, noise control, soil and
landscape protection, environmental appearance, aquatic resources
and protection of flora and fauna.
b. The commission shall have power to conduct research into the use and
possible use of the open land areas of the municipality and may
coordinate the activities of unofficial bodies organized for similar
purposes.
§ 12-6 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-7
BAO:121
§ 12-8. Acquisition and Administration of Property. [Ord. No.
2014-17]
The commission may investigate and negotiate, with the approval of the
council, the acquisition of property, both real and personal, by gift,
purchase, grant, bequest, devise or lease, for any of its purposes. Such
acquisitions may be to acquire the fee or any lesser interest, development
right, easement (including conservation easement), covenant or other
contractual right (including a conveyance on conditions or with limitations
or reversions), as may be necessary to acquire, maintain, improve, protect,
limit the future use of or otherwise conserve and properly utilize open
spaces and other land and water areas in the municipality. All such
acquisitions shall be in the name of the municipality, and the governing
body shall have the right finally to approve or disapprove the commission's
recommendations. The commission may recommend to the council policies,
rules and regulations for the administration of such acquisitions and, if so
authorized by the council, administer such acquisitions for the purposes for
which they were obtained, subject to the terms of any conveyance or gift
thereof.
§ 12-9. Regional Considerations as to Open Spaces. [Ord. No.
2014-17]
In addition to the research performed and recommendations made by the
commission to the planning board and council, as set forth in section
c. The commission may advertise, prepare, print and distribute books,
maps, charts, plans and pamphlets which, in its judgment, it deems
necessary for its purposes, subject to appropriations made available to
it for such activities.
d. The commission shall develop and maintain an inventory of all open
space areas, publicly or privately owned, including sensitive
environmental features like streams, open marsh lands, swamps,
wetlands and flood plains, as a resource for obtaining information on
the proper use of such areas. It may recommend to the planning board
plans and programs for inclusion in the municipal master plan and for
the development and use of such areas.
e. The commission shall, at the commission's discretion, have the power to
review applications for development submitted to the planning board
and offer written advice to said board which, in said commission's
judgment, would alleviate or avoid negative environmental impacts.
f. The commission may, upon the council's approval, develop or
participate in programs, activities and projects aimed at supporting
and/or promoting the commission's goals and purposes, including but
not limited to, fundraising efforts.
g. The commission shall also have such other powers and duties as shall,
from time to time, be prescribed by the council.
§ 12-7 PRINCETON CODE § 12-9
BAO:122
12-7 above, the commission shall have the power to take into account
the regional aspects of conservation of open space. For such purpose,
the commission may consult and cooperate with boards, bodies and
commissions of other municipalities having a mutual interest in open space
and may invite and permit delegates of such boards, bodies or commissions
to attend meetings and participate in the deliberations of the commission,
without the right to vote.
§ 12-10. Records and Reports. [Ord. No. 2014-17]
The commission shall keep minutes of its meetings and records of its
activities and shall make a report to the council annually, and at such other
times as the council may request.
§ 12-11. Personnel. [Ord. No. 2014-17]
The commission may appoint, in consultation with the administrator, such
clerical, technical or other assistants and incur such other expenses as it
may from time to time require and as shall be within the limits of funds
appropriated to it by the council.
§ 12-12. Budget; Appropriations. [Ord. No. 2014-17]
The council shall appropriate in the annual budget funds for the expenses
incurred by the commission. The commission shall submit its proposed
annual budget to the council at such time and in such form and in
accordance with such procedures as the council shall prescribe. Budget
review and approval shall be performed in the manner required by the New
Jersey statutes and regulations.
Chapter B13
FINANCE AND TAXATION
For state law as to taxation generally, see R.S., tit. 54. As to assessment of
personal property generally, see R.S., § 54: - 4-9 et seq.
As to deputy borough collector, see §§ 2-18 to 2-20 of this Code. As to
licenses for sale, etc., of alcoholic beverages, see §§ 4-3 to 4-12. As to
license for coin operated music machines, see §§ 5-13 to 5-15. As to license
for skill amusement machines, see §§ 5-17 to 5-20. As to license for billiard
saloons and bowling alleys, see §§ 5-21 to 5-24. As to licenses for motion
picture shows, see §§ 5-29 to 5-33. As to license for individual dogs, see
§ 6-2. As to kennel license, see § 6-3. As to license for auctioneers, see
§§ 7-1, 7-2. As to licenses for transporting offensive materials over streets,
see §§ 15-5, 15-6. As to tax surcharge for purpose of increasing rent, see
§ 16-54. As to parking meter fees, see §§ 19-60 to 19-63. As to permissible
parades, see §§ 24-3 to 24-11. As to licenses for canvassers and solicitors,
see §§ 25-12 to 25-16. As to licenses for hawkers, hucksters and peddlers,
see §§ 25-29 to 25-36. As to licensing of transient merchants and itinerant
§ 12-9 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-12
BAO:123
vendors generally, see § 25-37. As to taxicab rate schedule, see § 31-21. As
to licenses for regular taxicabs and liveries, see §§ 31-25 to 31-37. As to diala-
ride taxicab rates, see § 31-41. As to licenses for dial-a-ride taxi-cabs, see
§§ 31-46 to 31-52. As to permits for connection with public sewer, etc., see
§§ 34-16 to 34-19.
§ 12-12 PRINCETON CODE § 12-12
BAO:124
ARTICLE I
In General
§ 13-1. Household Personal Property and Personal Effects not to be
Assessed and Taxed. [R.O. 1964, § 79.1]
No tangible household personal property or personal effects located within
the borough shall be assessed and taxed.
For state law as to authority of borough to exempt tangible household
property and personal effects from taxation, see R.S., § 54:4-9.2.
§ 13-2. Joint Purchasing Agreement. [2-13-1973, § 3]
(a) Legislative Findings; Purpose. The mayor and council find that
economies in the purchase of work, materials and supplies may be
expected through the borough's participation in large volume
purchasing on behalf of two or more public agencies. It is, therefore,
the purpose of this section to achieve such economies by authorizing
the borough to participate in such joint purchasing pursuant to Revised
Statutes, section 40A: 11-10 et seq.
(b) Terms and Conditions. The borough hereby agrees with the county that
the purchase of work, materials and supplies for use by their respective
jurisdictions and by such other contracting units as shall lawfully enter
into similar agreements shall be accomplished under the following
terms and conditions:
(1) This agreement shall apply only to such work, materials and
supplies, which shall conform to such specifications, as shall from
time to time by resolution be designated by the county and
approved by the borough.
(2) The county shall cause advertisements for bids to be made as
required by law and shall open bids and notify the borough of the
amounts thereof. All administrative costs incurred by the county in
connection therewith, including the cost of advertising, shall be
borne by the county without reimbursement from the borough.
(3) The borough shall award contracts for work, materials and supplies
for its own use, and such awards shall be to the same successful
bidders at the same net unit prices as are awards by the county for
the county's requirements. However, the borough shall have the
right, after receiving notice of the bids in any instance, not to make
any award thereon and to purchase its requirements from any
other source and in any other lawful manner.
(4) All payments for work, materials and supplies for the borough's
own use shall be made directly to the suppliers by the borough in
accordance with awarded contracts, and the county shall not be
liable for any such payment.
§ 13-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-2
BAO:125
§ 13-2A. Cooperative Pricing Agreement. [Ord. No. 97-8]
(5) All contracts shall be subject to all applicable terms and conditions
of Revised Statutes, section 40A:11-1 et seq.
(c) Joint Purchasing Agent. The purchasing agent of the county is hereby
designated as the joint purchasing agent of the county and the borough,
and of such other contracting units as shall lawfully make such
designations, for the purpose of advertising for, receiving and
administering bids and making reports, in accordance with Revised
Statutes, sections 40A:11-11 and 40A:11-23. The joint purchasing agent
so designated shall perform its duties without cost to the borough.
(a) Preamble. The Borough of Princeton wishes to enter into a cooperative
pricing agreement with the County of Mercer, the County of Mercer to
act as lead agency in connection with the purchasing of certain
services, materials and supplies.
Said agreement is authorized by the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:11-11(5).
(b) Authorization to Execute Agreement. The mayor and clerk are hereby
authorized to execute a cooperative pricing agreement with the County
of Mercer or any of its contracting units within the county, to act as lead
agency for the purchase of certain services, materials and supplies as
stipulated in said agreement. The County of Mercer and/or any of its
contracting units within the county shall be responsible for complying
with the provisions of the Local Public Contracts Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1
et seq. and all other necessary provisions of the revised statutes of the
State of New Jersey in connection with any contracts it enters into on
behalf of the borough.
§ 13-2 PRINCETON CODE § 13-2A
BAO:126
ARTICLE II
Finance Committee
§ 13-3. Creation; Composition; Term of Office; Vacancies. [Ord. No.
89-5, § 1]
The finance committee of the borough is hereby created, and it shall consist
of the mayor as ex officio, and three of the members of the council appointed
by the mayor. The terms of the appointed members shall expire on the
first day of January next following their appointments, but they shall serve
after the expiration of their terms until their successors shall have been
appointed and qualified. Any vacancy in any of the appointive offices shall
be filled in like manner, but for the unexpired term only. The mayor shall
designate one of the appointed members the chairperson of the finance
committee.
§ 13-4. Powers and Duties of the Finance Committee. [Ord. No.
89-5, § 1]
The finance committee shall have the power to oversee both the revenues
and expenditures of the Borough of Princeton and to conduct such
investigations and studies as the need warrants. The finance committee
shall provide advice to the mayor and council as to the finances of the
municipality generally and shall also serve to regulate the provision of taxi
and livery service in the Borough of Princeton, as more particularly defined
in Chapter 31 of this Code. The finance committee shall also have the power
to adopt such rules and regulations concerning the finances of the borough
as are not inconsistent with state law and the provisions of the Code or
other municipal ordinances.
§ 13-3 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-4
BAO:127

ARTICLE III
Conditional Trust Accounts for Self-Insurance Needs
§ 13-5. Trust Fund for Employee Health Benefits. [Ord. No. 91-27,
§§ I — IV]
§ 13-6. Trust Fund for General Liability Claims. [Ord. No. 91-30, §§ I
— IV]
(a) Authority to Appropriate Funds. The Local Budget Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:4-1
et seq., and the Local Fiscal Affairs Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:5-1 et seq., permit
a governing body to appropriate and place conditions on funds.
(b) Purpose. The primary purpose of this trust will be to provide the
Borough of Princeton with available funds to properly manage and fund
self insurance liabilities of the borough in connection with employee
health benefits.
(c) Principal to be Held in Trust Fund. The principal which will be
appropriated under this section is to be held in the trust fund of the
Borough of Princeton and invested as permitted by law. The interest
earned shall remain in the trust account and the principal is not to be
expended but will be used to generate interest income which after the
year 1991 may be appropriated through the annual budget to meet the
operating costs for the calendar year next following a certification by
the chief financial officer of the amount of interest that has been earned
and not appropriated. Certification shall be made each year by January
10th following December 31, 1991 and each succeeding year thereafter
and delivered to the borough administrator in written form.
(d) Reduction of Principal Amount Appropriated. If the mayor and borough
council determine that conditions require reduction of the principal
amount appropriated in the trust fund hereby established, it may do so
by a vote not less than two thirds of the full council.
(a) Authority to Appropriate Funds. The Local Budget Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:4-1
et seq., and the Local Fiscal Affairs Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:5-1 et seq., permit
a governing body to appropriate and place conditions on funds.
(b) Purpose. The primary purpose of this trust will be to provide the
Borough of Princeton with available funds to properly manage and fund
self insurance liabilities of the borough in connection with general
liability claims.
(c) Principal to be Held in Trust Fund. The principal which will be
appropriated under this section is to be held in the trust fund of the
Borough of Princeton and invested as permitted by law. The interest
earned shall remain in the trust account and the principal is not to be
expended but will be used to generate interest income which after the
year 1991 may be appropriated through the annual budget to meet the
operating costs for the calendar year next following a certification by
§ 13-5 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-6
BAO:129
the chief financial officer of the amount of interest that has been earned
and not appropriated. Certification shall be made each year by January
10th following December 31, 1991 and each succeeding year thereafter
and delivered to the borough administrator in written form.
(d) Reduction of Principal Amount Appropriated. If the mayor and borough
council determine that conditions require reduction of the principal
amount appropriated in the trust fund hereby established, it may do so
by a vote not less than two thirds of the full council.
§ 13-6 PRINCETON CODE § 13-6
BAO:130
Chapter B14
FIRE PREVENTION AND SAFETY
As to removal from private property of materials constituting fire hazard,
see §§ 15-1, 15-2. As to alarm systems, see Princeton Township Code
Chapter 2A, Alarm Systems.
[Editor's Note: Prior ordinances codified herein include prior 1964
Code §§ 29.1, 29.2 — 29.5, 29.11 — 29.15, 29.21 — 29.25,
29.31 — 29.33, 29.42, 29.44 — 29.46, 29.51 — 29.53, 31.4, 31.5 and
portions of Ordinance Nos. 8-11-70, 11-21-72, 2-13-73, 76-20, 77-9,
79-35, 80-26, 82-15, 83-34, 83-40, 84-27, 85-33, 86-2, 86-3, 86-4,
86-5, 1988-16, 88-40, 90-19, 90-20, 92-12, 96-15, 99-5, 2003-35,
2013-7, 2015-23, 2015-47, 2017-63.]
§ 13-6 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-6
BAO:131

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 14-1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2019-13]
The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards and procedures for the
prevention of fires and related hazards in Princeton, consistent with New
Jersey laws and regulations, and to provide for the enforcement of those
standards and procedures.
§ 14-2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2019-13]
As used in this chapter:
AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE — Means those vehicles that are
defined and authorized as such under the laws of the State of New Jersey.
CHIEF OF POLICE — Means the chief of the Princeton police department,
or designee.
DIRECTOR OF EMERGENCY AND SAFETY SERVICES (ALSO REFERRED
TO HEREIN AS DIRECTOR) — Means the Princeton department head
responsible for all fire prevention and safety matters in the municipality.
FIRE OFFICIAL — Means the Chief Administrator of the Bureau of Fire
Safety established in section 14-4 or his or her authorized representative.
PERSON — Means any individual, corporation, limited liability company,
sole proprietorship, association, partnership, other legal entity,
government, or governmental subdivision or agency.
PRINCETON — Means the Municipality of Princeton, County of Mercer,
State of New Jersey.
SOGS OR SOG — Means the Standard Operating Guidelines of the
Princeton fire department.
UNIFORM FIRE CODE — Means the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code,
N.J.A.C. 5:70-1.1 et seq., created pursuant to the Uniform Fire Safety Act,
N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq.
§ 14-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-2
BAO:133

ARTICLE II
Fire Prevention Code
§ 14-3. Local enforcement of the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code.
[Ord. No. 2019-13]
Pursuant to the Uniform Fire Safety Act, the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code
shall be locally enforced in Princeton.
§ 14-4. Creation of the Bureau of Fire Safety. [Ord. No. 2019-13]
The local enforcing agency required by the Uniform Fire Safety Act shall
be the Princeton Bureau of Fire Safety, heretofore created and hereby
continued.
§ 14-5. Organization of the Bureau of Fire Safety; Fire Official.
[Ord. No. 2019-13]
The Fire Official shall be the chief Administrator of the Bureau of Fire
Safety. The Bureau of Fire Safety shall be under the direct supervision of
the Fire Official, who shall report to the Director of Emergency and Safety
Services.
§ 14-6. Appointment of Fire Official; Removal. [Ord. No. 2019-13]
§ 14-7. Inspectors and Employees; Appointment and Removal. [Ord.
No. 2019-13]
Such inspectors and other personnel as may be necessary in the Bureau of
Fire Safety shall be appointed by the Administrator. Inspectors and other
employees of the Bureau of Fire Safety shall be subject to removal by the
Administrator in accordance with the Princeton Personnel Manual.
§ 14-8. Duties of the Bureau of Fire Safety. [Ord. No. 2019-13]
The Bureau of Fire Safety shall enforce the Uniform Fire Code, pursuant
to the Uniform Fire Safety Act, and the codes and regulations adopted
under it, in all buildings, structures, and premises within the established
boundaries of Princeton, other than owner-occupied one and two family
dwellings; premises owned by or leased to and maintained by the federal
government or any agency or instrumentality thereof; interstate agencies;
and the State of New Jersey or any agency or instrumentality thereof. In
(a) The position of Fire Official heretofore created is hereby continued.
(b) The Bureau of Fire Safety shall be under the direct supervision of the
Fire Official, who shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of council.
(c) The Fire Official shall be subject to removal by the Administrator in
accordance with the Princeton Personnel Manual.
§ 14-3 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-8
BAO:135
undertaking said enforcement, the Bureau of Fire Safety shall faithfully
comply with the requirements of the Uniform Fire Code.
§ 14-9. Appeal of Order of the Bureau of Fire Safety. [Ord. No.
2019-13]
Pursuant to the Uniform Fire Safety Act, any person aggrieved by any order
of the Bureau of Fire Safety as it relates to the Uniform Fire Code shall have
the right to appeal to the Princeton construction board of appeals.
§ 14-10. Inspection of Life Hazard Uses. [Ord. No. 2019-13]
The Bureau of Fire Safety shall carry out on behalf of the Commissioner of
the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs the periodic inspection of
life hazard uses required by the Uniform Fire Code.
§ 14-11. Inspection of Non-Life Hazard Uses. [Ord. No. 2019-13]
The Bureau of Fire Safety shall inspect all buildings, structures or premises
not listed as life hazard uses (referred hereafter as non-life hazard uses),
with the exception of owner-occupied detached one and two family
dwellings that are used exclusively for residential purposes. Individual
dwelling units in multi-family dwellings are also excluded from this
inspection program with the exception of the common egress, storage,
and mechanical areas of such structures. All non-life hazard uses shall be
inspected periodically as follows:
§ 14-12. Permit Fees. [Ord. No. 2019-13]
The permit fees shall be as follows:
Type I Fire Safety Permit $100
Type II Fire Safety Permit As set forth in the Uniform Fire Code at
N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.9(c)
Type II Fire Safety Permit As set forth in the Uniform Fire Code at
N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.9(c)
Type IV Fire Safety Permit:\ As set forth in the Uniform Fire Code at
N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.9(c)
(a) At least every 24 months, except that
(b) Non-life hazard uses that are required by New Jersey law or rule to
have annual inspections shall be inspected at least every 12 months.
Nothing herein shall prohibit the Bureau of Fire Safety from inspecting
any non-life hazard more frequently at the request of the occupant and
subject to the inspection fees set forth herein.
§ 14-8 PRINCETON CODE § 14-13
BAO:136
§ 14-13. Fees for Inspection of Uses not Classified as Life Hazard
Uses and Fees for Inspection of Multiple Dwellings. [Ord. No.
2019-13]
§ 14-14. Fees for Certificate of Smoke Detector and Carbon
Monoxide Alarm Compliance. [Ord. No. 2019-13]
(a) Owners of businesses or other uses constituting industrial, commercial,
educational, professional services and other uses not classified as life
hazard uses by the Uniform Fire Code shall pay to Princeton for each
inspection pursuant to this chapter fees determined by the gross floor
area of the use as follows:
0 - 999 square feet $50
1,000 — 1,999 square feet: $125
2,000 — 4,999 square feet: $150
5,000 — 9,999 square feet: $350
10,000 — 19,999 square feet $520
20,000 — 49,999 square feet $572
50,000 — 10,000 square feet $624*
One and two story parking decks $50 per deck
3 or more multiple story parking
decks
$110 per deck
* An additional fee of $75 for each 50,000 square feet or part thereof
above 100,000 square feet will be added to cover the expense of
performing the fire safety inspection.
(b) Where a multiple family dwelling not classified as a life hazard use by
the Uniform Fire Code contains common areas which require
inspection in accordance with this section, the owners of multi-family
dwellings shall pay for said inspections a fee of $30 per dwelling unit
for each building requiring inspection, except that no building owner
shall be required to pay more than $500 per building.
(a) The fees for a certificate of smoke detector and carbon monoxide alarm
compliance (CSACMAPFEC) shall be as follows:
Initial inspection: $50
First re-inspection: $0
All subsequent reinspections:
$50 per re-inspection
Certificate: As set forth in the Uniform Fire Code at
N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.9(d), based on the amount of
time remaining before the change of occupant
is expected.
§ 14-13 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-14
BAO:137
§ 14-15. Registration of Non-Life Hazard Uses. [Ord. No. 2019-13]
(b) All fees shall be paid prior to inspection.
(c) Exceptions for affordable housing units sold through the Princeton
Affordable Housing Program:
Initial inspection: $0
First re-inspection: $0
All subsequent reinspections:
$0
Certificate: $45 or lowest fee set by N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.9(d),
whichever is lower, regardless of when the
certificate is requested
(a) Owners of businesses and/or other uses constituting industrial,
commercial, professional services, educational, multi-family residential
and other uses not classified as life hazard uses by the Uniform Fire
Code and which are required to be inspected herein in accordance with
this article and the requirements of the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code
shall register annually with the Bureau of Fire Safety as provided
herein.
(b) The owners of uses required to be registered shall do so on forms
provided by the Bureau of Fire Safety, which forms shall include, but
not be limited to, the following information:
(1) The name, address, telephone number of the owner of the property
upon or in which the use is located.
(2) The name, home address, and home telephone number of the
owner, operator, or registered agent of the use, if different from the
owner of the property.
(3) The name, physical location, mailing address, and telephone
number of the use or business.
(4) The type of use along with a description of the business of activity
being conducted.
(5) The amount of square footage being utilized or occupied by the use
or business.
(6) Any further information deemed necessary to identify or classify
the use or business, as may be required by the Fire Official.
(c) It shall be a violation of this article for the owner or operator of a
business to fail to return such forms within 30 days of being ordered to
do so by the Fire Official. If the ownership is transferred, whether by
sale, assignment, gift, intestate succession, devise, reorganization,
§ 14-14 PRINCETON CODE § 14-15
BAO:138
§ 14-16. Certificate of Fire Code Status. [Ord. No. 2019-13]
§ 14-17. Local Technical Amendments to the Uniform Fire Code.
[Ord. No. 2019-13]
Pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:71-2.8, the following provisions are hereby adopted
as local amendments to the technical standards of the Uniform Fire Code:
receivership, foreclosure or execution process, the new owner or
operator shall file a new registration within 30 days of such a transfer.
(d) Waivers. The following shall be exempt from the local permit and
inspection fees required herein; however, they shall be required to
properly apply for such permits and registrations and comply with all
other code requirements:
(1) Volunteer fire companies.
(2) Volunteer ambulance squads.
(3) The municipality of Princeton, its boards and committees and all
contractors, subcontractors, agents, and employees of the
municipality of Princeton within the performance of their
authorized duties.
(e) Failure to Register. A penalty of $250 shall be assessed for any business
or use required to register that fails to register in accordance with the
requirements herein.
(a) Pursuant to the Uniform Fire Code at N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.2(e), upon request
of the owner, contract purchaser, transferee or the authorized agent of
any of them, the Fire Official shall issue a certificate either indicating
that violations exist or that fees and/or penalties remain outstanding
according to its records, or which states that its records indicate that no
violations remain unabated and no penalties or fees remain unpaid.
Upon request, the agency shall provide copies of the violations list and
penalty orders.
(b) All requests for a certificate of fire code status shall be in writing. The
fee for the issuance of such a certificate shall be $35.
(c) Subsequent owners or those succeeding to control over the premises
shall be responsible for correcting unabated violations and for the
payment of outstanding fees and/or penalties whether or not they have
requested a certificate of fire code status. A person who purchases a
property without having obtained a certificate of fire code status stating
that there are no unabated violations of record and no unpaid fees or
penalties shall be deemed to have notice of all violations of record and
shall be liable for the payment of all unpaid fees or penalties.
(a) Fire Hydrants.
§ 14-15 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-17
BAO:139
(1) Markings: All new and existing fire hydrants installed on private
property shall have red barrels with white reflective caps.
Exception: Existing limited-service fire hydrants shall have yellow
barrels with white reflective caps.
(b) Exterior Storage:
(1) Dumpster Enclosures: No dumpster shall be placed closer than 10
feet to any building, fire escape, or exit door unless provided with
an approved, noncombustible enclosure constructed in accordance
with the Uniform Construction Code. Dumpsters placed closer than
15 feet to any building shall be provided with an approved
enclosure of limited- combustibility, constructed in accordance with
the Uniform Construction Code.
(2) Trash Enclosures: With the exception of one-and two-family
dwellings, no loose trash, trash bags, or trash cans shall be located
closer than 10 feet to any fire escape or exit, nor closer than five
feet to any building unless provided with an approved enclosure of
limited-combustibility constructed in accordance with the Uniform
Construction Code.
(3) Exterior Storage: Exterior storage shall be neat, orderly, shall not
obstruct ingress or egress to the building, and shall not be within
10 feet of any building.
(c) Street Obstruction:
(1) Street Obstruction: No person or persons shall erect, construct,
place or maintain any fences, gates, chains, bars, pipes, or any
other type of obstruction in or on any street or fire access lane
within the municipal boundaries of Princeton, without approval of
the Fire Official. The word "street", as used herein, shall mean any
roadway accessible to the public for vehicular traffic, including but
not limited to private streets or access lanes, as well as all public
streets within the municipal boundaries of Princeton.
(d) Storage of flammable or combustible liquids or hazardous materials:
(1) Secondary Containment: All new and existing aboveground tanks
greater than 55 gallons capacity utilized for the storage of
flammable or combustible liquids or hazardous materials shall be
provided with secondary containment constructed of an
impermeable material and sized to hold 115% of the largest tank or
container inside the containment area.
Exception: Owner occupied one- and two-family residential fuel oil
tank installations of 660 gallons capacity or less.
(e) Multi-Family Dwellings:
§ 14-17 PRINCETON CODE § 14-17
BAO:140
§ 14-18. Violations; Penalties. [Ord. No. 2019-13]
The provisions of this article shall be enforced pursuant to the provisions of
the Uniform Fire Safety Act and violations shall be subject to the penalties
contained therein. Appeals of any such penalties shall be filed with the
Princeton construction board of appeals.
(1) Smoke Detectors: Smoke detectors required to be installed in
individual dwelling units or guest rooms by the Uniform Fire Code
shall be powered by an alternating current (AC) constantly active
electric current which cannot be deactivated by the operation of
any interconnected switching device. All detectors shall meet the
requirements of Underwriters Laboratories 217 and shall not be
interconnected with a system of smoke detectors serving any
common areas and shall be installed in accordance with the
Uniform Construction Code.
(2) Dwelling Unit Doors: Dwelling unit, guest room or rooming unit
corridor doors in buildings of use groups R-1, R-2, and I-1, as
defined in the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code, shall be at least 1 3/8
inch solid core wood or approved equal with approved door closers
and shall not have any glass panels, other than approved wired
glass in metal frames. Replacement doors shall be 1 3/4 inch solid
core wood or approved equal, unless existing frame will
accommodate only a 1 3/8 inch door. All replacement doors shall be
installed in accordance with the Uniform Construction Code.
(3) Party walls (defined as walls separating dwelling units from one
another and/or from a common area) shall be kept free of unsealed
or improperly sealed penetrations and upon completion of any work
causing the unsealing or penetration of a party wall the responsible
party shall provide a certification to the Bureau of Fire Safety
demonstrating compliance with this section. The certification shall
be provided at the time of the Bureau of Fire Safety's scheduled
inspection of the premises, and shall state that a visual review was
conducted in the area in which the work was completed and that all
penetrations have been sealed with the proper fireproof material
and in accordance with applicable code requirements.
§ 14-17 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-18
BAO:141

ARTICLE III
Fire Lanes
§ 14-19. Designation and Notification. [Ord. No. 2019-13]
§ 14-20. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2019-13]
The police chief and the Fire Official shall enforce the provisions of this
article.
§ 14-21. Vehicle Parking, Standing and Obstruction Prohibited;
Removal of Same. [Ord. No. 2019-13]
(a) Designation. Fire lanes on private property shall be designated in
writing by the Fire Official of in accordance with the provisions of the
Uniform Fire Code.
(b) Markings.
(1) Signs. The owner of any property upon which fire lanes are
designated in accordance with the requirements of this article shall
install signs at intervals of one for every 100 linear feet of fire lane
or part thereof, or as otherwise approved by the Fire Official. Signs
shall have a white reflective background and be provided with red
lettering which reads "No Parking — Fire Lane." Such signs shall
measure 12 inches by 18 inches or as approved by the Fire Official.
(2) Striping. The owner of any property upon which fire lanes are
designated in accordance with the requirements of this article shall
install striping as described herein for all fire lanes on improved
areas provided as any portion of a fire lane. Fire lanes shall be
provided with yellow lines four inches in width along their entire
circumference. The fire lane shall further be provided with
diagonal striping, yellow in color and having a minimum width of
four inches, spaced at intervals of five feet.
(3) Size. Fire lanes for vehicle access shall be a minimum of 12 feet in
width, or as otherwise required by the Fire Official. Fire lanes for
egress of occupants only shall only be required to be the width of
the exit way served.
(c) Notification. Once a fire lane on private property has been designated
by the Fire Official in accordance with the requirements of the Uniform
Fire Code and properly marked by the property owner, the Fire Official
shall notify the police department and municipal clerk in writing of the
existence and location of such designated fire lane.
(a) No person shall park, or otherwise leave unattended any vehicle or
place any obstruction in or upon any fire lane at any time; or obscure
from view, damage, deface, obstruct or restrict the access to any fire
hydrant or any other fire department connection for the suppression of
fires, including fire hydrants and fire department connections that are
§ 14-19 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-21
BAO:143
§ 14-22. Violations; Penalties. [Ord. No. 2019-13]
In addition to the removal costs required in section 14-21 above, a person
who violates any section of this article shall be subject to the penalties set
forth in section 1-6 of the Princeton Code.
located in public or private streets and access lanes, or on private
property.
(b) The Fire Official or the chief of police shall have the authority to remove
or have removed such obstructions or vehicles as may violate this
section at the expense of the owner of the vehicle or property causing
such obstruction.
§ 14-21 PRINCETON CODE § 14-22
BAO:144
ARTICLE IV
Fire Hydrants; Public Water Supply
§ 14-23. New or Relocated Hydrants. [Ord. No. 2019-13]
The Fire Official shall consult with the fire chief prior to recommending the
location of new or relocation of existing fire hydrants or the placement or
replacement of inadequate water mains.
§ 14-24. Removal of Hydrant From Service. [Ord. No. 2019-13]
(a) A fire hydrant shall not be removed from service until notification is
provided to the fire chief.
(b) No person shall use or operate any fire hydrant intended for use of the
fire department unless such person first secures a permit for such use
from the Fire Official and the water company having jurisdiction. This
subsection shall not apply to the use of such hydrants by an authorized
officer or agent of the water company having jurisdiction.
§ 14-23 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-24
BAO:145

ARTICLE V
Violations and Penalties Generally
§ 14-25. Violations; Penalties. [Ord. No. 2019-13]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which no other
penalty is provided herein shall be subject to the penalties set forth in
section 1-6 of the Princeton Code.
§ 14-25 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-25
BAO:147
Chapter B14A
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
§ 14A-1. Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose and
Objectives.
§ 14A-1.1. Statutory Authorization. [Ord. No. 2016-33 Exh. A]
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1, et
seq., delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote public health, safety, and general welfare
of its citizenry. Therefore, the Mayor and Council of Princeton in Mercer
County, New Jersey does ordain as follows.
§ 14A-1.2. Findings of Fact. [Ord. No. 2016-33 Exh. A]
§ 14A-1.3. Statement of Purpose. [Ord. No. 2016-33 Exh. A]
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
(a) The flood hazard areas of Princeton are subject to periodic inundation
which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary
public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of
the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and
general welfare.
(b) These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and
velocities, and when inadequately anchored, causes damage in other
areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise
protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
(a) Protect human life and health;
(b) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
(c) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding
and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
(d) Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(e) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas
mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, bridges located in
areas of special flood hazard;
(f) Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
§ 14-25 PRINCETON CODE § 14A-1.3
BAO:148
§ 14A-1.4. Methods of Reducing Flood Losses. [Ord. No. 2016-33
Exh. A]
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
§ 14A-2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2016-33 Exh. A]
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
ADMINISTRATOR OR LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR — Shall mean the
individual or individuals designated in section 14A-4.2 below.
AH ZONE — Shall mean areas subject to inundation by 1%-annual-chance
shallow flooding (usually areas of ponding) where average depths are
between one and three feet. Base Flood Elevations (BFEs) derived from
detailed hydraulic analyses are shown in this zone.
AO ZONE — Shall mean areas subject to inundation by 1%-annual-chance
shallow flooding (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain) where average
depths are between one and three feet.
APPEAL — Shall mean a request for a review of the local administrator's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
(g) Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
(h) Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
(a) Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
(b) Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
(c) Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood
waters;
(d) Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage; and,
(e) Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
§ 14A-1.3 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14A-2
BAO:149
APPEAL BOARD — Shall mean the board designated in Section 14A-4.4
below to hear appeals from the local administrator's interpretation of, and
requests for variances from, the provisions of this chapter.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — Shall mean a designated AO or AH Zone
on a community's Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM) with a 1%
annual or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet
where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding
is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — Shall mean land in the floodplain
within a community subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any
given year. It is shown on the FIRM as Zone V, VE, V1-30, A, AO, A1-A30,
AE, A99, or AH.
BASE FLOOD — Shall mean a flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — Shall mean the flood elevation shown on
a published Flood Insurance Study (FIS) including the Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM). For Zones AE, AH, AO, and A1-30 the elevation represents
the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a 1% or greater
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Shall mean any area of the building having its floor subgrade
(below ground level) on all sides.
DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean any manmade change to improved or
unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other
structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations, or storage of equipment or materials located within the area of
special flood hazard.
DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM) — Shall mean the
official map on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated
both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones
applicable to the community.
ELEVATED BUILDING — Shall mean a non-basement building (i) built, in
the case of a building in an Area of Special Flood Hazard, to have the top
of the elevated floor elevated above the base flood elevation plus freeboard
by means of piling, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to
the flow of the water, and (ii) adequately anchored so as not to impair the
structural integrity of the building during a flood up to the magnitude of
the base flood. In an Area of Special Flood Hazard "elevated building" also
includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter
walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of flood
waters.
EROSION — Shall mean the process of the gradual wearing away of land
masses.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — Shall mean
a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
§ 14A-2 PRINCETON CODE § 14A-2
BAO:150
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — Shall mean the official map
on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the
areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — Shall mean the official report in which
the Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as
the Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.
FLOOD OR FLOODING — Shall mean a general and temporary condition of
partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Shall mean zoning
ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations,
special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading
ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police
power. The term describes such State or local regulations, in any
combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood
damage prevention and reduction.
FLOODPROOFING — Shall mean any combination of structural and
nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which
reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property,
water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — Shall mean the channel of a river or other watercourse and
the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without accumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more
than 0.2 feet.
FREEBOARD — Shall mean a factor of safety usually expressed in feet
above a flood level for purposes of flood plain management. "Freeboard"
tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute
to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood
and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the
hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — Shall mean the highest natural elevation
of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed or existing
walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Shall mean any structure that is:
(a) The overflow of inland or tidal waters and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
(b)
§ 14A-2 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14A-2
BAO:151
LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR — See definition of "Administrator" above.
LOWEST FLOOR — Shall mean the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
[including basement]. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, useable
solely for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other
than a basement is not considered a building's lowest floor provided that
such enclosure is not built so to render the structure in violation of other
applicable non-elevation design requirements of 44 CFR Section 60.3.
MANUFACTURED HOME — Shall mean a structure, transportable in one
or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for
use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational
vehicle".
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR MANUFACTURED HOME
SUBDIVISION — Shall mean a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided
into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Shall mean structures for which the start of
construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain
regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — Shall mean
a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction
of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by the municipality.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
(a)
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
(b)
Individually listed on a State inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
(c)
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved State program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
(d)
§ 14A-2 PRINCETON CODE § 14A-2
BAO:152
PERMANENT CONSTRUCTION — Does not include land preparation, such
as clearing, grading and filling nor does it include the installation of streets
and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings
or piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it
include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as
garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part
of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions
of the building.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — Shall mean a vehicle which is (i) built on a
single chassis; (ii) 400 square feet or less when measured at the longest
horizontal projections; (iii) designed to be self-propelled or permanently
towable by a light duty truck; and (iv) designed primarily not for use as
a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational,
camping, travel, or seasonal use.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Shall mean for other than new construction
or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L.
No. 97-348) includes substantial improvements and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement
was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site such as
the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of pilings, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation.
STRUCTURE — Shall mean a walled and roofed building, a manufactured
home, or a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Shall mean damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its condition before
damage would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Shall mean any reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of
which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the
"start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures
which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair
work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of State or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement officer and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
(a)
Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic
structure".
(b)
§ 14A-2 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14A-2
BAO:153
VARIANCE — Shall mean a grant of relief from the requirements of this
chapter that permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be
prohibited by this chapter.
VIOLATION — Shall mean the failure of a structure or other development
to be fully compliant with this chapter. A new or substantially improved
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR
§ 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in
violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
§ 14A-3. General Provisions.
§ 14A-3.1. Lands to Which This Chapter Applies. [Ord. No. 2016-33
Exh. A]
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of Princeton.
§ 14A-3.2. Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard.
[Ord. No. 2016-33 Exh. A]
The areas of special flood hazard for Princeton, Community No. 340252, are
identified and defined on the following documents prepared by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency:
§ 14A-3.3. Penalties for Noncompliance. [Ord. No. 2016-33 Exh. A]
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, relocated to, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this Chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined
not more than $2,000 or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both,
(a) A scientific and engineering report "Flood Insurance Study, Mercer
County, New Jersey (All Jurisdictions)" whose effective date is July 20,
2016.
(b) "Flood Insurance Rate Map for Mercer County, New Jersey (All
Jurisdictions)" as shown on Index and panel(s) 34021C0038F,
34021C0039F, 34021C0043F, 34021C0044F, 34021C0063F,
34021C0126F, 34021C0127F, 34021C0129, 34021C0131F,
34021C0132F, 34021C0133F, 34021C0134F, 34021C0137F,
34021C0141F, and 34021C0151F, whose effective date is July 20, 2016.
The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study, maps and advisory documents
are on file in the office of the Princeton Municipal Engineer, 400
Witherspoon Street, Princeton, New Jersey.
§ 14A-2 PRINCETON CODE § 14A-3.3
BAO:154
for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved
in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent Princeton, from taking
such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
§ 14A-3.4. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. [Ord. No. 2016-33
Exh. A]
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
and other regulation, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 14A-3.5. Interpretation. [Ord. No. 2016-33 Exh. A]
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be
considered as minimum requirements, liberally construed in favor of the
Governing Body, and deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers
granted under State statutes.
§ 14A-3.6. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. [Ord. No. 2016-33
Exh. A]
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special flood
hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or
flood damages.
This chapter shall not create liability on the part of Princeton, any officer
or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance Administration, for any flood
damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative
decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 14A-4. Administration.
§ 14A-4.1. Establishment of Development Permit. [Ord. No. 2016-33
Exh. A]
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development
begins, including placement of manufactured homes, within any area of
special flood hazard established in Section 14A-3.2. Application for a
development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the local
administrator and may include, but not be limited to; plans in duplicate
drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations
of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of
materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically,
the following information is required:
§ 14A-3.3 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14A-4.1
BAO:155
§ 14A-4.2. Designation of the Local Administrator. [Ord. No.
2016-33 Exh. A]
The Princeton Land Use Engineer is hereby appointed to administer and
implement this Chapter by granting or denying development permit
applications in accordance with its provisions.
§ 14A-4.3. Duties and Responsibilities of the Administrator. [Ord.
No. 2016-33 Exh. A]
The duties of the administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the
duties and responsibilities set forth in Sections 14A-4.3-1 through 14A-4.3-6
below.
§ 14A-4.3-1. Permit Review. [Ord. No. 2016-33 Exh. A]
§ 14A-4.3-2. Use of Other Base Flood and Floodway Data. [Ord. No.
2016-33 Exh. A]
When base flood elevation and floodway data has not been provided in
accordance with Section 14A-3.2, "Basis for establishing the areas of special
flood hazard," the local administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably
utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a Federal,
State or other source, in order to administer Sections 14A-5.2-1, "Specific
standards, residential construction," and 14A-5.2-2, "Specific standards,
nonresidential construction."
(a) Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all structures;
(b) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been
floodproofed.
(c) Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the
floodproofing criteria in Section 14A-5.2-2; and,
(d) Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
(a) Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
(b) Review all development permits to determine that all necessary permits
have been obtained from those Federal, State or local governmental
agencies from which prior approval is required.
(c) Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway. If located in the floodway,
assure that the encroachment provisions of Section 14A-5.3(a) are met.
§ 14A-4.1 PRINCETON CODE § 14A-4.3-3
BAO:156
§ 14A-4.3-3. Information to Be Obtained and Maintained. [Ord. No.
2016-33 Exh. A]
§ 14A-4.3-4. Alteration of Watercourses. [Ord. No. 2016-33 Exh. A]
§ 14A-4.3-5. Substantial Damage Review. [Ord. No. 2016-33 Exh. A]
§ 14A-4.3-6. Interpretation of FIRM Boundaries. [Ord. No. 2016-33
Exh. A]
Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field
conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be
(a) Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of
the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially
improved structures, and whether or not the structure contains a
basement.
(b) For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(1) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level); and
(2) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in Section
14A-4.1(c).
(c) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of
this chapter.
(a) Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Dam Safety and Flood Control Section and
the Land Use Regulation Program prior to any alteration or relocation
of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the
Federal Insurance Administration.
(b) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated
portion of said watercourse so the flood carrying capacity is not
diminished.
(a) After an event resulting in building damages, assess the damage to
structures due to flood and non-flood causes.
(b) Record and maintain the flood and non-flood damage of substantial
damage structures and provide a letter of Substantial Damage
Determination to the owner and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Dam Safety and Flood Control Section.
(c) Ensure substantial improvements meet the requirements of Sections
14A-5.2-1, "Specific standards, residential construction," and
14A-5.2-2, "Specific standards, nonresidential construction."
§ 14A-4.3-3 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14A-4.3-6
BAO:157
given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in
Section 14A-4.4.
§ 14A-4.4. Variance Procedure.
§ 14A-4.4-1. Appeal Board. [Ord. No. 2016-33 Exh. A]
(a) The Princeton Mayor and Council is hereby established as the Appeal
Board to decide appeals and requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter, except that pursuant to the authorization
granted by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-25b(3), the Mayor and Council may obtain
the aid and assistance of the Princeton Planning Board by referring any
appeal or request for variances to the said Board to conduct a hearing
thereon and advise the Mayor and Council as to its recommended
findings and conclusions, applying the criteria set forth in this section
and in Section 14A-4.4-2 below.
(b) The Appeal Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there
is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the
local administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.
(c) Those aggrieved by the decision of the Appeal Board, or any taxpayer,
may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of New Jersey, Law
Division.
(d) In passing upon such applications, the Appeal Board shall consider all
technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other
sections of this chapter, and:
(1) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(2) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(3) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
(4) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
(5) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(6) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(7) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
(8) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program of that area;
§ 14A-4.3-6 PRINCETON CODE § 14A-4.4-1
BAO:158
§ 14A-4.4-2. Conditions for Variances. [Ord. No. 2016-33 Exh. A]
(9) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
(10) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment
transport of the flood waters; and,
(11) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
(e) Upon consideration of the factors of Section 14A-4.4-1 d) and the
purposes of this chapter, the Appeal Board may attach such conditions
to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the
purposes of this chapter.
(f) The local administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions,
including technical information, and report any variances to the Federal
Insurance Administration upon request.
(a) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood level, providing items (1)-(11) in
Section 14A-4.4-1 d) have been fully considered. As the lot size
increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required
for issuing the variance increases.
(b) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as
a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to
preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
(c) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
(d) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is
the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
(e) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(1) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(2) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and,
(3) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
§ 14A-4.4-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14A-4.4-2
BAO:159
§ 14A-5.0. Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction.
§ 14A-5.1. General Standards. [Ord. No. 2016-33 Exh. A]
In all areas of special flood hazards, compliance with the applicable
requirements of the Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23) and the
following standards, whichever is more restrictive, is required.
§ 14A-5.1-1. Anchoring. [Ord. No. 2016-33 Exh. A]
§ 14A-5.1-2. Construction Materials and Methods. [Ord. No.
2016-33 Exh. A]
§ 14A-5.1-3. Utilities. [Ord. No. 2016-33 Exh. A]
victimization of the public as identified in Section 14A-4.4- 1(d), or
conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(f) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor
elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood
insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from
the reduced lowest floor elevation.
(a) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored
to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure.
(b) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved shall be
anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of
anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use of over-the-top
or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to
applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind
forces.
(a) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
(b) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
(a) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system;
(b) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and
discharge from the systems into flood waters;
(c) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
them or contamination from them during flooding; and
§ 14A-4.4-2 PRINCETON CODE § 14A-5.1-3
BAO:160
§ 14A-5.1-4. Subdivision Proposals. [Ord. No. 2016-33 Exh. A]
§ 14A-5.1-5. Enclosure Openings. [Ord. No. 2016-33 Exh. A]
All new construction and substantial improvements having fully enclosed
areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles,
building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are
subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic
flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of
floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed
the following minimum criteria: A minimum of two openings in at least two
exterior walls of each enclosed area, having a total net area of not less than
one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one
foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
covering or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit
of floodwaters.
§ 14A-5.2. Specific Standards. [Ord. No. 2016-33 Exh. A]
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data have
been provided as set forth in Section 14A-3.2, "Basis for establishing the
areas of special flood hazard" or in Section 14A-4.3-2, "Use of Other Base
Flood Data," the following standards are required.
§ 14A-5.2-1. Residential Construction. [Ord. No. 2016-33 Exh. A]
(d) For all new construction and substantial improvements the electrical,
heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning equipment and
other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding.
(a) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development shall be
consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
(b) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development shall
have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and
water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage;
(c) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development shall
have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage;
and,
(d) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals
and other proposed new development which contain at least 50 lots or
five acres (whichever is less).
(a) New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure located in an A or AE Zone shall have the lowest floor,
§ 14A-5.1-3 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14A-5.2-1
BAO:161
§ 14A-5.2-2. Nonresidential Construction. [Ord. No. 2016-33 Exh. A]
In an area of special flood hazard, all new construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential
structure located in an A or AE Zone shall have the lowest floor, including
basement together with the attendant utilities and sanitary facilities:
§ 14A-5.2-3. Manufactured Homes. [Ord. No. 2016-33 Exh. A]
including basement together with the attendant utilities and sanitary
facilities, elevated at or above the base flood elevation plus one foot
or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1, whichever is more
restrictive;
(b) Require within any AO or AH Zone on the municipality's FIRM that all
new construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement together with
the attendant utilities and sanitary facilities, elevated above the depth
number specified in feet plus one foot, above the highest adjacent grade
(at least three feet if no depth number is specified). And, require
adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
(a) Either:
(1) Elevated to or above the base flood elevation plus one foot or as
required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1, whichever is more
restrictive; and
(2) Require within any AO or AH Zone on the municipality's DFIRM to
elevate above the depth number specified in feet plus one foot,
above the highest adjacent grade (at least three feet if no depth
number is specified). And, require adequate drainage paths around
structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from
proposed structures;
(b) Or:
(1) Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level plus one foot or
as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 6-1, whichever is more
restrictive, the structure is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water;
(2) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and,
(3) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice for meeting the applicable
provisions of this subsection. Such certification shall be provided to
the official as set forth in Section 14A-4.3-3(b)(2).
§ 14A-5.2-1 PRINCETON CODE § 14A-5.2-3
BAO:162
§ 14A-5.3. Floodways. [Ord. No. 2016-33 Exh. A]
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Section 14A-3.2
are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely
hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris,
potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
§ 14A-6. Severability. [Ord. No. 2016-33 Exh. A]
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
Chapter 14A shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such a
decision shall not affect the remaining portions of the chapter, which shall
remain in full force and effect, and for this purpose the provisions of this
chapter are hereby declared to be severable.
Chapter B15
GARBAGE AND REFUSE
(a) Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with Section
14A-5.1-1(b).
(b) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved within
an area of special flood hazard shall:
(1) Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage,
(2) Be constructed to minimize flood damage,
(3) Have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage; and,
(4) Be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the top of the
lowest floor is at or above the base flood elevation plus one foot or
as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1, whichever is more
restrictive.
(a) Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development unless a technical evaluation
demonstrates that encroachment shall not result in any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(b) If Section 14A-5.3(a) is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements must comply with Section 14A-5., Provisions for Flood
Hazard Reduction.
(c) In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation data
has been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
accumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with
all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than two-tenths of a foot
at any point.
§ 14A-5.2-3 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14A-6
BAO:163

ARTICLE I
In General
§ 15-1. Materials Injurious to Public Health, Constituting Fire
Hazard, Etc. — Removal Generally. [Ord. No. 2017-7]
The owner or tenant of any land in the municipality shall remove therefrom
any brush, weeds, dead and dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious growths,
filth, garbage, trash or debris, where it shall be necessary and expedient for
the preservation of public health, safety or general welfare or to eliminate a
fire hazard that the same be removed, within the time specified in the notice
to remove the same by the municipal health officer.
§ 15-2. Materials Injurious to Public Health, Constituting Fire
Hazard — Removal by Municipality; Costs of Removal to Constitute
Lien on Property. [Ord. No. 2017-7]
In case an owner or tenant shall have refused or neglected to remove such
material in the required manner and within the required time, such removal
may be done by or under the direction of the health officer, in which event
the cost thereof shall be certified by the health officer to the mayor and
council, which shall examine such certification and if found correct, shall
cause such cost to be charged against such land. The amount so charged
shall thereupon become a lien upon such land and shall be added to and
form part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied thereon and shall be
enforced and collected with interest by the same officers and in the same
manner as taxes in the municipality.
§ 15-3. Dumping — Limited to Designated Places; Compliance With
Rules and Regulations. [Ord. No. 2017-7]
No person shall dump any garbage, rubbish, ashes, offal or other similar
offensive material in the municipality or in any place under the jurisdiction
of the municipality, except in compliance with the rules and regulations that
may be posted thereat, or issued in relation thereto, by the official in charge
of such landfill or disposal plant or otherwise.
§ 15-4. Dumping — Prohibited Upon Lots, Roads, Highways, Etc.
[Ord. No. 2017-7]
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, place or in any way dispose
of, or allow to be thrown, placed or disposed of, any garbage, refuse or any
material mentioned in section 15-5 on any lot, road, highway, lane or alley
in the municipality.
§ 15-4.1. Removal and Storage of Garbage, Refuse and Recyclables
from Commercial and Business Establishments and Multiple and
Single Family Dwellings. [Ord. No. 2017-7]
(a) Removal of Garbage. All property owners shall arrange for the periodic
removal of all garbage, refuse and recyclables from the premises as
§ 15-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-4.1
BAO:165
§ 15-4.2. Container Required for Waste. [Ord. No. 2017-7]
All property owners and tenants thereof shall use containers other than
plastic bags for the disposal and temporary storage of garbage, refuse and
other waste outside the premises. Such containers shall be constructed
of watertight metal, rubber or heavy duty plastic with tight fitting covers
to prevent spillage, leakage or access by animals. Dumpsters which meet
these standards and otherwise comply with the requirements of this article
shall be acceptable.
§ 15-4.3. Requirements for Use of Dumpsters by Commercial and
Business Establishments and Multiple Dwellings. [Ord. No. 2017-7]
Commercial and business establishments and multiple dwellings which use
dumpsters for the disposal of garbage and refuse shall:
often as necessary to handle the amounts of waste generated. Property
owners of single family dwellings and dwellings with four or less units
shall be permitted, as designated by Princeton, to place garbage and
refuse generated on the premises for municipal collection. Only
garbage, refuse and recyclables which have been generated from the
premises itself shall be placed for pick-up for collection in view from the
public right-of-way.
(b) Storage of garbage: generally. No container, plastic bag, tied bundle, or
other receptacle containing garbage, refuse or recyclables from any
such establishment or multiple or single family dwelling shall be placed
for pick-up in the public right-of-way; and no such container, plastic
bag, tied bundle, or other receptacle shall be placed in view from the
public right-of-way before 7:00 p.m. or dusk, whichever is earlier, the
evening prior to the scheduled pick-up. No empty container or
receptacle shall remain in view from the public right-of-way after 12:00
midnight after collection, or 9:00 a.m. after collection for all
commercial and business establishments and owners of multiple and
single family dwellings in the Central Business ("CB") zone. This section
shall not apply to dumpsters, which shall be screened from view at all
times as otherwise provided in this article; nor shall this section apply
to trash receptacles installed by food establishments pursuant to
ordinance.
(c) Disposal of Insect Infested Property. No person shall place property
infested with insects in the public right-of-way for disposal in municipal
waste stream unless when, as a result of an insect infestation, any
person places affected personal property into the public right-of-way for
disposal in the municipal waste stream, said person shall completely
seal the containers and clearly mark on the outside to indicate the date
of placement into the right-of-way and nature of the infestation.
(a) Use only such dumpsters as are equipped for handling by motorized
equipment and as otherwise meet specifications on file in the office of
the municipal engineer;
§ 15-4.1 PRINCETON CODE § 15-4.3
BAO:166
§ 15-4.4. Enforcement and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2017-7]
The health officer shall be responsible for enforcement of all provisions of
this article except as may be delegated to another officer or agency. Any
person, firm or corporation which violates or neglects to comply with any
provision of this article shall be given written notice of violation which
shall stipulate a twenty-four-hour time period for abatement and shall be
punishable in Municipal Court by the penalties set forth in section 1-6.
Enforcement of any provision requiring an owner to obtain land use
approval shall be deferred 90 days or for as long as the related land use
application is pending, whichever is later. A repeat offender as that term is
defined in section 1-6 shall be subject to the penalties as set forth in section
1-6.
(b) Provide a number of dumpsters sufficient to contain, with covers
closed, all garbage, refuse and other waste generated;
(c) Keep dumpster covers closed at all times when not in use;
(d) Clean, rinse and sanitize dumpsters at regular intervals;
(e) Deodorize dumpsters, and the waste contained in dumpsters as
necessary, to prevent an odor nuisance;
(f) Secure dumpsters from overturning;
(g) Maintain dumpsters in good condition ensuring that lids remain
attached and in such condition as to permit a tight seal, and replacing
dumpsters in the event of deterioration, breakage or vandalism;
(h) Keep the area surrounding any dumpster clear of all garbage and
refuse and clean the area in the event of spillage;
(i) Establish a fixed location for dumpsters and provide such fencing or
other screening for that location as shall be necessary to keep
dumpsters out of view from the public right-of-way;
(j) Keep all dumpsters out of view from the public right-of-way at all times
except when being emptied; and
(k) Spilling, dumping, leaking or otherwise discharge of liquids, semiliquids
or solids from dumpsters into the municipality's storm sewer
system and/or waters of the State of New Jersey is strictly prohibited.
§ 15-4.3 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-4.4
BAO:167

ARTICLE II
Convenience Center
§ 15-4.5. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2017-7]
For the purposes of section 15-4.6 and 15-4.7, the words and phrases
set forth below shall have the meanings given herein. Such meaning or
definition of terms shall in no way be construed to broaden, alter or conflict
with state or county definitions:
ACCEPTABLE SOLID WASTE MATERIALS — Appliances, furniture and
household construction debris. This definition specifically excludes
garbage, recyclables, tires, plastic bags and hazardous materials, or other
materials as may be determined by the Princeton Sewer Operating
Committee.
CONVENIENCE CENTER — The solid waste convenience center located
on River Road in the municipality, which is operated by the Princeton
Sewer Operating Committee, and as defined pursuant to the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection Rules, N.J.A.C. 7:26 et seq.
OPERATING COMMITTEE — The committee currently existing in the
municipality, and which was originally authorized and set up by agreement
in relation to the Princeton Sewage System entered into under the date
of December 15, 1932 and as amended by the mayor and council of the
Borough of Princeton and the Township of Princeton in a like agreement
entered into under the date of December 15, 1932 and as amended between
the mayor and council of the Borough of Princeton and the trustees of
Princeton University.
UNIT CHARGE — The basis for the imposition of charges for disposing
of acceptable solid waste materials at the convenience center. The price
of disposing of a unit will be $15. The unit charge may be reviewed and
amended by the Princeton Sewer Operating Committee as needed to cover
the costs associated with operation of the convenience center.
§ 15-4.6. Use of convenience center by residents. [Ord. No. 2017-7]
(a) The owners or tenant of any residential property located in the
municipality may dispose of acceptable solid waste materials which are
generated by these properties at the convenience center in accordance
with the rules and regulations of the Princeton Sewer Operating
Committee, which are incorporated by reference herein. The cost for
such disposal shall be imposed by the operating committee as set forth
below:
(1) The cost of disposal of one unit of solid waste shall be $15.
(2) The unit charge will be levied regardless of the size of the load in
accordance with the categories listed below. All vehicles,
regardless of category must be noncommercial in character.
§ 15-4.5 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-4.6
BAO:169
§ 15-4.7. Prohibited Use of Convenience Center. [Ord. No. 2017-7]
Building contractors, tree companies, gardeners and other businesses are
not permitted to dispose of solid waste at the convenience center, even
if such waste is generated by home renovation and/or landscaping at a
residential property.
Category of Vehicle Unit
Passenger automobile 1
Station wagons and sports
utility vehicles
3
Pick-up trucks 5
Vans 7
(b) Payment for disposal shall be made using tickets which will be available
for purchase with proof of registration of the resident's vehicle at a
residence in the municipality and proof of property ownership or
tenancy in the municipality which shall be required prior to the
issuance of any tickets.
(c) In the event of dispute as to which category a motor vehicle shall be
placed for the determination of a unit charge, the manager of the
Princeton Sewer Operating Committee or his or her designee shall
make the final determination.
(d) The manager of the Princeton Sewer Operating committee or his or her
designee shall have the ability, in his or her discretion, to limit
quantities of disposals or refuse access to the convenience center to
ensure compliance with this article.
§ 15-4.6 PRINCETON CODE § 15-4.7
BAO:170
ARTICLE III
Mandatory Source Separation of Recyclables
§ 15-5. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2017-7]
For the purposes of sections 15-6 to 15-6.5, the words and phrases set
forth herein shall have the meaning set forth in the definitions contained in
Mercer County Ordinance No. 2006-19, which definitions are incorporated
herein by reference as if fully restated.
§ 15-6. Adoption of the Mercer County Recycling System. [Ord. No.
2017-7]
Princeton hereby adopts as its municipal recycling program, pursuant to
the New Jersey Statewide Mandatory Source Separation and Recycling Act,
the County Recycling System as set forth in Ordinance No. 2006-19 adopted
by the Board of Chosen Freeholders of the County of Mercer, State of New
Jersey on December 21, 2006, and as more fully set forth in the amendment
to the Mercer County Solid Waste Management Plan detailing its recycling
plan also incorporated into that ordinance.
§ 15-6.1. Recycling Requirements. [Ord. No. 2017-7]
Pursuant to the Recycling Act, each resident, commercial, industrial or
institutional establishment in the municipality, shall conform to the Mercer
County Recycling Plan to meet the State mandated recycling goals. As part
of implementation of the Princeton Recycling Plan, it is hereby required
that:
(a) Municipality:
(1) Princeton hereby adopts this article to provide recycling within its
borders pursuant to the Recycling Act adopting herein the Mercer
County Recycling Plan as its official municipal recycling program;
and
(2) All municipal contracts for solid waste collection and/or disposal
within Princeton shall be consistent with this article and the
Mercer County Recycling Plan.
(3) Princeton shall provide for a collection system for leaves generated
from residential premises within the municipal boundaries, for the
period from September 1 to December 31 of each year, and shall
source separate leaves from solid waste generated at those
premises and, unless leaves are stored or recycled for composting
or mulching by the generator, place the leaves in the Joseph P.
Maher Ecological Center in Lawrence Township.
(4) Princeton may deliver tires to Mercer County Improvement
Authority's Solid Waste Transfer Station, or such site as designated
by the Mercer County Improvement Authority, for transfer to a tire
recycler.
§ 15-5 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-6.1
BAO:171
(5) Princeton shall, at a minimum, within 30 days after the adoption of
this article and at least once every six months thereafter, notify all
persons occupying residential, commercial, and institutional
premises within the municipal boundaries of recycling
opportunities, and the source separation requirements of this
article and the Mercer County Recycling Plan. In order to fulfill the
notification requirements of this subsection, this municipality may,
in its discretion, place an advertisement in a newspaper circulating
in the municipality, post a notice in public places where public
notices are customarily posted, include a notice with other official
notifications periodically mailed to residential taxpayers, or any
combination thereof, as the municipality deems necessary and
appropriate.4
(6) Princeton shall, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.16(c), within 30 days
of the effective date of this article, and at least once every 36
months thereafter, conduct a review and make necessary revisions
to the master plan and development regulations adopted pursuant
to P.L. 1975, C. 291 (C. 40:55D-1 et seq.), which revisions shall
reflect changes in state, county and municipal policies and
objectives concerning the collection, disposition and recycling of
designated recyclable materials.
The revised state plan shall include provisions for the collection,
disposition and recycling of recyclable materials and recycling of
designated materials in this article, and for the collection,
disposition and recycling designated recyclable materials within
any development proposal for the construction of 50 or more units
of single-family residential housing or 25 or more units or multifamily
residential housing and any commercial or industrial
development proposal for the utilization of 1,000 square feet or
more of land.
(b) Residents:
(1) On and after the official commencement date of the County
Recycling System within Princeton, each person residing in areas
designated for recycling collection, shall separate for curbside
collection on designated collection days and such additional days
as may be designated by the Mercer County Improvement
Authority, those materials designated in the Mercer County
Recycling Plan as listed below; and shall do so in the manner as set
forth in this article; and
(2) All residents shall recycle, or cause to be recycled, at a minimum,
the following categories of recyclables:
a. Acceptable glass containers;
b. Acceptable metal containers;
4. Editor's Note: This article was adopted February 13, 2017 as part of Ordinance No. 2017-7.
§ 15-6.1 PRINCETON CODE § 15-6.1
BAO:172
c. Acceptable plastic containers;
d. Acceptable mixed paper;
e. Corrugated cardboard;
f. Office paper and other paper;
g. Tires;
h. White goods;
i. Leaves: and
(3) Any and all persons having been found to have violated the
provisions of the Recycling Plan of Princeton will be assessed
warnings, penalties and fines pursuant to section 15-6.5(a) of this
article; and
(4) At the time of placement of recyclable materials designated for
collection by the Recycling Plan of Princeton at the curb or
streetside of residential units, said materials shall be considered
the sole property of the Mercer County Improvement Authority and
shall be considered a conscious contribution by that resident to the
County Recycling System for collection by the Mercer County
Improvement Authority or its agent; and
(5) Any resident within Princeton may donate or sell designated
recyclable materials to any person, whether operating for profit or
not-for-profit, provided that the receiving person may not perform
curbside collection under any circumstances unless that person has
registered with the Mercer County Improvement Authority as a
private recycler.
(c) Commercial, industrial and institutional establishments:
(1) All commercial, industrial, and institutional establishments located
within Princeton shall recycle, or cause to be recycled, at a
minimum, the following categories of recyclables:
a. Acceptable glass containers;
b. Acceptable metal containers;
c. Acceptable plastic containers;
d. Acceptable mixed paper;
e. Corrugated cardboard;
f. Office paper and other paper;
g. Tires;
h. White goods;
§ 15-6.1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-6.1
BAO:173
i. Leaves: and
(2) All commercial/industrial/institutional establishments located
within Princeton shall submit a source separation recycling plan to
the Mercer County Improvement Authority to meet the state
recycling mandates identifying or incorporating the following:
a. All waste material generated, listed by type; and
b. All volumes of these waste categories currently recycled; and
c. Any agreement with any solid waste hauler or with a separate
entity for the recycling of source separated designated
materials as defined within the Mercer County Recycling Plan;
and
d. A description of current or proposed recycling efforts for
designated materials; and
(3) The schedule for submittal of these commercial/industrial/
institutional recycling plans to the Mercer County Improvement
Authority shall be as follows:
a. All commercial/industrial/institutional establishments whose
waste is collected by private haulers and not serviced by
municipal collection shall prepare the plan within four months
of enactment of this article and shall implement same within
two months following approval of the plan by the Mercer
County Improvement Authority;
b. All commercial/industrial/institutional establishments whose
waste is collected through a municipal collection system shall
be part of the municipal collection system of recyclables.
(4) All commercial/industrial/institutional establishments required to
submit a recycling plan under this article may, at their option,
prepare a joint recycling plan with any other entity or entities
whereby a common hauler and/or collection point, for common
pickup, is set forth. However, each commercial/industrial/
institutional establishment shall prepare a plan identifying that
they are part of this joint plan and shall attach a copy of same,
incorporating it by reference.
(5) Any such commercial/industrial/institutional recycling plan shall be
consistent with those terms, conditions and goals set forth in the
Mercer County Recycling Plan and this article. The failure to
submit said plan or comply with same shall subject the commercial/
industrial/institutional establishments to penalties pursuant to
section 15-6.5(b) of this article; and
(6) An extension of the time for plan preparation and/or plan
implementation of up to 90 days may be requested from the Mercer
County Improvement Authority depending upon the size of the
§ 15-6.1 PRINCETON CODE § 15-6.1
BAO:174
establishment. Justification for such a request shall be submitted to
the Mercer County Improvement Authority in writing and shall be
verified as necessary or justified; and
(7) Pursuant to Mercer County Recycling Ordinance 2006-19, upon
failure of a commercial/industrial/institutional establishment to
meet the source separation recycling provisions of this article and/
or the source separation and recycling provisions of the Recycling
Act, if not exempted pursuant to subsection (c)(8) as described
below, the Mercer County Improvement Authority shall provide
said recycling service, and all fees and costs for providing said
recycling service shall be assessed at rates to be established by the
Mercer County Improvement Authority through the New Jersey
Board of Public Utilities and Mercer County's Solid Waste
Franchise; and penalties shall be assessed as provided for in this
article; and
(8) Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99-16 of the Recycling Act, this
municipality shall have the right to exempt persons occupying
commercial and institutional premises within the municipal
boundaries from the source separation requirements of the article
if those persons have otherwise provided for the recycling of the
recyclable materials designated in the Mercer County Recycling
Plan from solid waste generated at those premises. This
municipality shall annually submit to the Mercer County
Improvement Authority a list of those commercial/industrial/
institutional establishments requesting exemptions under this
subsection and the results of its determination with an explanation
for said action. To be eligible for an exemption pursuant to this
subsection, a commercial or institutional solid waste generator
shall annually provide written documentation to this municipality
and the Mercer County Improvement Authority of the total number
of tons recycled. Persons occupying commercial and institutional
premises exempted under this subsection shall not be exempted
from the reporting provisions of subsection (c)(3) as described
above.
(d) Private Recyclers:
(1) Any person or group of persons wishing to collect recyclable
materials shall register with the Mercer County Improvement
Authority as a "private recycler;" and
(2) No private recycler shall conduct recycling collection activities
within Princeton on designated county collection days; and
(3) Upon registration each private recycler shall receive an
identification/registration decal from the Mercer County
Improvement Authority and shall prominently display same on
recycling vehicles when collecting recyclables within Princeton;
and
§ 15-6.1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-6.1
BAO:175
§ 15-6.2. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2017-7]
The enforcement of the Recycling Plan of Princeton shall be provided
individually and severally by Princeton with regard to enforcement of this
article, and/or the Mercer County Improvement Authority, and/or the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
§ 15-6.3. Registration Requirements. [Ord. No. 2017-7]
No person shall collect recyclables within Princeton unless registered with
the Mercer County Improvement Authority and the requisite fee has been
paid, unless an exemption has been granted by the Mercer County
Improvement Authority in accordance with Mercer County Ordinance No.
2006-19. The identification/registration decal of each person so registered
be prominently displayed on each recycling vehicle at all times while
collecting recyclables within of Princeton.
§ 15-6.4. Violations of Registration Requirements. [Ord. No.
2017-7]
Failure to register or to display the identification registration decal on
vehicles while collecting recyclables within Princeton shall subject such
private recycler to a fine of $250 per offense; and
Any person or entity conducting recycling collection activities within
Princeton on designated county recycling collection days shall be assessed
a penalty of $250 per offense.
§ 15-6.5. Penalties.
(4) An ongoing condition of collection activities within the municipality
shall be the submittal of certified weight tickets to the Mercer
County Improvement Authority for material sold to quantify levels
for state mandated recycling goals. Said tickets shall be submitted
to the Mercer County Improvement Authority no later than 30 days
following the date of sale of the subject material.
(a) Residents:
(1) Any resident of Princeton who is found to have violated the
provisions of this article shall be subject to the following
procedures and penalties:
a. A warning shall be issued on the first three occasions that said
article is violated, and thereafter;
b. A cessation in the collection of garbage which contains
recyclable materials from that household; and/or
c. A fine up to $500 per day of violation depending upon the
extent of and circumstances of the violation to be assessed
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:1E-9 by the Mercer County
§ 15-6.1 PRINCETON CODE § 15-6.5
BAO:176
Improvement Authority, as authorized hereby and pursuant to
the inclusion of this article within the Mercer County Solid
Waste Management Plan.
d. The terms and provisions of this article may be enforced
individually and severally by Princeton, the Mercer County
Improvement Authority and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection.
(b) Commercial, Industrial and Institutional Establishments:
(1) Failure to submit the plan or have an approved plan in place as
required by this article shall subject the commercial/industrial/
institutional establishment to a fine up to $100 per day until plan
submittal requirements are met.
(2) Any commercial/industrial/institutional establishment located
within Mercer County found to have violated their required
recycling plan as submitted to the county pursuant to section
15-6.1(c)(2) of this article shall be subject to the following
procedures and penalties:
(a) A warning on the first three occasions that said plan is violated,
and thereafter
(b) A fine up to $1,000 per day of violation depending upon the
extent of and circumstances of the violation and the size of the
violating establishment, to be assessed pursuant to N.J.S.A.
13:1E-9 by the Mercer County Improvement Authority, as
authorized hereby.
(c) The terms and provisions of this article may be enforced
individually and severally by Princeton, the Mercer County
Improvement Authority and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection.
§ 15-6.5 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-6.5
BAO:177

ARTICLE IV
Recycling Reporting Requirements
§ 15-7. Reporting Required. [Ord. No. 2017-7]
Pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:26A-10.3 all commercial and institutional generators,
including multifamily housing owners or their agents, shall report the
tonnage of designated recyclable materials collected for recycling from
their business or premises, as follows:
(a) The person responsible for the provision of recycling services by a
covered generator of recycling material shall submit to the municipal
recycling coordinator by the first day of February each year
documentation verifying the previous year's total recycling (expressed
by weight) for each material recycled.
(b) Documentation shall take the form of a letter or report issued by the
recycling service provider or end market to the generator of the
recycled material. The generator must maintain weight slips or paid
invoices and make such records available for inspection by the
municipality, county or state for a period of five years.
(c) At a minimum, all reporting shall detail the municipality of origin, the
name and location of the market or recycling center and the amount of
each source separated recyclable material, expressed in gallons, tons
or cubic yards, brought to each manufacturer or recycling center from
the municipality of origin. Those persons specifying this information in
cubic yards shall also indicate the conversion ratio utilized for
calculating the materials from cubic yards to tons.
§ 15-7 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-7
BAO:179

ARTICLE V
Recycling of Construction and Demolition Waste
§ 15-8. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2017-7]
For the purposes of sections 15-8 through 15-12, the words and phrases set
forth below shall have the meaning given herein.
APPROVED RECYCLING FACILITY — A recycling, composting, materials
recovery or reuse facility which accepts construction and demolition debris
and which is an approved/licensed NJDEP Class A-D recycling center, or a
recognized facility by the Recycling Coordinator.
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS — The waste building
materials, packaging, and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling,
repair, alteration, and/or demolition operations on pavement, houses, all
residential and non-residential developments, and other structures and may
include, but is not limited to, concrete, asphalt, wood, metals, bricks, block
masonry, wall board, dirt, rocks, landscape waste and other inert waste.
COVERED PROJECT — A construction, renovation or demolition project
for which a building permit or a demolition permit is required, and which
requires the use of a dumpster, roll-off container or any similar container
for the placement of construction and demolition debris.
DIVERSION; DIVERT — The separation and recycling of construction and
demolition debris and delivery of same to an approved recycling facility.
RECYCLING COORDINATOR — The recycling coordinator of Princeton or
his or her designee.
§ 15-9. Construction, Renovation and Demolition Debris Recovery
Plan.
A debris recovery plan shall be filed with the recycling coordinator, prior to
the commencement of any activity for which municipal approval as further
identified above is required.
The debris recovery plan shall identify the types and estimated quantities of
construction and demolition debris to be generated from the project, how
each material will be managed, and the name of each facility or service
provider that the applicant will use to manage each material. The plan shall
further detail how the applicant shall ensure that a minimum of 50% of the
materials to be generated will be diverted.
Said plan shall be reviewed by the recycling coordinator for compliance
with the requirements set forth in this article. Princeton shall notify the
person that submitted the plan (also "applicant" as used in this article)
whether the plan has been approved or denied within 10 days of its receipt
of same.
§ 15-8 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-9
BAO:181
If the plan provides for the information required by this article and
otherwise complies with this article, then said plan shall be approved. The
approved plan shall be marked "approved" and returned to the applicant.
If the plan fails to provide all of the information required by this article
or otherwise fails to comply with this article, then said plan shall not be
approved. If the plan is not approved, the municipality shall notify the
applicant in writing that the plan has not been approved, including the
reasons for the decision. The person who will carry out the construction,
renovation or demolition project shall have 15 days to make the required
changes and resubmit the debris recovery plan to the recycling coordinator.
§ 15-10. Diversion Requirement Adjustment. [Ord. No. 2017-7]
§ 15-11. Debris Recovery Plan Reporting Requirements;
Documentation. [Ord. No. 2017-7]
Upon completion of the covered project, the person who carried out a
covered project shall submit in person or by certified mail to the recycling
coordinator, the documentation required to demonstrate that said person
has met the diversion requirement. The required documentation shall
include the following:
(a) Application. If the applicant experiences circumstances which renders
compliance with the diversion requirement cited in this article not
feasible, said applicant may apply for an adjustment. The applicant
shall indicate in writing why it is not feasible to divert 50% of the
materials being generated from the covered project and specify what
percentage of diversion could be achieved. Increased costs to the
person carrying out the covered project will not be an acceptable
justification for an adjustment.
(b) Review. The recycling coordinator shall review the information supplied
by the applicant. If warranted, the recycling coordinator shall attempt
to contact the applicant to discuss possible ways of meeting the
diversion requirement.
(c) Granting of an adjustment. If the recycling coordinator determines that
it is not feasible for the applicant to divert 50% of the generated
construction and demolition debris from the covered project, the
percent of diversion required shall be adjusted. The applicant shall be
notified in writing of the adjusted diversion requirement. The applicant
shall be required to divert the percent of construction and demolition
debris required by the adjustment.
(d) Denial of Adjustment. If the recycling coordinator determines that it is
feasible for the applicant to meet the diversion requirement cited in this
article, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the denial of the
diversion requirement adjustment.
§ 15-9 PRINCETON CODE § 15-11
BAO:182
§ 15-12. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2017-7]
The code enforcement official, the police department, the health
department, the recycling coordinator, Mercer County Division of Public
Health and the Mercer County Improvement Authority are hereby
individually and severally empowered to enforce the provision of this
article. The respective enforcing official may, in his or her discretion, post
warning notice stickers for a first offense. An inspection may consist of
dumping and opening of solid waste bags and containers to detect, by sound
or sight, the presence of any recyclable material.
§ 15-13. Violations and penalties. [Ord. No. 2017-7]
Any person, corporation, occupant or other entity that violated or fails to
comply with any provision of this article or any of the rules and regulations
promulgated hereunder shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a
fine no less than $100, nor more than $2,500. Each day for which a violation
of this chapter occurs shall be considered a separate offense.
(a) A completed debris recovery report, signed by the person carrying out a
covered project, indicating the quantity of each material generated
during the covered project diverted and disposed;
(b) Receipts from all facilities or service providers utilized to divert and
dispose materials generated during the covered project; and
(c) Any additional information that the person carrying out the covered
project believes is relevant to determining compliance with the
diversion requirement.
§ 15-11 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-13
BAO:183
Chapter B15A
HOTEL USAGE TAX
Editor's Note: This Chapter 15A to be adopted in the Princeton Code.
§ 15A-1. Tax Imposed. [Ord. No. 2014-14]
The municipality does hereby impose a tax, at a uniform percentage rate
of 1% on charges of rent for every occupancy on or after July 1, 2003 but
before July 1, 2004, and 3% on charges of rent for every occupancy on or
after July 1, 2004, on a room or rooms in a hotel subject to taxation pursuant
to the New Jersey State Sales Tax, more specifically set forth in subsection
(d) of section 3 of P.L. 1966, c.30 (N.J.S.A. 54:32B-3). A tax imposed under
this section shall be in addition to any other tax or fee imposed pursuant
to statute or local ordinance or resolution by the municipality. Any unpaid
taxes under this chapter shall be subject to interest at a rate of 5% per
annum.
The terms used in this chapter, including but not limited to "hotel,"
"occupancy" and "room," shall be as defined in N.J.S.A. 54:32B-2.
§ 15A-2. Copy of Chapter to State Treasurer; Effective Date; Annual
Submission to State Treasurer. [Ord. No. 2014-14]
A copy of this chapter shall be transmitted upon adoption or amendment
to the State Treasurer, along with a list of the names and addresses of
all hotels and motels located within the municipality. This chapter or any
amendment thereto shall take effect on the first day of the first full month
occurring 30 days after the date of transmittal to the State Treasurer
during calendar year 2003 and on the first day of the first full month
occurring 90 days after the date of transmittal to the State Treasurer for
any amendments adopted in calendar year 2004 and thereafter.
Princeton shall annually provide to the State Treasurer, no later than
January 1 of each year, a list of the names and addresses of all hotels and
motels located in the municipality, as well as the name and address of any
hotel or motel that commences operation after January 1 of any year.
§ 15A-3. Conformance With State Statutes. [Ord. No. 2014-14]
The Hotel Occupancy tax shall be administered in conformance with Section
4 of Chapter 114 of the Laws of 2003 as follows:
(a) All taxes imposed by this chapter shall be paid by the purchaser or
guest renting a hotel room;
(b) A vendor or hotel establishment (hereinafter "vendor") shall not assume
or absorb any tax imposed by this chapter;
(c) A vendor shall not in any manner advertise or hold out to any person or
to the public in general, in any manner, directly or indirectly, that the
§ 15-13 PRINCETON CODE § 15A-3
BAO:184
§ 15A-4. Collection of Tax. [Ord. No. 2014-14]
§ 15A-5. Filing of Return with Director of Division of Taxation. [Ord.
No. 2014-14]
tax will be assumed or absorbed by the vendor, that the tax will not be
separately charged and stated to the customer or hotel guest, or that
the tax will be refunded to the customer.
(d) Each assumption or absorption by a vendor of the tax shall be deemed a
separate offense and each representation or advertisement by a vendor
for each day the representation or advertisement continues shall be
deemed a separate offense; and
(e) Any violation of this section shall be subject to the penalties provided
for in section 1-6 of this Code. Each violation of a provision of this
section shall be considered a separate offense and a separate offense
shall be deemed committed on each day during which or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
(a) A tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be collected on behalf of
the municipality by the person collecting the rent from the hotel
customer.
(b) Each vendor or person required to collect a tax imposed by the chapter
shall be personally liable for the tax imposed, collected or required to
be collected hereunder. Any such vendor or person shall have the same
right in respect to collecting the tax from a customer or hotel guest as if
the tax were a part of the rent and payable at the same time; provided,
however, that the chief fiscal officer of the municipality shall be joined
as a party in any action or proceeding brought to collect the tax.
(a) A person required to collect a tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter shall, on or before the dates required pursuant to section
17 of P.L. 1966, c.30 (C.54:32B-17), forward to the Director of the
Division of Taxation in the New Jersey Department of the Treasury
(hereinafter the "Director"), the tax collected in the preceding month
and make and file a return for the preceding month with the Director on
any form and containing any information as the Director shall prescribe
as necessary to determine liability for the tax in the preceding month
during which the person was required to collect the tax.
(b) The Director may permit or require returns to be made covering other
periods and upon any dates as the Director may specify. In addition, the
Director may require payments of tax liability at any intervals and
based upon any classifications as the director may designate. In
prescribing any other periods to be covered by the return or intervals or
classifications for payment of tax liability, the Director may take into
account the dollar volume of tax involved as well as the need for
ensuring the prompt and orderly collection of the tax imposed.
§ 15A-3 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15A-5
BAO:185
§ 15A-6. Director to Administer Tax. [Ord. No. 2014-14]
§ 15A-7. Written Notification of Nonpayment of Taxes; Actions of
Municipality. [Ord. No. 2014-14]
(c) The Director may require amended returns to be filed within 20 days
after notice and to contain the information specified in the notice.
(a) The Director shall collect and administer any tax imposed pursuant to
the provisions of section 3 of Chapter 114 of the Laws of 2003. In
carrying out the provisions of this section, the Director shall have all
the powers granted in P.L. 1966, c.30 (C.54:32B-1 et seq.).
(b) The Director shall determine and certify to the State Treasurer on a
quarterly or more frequent basis, as prescribed by the State Treasurer,
the amount of revenues collected for the municipality pursuant to
section 3 of Chapter 114 of the Laws of 2003.
(c) The State Treasurer, upon the certification of the Director and upon the
warrant of the State Comptroller, shall pay and distribute to the
municipality on a quarterly or more frequent basis, as prescribed by the
State Treasurer, the amount of revenues determined and certified
under subsection (b) of this section. The State Treasurer shall include
within each distribution of tax revenue a list of all of the hotels and
motels in the municipality that submitted municipal occupancy tax
revenue to the State as required by subsection (a) of section 15A-5.
(d) A tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be
governed by the provisions of the "State Uniform Tax Procedure Law,"
N.J.S.A. 54:48-1 et seq.
(a) The State Treasurer shall annually provide to the municipality written
notification of nonpayment by a hotel or motel of taxes required to be
paid under this chapter. The written notification required shall also
authorize the municipality to act as the collection agent for the
outstanding balance of taxes due and owing to it in place of the State
Treasurer.
(b) In the event that the tax imposed under this chapter is not paid as and
when due by a hotel or motel, the unpaid balance, and any interest
accruing thereon, shall be a lien on the parcel of real property
comprising the hotel or motel in the same manner as all other unpaid
municipal taxes, fees, or other charges. The lien shall be superior and
paramount to the interest in such parcel of any owner, lessee, tenant,
mortgagee, or other person, except the lien of municipal taxes and shall
be on a parity with and deemed equal to the municipal lien on the parcel
for unpaid property taxes due and owing in the same year.
(c) The municipality shall file in the office of its tax collector a statement
showing the amount and due date of the unpaid balance and identifying
the lot and block number of the parcel of real property that comprises
§ 15A-5 PRINCETON CODE § 15A-7
BAO:186
§ 15A-8. Chapter Subject to Rules and Regulations Adopted by State
Treasurer. [Ord. No. 2014-14]
The provisions of this chapter shall be subject to any rules or regulations
that may be adopted by the State Treasurer.
Chapter B16
HOUSING
Editor's Note: Articles I, II and III of this Chapter 16 to be adopted
in the Princeton Code.
the delinquent hotel or motel. The lien shall be enforced as a municipal
lien in the same manner as all other municipal liens are enforced.
§ 15A-7 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15A-8
BAO:187

ARTICLE I
Housing Code
§ 16-1. Public Officer — Designated; Authority to Enforce Article.
[Ord. No. 2013-17; Ord. No. 2015-46]
The Housing Official of Princeton and such assistants as the Housing
Official shall designate in writing are hereby designated as the officer to
exercise the powers prescribed by this ordinance and revised statutes,
sections 40:48-2.3 through 40:48-2.12, and are hereinafter called the
"public officer."
§ 16-2. Public Officer — Authority to Make Rules and Regulations.
[Ord. No. 2013-17; Ord. No. 2015-46]
The public officer is authorized to make and adopt such written rules and
regulations as the officer may deem necessary for the proper enforcement
of the provisions of this article; provided, that such rules and regulations
shall not be in conflict with the provisions of this article. The public officer
shall file a certified copy of all rules and regulations which may be adopted
in the office of the municipal clerk and in the office of the public officer.
§ 16-3. Adoption of Municipal Housing Code of New Jersey State
Housing Code, as Supplemented by Municipal Provision. [Ord. No.
2013-17; Ord. No. 2015-46]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.1 et seq., the "New Jersey
State Housing Code (1980 revisions)", as approved by the Department of
Community Affairs and filed in the Secretary of State's Office, is hereby
accepted, and adopted in conjunction with supplemental municipal
provisions as a standard to be used in determining whether dwelling units
in Princeton are safe, sanitary, and fit for human habitation and rental.
§ 16-3A. Provision of Municipal Housing Code. [Ord. No. 2013-17;
Ord. No. 2015-46]
(a) Scope. The provisions of the Housing Code shall constitute the
standards to guide the public officer, and such agents as the officer may
designate in determining the fitness of a building for human habitation,
use, or occupancy.
(b) Definitions. The words, terms, or phrases listed below for the purpose
of the Housing Code shall be defined and interpreted as follows:
(1) ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY - The department, branch, or
agency of this municipality which is authorized by the adopting
ordinance to administer the provisions of the Housing Code.
(2) BUILDING - Any building or structure, or part thereof, used for
human habitation, use, or occupancy and includes any accessory
§ 16-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-3A
BAO:189
buildings and appurtenance belonging to or usually enjoyed
therewith.
(3) DWELLING - A building or structure, or part thereof containing one
or two dwelling units.
(4) DWELLING UNIT - Any room or group of rooms or any part thereof
located within a building and forming a single habitable unit with
facilities which are used, or designed to be used for living, sleeping,
cooking, and eating.
(5) GARBAGE - The animal and vegetable and other organic waste
resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption
of food.
(6) HABITABLE ROOM - A room or enclosed floor space within a
dwelling unit used or designed to be used for living, sleeping,
cooking or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms, water closet
compartments, laundries, pantries, foyers or communicating
corridors, closets, and storage spaces.
(7) INFESTATION - The presence, within or around a building, of any
insects, rodents, or other pests.
(8) LOCAL HEALTH AGENCY - Any county, regional, municipal or
other governmental agency organized for the purpose of providing
health services, administered by a full-time health officer and
conducting a public health program pursuant to law.
(9) (Reserved)
(10) (Reserved)
(11)OCCUPANT - Any person or persons in actual possession of, and
living in the building or dwelling unit, including the owner.
(12)OVERCROWDING - Occupancy of a dwelling or dwelling unit by
more persons than allowed or permitted by the maximum
occupancy requirements for habitable space in accordance with
subsection (c) of the Housing Code.
(13)OWNER OR DESIGNATED AGENT - The owner of property, or any
person properly authorized to exercise powers of, or for an owner
of property for purposes of its purchase, sale, use, occupancy, or
maintenance. For the purposes of this Article, a tenant shall not be
considered a "designated agent", unless such tenant has accepted
the designation in writing. The use of the term "owner" shall be
deemed to include "designated agent".
(14) PARTY WALL - The walls separating a dwelling unit from another
dwelling unit or from a common area.
§ 16-3A PRINCETON CODE § 16-3A
BAO:190
(15)PERSON - Shall be given the same meaning as defined in R.S. 1:1-2
of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey.
(16) PLUMBING FIXTURES - All installed receptacles or devices which
are supplied with water or which receive or discharge liquid waste
or sewage into the drainage system with which they are directly or
indirectly connected.
(17) PUBLIC OFFICER - The Housing Official of Princeton, as
authorized by Section 16-1 of the General Ordinances of Princeton.
(18) RUBBISH - All combustible and noncombustible waste material,
except garbage.
(19) UTILITIES - Electric, gas, heating, water and sewerage services,
and equipment therefor.
(c) Use and Occupancy of Space.
(1) Habitable Space - Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 150
square feet of floor space for the first occupant thereof and at least
100 additional square feet of floor space for every additional
occupant thereof, the floor space to be calculated on the basis of
total habitable room area.
(2) Sleeping Rooms - Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by
one occupant shall contain at least 70 square feet of floor space,
and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one
occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor space for
each occupant thereof.
(3) Ceilings - At least 1/2 of the floor area of every habitable room shall
have a ceiling height of at least seven feet. The floor area of that
part of any room where the ceiling is less than five feet shall not be
considered as part of the floor area in computing the total floor
area of the room for the purpose of determining the maximum
permissible occupancy thereof.
(4) Rooms Below Grade - A room located in whole or in part below the
level of the ground may be used for sleeping provided that the walls
and floor thereof in contact with the earth have been damp-proofed
in accordance with a method approved by the administrative
authority; and provided that all requirements otherwise applicable
to habitable rooms generally are satisfied.
(5) Prohibited Areas - No room or area shall be utilized as habitable
space or as a sleeping room unless a certificate of occupancy has
been issued by the construction official pursuant to the New Jersey
Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23-1.1 et seq.) covering the
area. If the room or area was constructed prior to the effective date
of the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code, the requirements of
the Princeton Building Official must have been met regarding this
§ 16-3A BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-3A
BAO:191
room or area. The public officer may issue a summons and
complaint to be filed without first issuing a notice of violation for
this section.
(6) Overcrowding - The following factors may be considered by the
public officer as rebuttable presumption of overcrowding, as that
term is defined by this chapter and shall support the issuance of a
summons and complaint by the public officer, without first issuing a
notice of violation:
a. The occupying of areas of a rental dwelling unit prohibited
pursuant to Section 16-3A(c)(5) of this chapter, such as
basements and attics;
b. The location of mattresses or bedding materials in areas of a
dwelling unit prohibited for occupation pursuant to Section
16-3A(c)(5); and
c. The existence of cooking appliances, and/or refrigeration units,
(excluding freezer appliances) in various areas of a dwelling
unit in addition to those located in the kitchen.
(d) Plumbing Facilities.
(1) Requirements - Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink of
nonabsorbent impervious material, at least one flush type water
closet, a wash basin in the toilet room or within close proximity
thereto, and a bathtub or shower, available only for the use of the
occupants of that dwelling unit.
(2) (Reserved)
(3) Accessibility - Every water closet, wash basin, and bathtub or
shower for each dwelling unit shall be accessible from within the
dwelling unit without passing through any part of any other
dwelling unit. Such water closet, bathtub or shower shall be
contained in a room or rooms which are separated from all other
rooms by walls, doors, or partitions that afford privacy. All floors,
walls, and ceilings within rooms containing water closets, bathtubs
or showers shall be of or protected by durable materials capable of
being exposed regularly to moisture without damage or
deterioration.
(4) Water/Sewer - Every plumbing fixture shall be connected to water
and sewer systems approved by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection and Energy and/or the local health
agency, and shall be maintained in good working condition. The
public officer may issue a summons and complaint to be filed
without first issuing a notice of violation for violation of this
section.
§ 16-3A PRINCETON CODE § 16-3A
BAO:192
(5) Hot/Cold Water Lines - Every kitchen sink, wash basin, and bathtub
or shower required by the Housing Code shall be connected with
both hot and cold water lines.
(6) Water Heating Facilities - Every dwelling shall have water heating
facilities which are installed and maintained in good and safe
working condition, connected with the hot water lines required
under the provisions of Section 16-3A(d)(5) of the Housing Code,
and capable of delivering water at a minimum temperature of not
less than 120° F. and at a maximum temperature of not more than
160° F. at all times in accordance with anticipated need. The public
officer may cause a summons and complaint to be filed without first
issuing a notice of violation for a violation of this section.
(7) Water Flow Rate - The minimum rate of flow of hot or cold water
issuing from a faucet or fixture shall not be less than two gallons
per minute.
(8) Water Source - Every dwelling unit shall be connected to a source
of and system for delivery of potable water sufficient to meet the
requirements for hot and cold water at all connected fixtures
simultaneously within the individual dwelling unit. The public
officer may cause a summons and complaint to be filed without first
issuing a notice of violation for violation of this section.
(e) Electrical Facilities.
(1) Receptacles - Every habitable room shall be provided with at least
two separate and remote duplex receptacles installed in
accordance with the Building Code in effect at the time of
construction or installation. All bathrooms, and kitchens or
kitchenettes with receptacles within six feet of a sink, shall have
receptacles of the Ground Fault Interrupted-type. Any new, or
additional, duplex receptacles shall be installed in accordance with
the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code.
(2) Electrical Service - Every dwelling unit shall be provided with
electrical service, circuiting, and receptacles which are adequate
for the electrical load being served. If the electrical load being
served is excessive or the electrical service inadequate to supply all
appliances contained in the dwelling unit, the service shall be
upgraded in accordance with the New Jersey Uniform Construction
Code.
(3) Overcurrent Devices - Every electric circuit shall be provided with
approved overcurrent devices installed in accordance with the
Building Code in effect at the time of construction or installation.
(f) Lighting.
(1) Natural Light - Every habitable room shall have at least one
window or skylight facing directly to the outdoors. The minimum
§ 16-3A BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-3A
BAO:193
total window or skylight area measured between stops, for every
habitable room shall be 8% of the floor area of such room.
Whenever walls or other portions of structures face a window of
any habitable room and are located less than three feet from the
window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room,
such a window shall not be included in calculating the required
minimum total window area.
(2) Artificial Light - Every habitable room shall have at least one source
of artificial light, capable of being controlled by a wall switch or
other means of controlling the electric power to the fixture.
(3) Nonhabitable Areas - Every portion of each staircase, hall, cellar,
basement, landing, furnace room, utility room, and all other similar
nonhabitable space located in a dwelling unit shall have artificial
light available at all times to adequately light the area. Every light
fixture shall be provided with a wall switch or other means of
controlling the electric power to the fixture which is convenient
and readily accessible for use.
(4) Interior Common Areas - Every portion of any interior or exterior
passageway or staircase common to two families in a dwelling shall
be adequately illuminated naturally or artificially at all times. In
buildings comprising two dwelling units such illumination shall not
be required at all times if separate switches, convenient and readily
accessible to each dwelling unit, are provided for the control of
such artificial light by the occupants thereof.
(5) Bathrooms - Every bathroom and water closet compartment shall
have artificial light available at all times, which is adequate to light
the area. Artificial lighting shall be controlled by a wall switch so
located as to avoid danger of electrical hazards. Any new or
additional receptacles or switches shall be of the Ground Fault
Circuit Interrupter-type, installed in accordance with the
requirements of the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code.
(6) Exterior Common Areas - Every portion of any exterior passageway
or staircase common to two families shall be provided with artificial
illumination to adequately light the area.
(g) Ventilation.
(1) Habitable Rooms - Means of ventilation shall be provided for every
habitable room. Such ventilation may be provided either by an
easily operable window or skylight having an openable area of at
least 50% of the minimum window area or minimum skylight area
for the room as required in Section 16-3A(f)(1) of the Housing
Code.
(2) Bathrooms - Means of ventilation shall be provided for every
bathroom or water closet. Such ventilation may be provided either
by an easily operable window or skylight having an openable area
§ 16-3A PRINCETON CODE § 16-3A
BAO:194
of at least 50% of the minimum window area or minimum skylight
area for the room as required in Section 16-3A(f)(1) of the Housing
Code, or by mechanical ventilation directly to the exterior by an
exhaust system capable of exhausting at least 50 cubic feet of air
per minute. A means of providing an adequate amount of make-up
air shall be provided. New or replacement mechanical ventilation
systems shall be constructed in accordance with the New Jersey
Uniform Construction Code.
(3) Kitchens - Kitchens or kitchenettes wherein the required natural
ventilation is not provided, shall be provided with mechanical
ventilation capable of exhausting at least two cubic feet of air per
minute per square foot of floor area of the kitchen or room in which
cooking facilities are provided. All new or replacement means of
mechanical ventilation in kitchens or cooking areas shall be
constructed and installed in accordance with the New Jersey
Uniform Construction Code.
(4) Clothes Dryer Exhaust - Clothes dryer exhausts shall be
independent of all other ventilation systems and shall be vented in
accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations and the
Building/Mechanical Code in effect at the time of installation.
(h) Heating Equipment.
(1) Requirements - Every dwelling unit shall have permanent heating
facilities which are properly installed, maintained in good and safe
working condition, and are capable of safely and adequately
heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and water closet
compartments located therein. From October 1 of each year to the
next succeeding May 1, every unit of dwelling space and every
habitable room therein shall be capable of being maintained at a
temperature of at least 68° F. between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and
11:00 p.m., and at least 65° F. between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and
6:00 a.m., during times that the outside temperature is above 0° F.
The temperature shall be read at a height of three feet above floor
level at the center of the room. The Public officer may cause a
summons and complaint to be filed without first issuing a notice of
violation for a violation of this section.
(2) Space Heaters - Every space heater, except electrical, shall be
properly installed and vented to a chimney or duct in accordance
with the manufacturer's recommendations and the Building Code
in effect at the time of the installation. Every space heater, except
electrical, and vent or chimney connected thereto, shall be
maintained in accordance with the requirements of the New Jersey
Uniform Fire Code. Unvented portable space heaters burning solid,
liquid, or gaseous fuels, shall be prohibited.
(3) Insulation - The heating system, including such parts as heating
risers, ducts and hot water lines and including all hot water
§ 16-3A BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-3A
BAO:195
heaters, shall be covered with an insulating material to guard
or protect occupants and other persons on the premises from
receiving burns due to contact.
(i) Egress.
(1) Requirements - Every dwelling and every dwelling unit shall have
safe and unobstructed means of egress. Such means of egress shall
not be through any other dwelling unit or part thereof and shall
lead to a safe and open space at ground level accessible to a street.
(2) Sleeping Rooms - A room used for sleeping purposes under the
provisions of Section 16-3A(c)(4) of the Housing Code shall be
provided with a safe and unobstructed means of egress leading
directly to an outside area accessible to a street.
(3) Porches and Balconies - Every porch, balcony, roof, and/or similar
place higher than 30 inches above the ground used for egress or
other purposes by the occupants shall be provided with adequate
railings or parapets installed in accordance with the requirements
of the Building Code in effect at the time of construction. All new
railings or parapets shall be constructed in accordance with the
New Jersey Uniform Construction Code.
(j) Windows and Doors.
(1) Requirements - All doors, and windows required for ventilation in
accordance with Section 16-3A(g)(1) or (g)(2) of the Housing Code,
shall be readily openable from the inside of the building or dwelling
unit. All doors and windows shall be properly installed so as to be
weathertight. All skylights shall be properly installed so as to be
weathertight, and where required by Section 16-3A(g)(1) or (g)(2)
for natural ventilation, shall be readily openable from the inside. All
windows and skylights required to be openable shall be capable of
being held open without the use of bars, stops, wedges or other
devices.
(2) Screens - From May 1 to October 1, all windows required to be
openable shall be provided with tightly fitting screens of not less
than 16 mesh per inch. Screens shall not be permanently affixed,
and shall be provided year round for the use and removal by the
occupants. Screens shall be stored in the building or dwelling unit
when not attached or in place.
(3) Door Locks (Dwelling Units) - All dwelling unit entrance doors shall
be equipped with a single cylinder medium duty dead latching
lockset meeting the requirements of American National Standards
Institute (ANSI) Standard A156.2, Grade 2, Type F20 (mortise), or
an approved equivalent. Outside cylinders of main entrance door
locks shall be operated by the tenant's key, which may also open the
tenant's dwelling unit provided it does not open any other
apartment door.
§ 16-3A PRINCETON CODE § 16-3A
BAO:196
(4) Door Locks (Common Areas) - In all buildings containing two
dwelling units, in which access to any dwelling unit is through
interior spaces such as hallways, vestibules, stairways, or lobbies,
the entrance doors shall be self-closing and shall be equipped with
heavy duty dead latching locksets meeting the requirements of
American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Standard A156.2,
Grade 1 Security, Type F86, (cylindrical) or standard A156.2, Grade
2, Type F20 (mortise), or an approved equivalent. Outside cylinders
of main entrance door locks shall be operated by the tenant's key,
which may also open the tenant's dwelling unit provided it does not
open any other apartment door.
(5) Door Locks (Bathroom and Water Closets) - In all buildings,
bathrooms and water closet doors shall be lockable from inside the
bathroom or water closet for privacy purposes.
(6) Door Locks (Prohibited) - In all buildings, all egress doors shall be
easily openable from the side from which egress is to be made
without the use of a key or special knowledge. The use of double
cylinder dead bolt locks is prohibited. Bedroom doors shall not be
equipped with a locking device that may be locked when the
bedroom is not occupied. The public officer may cause a summons
and complaint to be filed without first issuing a notice of violation
of this section.
(7) Basement/Storage Area Door Locks - All entrance doors to common
cellar or storage areas shall be lockable.
(8) Window Locks - All openable windows, sliding doors, basement
windows and windows opening onto exterior stairways, fire
escapes, porches, balconies or other area affording easy access to
the premises shall be equipped with a locking device of some kind.
(k) Garbage Receptacles and Exterior Storage.
(1) Receptacles - Garbage, rubbish, or other organic waste shall be
stored in watertight receptacles of metal or other approved
material. Such receptacles shall be provided with tight-fitting
covers.
(2) Location - Receptacles for garbage, rubbish, or other organic
waste, along with any exterior materials storage shall be located
and protected in accordance with the requirements of Section
14-13(c) of the Code of Princeton.
(3) Recycling Containers - Receptacles required for recyclable
materials shall be provided on site and shall be located and
protected in accordance with the requirements of Section 14-13(c)
of the Code of Princeton.
(l) Maintenance.
§ 16-3A BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-3A
BAO:197
(1) Exterior (General) - All exterior property and premises shall be
maintained clean, safe, sanitary, and free from any accumulation of
rubbish and garbage. All sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking
spaces, and similar areas shall be kept in a proper state of repair
and maintained free of hazardous conditions.
(2) Accessory Buildings - All accessory structures, including detached
garages, fences and walls, shall be maintained structurally sound
and in good repair.
(3) Street Numbers - Each building to which a street number has been
assigned by the Municipal Engineer shall have such number
displayed in a position easily observed and readable from the
public right-of-way. All numbers shall be at least three inches high
and have a 1/2 inch stroke.
(4) Structure (General) - All structural members shall be maintained
free of deterioration, and capable of safely bearing the imposed
dead and live loads. All repairs necessitated by compliance with
this section shall be performed in accordance with the
requirements of the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code. All
foundation walls shall be maintained plumb and free from open
cracks and breaks and shall be kept in such condition so as to
prevent entry of vermin, water, snow, and ice.
(5) Exterior (Structure) - All exterior surfaces shall be free of holes,
breaks, loose or rotting materials; and maintained waterproof and
properly surface coated where required to prevent deterioration.
The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight, and not have defects
which admit rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent
dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior portions of the
building. Roof water shall not be discharged in a manner which
creates a hazard or public nuisance.
(6) Handrails - Every handrail and guardrail shall be firmly fastened
and capable of bearing normally imposed loads, and shall be
maintained in good condition. New handrails and guardrails shall
be constructed and installed in accordance with the New Jersey
Uniform Construction Code.
(7) Windows/Doors - Every window, door, and frame, shall be kept in
sound condition, good repair, and weathertight. All glazing material
shall be maintained free and of cracks and holes. All screens shall
be properly maintained and free from holes and tears. All exterior
doors and hardware shall be maintained in good condition. Locks at
all entrances to dwelling units shall tightly secure the door. Every
basement hatchway shall be properly maintained so as not to be a
hazard or public nuisance, and to prevent the entry of rain and
surface drainage water.
(8) Interior (General) - All interior walls, floors, ceilings, cabinets,
counter tops and other surfaces shall be kept in good repair, free
§ 16-3A PRINCETON CODE § 16-3A
BAO:198
from cracks, holes, breaks, split or splintering boards or woodwork,
loose plaster, and flaking or peeling paint. Interior walls, floors and
ceiling surfaces shall be spackled, painted, papered, tiled, finished
or otherwise provided with protective coating appropriate for the
surface material when necessary. The required fire-resistance
rating of fire-resistance-rated construction shall be properly
maintained. Such elements shall be properly repaired, restored, or
replaced when damaged, altered, breached or penetrated.
(9) Ventilation Systems - All mechanical ventilation systems and
clothes dryer exhausts installed or required by this Code shall be
installed in accordance with the New Jersey Uniform Construction
Code, and shall be kept free of accumulations of dust and waste
materials, and be maintained in an operable condition at all times.
(10) Heat/Hot Water - All heating units, furnaces, hot water heaters,
vents, chimneys, connector pipes, and all portions and parts
thereof, shall be maintained in accordance with the requirements
of the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code.
(11) Appliances - All appliances including, but not limited to, stoves,
ovens, refrigerators, washers, dryers, freezers and light fixtures
shall be maintained in proper working order at all times, and
promptly repaired or replaced when necessary.
(12) Carpeting - All carpeting, where provided or installed, shall be kept
in good repair, properly attached to the floor surface which it is
covering, and shall be cleaned at regular intervals to prevent
accumulations of dust and dirt. Carpeting which is worn or
becomes a trip hazard shall be properly repaired or replaced.
(13) Doorbells - Doorbells, where provided or required by any law or
ordinance, shall be maintained in proper working order at all times
and be available for the occupants' use.
(14) Plumbing - All plumbing fixtures and piping shall be kept free of
leaks and breaks, and shall be maintained in operative condition at
all times.
(15) Every chimney shall be inspected by a licensed/certified chimney
contractor every two years to ensure adequate draft, structural
integrity and freedom from combustible deposits and obstructions
in accordance with NFPA 211, 2003 Edition, and a certification
documenting compliance with this requirement shall be provided to
the housing inspector at the time of the structure's scheduled
inspection.
(16) Every fireplace and fireplace chimney shall be inspected by a
licensed/certified chimney contractor every two years to ensure
adequate draft, structural integrity and freedom from combustible
deposits and obstructions in accordance with NFPA 211, 2003
Edition, and a certification documenting compliance with this
§ 16-3A BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-3A
BAO:199
requirement shall be provided to the housing inspector at the time
of the structure's scheduled inspection.
(17) Every boiler/furnace shall be cleaned, serviced, and inspected by a
licensed/certified HVAC contractor or plumber every two years to
ensure adequate draft, structural integrity, freedom of combustible
deposits, obstructions and all safety and control devices are
properly working, and a certification documenting compliance with
this requirement shall be provided to the housing inspector at the
time of the structure's scheduled inspection.
(18) Open electrical junction boxes and open-wiring splices shall be
prohibited. Approved covers shall be provided for all switch, outlet
and electrical junction boxes.
(19) All electrical wiring, devices, appliances and other equipment shall
be installed and maintained in accordance with the manufacturer's
recommendations and provisions of the electrical subcode of the
Uniform Construction Code and this chapter.
(20) Portable fire extinguishers shall be the proper type (dry chemical),
sized (minimum 2A-10B:C) not weighing more than 10 lbs. and
installed within 10 feet of the kitchen; the extinguisher must be
visible and in a readily accessible location, free from being blocked
by furniture, storage, or other items. Fire extinguishers shall be
mounted using an approved mounting bracket. The top of the fire
extinguisher shall not be more than five feet above the floor, and
the bottom of the installed fire extinguisher shall not be less than
four inches from the floor.
(21) Single- and multiple-station smoke detectors shall be maintained,
periodically inspected and tested in accordance with NFPA 72,
2002 Edition. Single- and multiple-station smoke alarms installed in
one- and two-family dwellings shall not remain in service longer
than 10 years from the date of manufacture and replaced when
necessary.
(22) Single- and multiple-station smoke detectors shall be installed and
maintained in accordance with NFPA 72, 2002 Edition. Single- and
multiple-station smoke alarms shall be on each level and outside
each separate sleeping area.
(23) All low voltage and/or monitored fire alarm systems installed in one
and two family dwellings shall be in accordance with NFPA 72,
2002 Edition, and shall be tested annually by a New Jersey Statecertified
fire protection equipment contractor. A certification
documenting compliance with this requirement shall be provided to
the housing inspector at the time of the structure's scheduled
inspection.
§ 16-3A PRINCETON CODE § 16-3A
BAO:200
(24) Carbon monoxide detectors shall be installed and maintained in
accordance with NFPA 720, 2005 Edition, and the manufacturer's
instructions.
(25) Party walls shall be kept free of unsealed or improperly sealed
penetrations and shall be inspected every two years from
foundation to roof deck by a licensed home inspector or other
licensed professional qualified to inspect party walls and/or fire
walls to ensure that any penetrations into said walls have been
sealed in accordance with applicable code requirements. A
certification demonstrating compliance with this section shall be
provided at the time of the Housing Official's scheduled inspection
of the premises. The certification shall state that a visual review of
all party walls was conducted, from foundation to roof deck, and no
penetrations were found that were not properly sealed in
accordance with applicable code requirements or, if any unsealed
or improperly sealed penetrations were discovered, same were
repaired and reinspected on (a certain) date or will be repaired and
reinspected within such period as shall be determined by the
housing inspector.
(26) The clearance between stored materials and heat producing
appliances shall not be less than three feet in all directions or in
accordance with the clearances listed on the heat producing
equipment label.
(27) Access to and a working space of not less than 30 inches in width,
36 inches in depth and 78 inches in height shall be provided in front
of HVAC units, electrical service equipment, gas meters, water
meters and valves.
(m) Responsibilities of Owners and Occupants.
(1) Facilities - No owner or occupant shall cause any services,
facilities, equipment, or utilities which are required under the
Housing Code to be removed from, shut off or discontinued in any
occupied dwelling unit let or occupied by them, except for such
temporary interruption which may be necessary while actual
repairs or alterations are in progress or during temporary
emergencies when discontinuation of service is authorized by the
public officer. In the event that any service or utility which the
owner has agreed to supply is discontinued, the owner shall take
immediate steps to cause the restoration of such service or utility.
(2) Infestation - The owner of a dwelling located in an area found by
the public officer to be infested by rats, insects, or other vermin
shall carry out such rat stoppage, vermin proofing, or other means
of preventing infestations of said dwellings as may be required by
the local health agency.
(3) Cleanliness - No owner shall occupy or let to an occupant any
vacant dwelling unit unless it is clean and sanitary. Carpeting
§ 16-3A BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-3A
BAO:201
provided by the owner shall be steam cleaned, or cleaned by other
means acceptable to the public officer, prior to occupancy by
tenants.
(4) Interior common areas - Every owner of a building containing two
dwelling units shall be responsible for maintaining in a clean and
sanitary condition the common areas of the dwellings and premises
thereof.
(5) Exterior common areas - It shall be the responsibility of the owner,
unless otherwise provided under lease agreement, to provide for
the orderly maintenance of the exterior of the premises, including
snow and ice removal. This shall not exempt the owner of any
property from removing snow or ice as may be required by any
other law or ordinance. The storage of objects or materials not
covered in Section 16-3A(m)(7) and (m)(8) of the Housing Code, or
not otherwise prohibited by municipal ordinance shall be done in
an orderly manner so as not to constitute a health, safety or fire
hazard.
(6) Dwelling Units - Every occupant of a dwelling shall keep in a clean,
safe and sanitary condition that part of the dwelling which the
occupant occupies and controls. Carpeting provided by the
occupants or tenants and which is not provided by the owner as
part of a lease agreement, shall be kept clean and in good repair, as
provided in Section 16-3A(m)(15) of the Housing Code.
(7) Garbage Receptacles - It shall be the responsibility of the owner of
each building to furnish sufficient garbage and recycling
receptacles outside the dwelling unit for the storage of garbage,
recycling and rubbish until removal from the premises.
(8) Removal of Garbage, Rubbish, and Recyclable Materials - Every
owner of a building shall be responsible for complying with the
regulations of this municipality for the periodic collection of all
garbage, rubbish, and recyclable materials.
(9) Extermination - Every occupant of a building unit comprising a
single dwelling unit shall be responsible for the extermination of
any insects, rodents, or other pests therein or on the premises; and
every occupant of a dwelling unit in a building containing more
than one unit shall be responsible for such extermination whenever
the occupant's dwelling unit is the only one infested.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of the subsection,
whenever infestation is caused by the failure of the owner to
maintain a dwelling in a vermin-proof or reasonably insect-proof
condition, extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner.
Whenever infestation exists in two dwelling extermination thereof
shall be the responsibility of the owner.
(10) Plumbing Fixtures (Cleanliness) - Every occupant of a dwelling unit
shall keep all plumbing fixtures therein in a clean and sanitary
§ 16-3A PRINCETON CODE § 16-3A
BAO:202
condition and shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable
care in the proper use and operation thereof.
(11) Heating and Hot Water Facilities (responsibility to provide) - Every
owner of a dwelling, or his or her designated agent, shall supply
heating facilities in accordance with Section 16-3A(d)(6) of the
Housing Code. Notwithstanding any agreement to the contrary
between the owner or his or her designated agent, and any
occupants, it shall be the responsibility of the owner, or his or her
agent, to obtain prompt or emergency service to repair or service
any heating or hot water facilities that are malfunctioning or
become inoperable, even in cases where the occupants are
required to provide the fuel.
(12) Fuel for Heating and Hot Water Facilities (Responsibility to
Provide) - It shall be the responsibility of the owner, or his or her
designated agent, unless otherwise agreed to in the written lease,
to provide fuel for the heating and hot water facilities.
Notwithstanding any agreement to the contrary between the
owner, or his or her designated agent, and any occupant, in
buildings of two dwelling units having a common source of heating
or hot water, and in dwelling units in which the heating and hot
water facilities are not under the exclusive control of the occupant,
it shall be the responsibility of the owner, or his or her designated
agent, to provide the fuel required to operate the heating and hot
water facilities.
(13) Owner's Responsibility - The owner shall be responsible for
compliance with all provisions of this Code not specified as the
responsibility of the occupants.
(14) Appliances - Any appliances provided by the owner at the time of
the occupancy shall, unless otherwise agreed to in writing, be
repaired or replaced by the owner at the owner's expense, unless
purposefully damaged by the occupant. The owner shall inspect the
appliances provided prior to occupancy, and such appliances shall
be repaired if necessary and be in proper working order prior to
occupancy.
(15) Carpeting - Owners shall be responsible for the repair and
replacement of worn or damaged carpeting provided at the time of
occupancy or as part of a lease agreement; and the occupants of a
dwelling unit shall be responsible for the installation, repair and
replacement of worn or damaged carpeting not provided by the
owner at the time of occupancy or as part of the lease agreement,
including removal and disposal by the owner after the occupants
vacate a dwelling unit. Occupants shall be responsible for
maintaining all carpeting in a clean and sanitary manner at all
times.
§ 16-3A BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-3A
BAO:203
(16) Repairs - All repairs or alterations to the building or an individual
dwelling unit required by this Code or performed in accordance
with any other lawful order, ordinance, statute, or regulation, shall
be performed and completed in a workmanlike manner. All repairs
or alterations required by the Housing Code shall be performed,
where required, in accordance with the requirements of the New
Jersey Uniform Construction Code. No violation of the Housing
Code shall be deemed corrected or repaired until all permits
required to perform such repair or alteration have been obtained
and the work completed in a satisfactory manner.
(17) Utilities - In buildings containing more than one dwelling unit, no
tenant shall be required to pay any utility cost, or portion thereof,
for water, sewer, electric, or natural gas unless separate meters for
each unit are provided. No owner shall enter into any agreement
with a tenant to the contrary.
(18) Pools - Outdoor water pools shall be construed to mean any
swimming pool or portable tank, erected or maintained which will
cause the retaining of water to a greater depth than 24 inches. All
installations and maintenance shall be in accordance with the
requirements of the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code.
(19) All 1- and 2-Family Dwellings are required to be provided with a
portable fire extinguisher, Installed in accordance with the
requirements of N.J.S.A. 52:27D-198.1 & the Princeton Housing
Code Chapter 16-3A(l)(20).
(20) All 1- and 2-Family Dwellings are required to be provided with
carbon monoxide detectors. Carbon monoxide detectors shall be
installed and maintained in accordance with NFPA 720, 2005
edition, CO detectors are required to be provided in the immediate
vicinity of all sleeping rooms and are required to be installed as
follows:
a. - The device is permitted to be a battery powered, hard-wired
or plug-in type.
b. - If installing an electrically operated device, the AC power
source is required to be supplied from either a dedicated
branch circuit or the nonswitched portion of a branch circuit
also used for power and lighting. Operation of a switch (other
than a circuit breaker) or GFCI is not permitted to cause loss of
power to the alarm.
c. - The device must be installed in accordance with the
manufacturer's instructions.
(21) Single- and multiple-station smoke detectors shall be installed and
maintained in accordance with NFPA 72, 2002 Edition. Single- and
multiple-station smoke alarms shall be on each level and outside
each separate sleeping area.
§ 16-3A PRINCETON CODE § 16-4
BAO:204
§ 16-4. Inspections Authorized. [Ord. No. 2013-17; Ord. No.
2015-46]
The public officer is authorized and directed to make inspection to
determine the condition of dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units and
premises located within the municipality, in order that he may perform his
duty of safeguarding the health and safety of the occupants of dwellings
and of the general public. For the purpose of making such inspections, the
public officer is authorized to enter upon premises with the consent of the
owner, his designated agent or occupant thereof, or failing that, pursuant
to a properly issued search warrant, in such a manner as to cause the least
possible inconvenience to the persons in possession thereof.
§ 16-5. Notice of Alleged Violation to Be Given by Public Officer.
[Ord. No. 2013-17; Ord. No. 2015-46]
Whenever the public officer determines that there are reasonable grounds
to believe that there has been a violation of any provisions of section 16-3A
of this article, the public officer shall give notice of such alleged violation
to the person responsible therefor, as provided in this section. Such notice
shall be put in writing, include a statement of the reasons why it is being
issued, allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires
and be served upon the owner or the owner's agent, or the occupant, as
the case may require. Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served
upon such owner or agent or upon such occupant, if a copy thereof is sent
by certified mail to the last known address, or if a copy thereof is posted
in a conspicuous place in or about the dwelling affected by the notice, or if
the owner or owner's agent is served with such notice by any other method
authorized or required under the laws of this state. Such notice may contain
an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect compliance with the
provisions of this article and with rules and regulations adopted pursuant
thereto.
§ 16-5.1. Extensions of Time to Correct Violations. [Ord. No.
2013-17; Ord. No. 2015-46]
The public officer may grant one or more extensions of time to correct
violations beyond the date set for correction in a notice of violation issued
pursuant to Section 16-5 of this article. Such extension of time shall only
be granted upon the written request of the person or agent responsible
for complying with the notice of violation, and shall be made upon forms
provided by the public officer. Any request for an extension of time shall
be deemed to be an admission that the notice is factually and procedurally
correct, and that the violations do or did exist.
§ 16-6. Designation of Owner's Agent for Service of Complaints and
Orders Required. [Ord. No. 2013-17; Ord. No. 2015-46]
If the owner of any building in the municipality shall neither reside nor have
a place of business in the municipality or within a radius of 20 miles from
§ 16-4 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-6
BAO:205
the intersection of Nassau and Witherspoon Streets within Princeton and
in the State of New Jersey, such owner shall designate a person residing
or having a place of business within the municipality or within a radius of
20 miles from the intersection of Nassau and Witherspoon Streets within
Princeton and in the State of New Jersey, as the owner's agent for service of
complaints, orders and notices relating to such building and issued by the
public officer under this article. Such designation shall be in writing, signed
by the owner and shall state the name, address and telephone number of the
local agent and include a signed acceptance by the agent. It shall be filed
with the public officer within 30 days after an owner's relocation outside the
aforementioned 20 mile radius. Any change in designation shall be made
and filed in like manner, but until such change in designation is filed with
the public officer, the prior designation shall remain in full force and effect.
Service of any complaint, order or notice in the manner prescribed in this
article upon an agent designated as provided in this section shall have
the same force and effect as if such service were made upon the owner
designating such agent.
§ 16-7. Certificate of Compliance from Public Officer Required
Prerequisite to Renting Building to Others; Occupancy of Building
after Failure to Comply with Order of Public Officer Prohibited;
Duration of Validity and Terms of Invalidation of Certificate; Duties
of Occupants; Certificate as to On-Site Sewage Disposal and Private
Water Supply Prior to Conveyance; Fees. [Ord. No. 2013-17; Ord.
No. 2015-46]
The occupancy and rental of buildings and parts thereof for human
habitation shall be subject to the following:
(a) No person shall rent to another or suffer or permit occupancy by
another of, any building or part thereof for human habitation or use,
without first obtaining from the public officer a certificate stating that
the premises, at the time of the proposed rental to or occupancy by such
other person, complies with the requirements of the Princeton Housing
Code.
(1) Exemptions - The following dwellings and dwelling units are
exempt from obtaining a certificate of compliance from the public
officer:
a. Premises that are ordinarily occupied by the owner and which
are not intended to be rented for more than 12 consecutive
months.
b. Any units owned or operated by a governmental authority as
part of a duly authorized public housing project.
c. Any units, the rent of which is controlled by any governmental
authority that provides financial or refinancing assistance in
the acquisition, construction and maintenance thereof.
§ 16-6 PRINCETON CODE § 16-7
BAO:206
d. Any unit where the relationship between landlord and tenant is
that of educational institution and student, faculty or staff
thereof, and where the rental of the unit is customarily
restricted to such persons.
e. Any unit in a hotel or motel.
f. (Reserved)
g. Any unit in a building containing three or more units registered
with and inspected by the State Commissioner of Community
Affairs, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1 et seq., or successor
statutes.
h. Any lodging or rooming unit in a building which is registered
with and inspected by the State Commissioner of Community
Affairs, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:13B-1 et seq., or successor
statutes.
(b) No person shall occupy or rent to another for occupancy any building or
part thereof for human habitation or use after having been served with
an order issued pursuant to this article relating to such building or part
thereof and after failure of compliance with such order, but this
subsection (b) shall not apply to rental or occupancy with the written
permission of the public officer for a specified period during the making
of repairs, alterations and improvements required by such order.
(c) The certificate referred to in subsection (a) above issued by the public
officer shall be valid for two years, or until another inspection by the
public officer occurs. The public officer may inspect as frequently as
reasonably necessary based on the history of violations or complaints
received; and such certificate shall be invalidated by the public officer if
the public officer finds substantial violations of the Princeton Housing
Code, on the premises. In case the certificate of compliance is
invalidated for substantial violations, the owner or the owner's agent
shall apply for a new certificate, paying the required fee, which
certificate will be issued when the public officer determines that there
are no substantial violations. The public officer shall report all
substantial violations to the Princeton rental housing coordinator.
The certificate referred to in subsection (a) above issued by the public
officer for a rental unit which is in a building that contains only one
rental unit in addition to the unit in which the owner resides, shall be
valid until a change in ownership occurs or the owner of the building
no longer resides in the building.
In case of invalidation of the certificate for substantial violations, the
public officer may grant extensions of the time period allowed for the
correction of violations as set forth in Section 16-5.1 of this article.
Every occupant of every dwelling unit shall give the owner thereof
or the owner's agent or employees access to any part of the dwelling
§ 16-7 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-7
BAO:207
unit upon reasonable notification, which under ordinary circumstances
shall be one day, for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations
as are necessary to effect compliance with the Housing Code. Every
owner shall give the public officer access to any part of the dwelling
unit, for the purpose of making an inspection, upon similar reasonable
notification.
If at the end of the period set for correction of violations, such
corrections have not been made to the satisfaction of the public officer,
the public officer may commence appropriate legal proceedings in a
municipal court of this municipality for violation of this section.
(d) The public officer shall not issue a certificate as required by subsection
(a) above until such time as the dwelling unit has been registered or
reregistered in accordance with Section 16-22 of this code.
(e) If the public officer determines that a dwelling unit has been rented
without first obtaining a certificate of compliance as required by
Section 16-7 of this article, the public officer may commence
appropriate legal proceedings in a municipal court of this municipality
for violation of this section. Any failure on the part of the public officer
to provide prior notice of the failure to obtain a certificate of
compliance shall not bar prosecution of the violation.
(f) No person shall convey to another, title to any building or part thereof
that contains any plumbing fixture connected to an on-site sewage
disposal system or to a private water supply, without first obtaining
from the public officer a certificate stating that such sewage disposal
system or water supply complies with the requirements of applicable
laws, ordinances and state regulations. However, title may be conveyed,
notwithstanding any such noncompliance, in cases where the grantee
first executes an agreement with the municipality, in form satisfactory
to the municipal attorney, undertaking to bring the premises into
compliance within a specified period. The premises so conveyed shall
not be occupied until certified by the public officer to be in compliance
with the aforementioned laws, ordinances and regulations.
(g) The owners of all dwelling units required to obtain a certificate under
subsections (a) or (c) of this section shall render payment of the
following fees, which shall be payable to Princeton prior to the issuance
of such certificate; except that no fees shall be required for premises
that are owned by a nonprofit housing corporation.
(1) Initial Inspection (to occur prior to issuance of certificate every two
years).
Fee per Unit
Structures, 1 or 2 dwelling units $200
(2) Reinspections of all structures (to correct violations within normal
two year inspection cycle)
§ 16-7 PRINCETON CODE § 16-7
BAO:208
§ 16-7.1. Enforcement; Penalties. [Ord. No. 2013-17; Ord. No.
2015-46]
§ 16-8. Effect of Article Upon Other Powers of Municipality, Officers
and Departments. [Ord. No. 2013-17; Ord. No. 2015-46]
Nothing in this article shall be construed to abrogate or impair the power
of the municipality or any officer or department thereof to enforce any
provisions of its ordinances or regulations or to prevent or punish violations
thereof, and the powers conferred by this article shall be in addition and
supplemental to the power conferred upon the municipality by any other
law or ordinance.
First inspection $0
Second inspection $150
Third inspection and all
subsequent inspections
$250
(3) In the event that the property owner, landlord or designated agent
fails to attend a scheduled inspection or arrives at such inspection
15 minutes late, they may be charged as if the inspection occurred.
(a) The public officer may prosecute any violation of this article by the
commencement of proceedings in the municipal court of Princeton.
Each such violation shall be subject to the penalties set forth in Section
1-6 of this Code. Each violation of the housing code shall be considered
a separate violation for each day that such a violation continues
unabated. Violations affecting more than one dwelling unit shall be
considered separate violations for each dwelling affected. A repeat
offender, as that term is defined in Section 1-6, shall be subject to the
penalties in Section 1-6.
(b) The public officer may cause a summons and complaint to be filed
without first issuing a notice of violation for violations of the following
sections of this chapter:
(1) Section 16-3A(c)(5) - Prohibited areas.
(2) Section 16-3A(d)(4) - Water/sewer.
(3) Section 16-3A(d)(6) - Water heating facilities.
(4) Section 16-3A(d)(8) - Water source.
(5) Section 16-3A(h)(1) - Heating equipment.
(6) Section 16-3A(j)(6) - Door locks (prohibited).
(7) Section 16-3A(c)(6) - Overcrowding.
§ 16-7 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-8
BAO:209

ARTICLE II
Buildings Unfit for Human Habitation or Use
§ 16-9. Legislative Findings; Purposes of Article. [Ord. No. 2013-17;
Ord. No. 2015-46]
It is hereby found that there exist in the municipality buildings that are unfit
for human habitation or occupancy due to dilapidation, defects increasing
the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities, lack of ventilation, light
or sanitation facilities, or due to other conditions rendering such buildings,
or parts thereof, unsafe and unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the
health or safety or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of
the municipality. It is hereby declared that this article is in the exercise of
the police powers of the municipality to repair, close, demolish, or cause
or require the repairing, closing or demolition of, such buildings or parts
thereof, in the manner herein provided.
§ 16-10. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2013-17; Ord. No. 2015-46]
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
DWELLING — A building or structure, or part thereof containing one or
more dwelling units. Owner. The holder of the title in fee simple.
PARTIES IN INTEREST — All individuals, association and corporations who
have interests of record in a building, and any who are in actual possession
thereof.
PUBLIC OFFICER — The Housing Official of Princeton and such assistants
as the housing official shall designate in writing are hereby designated as
the officer to exercise the powers prescribed by this article and by Revised
Statutes sections 40:48-2.3 through 40:48-2.12.
§ 16-11. Public Officer — Powers Generally. [Ord. No. 2013-17; Ord.
No. 2015-46]
The Housing Official is hereby authorized to exercise such powers as may
be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and
provisions of this article, including the following powers in addition to
others herein granted.
(a) To investigate the building conditions in the municipality in order to
determine which buildings therein are unfit for human habitation,
occupancy or use.
(b) To administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence.
(c) To enter upon premises for the purposes of making examinations with
the consent of the owner, his designated agent or occupant thereof, or
failing that, pursuant to a properly issued search warrant in such
§ 16-9 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-11
BAO:211
§ 16-12. Standards for Finding Unfitness. [Ord. No. 2013-17; Ord.
No. 2015-46]
The public officer may determine that a building is unfit for human
habitation, occupancy or use upon a finding that conditions exist in such
building which are dangerous or injurious to the health or safety of the
occupants of such building, the occupants of neighboring buildings or other
residents of Princeton. Such conditions may include defects therein
increasing the hazards of fire, accident or other calamity; lack of adequate
ventilation, light or sanitary facilities; dilapidation; disrepair; structural
defects.
§ 16-13. Hearings - Determination of Condition of Building -
Generally. [Ord. No. 2013-17; Ord. No. 2015-46]
Whenever a petition is filed with the public officer by a public authority or
by at least five residents of the municipality, charging that any building is
unfit for human habitation, occupancy or use, or whenever it appears to
the public officer, on his own motion, that any building is unfit for human
habitation, occupancy or use, the public officer shall, if his preliminary
investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause to be
served upon the owners of and parties in interest in such building a
complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing a notice that
a hearing will be held before the public officer, or his designated agent, at
a place therein fixed, not less than 10 days nor more than 30 days after
the serving of such complaint. The owner and parties in interest shall be
given the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear, in person or
otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the notice. The
rules of evidence prevailing in the courts shall not be controlling in hearings
before the public officer.
§ 16-14. Hearings - Determination and Order by Public Officer.
[Ord. No. 2013-17; Ord. No. 2015-46]
If, after such notice and hearing, the public officer determines that the
building under consideration is unfit for human habitation, occupancy or
use, he shall state in writing his findings of fact in support of such
determination including written statements from any of the appropriate
sub-code inspectors, the fire inspector and/or housing inspector and shall
issue and cause to be serviced upon the owner thereof and parties in
interest an order:
manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in
possession.
(d) To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees as
he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this article.
(e) To delegate any of his functions and powers under this article to such
officers and agents as he may designate.
§ 16-11 PRINCETON CODE § 16-14
BAO:212
§ 16-15. Authority of Public Officer to Order Repairs, etc., of
Building upon Noncompliance with Order; Posting of Closed
Building. [Ord. No. 2013-17; Ord. No. 2015-46]
If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or improve or,
at the option of the owner, to vacate and close the building, the public
officer may cause such building to be repaired, altered or improved, or to be
vacated, closed and boarded up, and may order utilities disconnected in the
latter case. The public officer may cause to be posted on the main entrance
of any building so closed a placard with the following words: "This building
is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use; the use or occupation of
this building is prohibited and unlawful."
§ 16-16. Removal or Demolition of Building by Public Officer. [Ord.
No. 2013-17; Ord. No. 2015-46]
If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the
building, the public officer may cause such building to be removed or
demolished or may contract for the removal or demolition thereof, after
advertisement for and receipt of bids therefor.
§ 16-17. Remedy for Persons Aggrieved by Orders of the Public
Officer, etc. [Ord. No. 2013-17; Ord. No. 2015-46]
Any person aggrieved by an order issued by the public officer under this
article may, within 60 days after the posting and service of such order, bring
an action for injunctive relief to restrain the public officer from carrying out
the provisions of the order and for any other appropriate relief. The court
may proceed in the action in accordance with the statutes and rules in such
case made and provided. The remedy herein provided shall be exclusive,
and no person affected by an order of the public officer shall be entitled
to recover any damages for action taken pursuant thereto, or because of
noncompliance by any person with any order of the public officer.
§ 16-18. Cost of Legal Proceedings, Repairs, etc., to Be Lien Against
Premises; Credit for Proceeds of Sale of Salvaged Materials on
Demolition of Buildings; Power of Municipality to Declare and
(a) Requiring the repair, alteration or improvement of the building to be
made by the owner, within a reasonable time, which time shall be set
forth in the order or, at the option of the owner, the vacation and closing
of the building within the time set forth in the order; and
(b) If the building is in such a condition as to make it dangerous to the
health and safety of persons on or near the premises, and the owner
fails to repair, alter or improve the building within the times specified in
the order, requiring the owner to board up all openings or remove or
demolish the building within a reasonable time as specified in such
order of removal.
§ 16-14 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-18
BAO:213
Cause Abatement of Nuisances Unaffected; Right of Court Review
on Lien. [Ord. No. 2013-17; Ord. No. 2015-46]
The amount of the cost of the filing of legal papers, expert witnesses'
fees, search fees and advertising charges, incurred in the course of any
proceeding taken under this article determined in favor of the municipality,
and such cost of such repairs, alterations or improvements, or vacating or
closing, or removal or demolition, if any, or the balance thereof remaining
after the deduction of the sum, if any, realized from the sale of materials
derived from such building or from any contract for removal or demolition
thereof, shall be a municipal lien against the real property upon which such
cost was incurred. If the building is removed or demolished by the public
officer he shall sell the materials of such building. There shall be credited
against the cost of the removal or demolition thereof the proceeds of any
sale of such materials or any sum derived from any contract for the removal
or demolition of the building. If there are not such credits or if the sum total
of such costs and the amounts so due shall be filed with the Municipal Tax
Assessor or other custodian of the records of tax liens, and a copy thereof
shall be forthwith forwarded to the owner by registered mail. If the total of
credits exceeds such cost, the balance remaining shall be secured in such
manner as may be directed by such court and shall be disbursed according
to the order or judgment of the court to the persons found to be entitled
thereto by final order of judgment of such court.
§ 16-19. Service and Publication of Complaints and Orders. [Ord.
No. 2013-17; Ord. No. 2015-46]
Complaints or orders issued by the public officer pursuant to this article
shall be served upon a person either personally or by registered mail,
but if whereabouts of such person is unknown and the same cannot be
ascertained by the public officer in the exercise of due diligence, and the
public officer shall make an affidavit to that effect, serving of such complaint
or order upon such person may be made by publishing the same one each
week for two successive weeks in a newspaper printed and published in
the municipality or, in the absence of such newspaper, in one printed and
published in the county and circulating in the municipality. A copy of such
complaint or order shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises
affected by the complaint or order. A copy of such complaint or order shall
be duly recorded or lodged for record with the County Clerk.
§ 16-20. Designation of Owner's Agent for Service of Complaints
and Orders Required. [Ord. No. 2013-17; Ord. No. 2015-46]
If the owner of any building in the municipality shall neither reside nor have
a place of business in the municipality or within a radius of 20 miles from
the intersection of Nassau and Witherspoon Streets within Princeton and
in the State of New Jersey, such person shall designate a person residing
or having a place of business in this municipality, or within a radius of
20 miles from the intersection of Nassau and Witherspoon Streets within
Princeton and in the State of New Jersey, as the owner's agent for service of
§ 16-18 PRINCETON CODE § 16-20
BAO:214
complaints, orders and notices relating to such building and issued by the
public officer under this article. Such designation shall be in writing, signed
by the owner, and shall state the name, address and telephone number of
the local agent and include a signed acceptance by the agent. It shall be
filed with the public officer within 30 days after the provisions of this section
become applicable to such owner. Any change in designation shall be made
and filed in like manner, but until such change in designation is filed with
the public officer, the prior designation shall remain in full force and effect.
Service of any complaint, order or notice in the manner prescribed in this
article upon an agent designated as provided in the section shall have
the same force and effect as if such service were made upon the owner
designating such agent.
§ 16-21. Effect of Article upon Other Powers of Municipality,
Officers and Departments. [Ord. No. 2013-17; Ord. No. 2015-46]
Nothing in this article shall be construed to abrogate or impair the power
of the municipality or any officer or department thereof to enforce any
provisions of its ordinances or regulations or to prevent or punish violations
thereof, and the powers conferred by this article shall be in addition and
supplemental to the power conferred upon the municipality by any other
law or ordinance.
§ 16-20 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-21
BAO:215

ARTICLE III
Regulation of Rental Housing
§ 16-22. Legislative Findings. [Ord. No. 2013-17; Ord. No. 2015-46]
It is hereby found and declared that it is desirable for the administration
of laws, ordinances and regulations related to housing that there be
established and maintained a registry of rental dwellings in the
municipality, in that such registry will identify accommodations that are
subject to the provisions of such laws, ordinances and regulations, and in
that it will also aid in the master planning and zoning of the municipality by
providing an inventory of rental accommodations, which are needed for the
achievement of a balanced residential community.
§ 16-23. Registration of Rental Dwellings Required. [Ord. No.
2013-17; Ord. No. 2015-46]
Every building or part thereof that is rented or held for rent for human
habitation shall be registered by the owner with the rental housing
coordinator prior to the issuance of a certificate required by Section 16-7 of
this Code, and every two years thereafter.
§ 16-24. Change of Status and Reregistration. [Ord. No. 2013-17;
Ord. No. 2015-46]
If premises that have been registered pursuant to this article thereafter
cease to be so rented and also cease to be held for rent, the owner shall file
notice of such change of status with the rental housing coordinator within
30 days thereafter. If premises for which notice of such change of status has
been filed shall again be so rented or held for rent, the same shall again be
registered by the owner with the rental housing coordinator and shall be
subject to periodic reregistration in accordance with Section 16-23.
§ 16-25. Exemptions. [Ord. No. 2013-17; Ord. No. 2015-46]
All rented dwelling units shall be subject to registration as provided herein,
except the following dwelling units:
(a) A certificate of registration issued by the State Commissioner of the
Department of Community Affairs for rooming and/or boarding homes
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:13B- 1 et seq. shall be deemed to satisfy the
requirements of this section.
(b) A certificate of registration issued by the State Commissioner of the
Department of Community Affairs for multiple family dwellings
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 46:8-28 and N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1 et seq. shall be
deemed to satisfy the requirements of this section.
(a) Any units owned or operated by a governmental authority as part of a
duly authorized public housing project;
§ 16-22 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-25
BAO:217
§ 16-26. Forms. [Ord. No. 2013-17; Ord. No. 2015-46]
Registration and notice of change of status shall be made upon forms
furnished by the rental housing coordinator. Such forms shall include, but
not be limited to, the address of the premises, the name and address of
the owner, the name and address of the agent in charge of the premises
if other than the owner or if the owner lives more than 20 miles from
the intersection of Nassau and Witherspoon Streets in Princeton, the name
and address of the tenant(s), the number of rental units and the number
of occupants in each and description of the premises and of the service
furnished in connection therewith, and the rents and other amounts
charged monthly for occupancy of each unit in the premises, and any
additional information the rental housing coordinator shall deem necessary.
It shall be a violation of this article for a person to knowingly provide
false information on any form submitted to the rental housing coordinator
pursuant to this article.
§ 16-27. Inventory of Rental Dwellings. [Ord. No. 2013-17; Ord. No.
2015-46]
The rental housing coordinator may survey all property owners for
compliance with the requirements contained herein at not less than six year
intervals for the purposes of updating the municipal records.
§ 16-28. Notice Concerning Flooding of Rental Dwellings. [Ord. No.
2013-17; Ord. No. 2015-46]
Every landlord shall provide written notification to each of the landlord's
tenants upon the event that a rental dwelling that is the subject of a lease
has been determined to:
(b) Any units, the rent of which is controlled by any government authority
that provides financial or refinancing assistance in the acquisition,
construction and maintenance thereof.
(c) Any unit where the relationship between the landlord and tenant is that
of educational institution and students therein and where the rental of
the unit is customarily restricted to such students.
(d) Any unit in a hotel or motel.
(a) Be located in a flood zone or flood area pursuant to N.J.S.A. 46:8-50; or
(b) The rental that is the subject of the lease has sustained flood damage
requiring repairs for which construction permits have been issued by
the Construction Official; or
(c) Either the landlord or prior tenants have filed for and received flood
damage payments through the National Flood Insurance Program
("NFIP"); or
§ 16-25 PRINCETON CODE § 16-28
BAO:218
§ 16-29. Rental Housing Coordinator — Designation; Duties and
Powers Generally. [Ord. No. 2013-17; Ord. No. 2015-46]
The position of rental housing coordinator is hereby created by this article.
The rental housing coordinator shall be an employee of Princeton. The
rental housing coordinator shall perform such duties as may be assigned
herein or by delegation from the public officer. The daily activities of the
coordinator shall be supervised by and subject to the direction of the public
officer in conformance with policies established by Mayor and Council,
pursuant to law.
The coordinator's duties shall include but not be limited to:
§ 16-30. Notices, Service, Hearings and Decisions Generally. [Ord.
No. 2013-17; Ord. No. 2015-46]
The following regulations shall apply to notices, service, hearings and
decision under this article:
(d) The landlord has elected to have the rental dwelling participate in a
Mitigation Grant Program through the New Jersey Office of Emergency
Management ("NJOEM") for Federal Emergency Management
Administration ("FEMA") grant funding for the sale of the rental
dwelling property due to repetitive and severe flooding.
(a) Keeping records on all dwelling units subject to the requirements of this
article.
(b) Informing tenants and landlords of the provisions and requirements of
this article, including any rights of appeal.
(c) Informing tenants and landlords of the provisions and requirements of
other state and municipal laws affecting rental housing, including
procedures affecting notices to quit and condominium conversions.
(d) Informing tenants of their rights under New Jersey law, including the
right to deduct sums of money from their rent in order to make
necessary repairs so that their dwelling units may be deemed habitable
and livable.
(a) Whenever a notice is required to be served, given, or furnished, it shall
be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to each person to
be notified at such person's last known address or it shall be served
personally upon such person. If it cannot be delivered by either of the
foregoing methods, it shall be posted in a conspicuous place upon the
affected dwelling unit or premises.
§ 16-28 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-31
BAO:219
§ 16-31. Waiver of Article by Landlord and Tenants. [Ord. No.
2013-17; Ord. No. 2015-46]
No arrangement between a landlord and tenant purporting to waive any
provision of this article shall be of any force or effect and all such
arrangements are declared to be void as against public policy.
§ 16-32. Violations. [Ord. No. 2013-17; Ord. No. 2015-46]
Any person who violates this article or any other order of the rental housing
coordinator pursuant to this article shall be subject to the penalties set forth
in Section 1-6 of the Code of Princeton. A repeat offender as that term is
defined in Section 1-6 of said Code shall be subject to the penalties in that
section. Failing to register a unit, knowingly providing false information
on any form submitted to the rental housing coordinator, or accepting
any installment of rent while a unit remains unregistered or without a
registered change of tenant, shall each be deemed a separate violation
of this article. Violations affecting more than one dwelling unit shall be
considered separate violations for each dwelling unit affected. The public
officer, rental housing coordinator, or any tenant or occupant affected by
a landlord or owner violating any provision of this article, may prosecute
any violation of this article by commencement or proceedings in a court of
competent jurisdiction. Nothing herein shall limit the right of any interested
party to file suit for restitution of any unlawful collection of rent in violation
of this article.
§ 16-33. through § 16-43. (Reserved)
§ 16-31 PRINCETON CODE § 16-33
BAO:220
ARTICLE IV
Housing Authority
§ 16-44. Created. [R.O. 1964, § 43.1; Ord. 86-35, § 10]
Pursuant to the provisions of Revised Statutes, section 55:14A-1 et seq., a
body corporate and politic to be known as the "Housing Authority of the
Borough of Princeton" is hereby created and established.
§ 16-45. Authority to Carry Out Redevelopment Projects. [R.O.
1964, § 43.11; Ord. 86-35, § 10]
Pursuant to the provisions of Revised Statutes, section 55:14A-31 et seq.,
the housing authority of the borough is authorized to carry out
redevelopment projects, as defined in such law, and to have all the rights,
powers, privileges and immunities conferred, and to be subject to the
limitations imposed, by such state law, for this purpose.
§ 16-46. through § 16-55. (Reserved)
§ 16-44 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-46
BAO:221

ARTICLE V
Reprisals by Landlords
[Ord. No. 86-35, § 7]
§ 16-56. Legislative Findings; Purpose of Article. [3-1-1973, § 1;
Ord. No. 81-23, § 1; Ord. No. 83-17, § 6; Ord. 86-35, § 8]
The mayor and council find that, although revised statutes, section N.J.S.A.
2A:42-10.10, et seq., prohibits landlords from taking reprisal for certain
activities of tenants, such prohibition can be enforced only in civil
proceedings in tribunals outside the borough; that the rights and remedies
thus provided to tenants frequently go unvindicated because of ignorance,
inconvenience, or expense; and that the objectives of the anti-reprisal law
will be furthered in the borough if violations thereof are deterred by threat
of prosecution and penalty in the municipal court. It is, therefore, the
purpose of this article, in the exercise of the police power and for the public
health, safety and general welfare, to prohibit reprisals by landlords for
certain activities of tenants and to provide penalties hereof.
§ 16-57. Applicability of Article to Rental Premises Used for
Dwelling. [3-13-1973, § 2; Ord. No. 81-23, § 1; Ord. 86-35, § 8]
This article shall apply to all rental premises or units used for dwelling
purposes in the borough except those exempted by section 16-39.
§ 16-58. Acts of Reprisal Prohibited. [3-13-1973, § 3; 7-31-1973, § 1;
Ord. No. 81-23, § 1]
No landlord of premises or units to which this article is applicable shall
serve a notice to quit upon any tenant or institute any action against a
tenant to recover possession of premises, whether by summary dispossess
proceedings, civil action for the possession of the land or otherwise:
(a) As a reprisal for the tenant's efforts to secure or enforce any rights
under the lease or contract, or under the laws or ordinances of the state
or of its governmental subdivisions, including the borough, or of the
United States;
(b) As a reprisal for the tenant's good faith complaint to a governmental
authority of the landlord's alleged violation of any health or safety law,
regulation, code or ordinance, or state law or regulation which has as
its objectives the regulation of premises used for dwelling purposes;
(c) As a reprisal for a tenant's being an organizer of, or a member of or
involved in any activities of any lawful tenant's organization;
(d) On account of the tenant's refusal or failure to comply with the terms of
the tenancy as altered by the landlord, if the landlord shall have altered
substantially the terms of the tenancy as a reprisal for any actions of the
tenant set forth in subsections (a), (b), and (c) of this section.
§ 16-56 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-58
BAO:223
§ 16-59. Rebuttable Presumption of Reprisal. [3-13-1973, § 4; Ord.
No. 81-23, § 1]
In the prosecution of any complaint under this article, the receipt by the
tenant of a notice to quit or any substantial alteration of the terms of the
tenancy without cause after:
§ 16-60. Compensation for Reprisal Rent Increases. [Ord. No.
83-17, § 7; Ord. No. 86-35, § 9]
The rent registration board shall have the power to determine whether or
not any rent being charged for a dwelling unit has been charged in violation
of this article. The board shall order a repaying of any such unlawful rent
for the period it was in effect or for a period of six months, whichever
is less. The board, in its discretion, may order either full repaying by the
landlord to the tenant of any unlawful rent which was so charged, or it may
order the landlord to credit the tenant the same amount which shall be
applied to future rent payments of the tenant. No additional rent increase
will be allowed for a period of one year after the landlord complies with the
repayment or credit provisions of this section and otherwise complies with
the provisions of this article.
Additionally, any tenant may pursue any action in the borough municipal
court for a violation of this article or any civil remedy provided by state law.
§ 16-61. (Reserved) [Reserved by Ord. No. 81-23]
Substantial alteration shall include the refusal to renew a lease or to
continue a tenancy of the tenant without cause.
Under subsection (b) of this section, the tenant shall first bring his good
faith complaint to the attention of the landlord or his agent and give the
landlord a reasonable time to correct the violation before complaining
to a governmental authority.
(a) The tenant attempts to secure or enforce any rights under the lease or
contract or under the laws of the state or of the United States; or
(b) The tenant, having brought a good faith complaint to the attention of
the landlord and having given him a reasonable time to correct the
alleged violation, complains to a governmental authority with a report
of the landlord's alleged violation of any health or safety law, regulation,
code or ordinance; or
(c) The tenant organizes, becomes a member of or becomes involved in any
activities of any lawful tenant's organization;
Shall create a rebuttable presumption that such notice or alteration
is a reprisal against the tenant for making such an attempt, report or
complaint, or for being an organizer of, a member of, or involved in any
activities of any lawful tenant's organization.
§ 16-58 PRINCETON CODE § 16-61
BAO:224
ARTICLE VI
Notice of Violation
§ 16-62. Notice of Violation Posting for any Public Health or
Emergency Condition. [Ord. No. 2010-07, § I]
In the event any agency of the Borough of Princeton shall issue a notice of
violation for any public health or emergency condition in respect to any real
property rented in the borough, for residential purpose, the agent of the
borough issuing said notice of violation may cause the notice of violation to
be posted on all doorways accessible from the street of the real property in
respect to which the notice of violation was issued where the agent of the
borough determines that the nature of the violation is such that notice is
required to protect the health and safety of the occupants of the property.
The owner of the property shall cause such notice of violation to remain so
posted, until the agency of the borough that issued the notice of violation
has declared the condition abated that caused the notice of violation to be
issued.
§ 16-62 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-62
BAO:225

ARTICLE VII
(Reserved)5
§ 16-63. through § 16-68. (Reserved)
5. Editor's Note: Former Article VII, Smoke Detectors Required, previously codified herein
and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 85-2 and 91-14 was repealed in its entirety by
Ordinance No. 92-12.
§ 16-63 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-63
BAO:227

ARTICLE VIII
Trust Fund for Affordable Housing
§ 16-69. Definitions. [Ord. No. 85-40, § 1]
AFFORDABLE HOUSING — Any housing unit with an acquisition price or
rent level not exceeding the maximum resale or rent level affordable by low
or moderate-income households pursuant to guidelines of the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development or successor agency,
except the term shall include also any housing development in which at
least 50% of the housing units comply with the aforesaid standard and
a substantial portion of the remaining units have acquisition prices and
rent levels affordable by households of modest income, albeit in excess of
the aforesaid income limits, giving preference to the volunteers and public
employees who serve the borough and its schools and various agencies and
commissions.
§ 16-70. Findings and Purpose. [Ord. No. 85-40, § 1]
Mayor and council find and declare that the creation and preservation
of sound affordable housing in the borough serves the public interest.
Maintaining and improving a stock of sound affordable housing requires
affirmative steps by local government working cooperatively with public
bodies at all levels and with the private sector. The purpose of this article
is to create in the borough a trust fund to assist in the marshaling of public
and private monies dedicated to affordable housing projects and programs.
§ 16-71. Establishment of Trust Fund for Affordable Housing. [Ord.
No. 85-40, § 1]
There is hereby established a trust fund to be held and administered by the
borough for the creation and preservation of affordable housing within the
municipality. All monies contributed to this trust fund shall be administered
by mayor and council in such manner as it determines best serves the
purposes of the fund.
§ 16-72. Contributions to Trust Fund. [Ord. No. 85-40, § 1]
Any person may contribute monies to the trust fund established pursuant to
this article. Borough revenues may be contributed to the fund at such times
and in such amounts as mayor and council may determine from time to time.
§ 16-73. Administration of Trust Fund. [Ord. No. 85-40, § 1]
Mayor and council shall adopt a plan for the creation and preservation
of affordable housing in the borough. Thereafter, pursuant to such plan,
mayor and council may authorize such disbursements from the fund as it
deems necessary to facilitate implementation of the plan consistent with
the purposes of the fund. Activities which may be financed by such
disbursements shall include but need not be limited to acquisition of
property by the borough, direct subsidization of purchasers and renters on
§ 16-69 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-73
BAO:229
terms, and construction and rehabilitation projects and the administration
of same.
§ 16-73 PRINCETON CODE § 16-73
BAO:230
ARTICLE IX
Affordable Housing Board
§ 16-74. Purpose. [Ord. No. 87-21, § 1]
The purpose of this article is to create the Affordable Housing Board of the
Borough of Princeton to monitor the compliance of the borough in providing
housing for low and moderate income families under its Mt. Laurel II
obligation.
§ 16-75. Membership: Terms of office. [Ord. No. 87-21, § 1; Ord. No.
90-30, § I]
(a) The affordable housing board (hereinafter referred to as "board") shall
consist of seven voting members, all of whom shall be appointed by the
mayor with the advice and consent of council, providing, however, that:
(1) At least two of the members shall be residents of the
neighborhoods within which the housing units are situated.
(2) At least two of the members shall be from among minority racial or
ethnic groups (i.e. black, American Indian or Alaskan native,
Hispanic, or Asian or Pacific Islander) as defined in the Affirmative
Fair Housing Marketing Procedures of the New Jersey Housing and
Mortgage Finance Agency.
In addition, two members of the Princeton Borough Council shall
be council Liaison members and shall have no voting rights. The
Mayor of Princeton Borough and the housing coordinator shall be
ex-officio members of the board with no voting rights.
(b) Attendance by four voting members shall constitute a quorum.
(c) The initial term of office of the board members shall be three members
for the period ending December 31, 1987, two members for the period
ending December 31, 1988 and two members for the period ending
December 31, 1989. The terms of office shall thereafter be three years
or until their successors are appointed.
(d) The board shall elect a chairperson and a vicechairperson from among
its members. Their terms of office shall be one year and they shall be
eligible for reelection. The board may also elect a secretary, who need
not be a member of the board.
(e) Expenses of and reimbursements for the board will be included in
appropriations made for the housing department of the borough. The
borough council may employ or assign at the request of the board such
personnel or experts and other staff as the board deems necessary,
provided such obligations do not exceed the borough budgetary
allocation available to the board for such use.
§ 16-74 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-76
BAO:231
§ 16-76. Vacancies: Removal for Cause. [Ord. No. 87-21, § 1]
Any voting member of the board who has been absent without excuse from
three successive regular meetings shall be removed from office by the
mayor after notice and an opportunity to explain the absences.
§ 16-77. Powers. [Ord. No. 87-21, § 1]
The board is hereby granted and shall have and exercise the following
powers:
(a) Review with the assistance of the housing coordinator regulations
pertaining to the sale, rental, resale and re-renting of affordable
housing units.
(b) With the assistance of the housing coordinator prepare
recommendations for amendments and additions to regulations as it
deems necessary or appropriate to implement the purpose of the
affordable housing program.
(c) Establish deadlines for receipt of applications for certification to the
affordable housing program.
(d) Issue certifications of individuals to the affordable housing program,
determine the period of validity for such certifications, renew
certifications, revise certifications, or revoke certifications in
accordance with applicable rules and regulations.
(e) Establish priority and waiting lists of potential participants in the
affordable housing program in accordance with applicable rules and
regulations.
(f) Establish a selection process to choose among households of equal
priority ranking once they are placed in the appropriate pool of
potential participants in the affordable housing program and to rank
applicants not falling into a priority category.
(g) Hold hearings upon notice and adjudicate the complaints of applicants,
owners and renters if the applicant, owner or renter is not satisfied with
the rulings of the housing coordinator or the board. In matters involving
a hearing, the housing coordinator shall give 10 days' written notice to
all parties involved and shall give all interested parties an opportunity
to be heard.
(h) With the assistance of the housing coordinator make recommendations
to the borough council regarding how borough funds or funds collected
from developers for affordable housing should be spent and proposed
priorities for such expenditures.
(i) Review all housing marketing programs for all housing in the affordable
housing program.
§ 16-76 PRINCETON CODE § 16-77
BAO:232
(j) Monitor the continued existence of low and moderately priced dwelling
units as such by: reviewing the qualification of prospective purchasers
and tenants to confirm that they are eligible for the affordable housing
program; determining the maximum resale and rent levels of the low,
and moderately priced dwelling units to assure that the units remain
affordable to families of low or moderate income; and requiring that a
covenant be recorded with each deed restricting the resale to families
of low or moderate income, as appropriate.
(k) Provide annual reports of all activity to the borough, courts, federal,
state and local agencies as required.
(l) Review and restrict the installation of improvements or amenities
within or as part of low or moderately priced dwelling units which
would unduly increase the resale price and rentals of such units above
the amounts considered by the board affordable by families of low or
moderate income, and to control the low or moderately priced dwelling
unit resale price adjustments for homeowner installed improvements.
§ 16-77 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-77
BAO:233

ARTICLE X
Low and Moderate Income Housing Regulations6
§ 16-78. Purpose. [Ord. No. 90-33, § I]
The purpose of this chapter is to provide an administrative mechanism for
assuring the affordability of low and moderate income units developed in
the borough.
§ 16-79. Definitions. [Ord. No. 90-33, § I; Ord. No. 91-32, § 1]
The following words used in this article are intended to have the same
meaning as given to them by the New Jersey Supreme Court in the Mount
Laurel II decision and as clarified or otherwise modified by subsequent
decisions, if any, by a court of competent jurisdiction and by the New Jersey
Council on Affordable Housing in N.J.A.C. 5:92-1.3.
AFFORDABLE — A sales price or rent within the means of a low or
moderate income household as defined in N.J.A.C. 5:93-12.
BOARD — The Princeton Borough Affordable Housing Board.
COUNCIL OR COAH — The New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing
established under the New Jersey Fair Housing Act and which has primary
jurisdiction for the administration of housing obligations in accordance with
sound regional planning considerations in this state.
EXEMPT SALES — Includes the transfer of ownership between husband
and wife; the transfer of ownership between former spouses ordered as a
result of a judicial decree of divorce or judicial separation (not including
sales to third parties); the transfer of ownership between family members
as a result of inheritance; the transfer of ownership through an executor's
deed to any person; and the transfer of ownership by court order.
FAIR MARKET VALUE — The unrestricted price of a low or moderate
income housing unit if sold at a current real estate market rate.
INCLUSIONARY DEVELOPMENT — A residential housing development in
which a substantial percentage of the housing units is provided for a
reasonable range of low and moderate income households.
LOW INCOME HOUSING — Housing affordable according to Federal
Department of Housing and Urban Development or other recognized
standards for home ownership and rental costs, and occupied or reserved
for occupancy by households with a gross household income equal to 50%
or less of the median gross household income for households of the same
size within the housing region in which the housing is located, and which is
subject to affordability controls.
6. Editor's Note: This article shall take effect immediately upon passage, publication
according to law, filing with the Mercer County Planning Board, and upon the court's or
court master's approval in connection with litigation entitled Witherspoon Jackson
Development Corp. v. Borough of Princeton, Docket No. L-37675-84.
§ 16-78 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-79
BAO:235
MIDDLE INCOME HOUSING — Housing affordable according to Federal
Department of Housing and Urban Development or other recognized
standards for home ownership and rental costs and occupied or reserved for
occupancy by households with a gross household income equal to or more
than 80% but less than 150% of the median gross household income for
households of the same size within the housing region in which the housing
is located and which is subject to affordability controls.
MODERATE INCOME HOUSING — Housing affordable according to
Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development or other
recognized standards for home ownership and rental costs, and occupied
or reserved for occupancy by households with a gross household income
equal to or more than 50% but less than 80% of the median gross household
income for households of the same size within the housing region in which
the housing is located, and which is subject to affordability controls.
PRICE DIFFERENTIAL — The difference between the controlled unit sales
price and the fair market value as determined at the date of the proposed
contract of sale, after reasonable real estate broker fees have been paid.
REPAYMENT CLAUSE — The obligation of a seller exercising a repayment
option to pay 95% of the price differential to a municipality at closing for
use in the municipal housing plan.
REPAYMENT OPTION — The option of a seller of a low or moderate income
unit to sell a unit pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:92-12.7 at fair market value subject
to compliance with the terms of a repayment clause.
SET-ASIDE — The percentage of housing units devoted to low and moderate
income households within an inclusionary development.
§ 16-80. Resolution of Conflicting Provisions. [Ord. No. 90-33, § I]
Notwithstanding the provisions of any other ordinance to the contrary, the
provisions of this article shall apply to developments containing affordable
housing units.
§ 16-81. Determination of Affordability of Housing Units. [Ord. No.
90-33, § I; Ord. No. 91-32, § 2; Ord. No. 96-14, § I]
(a) The affordability of a low, moderate or middle income unit shall be a
function of the rent or sales price which shall be established so as to
ensure that occupants do not pay a sum for shelter costs which exceeds
30% of gross annual income for rental units or 28% of gross annual
income for sales units in accordance with council on affordable housing
regulations as follows:
(1) Shelter costs for rental units shall include gross rent, including
utilities;
(2) Shelter costs for sales units shall include monthly principal,
interest, property taxes, condominium fees, homeowner and
private mortgage insurance;
§ 16-79 PRINCETON CODE § 16-81
BAO:236
(3) Sales costs of a unit shall be based on a presumed 5% down
payment;
(b) Rental and sales costs shall be fixed for a unit depending on bedroom
number calculated on the following basis as to household size:
(1) Efficiency units: one person households.
(2) One bedroom units: 1.5 person households.
(3) Two bedroom units: three person households.
(4) Three bedroom units: 4.5 person households.
(c) In the case of owner occupied housing rehabilitation assistance,
affordability shall be based on unit occupancy.
(d) In order to assure that low and moderate income units are affordable by
households whose income is less than the low and moderate income
ceilings the maximum sales price that may be offered for each such unit
shall on average be affordable to households earning at 57.5% of
median income for the housing region, and shall provide, as nearly as
practicable, for the following distribution of prices for every 20 low and
moderate income units:
Low income 1 at 40.0 through 42.5%
3 at 42.6 through 47.5%
6 at 47.6 through 50.0%
Moderate income 1 at 50.1 through 57.5%
1 at 57.6 through 64.5%
1 at 64.6 through 68.5%
1 at 68.6 through 72.5%
2 at 72.6 through 77.5%
4 at 77.6 through 80.0%
(e) For initial occupancy, priority shall be given to households that fall
within the median income categories delineated in subsection (d)
above.
(f) For initial occupancy or resale, to the greatest extent possible, certified
households shall be referred to available units for low, moderate and
middle income housing on the basis of two persons per bedroom. In no
case shall a household be referred to a unit that provides for more than
one extra bedroom per household.
(g) Master deeds of inclusionary developments must regulate
condominium or homeowner association fees or special assessments of
low and moderate income purchasers at a specific percentage of those
paid by market purchasers. The percentage that shall be paid by low
§ 16-81 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-81
BAO:237
§ 16-82. Certified Households; Distribution of Low and Moderate
Income Units and Bedroom Distribution. [Ord. No. 96-14, § I]
and moderate income purchasers shall be at least 1/3 of the
condominium or homeowner association fees paid by market
purchasers. Once established within the master deed, the percentage
may not be amended without prior approval from the council on
affordable housing.
(a) Households whose total gross annual income is measured at 50% or
below 50% of the authorized median income guidelines shall be
certified as low income households by the board and referred to units
designated for low income households. Households whose total gross
annual income is measured above 50% but below 80% of the authorized
median income shall be certified by the board as moderate income
households and referred to units designated for moderate income
households. The board shall issue to a low income or moderate income
household said written certification that shall remain valid for not more
than 120 days during which time said household shall enter into a valid
sales contract or lease for the affordable unit to which the household
has been referred by the board. Certification may be renewed in writing
at the request of a certified household no more than an additional
period of 120 days at the discretion of the board.
(b) Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.2, at least half of all units
within each inclusionary development shall be affordable to low income
households.
(c) Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.2 and 7.3, at least 1/3 of all
units in each bedroom distribution in an inclusionary development shall
be affordable to low income households.
(d) For inclusionary developments of low and moderate income units that
are not restricted to senior citizens, the bedroom distribution shall be
structured as follows:
(1) The combination of efficiency and one bedroom units shall be at
least 10% and no greater than 20% of the total low and moderate
income units;
(2) At least 30% of all low and moderate income units shall be two
bedroom units and at least 20% of all low and moderate income
units shall be three bedroom units. Low and moderate income units
restricted to senior citizens may utilize a modified bedroom
distribution. At a minimum the number of bedrooms shall equal the
number of senior citizen low and moderate income units within the
inclusionary development.
(e) Units constructed by the Borough of Princeton may also utilize a
modified bedroom distribution in order to provide greater flexibility in
construction.
§ 16-81 PRINCETON CODE § 16-83
BAO:238
§ 16-83. Controls on Affordability. [Ord. No. 90-33, § I; Ord. No.
96-14, § I]
(a) The developers of low and moderate income housing units shall
incorporate deed restrictions on all dwelling units sold or leased as
units affordable to low and moderate income households pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:92-5:93-9.1, et seq., the Council on Affordable Housing
Substantive Rules. Affordability controls shall remain in force as set
forth below.
(1) For owner-occupied rehabilitation as well as rental rehabilitation
renovated pursuant to the Princeton Borough Rehabilitation
Program, the controls shall be based upon a sliding scale
commensurate with the amount of funding needed to rehabilitate
the housing. The affordability controls for owner occupied
rehabilitation shall be as follows:
Amount of Funding Length of Controls
Up to $8,000 10 years
$8,001 to $12,000 14 years
$12,001 to $15,000 17 years
$15,001 or more 17 years + 1 year for every
$1,000 (or fraction) in funding
above $15,001
(2) The affordability controls for rental housing rehabilitation shall be:
Amount of Funding per unit Length of Controls
Up to $8,000 15 years
$8,001 to $12,000 19 years
$12,001 to $15,000 22 years
$15,001 or more 22 years + 1 year for every
$1,000 (or fraction) in funding
above $15,001
(3) The affordability controls for sale units, new affordable rental units
and rehabilitated rental units created pursuant to the affordable
housing overlay zones as set forth in this code shall be as follows:
Type of Housing Length of Controls
For Sale 40 years
Rental Housing 30 years
Rental Rehabilitation 20 years
§ 16-83 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-83
BAO:239
§ 16-84. General Provisions Concerning Uniform Deed Restrictive
Liens and Enforcement Through Certification of Occupancy or
Reoccupancy on Sale Units. [Ord. No. 90-33, § I; Ord. No. 96-14, § I]
(4) The affordability controls for new construction, affordable housing
shall vary, based upon whether the construction is publicly or
privately financed as set forth below:
Type of Housing Length of Controls
Publicly funded 99 years
Privately financed 30 years
(b) These affordability controls shall run with the land and shall place
limitations upon the re-sale/re-rental affordable units in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.1 et seq. and by means of any deed restrictions and/
or lien documents promulgated by the department of community
affairs, the Borough of Princeton and/or the council on affordable
housing. The time period of the control shall run from the date of the
initial deed of a particular unit to a qualified purchaser. In the case of a
rental unit, the affordability control shall begin to run from the issuance
of the initial certificate of occupancy of such low or moderate rental
unit.
(a) No certificate of occupancy for initial occupancy of a low or moderate
income sales unit shall issue unless there is a written determination by
the board that the unit is to be controlled by deed restriction and
mortgage lien as required herein and that said documents have been
recorded with the Mercer County Clerk and proof of such recording has
been provided to the borough clerk. The board shall make such
determination within 10 days of receipt of a proposed deed restriction
and mortgage lien. The deed restriction and mortgage lien required by
these regulations is appended to this section as Exhibit A and is
incorporated by reference herein.7
(b) No initial occupancy of a low or moderate income sales unit shall be
permitted prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy in accordance
with subsection (a) above.
(c) A certificate of reoccupancy for any occupancy of a low or moderate
income sales unit resulting from a resale shall be required and the
borough shall not issue such certificate unless there is a written
determination by the board that the unit is to be controlled by the deed
restriction and mortgage lien described herein and that said documents
have been recorded with the Mercer County Clerk and proof of such
recording has been provided to the borough clerk. The board shall
make such determination within 10 days of receipt of the proposed
deed restriction and mortgage lien.
7. Editor's Note: Exhibit A, referred to herein, may be found on file in the office of the
borough clerk attached to Ordinance No. 96-14.
§ 16-83 PRINCETON CODE § 16-84
BAO:240
§ 16-85. Option to Buy Sales Units. [Ord. No. 90-33, § I; Ord. No.
96-14, § I]
(d) The certificate of reoccupancy shall not be required in sales for which
controls are allowed to expire or in which the repayment option is being
exercised pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:92-12.2.
(e) No certificate of occupancy or reoccupancy shall be issued for a rental
unit(s), unless the deed restriction and mortgage lien required by this
ordinance is filed with the Clerk of Mercer County and proof of such
recording has been provided to the borough clerk. It shall be the
owner's obligation to file the deed restrictions with the Clerk of Mercer
County.
(f) The restrictive covenant, including the repayment clause, and the
mortgage lien shall have priority over all mortgages on the property
except for a first mortgage placed on the property by the mortgagee
prior to the expiration of resale controls.
(g) No unit (for sale or for rent) may be initially occupied or reoccupied by
any household, other than a household which has been certified as
income eligible for the unit size in accordance with COAH standards, by
the affordable housing board or the affordable housing management
service pursuant to an agreement between the borough and the service.
(a) The restrict covenant governing the deeds of low and moderate income
units shall include an option permitting purchase of the affordable
housing unit at the maximum allowable restricted sales price at the
time of the first nonexempt sale after controls on affordability have
been in effect on the unit for the period specified in this Borough Code.
The option to buy shall be first available to the Borough of Princeton,
then the department of community affairs, housing and mortgage
finance agency, or a qualified nonprofit agency as determined by COAH.
(b) All restrict covenants governing low and moderate income units shall
require the owner to notify the board and COAH by certified mail of any
intent to sell the unit at least 90 days prior to entering into an
agreement for the first nonexempt sale after controls have been in
effect on the housing unit for the period specified in this Borough Code.
(c) Upon receipt of such notice, the option to buy the unit at the maximum
allowable restricted sales price shall be available for 90 days. The
Board shall first notify the Borough of Princeton, then the department
of community affairs, housing and mortgage finance agency, and COAH
that the unit is for sale. If the Borough of Princeton exercises this
option, it may enter into a contract of sale. If the Borough of Princeton
fails to exercise this option within 90 days, the first of the other entities
giving notice to the seller of its intent to purchase during the ninety-day
period shall be entitled to purchase the unit. If the option to purchase
the unit at the maximum allowable restricted sales price is not
exercised by a written offer to purchase the housing unit within 90 days
§ 16-84 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-85
BAO:241
§ 16-86. Municipal Option. [Ord. No. 90-33, § I; Ord. No. 96-14, § I]
§ 16-87. State Option. [Ord. No. 90-33, § I; Ord. No. 96-14, § I]
of receipt of the intent to sell, the owner may proceed to sell the
housing unit. If the owner does not sell the unit within one year of the
date of the delivery of notice of intent to sell, the option to buy the
unit shall be restored and the owner shall be required to submit a new
notice of intent to sell at least 90 days prior to any future proposed date
of sale.
(d) Any option to buy a housing unit at the maximum allowable restricted
sales price shall be exercised by certified mail and shall be deemed
exercised upon mailing.
(a) The Borough of Princeton may elect to purchase a low or moderate
income unit provided for in N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.5 and may:
(1) Convey or rent the housing unit to a low or moderate income
purchaser or tenant at a price or rent not to exceed the maximum
allowable restricted sales price or rental for a period of time
established by the filing of the deed restriction.
(2) Convey the unit at fair market value subject to the provisions of the
following subsection (b).
(b) Upon purchase, the Borough of Princeton may maintain the unit as an
affordable housing unit or convey it at fair market value in accordance
with the following:
(1) Notify COAH of any proposed sale and sales price 90 days before
closing;
(2) Notify COAH of the price differential as defined in COAH
regulations;
(3) Deposit the price differential in the Borough of Princeton
Affordable Housing Trust Fund as set forth in section 15-5.18c and;
(4) Notify COAH by February 1 of each calendar year of the balance
within the affordable housing trust fund from such sale.
(c) Money deposited in the affordable housing trust fund from such sale
may not be expended until the Borough of Princeton submits and COAH
approves a repayment housing plan. COAH may approve the repayment
housing plan if it determines that it provides a realistic opportunity for
the creation, rehabilitation or maintenance of low and moderate income
housing.
(a) When the department of community affairs or housing and mortgage
finance agency elects to purchase a low or moderate income unit
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.6, it may:
§ 16-85 PRINCETON CODE § 16-87
BAO:242
§ 16-88. Nonprofit Option. [Ord. No. 90-33, § I; Ord. No. 96-14, § I]
§ 16-89. Seller Option. [Ord. No. 90-33, § I; Ord. No. 96-14, § I]
(1) Convey or rent the housing unit to a low or moderate income
purchaser or tenant at a price or rent not to exceed the allowable
restricted sales price or rental; or
(2) Convey the unit at fair market value and utilize the price
differential to subsidize the construction, rehabilitation or
maintenance of low and moderate income housing within the
housing region.
(a) Nonprofit agencies may apply to COAH at any time for the right to
purchase low or moderate income units subsequent to the periods of
control for the types of housing specified in section 16-83.
(b) Nonprofit agencies that have been designated by COAH shall be eligible
to purchase low or moderate income units pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.7
for the sole purposes of conveying or renting the housing unit to a low
or moderate income purchaser or a tenant at a price or rent not to
exceed the allowable restricted sales price or rental. Low income units
shall be made available to low income purchasers or tenants and the
housing units shall be regulated by the restrictive covenant and lien
adopted by COAH.
(a) An eligible seller of a low or moderate income unit which has been
controlled for the period established herein, and who has provided
notice of an intent to sell may proceed with the sale if no eligible entity
as outlined in N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.8 and N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.4(c) and 9.7
exercises its option to purchase within 90 days.
(b) Subject to N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.8, the seller may elect to:
(1) Sell to a qualified low and moderate income household at the
controlled unit sales price in accordance with existing COAH
regulations, providing the unit is regulated by the restrictive
covenant and lien adopted by the borough or COAH for the
remainder of the original control period; or
(2) Exercise the repayment option and sell to any purchaser at market
price, providing that 95% of the price differential is paid to the
authority, as an instrument of the Borough of Princeton, at closing;
(c) If the sale will be to a qualified low or moderate income household, the
board shall certify the income qualifications of the purchaser and shall
ensure the housing unit is regulated by the restrictive covenant and lien
required by this Code.
(d) The board shall examine any contract of sale containing a repayment
option to determine if the proposed sales price bears a reasonable
relationship to the housing unit's fair market value. In making this
§ 16-87 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-89
BAO:243
§ 16-90. Borough Rejection of Repayment Option. [Ord. No. 90-33,
§ I; Ord. No. 96-14, § I]
determination, the board may rely on comparable sales data or an
appraisal. The board shall not approve any contract of sale where there
is a determination that the sales price does not bear a reasonable
relationship to fair market value. The board shall make a determination
within 20 days of receipt of the contract of sale and shall calculate the
repayment option payment.
(e) The board shall adopt an appeal procedure by which a seller may
submit written documentation requesting the board to (i) recompute
the repayment obligation if the seller believes an error has been made
or to (ii) reconsider a determination that a sales price does not bear a
reasonable relationship to fair market value. A repayment obligation
determination made as a result of an owner's appeal shall be a final
administrative determination of the board.
(f) The repayment shall occur at the date of closing and transfer of title for
the first nonexempt transaction after the expiration of controls on
affordability.
(g) Repayment proceeds shall be deposited in the Borough of Princeton's
Affordable Housing Trust Fund. Money deposited in the Borough of
Princeton's Affordable Housing Trust Fund from such sale may not be
expended until the Borough of Princeton submits and COAH approves a
repayment housing plan. COAH may approve the repayment housing
plan if it determines that it provides a realistic opportunity for the
creation, rehabilitation or maintenance of low and moderate income
housing.
(a) The Borough of Princeton shall have the right to determine that the
most desirable means of promoting an adequate supply of low and
moderate income housing is to prohibit the exercise of the payment
option and maintain controls on lower income housing units sold within
the borough beyond the period of affordability set forth in this Code.
Such determination shall be made by resolution of the mayor and
borough council and shall be effective upon filing with COAH and the
board. The resolution shall specify the time period for which the
payment option shall not be applicable. During such period, no seller in
the Borough of Princeton may utilize the repayment option permitted
by N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.9.
(b) If the borough exercises the option outlined in subsection (a), it shall:
(1) Provide public notice in a newspaper of general circulation; or
(2) Notify the board and COAH of the borough's action. The board shall
ensure that the deed restriction of all affected housing units reflect
the extended period of controls.
§ 16-89 PRINCETON CODE § 16-91
BAO:244
§ 16-91. Continued Application of Options to Create, Rehabilitate or
Maintain Low and Moderate Income Units. [Ord. No. 90-33, § I; Ord.
No. 96-14, § I]
§ 16-92. Impact of Foreclosure on Resale While Controls are in
Place. [Ord. No. 90-33, § I; Ord. No. 96-14, § I; Ord. No. 2006-22, § I]
Pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5(e), a judgment of foreclosure or deed in lieu
of foreclosure by a financial institution regulated by state and/or federal law
or by a lender on the secondary mortgage market (including but not limited
to the Federal National Mortgage Association, the Home Loan Mortgage
Corporation, the Government National Mortgage Association or an entity
acting on their behalf) shall not extinguish controls on affordable housing
units. All affordable restrictions imposed by the borough ordinance, the
New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing, and any recorded covenants
shall remain in effect despite entry and enforcement of any judgment of
foreclosure with respect to the affordable unit for the balance of the
intended period of controls.
§ 16-93. Excess Proceeds upon Foreclosure. [Ord. No. 90-33, § I]
§ 16-93A. Affordable Housing Rehabilitation Loan Program. [Ord.
No. 96-14, § I]
The purpose of the rehabilitation loan program is to rehabilitate
substandard housing units (units with health and safety code violations)
occupied by low or moderate income households by providing deferredpayment
loans to the property owners.
(a) When a housing unit has been maintained as low or moderate income
unit after controls have been in effect for the period specified herein,
the restrictive covenant governing the housing units shall allow the
Borough of Princeton, the state, nonprofit agencies and sellers of low
and moderate income units to again exercise all the same options as
provided in this section.
(a) In the event of a foreclosure sale, the owner of the affordable housing
unit shall be personally obligated to pay to the authority responsible for
assuring affordability, any surplus funds, but only to the extent that
such surplus funds exceed the difference between the maximum price
permitted at the time of foreclosure and the amount necessary to
redeem the debt to the financial institution including costs of
foreclosure.
(a) Eligibility for participation in program:
(1) In order to participate in the loan program, the property owner (in
the case of owner-occupied property) or tenant (in the case of
rental property) must be within the guidelines for qualification as a
low or moderate income family.
§ 16-91 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-93A
BAO:245
(2) Loans averaging at least $8,000 are available for the repair or
replacement of major systems which are in violation of the local
property maintenance code. Major systems include: roofs,
plumbing (including wells), heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing
and/or load bearing structural systems. Rehabilitation activity does
not include luxury improvements, the purchase of appliances (with
the exception of stoves), or improvements that are strictly
cosmetic.
(b) Administration of the program:
(1) The housing coordinator shall be the program administrator
appointed by the mayor and borough council and will administer
the program under the supervision of the Princeton Borough Non-
Profit Housing and Redevelopment Corporation.
(2) A marketing plan, subject to the approval of COAH or the New
Jersey Superior Court, will be prepared which includes a
combination of some, though not necessarily all, of the following:
brochures; posters; cable television and radio announcements;
notices in utility bills, municipal tax bills, municipal publication;
informational meetings with welfare organizations, urban action
community groups, personnel departments of local employers,
social workers, civic and religious leaders, senior citizens groups
and fraternal organizations.
(3) Files will be maintained on each program applicant which will
include: the name of each applicant; if disapproved, the reason for
disapproval; if approved: proof of income eligibility, initial
inspection by the building inspector, bids by contractors, work
contract (final version), progress reports, copy of final inspection
and the lien on the property.
(4) A rehabilitation manual that complies with COAH's rules will be
developed which summarizes the borough's rehabilitation
program. It will describe: the program's staff and their
responsibilities; procedures for program marketing; eligible
repairs and improvements; the amount of money available;
financing terms; income qualification criteria; intake application
procedures; review and work approval procedures; and length of
affordability controls.
(5) Annual monitoring reports will be sent to COAH as required by
N.J.A.C. 5:93-12.
(6) The borough is responsible for funding the program with a
minimum of $10,000 per unit to be broken down to $2,000 for
administrative costs and $8,000 for the rehabilitation activity.
Rehabilitation activity must average at least $8,000 per unit. An
amount sufficient to fund 1/3 of the rehabilitation component must
be provided in the first year and 1/6 in each subsequent year.
§ 16-93A PRINCETON CODE § 16-93A
BAO:246
§ 16-93B. Affordable Housing Down Payment Assistance Loan
Program. [Ord. No. 99-20, § I]
The purpose of the down payment assistance loan program is to provide
deferred-payment loans to income-eligible families to cover the down
payment amount and therefore make it possible for those families to
purchase low and moderate income affordable housing units in the borough.
(c) Conditions on receiving loans:
(1) The borough will place a lien on the property for the total cost of
the approved rehabilitation. Payment on the loan will be deferred
as long as the property owner maintains the property as his or her
principal residence. If the property owner remains at the property
for the full term of the loan, the full amount of the loan will be
"forgiven" and converted to a grant. If the property is sold prior to
the completion of the full term of the loan, the repayment of the
loan is for the principal amount plus interest (as stipulated in the
mortgage note) and must be paid from the sale proceeds.
(2) Monies from repaid loans, including principal plus interest, shall be
used to first rehabilitate other dwelling units which are eligible for
participation in this program. Once funding is made available for
additional rehabilitation, monies from repaid loans, including
principal and interest, shall be utilized for other low and moderate
income housing purposes, including, but not limited to, the
repayment of any municipal debt incurred in support of the
creation or maintenance of low and moderate income units, down
payment assistance or any other housing activity involving the
Princeton Borough Affordable Housing Program.
(3) The length of the term of the rental rehabilitation loan shall be
fixed in accordance with this chapter. Repayment terms of said
loans shall be established by the Princeton Borough Non-Profit
Housing and Redevelopment Corporation which shall be based
upon an evaluation of all circumstances surrounding the
rehabilitation loan request.
(4) Payments for rehabilitation work, execution of rehabilitation loan
agreements, etc. shall be in accordance with the rehabilitation
program procedures manual which is on file with the borough
clerk.
(a) Eligibility for participation in program:
(1) In order to participate in the loan program, the applicant must be
within the guidelines for qualification as a low or moderate income
family.
(2) The minimum amount of any loan shall be $8,500.
(b) Administration of the program:
§ 16-93A BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-93B
BAO:247
(1) Purchases seeking down payment assistance through this program
must make application to the Princeton Borough Affordable
Housing Board.
(2) Any approval by the housing board for down payment assistance
shall be subject to certification by the borough's chief financial
officer that funds for the loan are available for said assistance and
have been approved by the mayor and council.
(3) The program shall be funded through the Princeton Borough
Affordable Housing Program.
(c) Conditions on receiving loans:
(1) The purchaser must agree to execute a secured second mortgage
on the property if the down payment assistance loan is granted.
(2) The down payment assistance loan is a deferred payment loan, with
the loan amount and accrued interest to be repaid either upon the
sale of the unit or upon the expiration of 30 years from the date of
the execution of the second mortgage, whichever occurs first.
(3) The interest rate to be charged in connection with the down
payment assistance loan shall be at that rate which the borough
has most recently borrowed money for a capital project, which rate
shall be certified to the housing board by the borough's chief
financial officer from time to time.
§ 16-93B PRINCETON CODE § 16-93B
BAO:248
ARTICLE XI
Affordable Housing Utility
§ 16-94. Established: Purpose. [Ord. No. 90-8, §§ 1 — 8]
(a) Pursuant to the "Local Budget Law", N.J.S.A. 40A:4-1 et seq., an
affordable housing utility is established in the Borough of Princeton and
the same shall be known and cited as the "Borough of Princeton
Affordable Housing Utility".
(b) The affordable housing utility shall commence as of August 3, 1989 and
the same shall be retroactive to that date.
(c) The affordable housing utility budget shall set forth the appropriations
in the form and detail prescribed by the regulations of the local
governing body and may include:
(1) Operations;
(2) Interest and debt retirement, and
(3) Deferred charges and statutory expenditures.
(d) The borough officers and employees are directed and empowered to
adopt accounting procedures consistent with this article and the
aforesaid statutes in the creation of the affordable housing utility.
(e) The affordable housing utility shall be governed by the governing body
of the Borough of Princeton.
(f) All matters with respect to the operation and conduct of the affordable
housing utility not determined by this article shall be determined by
resolutions to be hereafter adopted.
(g) Upon completion of the affordable housing units and the appropriate
sale of those units, after all required debt service payments are made
this utility will terminate.
§ 16-94 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-94
BAO:249

ARTICLE XII
Municipal Housing Liaison
§ 16-95. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2007-16, § 1]
The purpose of this article is to create the administrative mechanisms
needed for the execution of the Borough of Princeton's responsibility to
assist in the provision of affordable housing pursuant to the Fair Housing
Act of 1985.
§ 16-96. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2007-16, § 2]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — The entity responsible for administering the
affordability controls of some or all units in the affordable housing program
for the Borough of Princeton to ensure that the restricted units under
administration are affirmatively marketed and sold or rented, as applicable,
only to low- and moderate-income households.
MUNICIPAL HOUSING LIAISON — The employee charged by the governing
body with the responsibility for oversight and administration of the
affordable housing program for the Borough of Princeton.
§ 16-97. Establishment of Municipal Housing Liaison Position and
Compensation; Powers and Duties. [Ord. No. 2007-16, § 3]
(a) Establishment of position of municipal housing liaison. There is hereby
established the position of municipal housing liaison for the Borough of
Princeton.
(b) Subject to the approval of the Council on Affordable Housing (COAH),
the municipal housing liaison shall be appointed by the governing body
and may be a full or part time municipal employee.
(c) The municipal housing liaison shall be responsible for oversight and
administration of the affordable housing program for the Borough of
Princeton, including the following responsibilities which may not be
contracted out, exclusive of paragraph (6) which may be contracted
out:
(1) Serving as the Borough of Princeton's primary point of contact for
all inquiries from the state, affordable housing providers,
administrative agents, and interested households;
(2) Monitoring the status of all restricted units in the Borough of
Princeton's Fair Share Plan;
(3) Compiling, verifying, and submitting annual reports as required by
COAH;
§ 16-95 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-97
BAO:251
(4) Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and
administrative agents, as applicable;
(5) Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring, and affirmative marketing as
offered or approved by COAH;
(6) If applicable, serving as the administrative agent for some or all of
the restricted units in the Borough of Princeton as described in
subsection (f) below.
(d) Subject to approval by COAH, the Borough of Princeton may contract
with or authorize a consultant, authority, government or any agency
charged by the governing body, which entity shall have the
responsibility of administering the affordable housing program of the
Borough of Princeton, except for those responsibilities which may not
be contracted out pursuant to subsection (c) above. If the Borough of
Princeton contracts with another entity to administer all or any part of
the affordable housing program, including the affordability controls and
Affirmative Marketing Plan, the municipal housing liaison shall
supervise the contracting administrative agent.
(e) Compensation. Compensation shall be fixed by the governing body at
the time of the appointment of the municipal housing liaison.
(f) Administrative powers and duties assigned to the municipal housing
liaison.
(1) Affirmative marketing.
a. Conducting an outreach process to insure affirmative
marketing of affordable housing units in accordance with the
Affirmative Marketing Plan of the Borough of Princeton and
the provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15; and
b. Providing counseling or contracting to provide counseling
services to low and moderate income applicants on subjects
such as budgeting, credit issues, mortgage qualification, rental
lease requirements, and landlord/tenant law.
(2) Household certification.
a. Soliciting, scheduling, conducting and following up on
interviews with interested households;
b. Conducting interviews and obtaining sufficient documentation
of gross income and assets upon which to base a determination
of income eligibility for a low- or moderate-income unit;
c. Providing written notification to each applicant as to the
determination of eligibility or noneligibility;
§ 16-97 PRINCETON CODE § 16-97
BAO:252
d. Requiring that all certified applicants for restricted units
execute a certificate substantially in the form, as applicable, of
either the ownership or rental certificates set forth in
Appendices J and K of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.;
e. Creating and maintaining a referral list of eligible applicant
households living in the housing region and eligible applicant
households with members working in the housing region
where the units are located; and
f. Employing the random selection process as provided in the
Affirmative Marketing Plan of the Borough of Princeton when
referring households for certification to affordable units.
(3) Affordability controls.
a. Furnishing to attorneys or closing agents forms of deed
restrictions and mortgages for recording at the time of
conveyance of title of each restricted unit;
b. Creating and maintaining a file on each restricted unit for its
control period, including the recorded deed with restrictions,
recorded mortgage and note, as appropriate;
c. Ensuring that the removal of the deed restrictions and
cancellation of the mortgage note are effectuated and properly
filed with the appropriate county's register of deeds or county
clerk's office after the termination of the affordability controls
for each restricted unit;
d. Communicating with lenders regarding foreclosures; and
e. Ensuring the issuance of continuing certificates of occupancy
or certifications pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.10.
(4) Resale and rental.
a. Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information between owners and the
administrative agent regarding the availability of restricted
units for resale or rental; and
b. Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information to low- and moderate-income
households regarding the availability of restricted units for
resale or rerental.
(5) Processing request from unit owners.
a. Reviewing and approving requests from owners of restricted
units who wish to take out home equity loans or refinance
during the term of their ownership;
§ 16-97 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-97
BAO:253
b. Reviewing and approving requests to increase sales prices
from owners of restricted units who wish to make capital
improvements to the units that would affect the selling price,
such authorizations to be limited to those improvements
resulting in additional bedrooms or bathrooms and the cost of
central air conditioning systems; and
c. Processing requests and making determinations on requests
by owners of restricted units for hardship waivers.
(6) Enforcement.
a. Securing annually lists of all affordable housing units for which
tax bills are mailed to absentee owners and notifying all such
owners that they must either move back to their unit or sell it;
b. Securing from all developers and sponsors of restricted units,
at the earliest point of contact in the processing of the project
or development, written acknowledgement of the requirement
that no restricted unit can be offered, or in any other way
committed, to any person, other than a household duly
certified to the unit by the administrative agent;
c. The posting annually in all rental properties, including twofamily
homes, of a notice as to the maximum permitted rent
together with the telephone number of the administrative
agent where complaints of excess rent can be made;
d. Sending annual mailings to all owners of affordable dwelling
units, reminding them of the notices and requirements outlined
in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.18(d)4;
e. Establishing a program for diverting unlawful rent payments to
the municipality's affordable housing trust fund or other
appropriate municipal fund approved by the DCA;
f. Creating and publishing a written operating manual, as
approved by COAH, setting forth procedures for administering
such affordability controls; and
g. Providing annual reports to COAH as required.
(7) The administrative agent shall have authority to take all actions
necessary and appropriate to carry out its responsibilities
hereunder.
§ 16-97 PRINCETON CODE § 16-97
BAO:254
Chapter B17
(RESERVED)
Chapter B17A
LAND USE AND ZONING
§ 16-97 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-97
BAO:255

Division 1
Zoning In General
§ B17A-200. Purpose of chapter. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No. 86-20,
§ 1.]
The purposes of this chapter shall be to promote and to protect the public
health, safety, comfort, convenience, prosperity, amenity and other aspects
of the general welfare, and in particular to do so by implementing the
following policies set forth in the master plan of the borough:
(a) To protect and preserve the character of the borough as primarily a
residential and college town and to provide for reasonable and
necessary adjustments to present day social and economic trends.
(b) To control the development of the borough's residential areas by
limiting the density of new development in such areas and by
preventing commercial and industrial uses.
(c) To encourage the development of a range of housing types at various
price levels, particularly around the center of the borough, with
emphasis upon dwelling units for single persons and small families, in
order to take into account the changing age structure of the borough's
population.
(d) To provide a buffer area devoted primarily to apartments and office
buildings between the business areas and nearby areas of low and
medium density residential development.
(e) To continue the present predominance of small retail and specialty
stores in the borough's business districts and to prevent therein:
(1) The development of large retail stores serving a regional marketing
area and generating heavy traffic which would overburden the
borough's street system, and
(2) The extension of the borough's commercial districts into adjacent
residential areas.
(f) To guide the further development of the downtown area in relation to
the capacity of the street system of that area, in order to prevent
additional traffic congestion.
(g) To provide appropriate small areas catering to neighborhood daily
shopping needs in other parts of the borough.
(h) To provide an appropriate area for automotive and other similar
services and to prevent the spreading of such services into the
remainder of the borough's business areas.
(i) To provide increased flexibility for the future growth of the educational
institutions which play so large a part in the borough's economy and
§ B17A-200 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-200
BAO:257
§ B17A-201. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2012-12 § 1; Ord. No. 77-1, § 2;
Ord. No. 78-26, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 80-24, § 1; Ord. No. 81-24, § 1; Ord.
No. 83-25, § 1; Ord. No. 83-38, § 3; Ord. No. 86-20, § 2; Ord. No.
89-26, § 1; Ord. No. 91-2, § 1; Ord. No. 94-19, § I; Ord. No. 95-20,
§ 1; Ord. No. 98-9, § I; Ord. No. 2000-8, § I; Ord. No. 2003-9, § IV;
Ord. No. 2003-29, § I; Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1; Ord. No. 2006-07, § 1;
Ord. No. 2009-01, § II; Ord. No. 2009-33, § I; Ord. No. 2014-44 § 5;
Ord. No. 2015-48 § 2; Ord. No. 2016-42 § 7; Ord. No. 2017-8 § 4;
Ord. No. 2017-52 § 2; Ord. No. 2018-24 §§ 2, 4, 5]
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words or phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section.
Words used in the present tense include the future. The singular number
includes the plural and the plural the singular. The word "person" includes a
corporation as well as an individual. The word "lot" includes the word "plot."
"Building" includes any part thereof. The word "use" shall include the words
"or intended, arranged or designed to be occupied or used."
ACCESSORY BUILDING — See "building, accessory."
ACCESSORY USE, OR ACCESSORY — An "accessory use" is a use which is
clearly incidental to, customarily found in connection with and, except in
the case of parking spaces or loading berths, located on the same lot as the
principal use to which it is related. When "accessory" is used in the text,
it shall have the same meaning as "accessory use." "Accessory use" shall
include without limitation, the following:
ANTENNA — A system of electrical conductors that transmit or receive
radio frequency signals for wireless communications.
cultural life, while at the same time providing protection to residential
zones immediately adjacent to such institutions.
(j) To preserve and enhance the historic architecture of the community.
The council hereby finds that the adoption and implementation of the
policies set forth in this section is necessary in order to prevent the
overcrowding of land or buildings; to avoid undue concentration of
population and to lessen congestion in the streets; to provide adequate
light and air; to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; and
to promote health and other aspects of the general welfare.
(a) Residential accommodations for servants.
(b) Accessory parking spaces, loading berths and signs.
(c) Home occupations.
(d) Rental of one or two rooms in a dwelling unit for residential purposes.
(e) Family day care.
§ B17A-200 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-201
BAO:258
ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE — A structure other than a
telecommunications tower which is attached to a building and on which one
or more antennas are located.
ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENCE — A facility which is licensed by the
department of health, in accordance with N.J.A.C. 8:36 as that section exists
as of March 14, 2000, to provide apartment-style housing and congregate
dining and to assure that assisted living services are available when needed.
An assisted living residence is within the continuum of senior housing types
recommended by the Princeton Community Master Plan. It is a form of
institutional health care facility which offers assisted living services for
the frail elderly and other persons with physical or cognitive impairment.
This does not include individuals requiring acute, intermediate, ongoing,
residential type supervised treatment for social, emotional, psychiatric,
addictions or school classified difficulties. It is an alternative for persons
who because of age, illness, or infirmity cannot live independently, but
who do not require continuous nursing home-level care. "Assisted living
services" means a coordinated array of supportive personal and health
services, available 24 hours per day, to residents who have been assessed to
need these services, including residents who require formal long-term care.
ATTIC — The part of a building that is immediately below and wholly or
partly within the roof framing.
BASEMENT — Space in which the ceiling (defined as the bottom of the
structural members of the floor above) is less than four feet above the
average finished grade line along the outside walls of the building and is
more than seven feet in height measured from the finished floor, except at
points of entry or access.
BILLBOARD — A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity,
service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered elsewhere than upon
the lot on which such sign is situated.
BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — Any combination of materials forming any
construction, except: (a) Where entirely underground, so as to permit the
use of the ground above the same as if no building were present and
without substantial change in the existing grade; and (b) fences and walls
of six feet in height or less. The terms "building" and "structure" are used
synonymously.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY — A detached building, subordinate to the
principal building on the same lot as the principal building and with no
cooking facilities, except outdoor barbecue pits or picnic fireplaces, or
sleeping facilities. The term "accessory building" shall not include
secondary residence buildings; garden or tool houses with an area of less
than 32 square feet and without a foundation when located in accordance
with section 17A-380 of this article, but it shall include the following:
Radio and television antennae, except for antennae installed on the roof
of a principal building and extending not more than 15 feet above the
highest level thereof.
(a)
§ B17A-201 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-201
BAO:259
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — That building which houses the primary use on a
lot. In the R1, R2, R3 and R4 zoning districts, only one principal building is
permitted on a lot. The following shall be considered part of the principal
building:
BUILDING, SECONDARY RESIDENCE — A detached building that is
subordinate to the principal building on the same lot and that: (a) in part
is used for and includes one or more permitted principal or accessory uses;
and (b) in remaining part contains not more than one secondary residence.
COLLOCATION — Use of a common PWTF or a common site by two or more
wireless license holders or by one wireless license holder for more than
one type of communication technology and/or placement of a PWTF on a
structure.
CONTINUING CARE RETIREMENT COMMUNITY (CCRC) — A
development of residential living units exclusively for persons who are 62
years of age or older, or for couples, one of whom is at least 62 years of
age, which provides a continuum of accommodations and care and which
provides "continuing care" as an integral part of the residential
development. Continuing care is the provision of lodging and nursing,
medical or other health related services at the CCRC or at another location
to an individual pursuant to an agreement effective for the life of the
individual or for a period greater than one year, and, in consideration of the
payment of an entrance fee with or without other periodic charges, provided
that the person receiving the care is not related to the person who provides
the care.
The continuing care retirement community (CCRC) must include
independent living units and assisted living units and nursing care units.
Amateur radio receiving and transmitting towers of 15 feet or less in
height.
(b)
Swimming pools and other outdoor sports buildings not operated for
gain.
(c)
Pergolas, pavilions, unroofed porches, outdoor bins and other similar
buildings.
(d)
(e) Garden houses, tool houses, playhouses and greenhouses.
(f) Detached garages.
Any attached accessory building, including an attached garage or
attached roofed carport, including those carports attached only by a
roofed breezeway.
(a)
(b) A roofed porch attached to the principal building.
A secondary residence located within a one-family dwelling.
Fences and walls more than six feet high, even though not attached to
a principal building, are subject to the bulk regulations pertaining to
principal buildings.
(c)
§ B17A-201 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-201
BAO:260
The nursing care units and/or assisted living units may be made available
at the CCRC or by contract at another facility. The CCRC shall also include
facilities and arrangements for providing continuing care and meals for
residents, with or without common dining facilities, and may include
accessory services customarily incidental to a continuing care retirement
community.
The following accessory structures and uses shall be permitted in a
continuing care retirement community: recreation facilities, physical
therapy facilities, entertainment facilities, libraries, food preparation
facilities, dining facilities, linen service facilities, nursing services,
housekeeping services, security facilities, administrative offices, staff
facilities, storage and maintenance facilities, chapels, temporary guest
lodging facilities, barber shop and beauty parlors, facilities for the sale
of sundries, personal articles, newspapers, food, and similar convenience
products to the residents, and such other uses as are customarily associated
with and subordinate to the principal permitted uses. Except as may
otherwise be authorized, all accessory facilities, functions, and services
shall be for the use and benefit of the residents of the facility. The space for
accessory uses shall not constitute gross floor area for purposes of any floor
area ratio limitation to the extent of 5% of the total gross floor area of the
CCRC development, excluding the space for accessory uses.
COURT, INNER — An open space which is enclosed on all sides by exterior
walls of a building and is unobstructed from the ground to the sky.
COURT, OUTER — An open space which is enclosed on three sides by
exterior walls of a building and is unobstructed from the ground to the sky.
COVERAGE — The area covered by all buildings on a lot, expressed as a
percentage of the lot area.
CURB LEVEL — The average elevation, established by existing curbs or
borough ordinance of the street grade along the entire street line of the lot.
Where a building is on a corner lot, the curb level is the average level of
such elevations on the two intersecting streets. Where a front yard of 25
feet or more is provided or where there are two or more principal buildings
on the lot, the curb level is the average level of the land immediately
adjacent to the building prior to or after any excavation or fill, as may be
determined by the development enforcement officer.
DORMITORY — That part of an educational institution which provides
sleeping accommodations, with or without accessory common rooms and
cooking and eating facilities, for groups of unmarried students in
attendance at the educational institution.
DRIVE-IN/DRIVE-THROUGH — An establishment that by design, physical
facilities, service or packaging procedures encourages or permits
Court, depth of outer. The average distance from the unenclosed side of
the court to the farthest wall which is parallel to, or walls which make
an angle of less than 45° with, the unenclosed side.
(a)
(b) Court, width of outer. The length of the unenclosed side of the court.
§ B17A-201 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-201
BAO:261
customers to receive services or obtain goods while remaining in their
motor vehicles.
DWELLING UNIT — A building or entirely self-contained portion thereof,
containing complete housekeeping facilities for only one family, including
any domestic servants employed on the premises, and having no cooking,
food preparation or sanitary facilities in common with other dwelling units
and no common enclosed space, other than vestibules, entrance or porches,
and laundry, heating and air conditioning rooms and equipment. The terms
shall not include a boarding house, convalescent home, dormitory, fraternity
or sorority house, hotel, nursing or similar home or other similar building,
or a secondary residence.
DWELLING, ATTACHED — A one-family dwelling with two common or party
walls separating it from adjacent units on both sides, or one party wall in
the case of a building at the end of a group of attached dwellings.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE — A building or portion thereof containing three or
more dwelling units, other than attached dwellings.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY — A detached building containing one dwelling
unit only, or if permitted in the district, one dwelling unit and secondary
residence. The term shall include a parish house.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A detached building containing two dwelling
units, either side by side, as in the case of a semi-detached dwelling, or one
over the other.
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION — An education institution of higher
learning chartered by the state, or a private educational institution
approved by and subject to regulations prescribed by the state and giving
instructions or affording facilities for study and research in academic or
technical subjects primarily at or above the college level.
ENLARGEMENT — An addition to the aggregate floor area or an increase in
the height of any existing building or area of the lot covered by any building.
EXTENSION — An increase in the amount of existing floor area used for an
existing use with an existing building.
FAMILY — One or more persons occupying one dwelling unit as a single,
non-profit housekeeping unit, whose relationship is of a stable and domestic
character. Uses such as non-familial institutional uses, rooming houses,
hotels, clubs, fraternities, sororities, transient housing or similar types of
housing shall not be considered family uses. It shall be considered a family
use to provide supportive personal and health services within a dwelling
unit to family members residing in the dwelling unit.
FAMILY DAY CARE — The provision of child care services for a fee, or
other consideration, to no more than five children, by a family occupying
a dwelling unit, provided that the use complies with the requirements of
section 17A-228(c)(2)e,f.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 30:5B-18, a child being cared for under the following
circumstances is not included in the number of children receiving child care
§ B17A-201 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-201
BAO:262
services, provided that there shall be no more than three such children
within either or both of the following categories:
FLOOR AREA — The total area of all of the stories of all structures on
the lot, measured from the outside faces of the exterior walls or from
the exterior roof edges where the structure has no walls and including
the following, although not by way of limitation: interior balconies and
mezzanines, roofed and/or enclosed areas such as sheds, barns, garages,
and carports.
Attic space in a single family or two family residence with a height of seven
feet or more measured from the finished floor to the roof rafter shall be
counted as floor area except for that area that is up to one-third of the
area of the floor directly below. Attic areas in a single family or two family
residence with a height of less than seven feet measured from finished floor
to roof rafter shall not be counted as floor area.
If an interior space in a one or two family structure has a ceiling height of
12 feet or greater, the floor area of that space shall be counted twice for the
purpose of floor area calculation. If an interior space in a one or two family
structure has a sloped ceiling, only that portion of the floor having a ceiling
height of 12 feet or greater shall be counted twice for the purpose of floor
area calculation.
For single- and two-family dwellings, the following shall be exempt from the
calculation of floor area (see Fig. 1):
Basements
A/C condenser units, generators, transformers, above-ground fuel tanks
and other similar devices, not to exceed 100 square feet in the aggregate.
The area in excess of 100 square feet in the aggregate shall be counted as
floor area
(A) Non-enclosed one-story porches, porticos, stoops and entrance
platforms, up to 200 square feet. Any additional square footage beyond
the first 200 square feet shall be included in the calculation
(B) That portion of any garage, porte-cochere, carport or other accessory
structure that is located behind the rearmost wall of the dwelling (C),
provided that said structure is no greater than 1 story and 15 feet in
height to the peak of the roof, not to exceed 300 square feet
The child being cared for is legally related to the person responsible for
and managing the child care services;
(a)
The child being cared for is part of a cooperative arrangement between
parents for the care of their children by one or more of the parents
where no payment for care is being provided.
Any other provision of Chapter 17A to the contrary notwithstanding,
no accessory off-street parking or accessory loading berths are
required in order to use a dwelling unit for family day care.
(b)
§ B17A-201 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-201
BAO:263
Figure 1
FLOOR AREA AGGREGATE — [Deleted by Ord. No. 2015-48 § 2]
FLOOR AREA RATIO — The gross floor area of all buildings on a lot divided
by the lot area.
GARAGE, MOTORCOURT — A garage located in between the front of a
structure and the street and which is accessible from a paved courtyard
located at the interior of the lot.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — An accessory building incidental to a house as defined
herein, which accessory building is used for the off-street storage of motor
vehicles belonging to the inhabitants of such house, and in which garage no
business, service or occupation is conducted or rendered for profit except
as permitted by section 17A-228(c)(6)a.
HEIGHT OF BUILDING — The greatest vertical distance between the
average level of finished grade or pre-construction grade, whichever is
lower in elevation, along all the exterior walls of a building and each of the
following:
HOME OCCUPATION — An occupation customarily carried on in a dwelling
unit by an occupant of the residence, which occupation is clearly an
accessory use incidental to the residential use. A "home occupation" shall
not include any occupation that gives external evidence of nonresidential
use, nor shall it include a barbershop, beauty parlor, commercial caterer,
(a) The highest ridge of the roof, in the case of a pitched roof;
(b) The highest parapet or cornice level, in the case of a flat roof;
The highest point of any structure that rises wholly or partly above
the roof line and whose area together with the area of all other such
structures exceeds 10% of the ground floor area of the building that
supports it; excepting, however, structures that constitute or house
mechanical equipment for such building; provided, that all the
structures that rise wholly or partly above the roof line do not exceed
in the aggregate 20% of the ground floor area of such building.
The finished grades of depressed courts, to the extent that they are
below abutting ground level, shall be disregarded in height
computations.
(c)
§ B17A-201 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-201
BAO:264
commercial rental office, medical doctor or dentist, or studio where
dancing, music or other personal instruction is offered to more than one
pupil at one time or where concerts or recitals are held.
HOTEL — A dwelling in which more than 10 rooms are rented to boarders
or lodgers, or any other building containing rooms or suites of rooms,
located on common hallways, which are used, rented or hired out to be
occupied or which are occupied for sleeping purposes primarily by transient
guests.
JOINT OCCUPANCY BUILDING — A building containing both dwelling units
and business uses which are permitted in the applicable district regulations.
KIOSK — A one-story freestanding structure not exceeding 250 square
feet in floor area and 20 feet in height. Kiosks may contain retail stores,
bakeries, and eating and drinking places and may not contain more than
five counter seats for patrons to eat or drink inside the premises.
LOT — A single tract of land under single ownership or control, located
within a single block which, at the time of filing for a building permit, is
designated by the owner as a tract to be used, developed or built upon as
a unit. Such lot may or may not coincide with the deed description thereof
or the boundaries of the same as shown on a map thereof filed for record
or otherwise, and it may be subsequently subdivided into two or more lots;
provided, that all such lots conform to all the regulations of the district. A
lot may be occupied by more than one principal building, except in the R1,
R2, R3 and R4 zoning districts.
LOT LINE — Any boundary of a lot, other than a street line.
LOT LINE, REAR — The lot line generally opposite to the street line.
LOT WIDTH — The measurement along a line drawn parallel to the street
line, at the depth of the required front yard.
LOT, CORNER — A lot at the junction of and abutting on two or more
intersecting streets, where the interior angle of intersection does not
exceed 135°. Any lot adjoining a curved street at a point where the street
line describes an arc subtended by an angle of 135° or less shall be
considered a corner lot.
LOT, DEPTH — The minimum distance from the street line of a lot to the
rear lot line of such lot.
LOT, IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE — The ratio, the numerator of which is the
area of lot coverage plus the area of all other impervious cover, and the
denominator of which is the gross area of the lot.
For single- and two-family dwellings, the following shall be exempt from the
calculation of impervious coverage (see Fig. 1):
§ B17A-201 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-201
BAO:265
A/C condenser units, generators, transformers, above-ground fuel tanks
and other similar devices, not to exceed 100 square feet in the aggregate.
The area in excess of 100 square feet in the aggregate shall be counted as
impervious coverage.
(A) Non-enclosed one-story porches, porticos, stoops and entrance
platforms, up to 200 square feet. Any additional square footage beyond
the first 200 square feet shall be included in the calculation.
(B) That portion of any garage, porte-cochere, carport or other accessory
structure that is located behind the rear most wall of the dwelling (C),
provided that said structure is no greater than one story and 15 feet in
height to the peak of the roof, not to exceed 300 square feet.
Figure 1
Note: the exemptions listed in the definition of impervious cover are for
purposes of this article only. With respect to the municipality's stormwater
management regulations, the definition of "impervious surface" set forth
in Article X shall control.
LOT, INTERIOR — Any lot which is not a corner lot or a through lot.
LOT, THROUGH — A lot which has two street lines and which is not a corner
lot.
NONCOMPLYING — A "noncomplying" building is any lawful building which
is a nonconforming structure and which does not comply with any one or
more of the applicable district bulk regulations or off-street parking and
loading requirements, either on November 19, 1968, or as a result of any
subsequent amendment to this article.
NONCONFORMING — A "nonconforming" use is any lawful use which is
a nonconforming use, whether of a building or a tract of land, which does
not conform to one or more of the applicable use regulations of the district
in which it is located, either on November 19, 1968, or as a result of any
subsequent amendment to this article.
NURSING HOME — A nursing home means any building or buildings which
are used for the housing of patients who require continuous nursing homelevel
care or who are in need of assisted living services. It shall include a
"nursing home" and/or "assisted living residence." For this purpose:
A nursing home means a facility which is licensed by the department of
health, in accordance with N.J.A.C. 8:39, to provide health care under
§ B17A-201 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-201
BAO:266
medical supervision and continuous nursing care for 24 or more consecutive
hours to patients who do not require the degree of care and treatment
which a hospital provides and who, because of their physical or mental
condition, require continuous nursing home-level care.
An assisted living residence means a facility which is licensed by the
department of health, in accordance with N.J.A.C. 8:36, to provide
apartment-style housing and congregate dining and to assure that assisted
living services are available when needed. "Assisted living services" means
a coordinated array of supportive personal and health services, available 24
hours per day, to residents who have been assessed to need these services,
including residents who require formal long-term care.
PARKING GARAGE — A structure containing parking spaces for vehicles,
some or all of which shall be enclosed, and facilities incident thereto.
PARKING SPACE — An accessory off-street space, open or enclosed and
paved or surfaced, which is accessible and available at all hours when the
building to which it is accessory is in use, for the parking of one passenger
car.
PERSONAL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT
FACILITIES (PWTEFS) — Facilities serving and subordinate in area, extent
and purpose to, and on the same lot as, a telecommunications tower or
antenna location. Such facilities include, but are not limited to, transmission
equipment, storage sheds, storage buildings, and security fencing.
PERSONAL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES (PWTFS) —
Facilities for the provision of wireless communications services, including,
but not limited to, antennas, antenna support structure,
telecommunications towers, and related facilities other than PWTEFs.
PRINCETON COMMUNITY — The Township of Princeton and the Borough
of Princeton, in the County of Mercer, and State of New Jersey.
PUBLIC BUILDING — A building owned or operated by the borough,
Princeton Township, the county, the state or the United States of America.
RELOCATION PLAN — The documents and information required to be
supplied in connection with a proposal for the acquisition and relocation of
a preservation structure as provided in section 393.3.
RELOCATION SITE — The land to which a preservation structure is
proposed to be relocated.
RESERVED — (Reserved by Ord. No. 2014-44)
ROOM, HABITABLE — A living room or enclosed floor space within a
dwelling unit, secondary residence, dormitory or boarding house, which
is used or designed to be used for living, sleeping or eating purposes. A
"habitable room" shall not include any of the following:
(a) A kitchen.
(b) A foyer, bathroom, toilet, public or private hall, corridor or passageway.
§ B17A-201 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-201
BAO:267
ROOMING HOUSE — A dwelling occupied by one family, with three to 10
rooms rented for more than seven consecutive days to boarders or lodgers,
in which there are provided services incidental to such use. The term shall
include a boarding house or a furnished rooming house. A lodger or roomer
may have privileges in the kitchen of the dwelling but shall not maintain
cooking or food preparation facilities elsewhere, alone or in common with
other roomers.
SECONDARY RESIDENCE — A group of interrelated rooms that: (a)
constitutes an entirely self-contained portion of a principal, one-family
dwelling, or is located in a secondary residence building on the same lot as
a principal, one-family dwelling; (b) is owned by the owner of the principal,
one-family dwelling; (c) contains complete housekeeping facilities for only
one family; (d) has no cooking facilities, food preparation facilities, sanitary
facilities, or enclosed space in common with any other part of the building
in which it is located, except vestibules, entrances, porches, garages, or
laundry, heating or air conditioning rooms or equipment; and (e) complies
with the provisions of section 17A-228(c)(7).
SENIOR SECONDARY RESIDENCE — A group of interrelated rooms that:
(a) constitutes an entirely self-contained portion of a principal, one-family
dwelling, or is located in a senior secondary residence building on the same
lot as a principal, one-family dwelling; (b) is owned by the owner of the
principal, one-family dwelling; (c) contains complete housekeeping facilities
for only one family; (d) has no cooking facilities, food preparation facilities,
sanitary facilities, or enclosed space in common with any other part of
the building in which it is located, except vestibules, entrances, porches,
garages, or laundry, heating or air conditioning rooms or equipment; and (e)
complies with the provision of section 17A-228(c)(8).
SIGN — Any structure or part thereof, or device attached thereto or painted
or represented thereon, which displays or includes any letter, word, model,
banner, flag, pennant, insignia, device or representation used as or which
is in the nature of, an announcement, direction or advertisement. For the
purpose of this article, the word "sign" does not include the flag, pennant
or insignia of any nation, group of nations, state, city or other political unit
or any artistic expression, even if it relates to the character of the business
being undertaken in the structure, provided that the artistic expression
does not contain the name of the business or of a product or service sold by
the business and, if it is proposed in a historic preservation district, receives
approval by the historic preservation review committee.
STORY — Any covered area whether finished or not, with a clear headroom
of seven feet or more measured from the finished floor to the ceiling
(defined as the bottom of the structural members of the floor or roof above).
If the covered area also meets the definition of "basement," it shall not be
considered a "story."
A dining alcove, dinette or other dining space, unless separated by
walls from habitable rooms or any of the above.
(c)
§ B17A-201 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-201
BAO:268
STREET — Any public street, place, square, lane or way with a minimum
right-of-way of 25 feet set aside or used as a right-of-way for common street
purposes.
STREET LINE — The dividing line between a lot and a street. Where a
proposed street widening is shown on the official map, the street line shall
be the line of the proposed widening. Where no right-of-way width is shown
on the official map, the street line shall be presumed to be 25 feet from the
center line of the street as determined by the borough engineer.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION — Any change in any supporting member of a
building.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER — A freestanding structure on which
one or more antennas are located, including lattice towers, guyed towers,
monopoles and similar structures.
TRAILER — Any vehicle mounted on wheels or on a truck body, movable
either by its own power or by being drawn by another vehicle, which is
initially designed or converted to be used for living or sleeping quarters.
The term "trailer" shall include such vehicles if mounted on temporary or
permanent foundations with the wheels removed.
USABLE OPEN SPACE — Common open space that comprises an enclosed
portion of the ground of a lot, which is available and accessible to all
occupants of the buildings on the lot for purposes of active or passive
outdoor recreation and:
USE — The term employed to refer to:
(a) Which is not devoted to driveways or parking spaces;
(b) Which is free of buildings;
Of which not more than 25% is roofed, and only for shelter purposes;
and
(c)
The minimum dimension of which is 20 feet.
Roof space may be substituted for ground space; provided that such
roof space is available and readily accessible to all the occupants.
Balconies with a minimum dimension of six feet or more may be
substituted for 50% of the ground space; provided, that each balcony
is directly accessible to the occupants of only one dwelling unit or
secondary residence from the interior of that dwelling unit or
secondary residence.
(d)
Any purpose for which building or land may be arranged, designed,
intended, maintained or occupied, as, for example, dwellings.
(a)
Any occupation, business, activity or operation carried on or intended
to be carried on in a building on land, as, for example, a food store.
(b)
§ B17A-201 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-201
BAO:269
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS — Any personal wireless services as
defined in the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 (FTA) which
includes FCC licensed commercial wireless telecommunications services
including cellular, personal communication services (PCS), specialized
mobile radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobile radio (ESMR), paging,
and similar services that currently exist or that may in the future be
developed. It does not include any amateur radio facility that is owned
and operated by a federally-licensed amateur radio station operator or is
used exclusively for receive only antennas, nor does it include non-cellular
telephone service.
YARD, FRONT — A portion of a lot extending open and unobstructed from
ground level to the sky along a street line and from the street line for a
depth set forth in the applicable district yard regulations.
YARD, MEAN PREVAILING FRONT SETBACK — The mean prevailing front
yard setback for a block. (See section 17A-376.1)
YARD, REAR — A portion of a lot extending open and unobstructed from
ground level to the sky, except for accessory buildings or uses explicitly
permitted in a rear yard by this article, along a rear lot line and from the
rear lot line for a depth set forth in the district yard regulations.
YARD, SIDE — A portion of a lot between the front yard and the rear yard,
extending open and unobstructed from ground level to the sky, except for
accessory buildings or uses explicitly permitted in a side yard by this article,
along any lot line other than a street line or rear lot line, and from such lot
line for a width set forth in the applicable district yard regulations.
§ B17A-202. Districts generally — Established; enumerated. [Ord.
No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No. 82-30, § 1; Ord. No. 85-12, § 3; Ord. No.
86-18, § 1; Ord. No. 90-27, § 3; Ord. No. 94-19, § I; Ord. No. 96-16,
§ I; Ord. No. 2000-14, § I; Ord. No. 2003-9, § I; Ord. No. 2006-19, § 2;
Ord. No. 2006-21, § 1; Ord. No. 2008-18, § 1; Ord. No. 2011-24.]
The borough is hereby divided into the following districts:
A name of a building or tract of land which indicates the purpose for
which it is arranged, designed, intended, maintained or occupied, as for
example, a courthouse.
(c)
(a) Residence: R1; R2; R3; R4; R4A; AH (Affordable housing); MX (mixed
use).
(b) Business
Residence-office: RO
Residence-business: RB
Neighborhood business: NB
Central business: CB
§ B17A-201 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-202
BAO:270
§ B17A-202.1. Affordable Housing Overlay Zone. [Ord. No. 90-32,
§ I; Ord. No. 2005-25, § II.]
§ B17A-202.2. Affordable housing component and new zoning
districts. [Ord. No. 2005-25, § III]
Any new zoning districts shall include an affordable housing component
of 20%, whose purpose will be to address affordable housing obligations
generated in connection with the Council on Affordable Housing's third
round regulations regarding growth share.
§ B17A-202.3. Affordable housing contribution for development of
four or less residential units. [Ord. No. 2005-25, § IV]
The development in any zoning district of four or less dwelling units shall
not be covered by the affordable housing set aside described in section
17A-202.1, but rather must include an affordable cash contribution to the
borough's Trust Fund for Affordable Housing based upon the Council on
Affordable Housing's third round standard of one affordable unit for every
eight units. Accordingly, an application for development in any zoning
district for four or less dwelling units shall not be approved by the regional
Service business: SB
(c) Education: E1; E2; E3; E4; E5;
(d) Mixed residential-retail-office: MRRO.
(e) Central historic preservation (Overlay district): HP - Central.
(f) Jugtown historic preservation (Overlay district): HP - Jugtown.
(g) Mercer hill historic preservation (Overlay district): HP - Mercer Hill.
(h) Bank Street historic preservation Overlay district) HP - Bank Street.
(a) Neither the regional planning board nor the board of adjustment shall
approve an application for development in any zoning district for a
multiple dwelling or joint occupancy building with five or more dwelling
units unless either:
(1) 20% of the units are set aside for low and moderate income
households, according to the Substantive Rules of the New Jersey
Council on Affordable Housing, N.J.A.C. 5:93, and the Borough of
Princeton's Affordable Controls (borough Code, sections 16-78
through 95), or
(2) The developer makes a cash contribution to the borough's Trust
Fund for Affordable Housing (see borough Code sections 16-69
through 73), in lieu of actual construction of the required low and
moderate income units, in an amount, determined by the mayor
and borough council, that is sufficient to create the equivalent
number of new units of low and moderate income housing.
§ B17A-202 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-202.3
BAO:271
planning board, the board of adjustment or the borough's land development
officer unless the developer makes a cash contribution to the borough's
Trust Fund for Affordable Housing in accordance with section 17A-202.5,
which shall be a condition of approval. For example, if the developer
demolishes one unit and constructs two new units, the developer shall be
obligated to make a contribution for the second unit at the rate of oneeighth
the cost of the pro-forma estimate for construction of an affordable
housing unit in the Borough of Princeton. (If no demolition occurs and the
developer constructs two new units on a vacant lot, the developer shall be
obligated to make a contribution for both units. This payment shall be in
lieu of the residential development fee set forth in section 17A-205.4.
§ B17A-202.4. Nonresidential required growth share. [Ord. No.
2005-25, § V]
(a) An application for nonresidential development proposing the
construction of net new floor area in any zoning district shall not be
approved by the regional planning board, board of adjustment or the
borough's land development officer unless the applicant provides
affordable housing to be constructed at the ratio of one affordable unit
for every 28 new jobs created as a result of the proposed net new
nonresidential floor area. The determination of the jobs created by the
development shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:94-1 et seq.,
Appendix E, entitled "UCC Use Groups for Projecting and Implementing
Nonresidential Components of Growth Share".
The affordable units shall be provided in one or more of the following
methods, subject to a determination by the mayor and council of the
Borough of Princeton, that the method selected by the developer
complies with the growth share needs of the Borough of Princeton as
set forth in the borough's third round housing element and fair share
plan:
(1) Through construction of the units on site;
(2) Through the provision by the applicant of units off-site but within
the Borough of Princeton, consistent with requirements of the zone
in which the site is located;
(3) Through a payment in lieu of construction, as set forth in section
17A-202.5, based upon a proportionate share of the total project
cost as set forth in one or more pro-formas for the provision of an
affordable housing development in the Borough of Princeton; or
(4) Through the donation of land within the borough, provided that the
mayor and council of the Borough of Princeton have determined
that the land is suitable for affordable housing and that it
represents a value at least equivalent to that payment in lieu of
construction as calculated pursuant to section 17A-202.5. The proformas
shall be on file in the Borough Zoning Office.
§ B17A-202.3 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-202.4
BAO:272
§ B17A-202.5. Payment in lieu of construction. [Ord. No. 2005-25,
§ VI]
§ B17A-202.6. Cost of administration of affordability controls. [Ord.
No. 2005-25, § VII]
Any developer of a project requiring growth share affordable housing under
this chapter shall be required to contract with the administrative agency
designated by the Borough of Princeton and pay the advertising and related
costs incurred for compliance with COAH's requirements for the initial
administration and related advertising. Execution of said contract shall be
a condition of approval of any development subject to this chapter. Failure
to comply with the requirements of this section may be cause for refusal of
issuance of building permits and/or certificates of occupancy.
(b) A proposed affordable housing plan shall be submitted at the time of
application for any development requiring provision of growth share
affordable housing units under this section. The plan shall be reviewed
and must be approved by the mayor and council of the Borough of
Princeton for consistency with the Council on Affordable Housing
(COAH) rules and regulations and with the borough's third round
housing element and fair share plan, prior to approval of the application
by the appropriate board of jurisdiction. Compliance with COAH's rules
and regulations and the borough's third round plan shall be a condition
of development approval.
(c) All affordable units shall comply with COAH's rules including those
regarding phasing of the construction of market and affordable units,
low/moderate split, affordability controls, bedroom distribution,
affirmative marketing and administration of the affordable units.
(a) Payments in lieu of construction of affordable housing shall be based
upon a pro-forma calculation of the cost of constructing an affordable
housing unit in the Borough of Princeton or of buying down the cost of
an existing market rate unit to a price affordable to the average low/
moderate income household. The pro formas shall be on file in the
borough zoning office and shall be reviewed and adjusted annually to
reflect current market conditions.
(b) Regardless of whether the developer provides the affordable units or is
permitted to make a payment in lieu thereof, any development which
generates a fraction of an affordable housing unit as a portion of the
total obligation, shall be required to make a payment in lieu of
construction for that fraction of a unit based upon the pro-rated cost of
constructing an affordable housing unit in the Borough of Princeton,
consistent with the pro-forma.
§ B17A-202.4 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-203
BAO:273
§ B17A-203. District map. [Ord. No. 77-12, § 1; Ord. No. 82-30, § 2;
Ord. No. 85-12, § 4; Ord. No. 86-18, § 2; Ord. No. 90-27, § 4; Ord. No.
94-19, § I; Ord. No. 2003-9, § II]
The boundaries of the districts established by section 17A-202 are hereby
established as shown on the "Zoning Map, Borough of Princeton" dated
September, 1968, as amended November 19, 1968, amended November,
1971, amended May, 1977, amended September, 1982, amended April
25,1985, amended August 9,1990, amended July 12,1994, and amended
February 25, 2003 which accompanies this Code and which, with all
explanatory matters thereon, is hereby adopted and made a part of this
chapter. Such map, with the latest amendments, shall be kept up-to-date in
the office of the borough engineer for the use and benefit of the public.
§ B17A-204. Applicability and compliance with regulations. [Ord.
No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No. 83-25, § 5]
(a) Control over use. In all districts, subject to the provisions of division 7
on nonconforming uses:
(1) Any new building or any lot may be used;
(2) The use of any existing building or any lot may be changed,
extended or enlarged; and
(3) Any existing building may be relocated, extended, enlarged,
converted, reconstructed or structurally altered; for any purpose
permitted by the regulations for the district in which such building
or lot is located, and for no other purpose. Such use, change,
relocation, extension, enlargement, conversion, reconstruction or
structural alteration shall conform to all other applicable
regulations of this division. The requirements set forth in the
district regulations for off-street parking and loading facilities shall
also apply including those situations when inactive, unoccupied
space such as storage is subsequently occupied and used.
(b) Control over bulk. In all districts subject to the provisions of division 7
of this chapter on noncomplying buildings, any new building and the
relocation, enlargement, conversion and reconstruction of any existing
building shall conform to the bulk regulations set forth in the
regulations for the district in which such building is located and to all
other applicable regulations of this article.
No yard or open space required in connection with any building or use
shall be considered as providing a required yard or open space for any
other building on the same or any other lot.
No lot shall be formed from part of a lot already occupied by a building,
unless such building, all yards and open spaces connected therewith
and the remaining lot comply with all the requirements prescribed by
this article for the district in which the lot is located. No permit shall be
§ B17A-203 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-204
BAO:274
§ B17A-204.1. Compliance with state, county and municipal
highway and/or street access management codes. [Ord. No. 89-40,
§ III]
Land adjacent to state highways shall be regulated in conformity with the
State highway access management code adopted by the Commissioner of
Transportation under section 3 of the "State Highway Access Management
Act," P.L. 1989, c. 32; land with access to county roads and highways shall
be regulated in conformity with any access management code adopted by
the county under R.S. 27:16-1; and land with access to municipal streets
and highways shall be regulated in conformity with any municipal access
management code adopted under R.S. 40:67-1. This subsection shall not be
construed as requiring the establishment of minimum lot sizes or minimum
frontage requirements for lots adjacent to but restricted from access to a
State highway.
§ B17A-205. Interpretation of article; conflicting provisions. [Ord.
No. 77-1, § 2]
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the
public health, safety, comfort, convenience, prosperity, amenity and other
aspects of the general welfare. Wherever the requirements of this article
differ from the requirements of another law or ordinance covering the
same subject matter, the provisions of that law or ordinance which imposes
greater restrictions upon the use or bulk of buildings or requires larger
yards, courts or other open space shall govern.
In the event of conflict in the terminology of any section or part thereof,
or between different sections of this article, the more restrictive provisions
shall govern.
§ B17A-205.1. Applicability of standards. [Ord. No. 97-7, § 1]
The provisions of chapter 17A, the land use regulations shall apply to all
development applications hereafter filed with any approving authority in
Princeton Borough, unless a particular standard or design requirement in
this chapter 17A has been specifically superseded by a statewide residential
site improvement standard validly adopted by the New Jersey commissioner
of community affairs pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:21. In the event of future
amendments of the residential site improvement Act, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-40.1,
issued for the erection of a building on any new lot thus created, unless
such building and lot comply with all the provisions of this article.
Nothing contained in this article shall require any change in the plans,
construction or designated use of a building complying with existing
law, if a construction permit has been duly issued and construction has
been started and is substantially under way before the date of the first
publication of notice of the public hearing on this article or on any
amendment subsequent thereto.
§ B17A-204 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-205.1
BAO:275
then only those specific sections of this chapter 17A which are then covered
by the Act shall be superseded by the statewide residential site
improvement standards as then in effect, and all other provisions and
design standards of this chapter 17A shall remain in force and shall be
applicable to all land development applications in every case.
§ B17A-205.2. Development fees — Purpose. [Ord. No. 95-13, § I]
In Holmdel Builder's Ass'n v. Holmdel Township, 121 N.J. 550 (1990), the
New Jersey Supreme Court determined that mandatory development fees
are authorized by the Fair Housing Act of 1985, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et
seq., and the State Constitution subject to COAH developing rules. The
purpose of these sections 17A-205.2 through 17A-205.11 is to establish
standards for the collection, maintenance and expenditure of development
fees pursuant to COAH's rules. Fees collected pursuant to these sections
17A-205.2 through 17A-205.11 shall be used for the sole purpose of
providing low and moderate income housing. These sections 17A-205.2
through 17A-205.11 shall be interpreted within the framework of COAH's
rules on development fees, at N.J.A.C. 5:93-8.
§ B17A-205.3. Development fees — Definitions. [Ord. No. 95-13, § I]
COAH — The New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing.
DEVELOPMENT FEE SPENDING PLAN — A plan approved by the Princeton
regional planning board as part of the borough's housing element and by
the mayor and council, pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-8.2 and approved by the
court or COAH.
DEVELOPMENT FEES — Money paid by an individual, person, partnership,
association, company or corporation for the improvement of property as
permitted in COAH's rules.
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — The value of a property determined by
the municipal tax assessor through a process designed to ensure that all
property in the municipality is assessed at the same assessment ratio or
ratios required by law. Estimates at the time of building permit may be
obtained by the tax assessor utilizing estimates for construction cost. Final
equalized assessed value will be determined at project completion by the
municipal tax assessor.
INTENSITY OF USE — Either: (a) an increase in residential density, i.e., the
number of dwelling units per acre, (b) an increase in floor area ratio (FAR)
for nonresidential development, or (c) conversion of an existing structure
that uses the structure more intensely, and which results in an increase in
the equalized assessed value of the improved structure, as demonstrated
by, but not limited to: (1) an increase in employees, (2) an increase in
customers, (3) an increase in visitors, (4) an increase in parking spaces, (5)
an increase in hours of operation, or (6) a change of existing nonhabitable
space to habitable space.
JUDGMENT OF REPOSE — A judgment issued by the Superior Court
approving a municipality's plan to satisfy its fair share obligation.
§ B17A-205.1 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-205.3
BAO:276
SUBSTANTIVE CERTIFICATION — A determination by COAH approving a
municipality's housing element and fair share plan in accordance with the
provisions of the Act and the rules and criteria as set forth herein. A grant of
substantive certification shall be valid for a period of six years in accordance
with the terms and conditions contained therein.
§ B17A-205.4. Development fees.8 [Ord. No. 95-13, § I; Ord. No.
2005-01, § I; Ord. No. 2005-25, § VIII; Ord. No. 2015-12]
§ B17A-205.5. Development fees — Eligible exaction, ineligible
exaction and exemptions. [Ord. No. 95-13, § I]
§ B17A-205.6. Collection of fees. [Ord. No. 95-13, § I]
(a) Developers of low and moderate income units shall be exempt from
paying development fees.
(b) Developers that expand an existing structure or increase the intensity
of use of an existing structure shall pay a development fee. The
development fee shall be calculated based on the increase in the
equalized assessed value of the improved structure.
(c) Developers that have received preliminary or final approval prior to the
effective date of these sections 17A-205.2 through 17A-205.11 shall be
exempt from paying a development fee unless the developer seeks a
substantial change in the approval. Examples of a substantial change in
the approval include a substantial alteration of the site layout,
development density or types or uses within the development.
(d) Developers who elect to make a cash contribution to the borough's trust
fund for affordable housing in lieu of actual construction of the required
low and moderate income units pursuant to Princeton borough land use
ordinance section 17A-202.1, "Affordable housing overlay zone", shall
be exempt from paying development fees.
(a) 50% of the calculated development fee shall be paid to the Borough of
Princeton at the issuance of building permits. The development fee
shall be estimated by the tax assessor prior to the issuance of building
permits.
(b) The remaining fee shall be paid to the Borough of Princeton at the
issuance of certificates of occupancy. At the issuance of certificates of
occupancy, the tax assessor shall calculate the equalized assessed value
and the appropriate development fee. The developer shall be
responsible for paying the difference between the fee calculated at
certificate of occupancy and the amount paid at building permit.
8. Editor's Note: Repealed by Ord. No. 2015-12. See Township Code Sections 10B-340.3
(a)(1) and 10B-340.4(a)(1).)
§ B17A-205.3 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-205.7
BAO:277
§ B17A-205.7. Development fee escrow account. [Ord. No. 93-15,
§ I]
All development fees paid pursuant to these sections 17A-205.2 through
17A-205.11 shall be deposited in a development fee escrow account which
shall be a separate interest bearing account maintained at a local bank. No
money shall be expended from this escrow account unless the expenditure
conforms to a spending plan approved by a court having jurisdiction over
the Borough of Princeton's housing plan, or COAH.
§ B17A-205.8. Use of funds. [Ord. No. 95-13, § I]
§ B17A-205.9. Monitoring and enforcement. [Ord. No. 95-13, § I]
COAH shall be responsible for monitoring the development fees component
of the borough's housing element and fair share plan. The borough shall
complete and return to COAH, with a copy to the special master, all
monitoring forms, quarterly financial reports and auditing reports relating
to the collection of fees, expenditure of revenues and implementation of
the borough's affordable housing plan on forms designed and prescribed by
COAH. The court shall be responsible for enforcement of the development
fees component of the plan. Upon review of the monitoring forms, COAH
shall advise the court and special master, as necessary, if any action is
required to enforce the development fee ordinance or the spending plan.
(a) Money deposited into the development fee escrow account may be used
for any activity approved by the court or COAH for addressing the
borough's low and moderate income housing obligation. Such activities
may include, but are not necessarily limited to: housing rehabilitation;
new construction; regional contribution agreements; the purchase of
land for low and moderate income housing; extensions and/or
improvements of roads and infrastructure to low and moderate income
housing sites; assistance designed to render units to be more affordable
to low and moderate income people; and administrative costs necessary
to implement the Borough of Princeton affordable housing plan. The
expenditure of all money shall conform to a spending plan approved by
the court or COAH.
(b) No more than 20% of the revenues shall be expended on administrative
costs necessary to develop, revise or implement the Borough of
Princeton's affordable housing plan. Examples of eligible administrative
activities include: personnel; consultant services; space costs;
consumable supplies; and rental or purchase of equipment.
(c) Development fee revenues shall not be expended to reimburse the
borough for housing activities that preceded substantive certification.
(d) All development fees generated pursuant to these sections 17A-205.2
through 17A-205.11 shall only be expended in accordance with an
approved development fee spending plan.
§ B17A-205.7 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-205.9
BAO:278
The court and special master shall advise COAH of any enforcement action
taken.
§ B17A-205.10. Development fees — Penalties. [Ord. No. 95-13, § I.]
Authorization is hereby granted to the court or COAH to direct the
disbursement of the development fees collected pursuant to these sections
17A-205.2 through 17A-205.11 in the event of noncompliance by the
borough with the consent order of final judgment and judgment of repose
entered in the matter of Witherspoon Jackson Development Corporation v.
Borough of Princeton, et als., Docket No. L-37675-84 (Mount Laurel II),
or upon occurrence of any of the conditions set forth in COAH's rules on
development fee penalties, N.J.A.C. 5:93-8.17(a).
§ B17A-205.11. Expiration of development fee ordinance. [Ord. No.
95-13, § I.]
The borough's authority to collect development fees pursuant to these
sections 17A-205.2 through 17A-205.11 shall expire with the expiration of
the consent order of final judgment and judgment of repose, unless the
borough has filed an adopted housing element with the court or COAH, has
petitioned for a further judgment of repose from the court or substantive
certification from COAH, and has received approval from the court or COAH
of its development fee ordinance.
§ B17A-205.9 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-205.11
BAO:279

Division 2
Administration And Enforcement
§ B17A-206. Interpretation of district boundaries. [Ord. No. 77-1,
§ 2.]
In determining the boundaries of districts shown on the map, the following
rules shall apply:
§ B17A-207. Protests by property owners against amendments.
[Ord. No. 77-1, § 2.]
A protest against any proposed amendment or revision of the zoning
ordinance may be filed with the municipal clerk, signed by the owners of
20% or more either of the area of the lots or land included in such proposed
change, or of the lots or land extending 200 feet in all directions therefrom
inclusive of street space, whether within or without the municipality. Such
amendment or revision shall not become effective following the filing of
such protest except by the favorable vote of two-thirds of all the members
of the governing body of the municipality.
(a) Unless otherwise shown, the district boundaries shall be construed to
coincide with the center lines of streets and alleys.
(b) Where such boundaries are indicated as approximately following the lot
lines of parks or other publicly owned lands, such line shall be
construed to follow such boundaries.
(c) Where a district boundary line is located not farther than 10 feet away
from a lot line of record, such boundary lines shall be construed to
coincide with such lot line.
(d) Where a district boundary line is located at least 10 feet but not more
than 35 feet away from a lot line of record, the board of adjustment may
allow, as a decision upon a special question, such boundary line to be
construed to coincide with such lot line.
(e) Where a district boundary line is located more than 35 feet away from a
lot line of record, the board of adjustment may permit as a special
exception the extension of the regulations for either portion of the lot
into the remaining portion of the lot, for a distance not to exceed 20 feet
from the district boundary.
(f) Unless otherwise shown, the E1 district boundary running parallel to a
lot line or street line shall be construed to be 150 feet from such lot line
or the right-of-way of such street.
(g) In all other cases, where dimensions are not shown on the map, the
location of boundaries shown on the map shall be determined by the use
of the scale appearing thereon.
§ B17A-206 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-208
BAO:281
§ B17A-208. Conditional uses; standards. [Ord. No. 2004-06, § 2]
Uses listed as a conditional use in a particular district may be permitted
by the planning board, only after it has determined that the development
proposal complies with the conditions and standards set forth elsewhere
in this chapter for the location and operations of such use and with the
following specifications and standards:
(a) That all proposed structures, equipment or materials shall be readily
accessible for fire and police protection.
(b) That the proposed use shall be of such location, size and character that,
in general, it will be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly
development of the district in which it is proposed to be situated, will
not significantly impact the environment in an adverse way, and will not
be detrimental to the orderly development of adjacent properties in
accordance with the zoning classification of said properties.
(c) That, in addition to the specifications and standards set forth in this
section, in the case of a conversion of a residential building in existence
on November 19, 1968, to a joint occupancy building, or the conversion
of a part of the residential portion of a joint occupancy building to office
or other nonresidential use, the following criteria are met:
(1) That the portion of the structure to be converted to a nonresidential
use shall not be located above the remaining residential uses in
said structure if said nonresidential use by the nature of its
operation can be considered detrimental to the residential living.
(2) That no floor may be used for both residential and business uses,
unless a separate entrance, hallway or stairway provides direct
access to each use and that the nonresidential use by the nature of
its operation will not be detrimental to residential living
immediately contiguous thereto.
(d) Each application for a conditional use shall be accompanied by a
proposed site plan in accordance with the provisions of section 17A-195
and 17A-196 of this Code showing the size and location of the lot, the
location of all buildings and proposed facilities, including access
driveways, parking areas, and all streets within 200 feet of the lot.
(e) Any lot for which conditional use approval is granted shall be deemed to
be a conforming use in the district in which such use is located,
provided that such approval shall affect only the lot or portion thereof
for which such use shall have been granted. A conditional use approval
shall be valid for one year unless preliminary approval of a site plan for
the lot involving the conditional use has been granted, at which time the
applicant shall receive the same right as that provided for preliminary
approval of site plans as set forth in this chapter.
(f) Any legally preexisting use located in a district in which it is listed as a
conditional use shall be deemed to be an authorized use on the lot or
§ B17A-208 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-208
BAO:282
portion thereof on which such use is located. However, any addition
or expansion to such use, or any enlargement or reconstruction of a
nonconforming building for such use, shall require the approval of the
planning board in accordance with the procedures for new conditional
uses as established under this section.
(g) Personal wireless telecommunications facilities and equipment shall be
permitted as conditional uses in all districts in the borough.
(1) Personal wireless telecommunications facilities and equipment
must comply with the following conditional use standards:
a. Height standards. Where permitted, PWTF may exceed the
maximum building height limitations, provided the height has
the least visual impact and is no greater than required to
achieve service area requirements and potential collocation,
when visually appropriate. PWTEFs are limited to 12 feet in
height.
b. Setback standards. All PWTFs and PWTEFs shall be subject to
the minimum yard requirements of the zoning district in which
they are located, provided the minimum setback may be
increased where necessary to address safety concerns. If
PWTEFs are located on the roof of a building, the area of the
PWTEFs and other equipment and structures shall not occupy
more than 25% of the roof area.
c. Visual impact standards. All PWTFs and PWTEFs shall be
located to minimize visual impacts on the surrounding area in
accordance with the following standards. In applying these
standards, locations in a higher priority category under section
17A-208(g)(3) shall be deemed more acceptable than lower
priority sites.
1. Sites for PWTFs and PWTEFs must demonstrate that they
provide the least visual impact on residential areas and
public way. All potential visual impacts must be analyzed
to illustrate that the selected site provides the best
opportunity to minimize the visual impact of the proposed
facility.
2. PWTEFs should be located to avoid being visually solitary
or prominent when viewed from residential areas and the
public way. The facility should be obscured by vegetation,
tree cover, topographic features and/or other structures to
the maximum extent feasible.
3. PWTFs and PWTEFs shall be placed to ensure that
historically significant viewscapes, streetscapes, and
landscapes are protected. The views of and vistas from
architecturally and/or significant structures should not be
§ B17A-208 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-208
BAO:283
impaired or diminished by the placement of
telecommunication facilities.
4. The applicant must document they are using the least
visually obtrusive technology to provide the required
service. The applicant must present to the board of
jurisdiction information on the available technologies for
the proposed location and how the selected technology has
the least visual impact.
5. The board may waive any of the above standards upon the
applicant showing that enforcement would prevent the
applicant from satisfying its license requirements.
(2) Personal wireless telecommunications facilities and equipment
must also comply with the following requirements, which shall not
be construed as conditional use standards:
a. Locational priority. If needed in accordance with an overall
comprehensive plan for the provision of full wireless
communications service within the Princeton community,
PWTFs and PWTEFs shall be permitted as a conditional use in
all districts. Proposals on lower priority sites with less visual
impact, assessed under 17A-208(g)(4), shall take preference
over higher priority sites. Locational priorities shall consist of
the following:
1. The first priority location shall be on lands or structures
owned by Princeton Borough if feasible and available;
2. The second priority location shall be on lands or structures
owned by the Princeton Regional School District if feasible
and available;
3. The third priority location shall be collocation on existing
PWTFs (or existing water tanks) provided that the new
installation does not increase the height by more than
10%; and
4. The fourth priority location shall be existing buildings,
steeples, bell towers, poles or other structures which can
be used for PWTEFs and PWTFs in such a manner as to
render the antennas and related equipment as visually
unobtrusive as possible.
5. The fifth priority location shall be such locations as the
applicant proves are essential to provide required service
to the Princeton community.
b. Site design standards. The following design standards shall
apply to PWTFs and PWTEFs installed or constructed pursuant
to the terms of this subdivision:
§ B17A-208 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-208
BAO:284
1. Collocation. Ordinance limitation on the number of
structures on a lot shall not apply when PWTFs and
PWTEFs are located on a lot with buildings or structures
already on it.
2. Fencing and other safety devices. PWTFs and PWTEFs
shall be surrounded by security features, such as a fence,
which prevent unauthorized access. Other safety
measures such as anti-climbing devices may be considered
by the board in accordance with applicable Federal U.S.
Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health
Administration standards and state building code
requirements.
3. Landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided along the
perimeter of the security fence to provide a visual screen
or buffer for adjoining private properties and the public
right-of-way. Required front yard setback areas shall be
landscaped. All PWTEFs shall be screened by an evergreen
hedge eight to 10 feet in height at planting time and/or a
solid fence eight feet in height.
4. Signs. Signs shall not be permitted except for signs
displaying owner contact information, warnings,
equipment information, and safety instructions. Such signs
shall not exceed two square feet in area. No commercial
advertising shall be permitted on any PWTF or PWTEF.
5. Color. PWTFs and PWTEFs shall be of a color appropriate
to the locational context and to make it as unobtrusive as
possible, unless otherwise required by the Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA).
6. Activity and access. All equipment shall be designed and
automated to the greatest extent possible in order to
reduce the need for onsite maintenance and thereby to
minimize the need for vehicular trips to and from the site.
Access shall be from established site access points
whenever possible. Minimal off-street parking shall be
permitted as needed and as approved by the planning
board.
7. Dish antennas. Dish antennas shall be colored,
camouflaged or screened to make them as unobtrusive as
possible and in no case shall the diameter of a dish
antenna exceed six feet.
8. Lighting. No lighting is permitted except as follows:
(i) PWTEFs enclosing electronic equipment may have
security and safety lighting at the entrance, provided
that the light is attached to the facility, is focused
§ B17A-208 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-208
BAO:285
downward and is on timing devices and/or sensors so
that the light is turned off when not needed for safety
or security purposes; and
(ii) No lighting is permitted on a PWTF except lighting
that specifically is required by the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA), and any such required lighting
shall be focused and shielded to the greatest extent
possible so as not to project towards adjacent and
nearby properties.
9. Monopole. Any proposed new telecommunications tower
shall be a "monopole" unless the applicant can
demonstrate that a different type pole is necessary for the
collocation of additional antennas on the tower. Such
towers may employ camouflage technology.
10. Noise. No equipment shall be operated so as to produce
noise in excess of the limits set by the local noise
ordinance, except for in emergency situations requiring
the use of a backup generator.
11. Radio frequency emissions. The FTT gives the FCC sole
jurisdiction of the field of regulation of radio frequency
(RF) emission and PWTFs which meet the FCC standards
shall not be conditioned or denied on the basis of RF
impacts. Applicants shall provide current FCC information
concerning PWTFs and radio frequency emission
standards. PWTFs shall be required to provide information
on the projected power density of the proposed facility and
how this meets the FCC standards.
12. Structural integrity. PWTFs must be constructed to the
Electronic Industries Association/Telecommunications
Industries Association EIA/TIA) 222 Revision F Standard
entitled "Structural Standards for Steel Antenna Towers
and Antenna Supporting Structures" (or equivalent), as it
may be updated or amended.
13. Maintenance. PWTFs shall be maintained to assure their
continued structural integrity. The owner of the PWTF
shall also perform such other maintenance of the structure
and of the site as to assure that it does not create a visual
nuisance.
14. PWTFs and PWTEFs, which are located on lands owned by
the Borough of Princeton shall be exempt from site plan
review. However, such facilities shall comply with the site
design standards and zoning requirements set forth in
borough code section 17A-208(g)(2)b.
§ B17A-208 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-208
BAO:286
c. Collocation policy. It is the policy of the Borough of Princeton
to minimize the number of PWTFs and to encourage the
collocation of antenna arrays of more than one wireless
telecommunications service provider on a single support
tower.
1. The municipal engineer shall maintain an inventory of
existing PWTF locations within or near the Princeton
community.
2. An applicant proposing a PWTF at a new location shall
demonstrate that it made a reasonable attempt to find a
collocation site that is technically feasible and that none
was practically or economically feasible and shall include
in its design the opportunity for collocation by others or
explain why collocation is not feasible. Applications within
the fourth locational priority are exempt from this
requirement.
3. Each application for a PWTF shall be accompanied by a
plan which shall reference all existing PWTF locations in
the applicant's Princeton community inventory, any such
facilities in the abutting towns which provide service to
areas within the Princeton community, any changes
proposed within the following twelve-month period,
including plans for new locations and the discontinuance
or relocation of existing facilities.
4. Each application shall include a site location alternative
analysis describing the location of other sites considered,
the availability of those sites, the extent to which other
sites do or do not meet the provider's service or
engineering needs, and the reason why the subject site
was chosen. The analysis shall address the following
issues:
(i) How the proposed location of the PWTF relates to the
objective of providing full wireless communication
services within the Princeton community at the time
full service is provided by the applicant throughout
the Princeton community.
(ii) How the proposed location of the proposed PWTF
relates to the location of any existing antennas within
and near the Princeton community.
(iii) How the proposed location of the proposed PWTF
relates to the anticipated need for additional antennas
within and near Princeton community by the applicant
and, to the extent known, by other providers of
wireless communication services within the Princeton
community;
§ B17A-208 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-208
BAO:287
§ B17A-209. Special questions — Minor adjustments in district
regulations. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2]
The board of adjustment may authorize, as a decision upon a special
question, minor exceptions to the yard, coverage and other bulk regulations
of this chapter, not including the regulations prescribing the maximum floor
area ratio and minimum lot area, in connection with an existing building
lawfully erected before more restrictive regulations were in effect, in such
situations as the following and in other situations which are essentially
similar:
(iv) How the proposed location of the proposed PWTF
relates to the objective of collocating the antennas of
many different providers of wireless communication
services on the same PWTF. Applications within the
fourth locational priority are exempt from this
requirement; and
(v) How its plan specifically relates to and is coordinated
with the needs of all other providers, to the extent
known, of wireless communication services within the
Princeton community.
(vi) The planning board may retain technical consultants
as it deems necessary to provide assistance in the
review of the site location alternatives analysis. The
service provider shall bear the reasonable cost
associated with such consultation, which cost shall be
deposited in accordance with Princeton's escrow
provisions.
(a) Minor adjustments in the yard and coverage regulations, to allow an
appropriate addition to such an existing building.
(b) Minor adjustments in the requirements for the minimum distance
between such an existing principal building and an accessory building.
The board of adjustment may similarly allow on a temporary basis the
installation within a one-family dwelling of additional minor cooking
and food preparation facilities, elsewhere than in the kitchen area, for
the exclusive use of immediate relatives of the principal occupant of
the one-family dwelling, which relatives are living in the one-family
dwelling. Such temporary allowances shall be for periods of not more
than five years and shall be renewable thereafter.
Authorization of such minor adjustments shall be subject to the
standards set forth in section 17A-208. The board may prescribe such
appropriate conditions and safeguards as may be required in order that
the result of its action may, to the maximum extent possible, further the
expressed intent of this article.
§ B17A-208 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-210
BAO:288
§ B17A-210. Additional height and floor area for multiple dwelling
and joint occupancy buildings and joint occupancy buildings in CB
districts. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 1; Ord. No. 80-24, § 2; Ord. No. 97-2, § I]
The board of adjustment, as a decision upon a special question, may
authorize not more than two stories of additional height for multiple
dwelling in an RO district and not more than one story of additional height
for multiple dwellings and joint occupancy buildings in a CB district. Said
additional height, however, shall not permit the dwelling to exceed a total
height of 65 feet and the board may authorize an increase in floor area
and floor area ratio from 1.5 to 2.5 for joint occupancy buildings in a CB
district, provided, that the board makes the following special findings as it
pertains to the additional height and/or increased floor area and floor area
ratio request before it:
§ B17A-211. Temporary allowance of nonconforming uses or
buildings accessory to construction. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2.]
The board of adjustment, as a decision upon a special question, may
authorize on a temporary basis, for a period not to exceed one year,
nonconforming uses or buildings accessory to construction on a lot;
provided that such authorization shall be conditional upon written
agreement by the owner to discontinue such use and to remove such
building at the expiration of the authorization.
§ B17A-212. Hardship variances by board of adjustment conditional
upon subdivision, site plan or conditional use approval by planning
board. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2.]
In cases involving an application to the planning board for a subdivision, site
plan or conditional use approval, and also involving a related application
(a) That such additional height is necessary in order to make it possible to
provide, for residents and for persons working in the borough area, low
rent or moderate rent housing, which is not otherwise available in
adequate quantity.
(b) That the proposed buildings are part of the master plan, approved by
the planning board, for the development of the area, and that with such
additional height it will be possible to provide more open space and a
more attractive plan for the area.
(c) That such plan is designed to bring together, rather than to separate,
the central business area and adjoining residential areas.
(d) That no such higher building will be located within 100 feet of a
residence district.
(e) That for additional floor area and floor area ratio, such additional floor
area is for residential purposes and the resulting floor area ratio shall
not exceed 2.5 overall and shall in no case exceed 1.5 for the
nonresidential portion of joint occupancy buildings.
§ B17A-210 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-212
BAO:289
to the board of adjustment for a hardship variance that is not within the
planning board's jurisdiction, the board of adjustment may condition any
grant of the hardship variance upon the planning board's approval of the
subdivision, site plan or conditional use.
§ B17A-213. Expiration of variance or conditional use where
construction permit not obtained. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No.
2008-07, § IV.]
Where the implementation of a variance or a conditional use requires the
obtaining of a construction permit, such variance or conditional use shall
expire 12 months after the date of the granting or approval thereof unless
within such period the construction permit shall be obtained. Should the
appellant or applicant fail to obtain the construction permit within such
time, the municipal agency that granted such variance or approved such
conditional use may authorize for good cause shown and in an appropriate
case not more than one twelve-month extension of the period for the
obtaining of such construction permit.
§ B17A-214. Zoning permits; requirements. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord.
No. 82-30, § 3; Ord. No. 97-2, § I; Ord. No. 2008-07, § V.]
(a) Zoning permits shall be secured from the development enforcement
officer, in cases not involving approvals by the board of adjustment or
planning board of an application for development, prior to the
conversion of the existing use of any land or building or part thereof
and prior to the construction, erection or alteration:
(1) Of any building or any part thereof in any district.
(2) Of any sign in the RO, NB, RB, CB, SB E1, E2 or HMC districts.
(3) Of any sign in the R1, R2, R3 or R4 districts larger than 144 square
inches in area.
(4) Of any parking area not accessory to a one-family or two-family
dwelling.
(b) A site improvement plan shall be submitted with the zoning permit
request for the following proposed improvements:
(1) Accessory structure.
(2) Addition(s) to existing structures.
(3) Patio, deck or paving area.
(4) Swimming pool.
(c) A plot plan shall be submitted with the zoning permit request for one or
two family dwelling. Zoning requests not described above shall be
considered a standard zoning permit. The fee pursuant to section
17A-36 is also required.
§ B17A-212 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-215
BAO:290
§ B17A-215. Application — Form and contents generally. [Ord. No.
77-1, § 2.]
All requests for zoning permits shall be made in writing by the owner or
his authorized agent and shall include a statement of the use or intended
use of the building, structure, land or the part thereof that is involved, and
shall be accompanied, among other things which the board of adjustment,
planning board or development enforcement officer may require, by a plan
and elevation of the building and a plot plan drawn to scale, showing
the proposed building in its exact relation to lot and street lines and, by
evidence satisfactory to the development enforcement officer, that the lines
of the bounding streets have been accurately located and staked on the
ground.
§ B17A-216. Application to be submitted in duplicate; one copy to
be returned to applicant on issuance of permit. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2.]
The zoning permit application and all supporting documentation shall be
made in duplicate. On the issuance of a zoning permit, the development
enforcement officer shall return one copy of all filed documents to the
applicant.
§ B17A-217. Restrictions on issuance — Construction or alteration
of buildings on lots without access to streets. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2]
No zoning permit shall be issued for the construction or alteration of any
building upon a lot without access to a street except in an E2 district when
the entire subject building is located more than 150 feet from a public
street.
§ B17A-218. Issuance or denial. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2]
The development enforcement officer shall, within 30 days after the filing of
a complete and properly prepared application, either issue or deny a zoning
permit.9 If a zoning permit is denied, the development enforcement officer
shall state in writing to the applicant the reasons for such denial.
§ B17A-219. Expiration; extensions; renewal. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2;
Ord. No. 2008-07, § VI]
Every zoning permit shall expire if the work authorized has not been
commenced within 12 months after the date of issuance or has not been
completed within two years from such date. The development enforcement
officer may, for cause, authorize in writing one permit extension of 12
additional months for the commencement of the work and one permit
extension of two additional years for the completion of work actually under
way, upon the payment in each case of a of the appropriate fee per section
17A-36; provided, that in the interim since the issuance of the permit,
9. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:55D-18 states: "The administrative officer shall issue or deny a
zoning permit within 10 business days of receipt of a request therefor."
§ B17A-215 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-219
BAO:291
no zoning amendment or other code or regulation affecting the subject
property shall have been enacted and that there is pending no published
notice of a public hearing or other procedure directed toward such an
amendment, code or regulation. When no further extension can be granted,
application may be made for a new permit.
§ B17A-220. Survey showing location of building foundation. [Ord.
No. 77-1, § 2]
As soon as the foundation of a building or of any addition on an existing
building for which a zoning permit is issued is completed, and before first
story framing or wall construction is begun, there shall be filed with the
development enforcement officer a certified survey prepared by a licensed
surveyor, showing the exact location of such foundation with respect to the
street lines and lot lines of the lot.
§ B17A-221. Zoning certificates of occupancy; effect. [Ord. No. 77-1,
§ 2]
A zoning certificate of occupancy shall be deemed to authorize, and is
required for both initial and continued occupancy and use of a building or
land for which a zoning permit is required.
§ B17A-222. Zoning certificate of occupancy required. [Ord. No.
77-1, § 2; Ord. No. 2008-07, § VII.]
In any case in which a zoning permit is required, no building or part of a
building erected, structurally altered or moved shall be occupied or used,
in whole or in part, and no change in the use of an existing building or
of land, or of any part thereof, shall be lawful, until a zoning certificate
of occupancy shall have been applied for and issued by the development
enforcement officer. In the case of a zoning certificate of occupancy request
for a new dwelling unit, a certificate of approval shall be first obtained
from the borough engineer prior to issuance of the zoning certificate of
occupancy by the development enforcement officer.
§ B17A-223. Application for zoning certificate of occupancy. [Ord.
No. 77-1, § 2.]
Application for a zoning certificate of occupancy shall be made on a form
furnished by the development enforcement officer. Such permit shall be
issued upon request where no work is involved or within 10 days after
a written request for inspection of the completed work where work is
involved, but only if all requirements of this chapter and other applicable
laws, ordinances or codes are complied with.
§ B17A-224. Certain construction prerequisite to issuance;
exception. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2.]
No zoning certificate of occupancy shall be issued until after the completion
of all parking spaces, access facilities and landscape planting required
§ B17A-219 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-224
BAO:292
by this chapter. Where, by reason of adverse weather conditions, it is
impractical to complete the parking spaces, access facilities and landscape
planting the zoning certificate of occupancy may be issued upon the posting
of a performance guarantee, which shall run for a period not to exceed six
months and shall otherwise be subject to the provisions of section 17A-137.
§ B17A-225. Issuance or denial of zoning certificate of occupancy.
[Ord. No. 77-1, § 2]
§ B17A-226. Required contents — Statement of compliance with
chapter. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2.]
Every zoning certificate of occupancy shall state that the building or the
proposed use of land complies with all provisions of this chapter and all
other applicable laws or ordinances of the borough.
(a) If a proposed use is one for which a zoning permit is required and is in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter and of all other applicable
laws and ordinances in effect, a zoning certificate of occupancy for the
use of vacant land or for a change of use of nonconforming use shall be
issued by the development enforcement officer.
(b) Upon written request by the owner, and after examination of all factual
information to be supplied by the owner and inspection of the building,
the development enforcement officer shall issue a zoning certificate of
occupancy for any legally existing building or use thereof, or of land
existing on November 19, 1968, or at the time of adoption of any
applicable amendments to this article, certifying such use, whether or
not such use or building conforms to the provisions of this article.
(c) If a zoning certificate of occupancy is denied, the development
enforcement officer shall state in writing the reasons for such denial.
§ B17A-224 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-226
BAO:293

Division 3
Residential Districts
SUBDIVISION I
R1 Districts
§ B17A-227. Use regulations — Generally. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2.]
In R1 districts, land and buildings may be used only for the purposes set
forth in section 17A-227 through 17A-230.
§ B17A-228. Uses permitted as of right. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No.
78-26, §§ 3, 4; Ord. No. 81-39, § 1; Ord. No. 94-19, § I; Ord. No.
2003-30, § I; Ord. No. 2017-8 § 5; Ord. No. 2018-14 § 2]
The following uses are permitted as of right, subject to the bulk regulations,
parking requirements and other regulations set forth or referred to below:
(a) Residential uses.
(1) One-family dwellings.
(b) Nonresidential uses.
(1) Public parks and playgrounds.
(c) Accessory uses.
(1) Within a one-family dwelling, rental of not more than two rooms for
residential purposes, for occupancy by not more than four persons
altogether, but only so long as there shall be no secondary
residence located in such one-family dwelling or in a secondary
residence building pertaining to such one-family dwelling.
(2) Home occupations; provided that:
a. Only one such occupation shall be carried on per dwelling unit.
b. Such occupation shall be carried on within the principal
building, and the floor area used for that purpose shall not
exceed the equivalent of 40% of the area of the ground floor or
400 square feet, whichever is less.
c. There shall be at least one additional parking space available
per home occupation, in addition to the required parking for
the district.
d. Such occupation shall be carried on by a resident, within no
regularly employed assistants or associates, except for
residents living on the premises.
e. Articles sold or offered for sale shall be limited to those
produced in the dwelling unit.
§ B17A-227 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-228
BAO:295
f. There shall be no exterior display, no exterior storage of
materials, no exterior sign, and no other exterior indication of
the home occupation or change in residential character of the
principal building.
g. There shall be created no dangerous, injurious, noxious or
otherwise objectionable fire, explosive or other hazard; noise
or vibration; smoke, dust, odor or other form of air pollution;
heat, cold or dampness, electromagnetic or other disturbance;
glare; liquid or solid refuse or other wastes; or other
objectionable substance, condition or element.
(3) Keeping domestic animals as pets; provided, that not more than
five animals over six months old shall be kept on any lot, and that
no animals except dogs or cats shall be housed or penned within 50
feet of any street line or lot line, except within the principal
building.
(4) Accessory buildings; provided, that any tennis court, and any
swimming pool with an area of more than 250 square feet or a
depth of more than 18 inches, shall be at least 20 feet from any lot
line or street line and shall in no event be within a front yard.
(5) Accessory signs, as permitted in division 6, subdivision I, sections
17A-367 through 17A-372 of this chapter.
(6) Accessory parking spaces for:
a. Residents and their guests; provided, that not more than one
such space may be leased on each lot to a person not living on
the lot; and
b. Other permitted uses, subject to the provisions of division 6,
subdivision III of this article.
(7) Secondary residences, provided that:
a. There shall be not more than one secondary residence per lot.
b. The lot shall have an area that is at least 25% greater than the
minimum lot area that is specified in this article for the zoning
district in which the lot is located, and it shall have at least 400
square feet of usable open space.
c. Each secondary residence shall be used only for residential
purposes for one family, and then only so long as the principal,
one-family dwelling to which it pertains, or the secondary
residence itself, is occupied by the owner of such principal,
one-family dwelling, and only so long as there shall be no room
rentals in the principal, one-family dwelling pursuant to
section 17A-228(c)(1).
§ B17A-228 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-228
BAO:296
d. There shall not be more than two habitable rooms per
secondary residence.
e. There shall be no external entrance that faces a street and that
is separate from any other external entrance to any building on
the same lot facing the same street, but this restriction shall
not apply to two or more entrances in existence on January 1,
1979.
(8) Senior secondary residences, provided that:
a. There should not be more than one senior or secondary
residence per lot.
b. The lot shall have an area that is the minimum lot area that is
specified in this article for the zoning district in which the lot is
located.
c. The senior secondary residence must be occupied by
individuals who are above the age of 62.
d. Each senior secondary residence shall be used only for
residential purposes for one family, and then only so long as the
principal, one family dwelling to which it pertains, or senior
residence itself, is occupied by the owner of the subject
property, and so long as there shall be no room rentals in the
principal one family dwelling.
e. There shall not be more than two habitable rooms per senior
residence.
f. There shall be no external entrance that faces a street and that
is separate from any other external entrance to any building on
the same lot facing the same street, but this restriction shall
not apply to two or more entrances in existence on January 1,
1979.
(9) Other accessory uses, as defined in section 17A-201.
(10) Installation of solar panels, provided that:
a. Said panels are affixed to an existing roof on an existing
dwelling.
b. Said panels are affixed within the existing footprint of the
existing roof.
c. Said panels do not increase the height of the existing roof by
more than six inches.
Solar panels complying with the requirements herein shall
be exempt from height requirements, setback to height ratio,
height to setback ratios, and required front, side and rear yard
setbacks.
§ B17A-228 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-229
BAO:297
§ B17A-229. Conditional uses. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No. 95-21,
§ I; Ord. No. 98-9, § I; Ord. No. 2017-51 § 2]
The following additional uses may be authorized as conditional uses subject
to the provisions of section 17A-208, and to the bulk regulations, parking
requirements and other regulations set forth or referred to below:
§ B17A-230. Other use regulations. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No.
83-38, § 3.]
All uses permitted under the provisions of sections 17A-225 and 17A-229
shall be subject to the additional use regulations set forth in sections
17A-364, 17A-365, 17A-366, and 17A-373.
(a) Nonresidential uses.
(1) Churches and other places of worship.
(2) Public and private day schools not for pecuniary profit which give
instructions in any grades from pre-kindergarten to grade 12, both
inclusive, and uses customarily accessory thereto; provided, that
the school sites conform to the standards set forth in section 300 of
the "Guide for School-House Planning and Construction, 1969,"
adopted by the State Board of Education.
(3) All facilities owned and operated by the municipality, the county,
the state or the United States of America, including parks and
playgrounds.
(4) Public buildings, libraries, philanthropic institutions, nursing
homes, and assisted living residences.
(5) Clubhouses, except for clubs whose principal activity is usually
carried on as a business.
(6) Railroad and public utility buildings, installations and rights-of-way
needed to serve the general welfare of all or a significant part of
the community, including, but not limited to, pumping stations,
electrical substations, transformers, and high tension towers and
wires; provided, that the planning board determines that no other
reasonable location in a less restricted district can be used for the
purpose contemplated. PWTFs and PWTEFs shall not be deemed a
public utility.
(7) Personal wireless telecommunications facilities and personal
wireless telecommunications equipment facilities as defined in
section 17A-201 shall be permitted as a conditional use, subject to
the provisions of section 17A-208.
(8) Child day care facilities, adult day care facilities, and nursery
schools, including pre-schools.
§ B17A-229 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-231
BAO:298
§ B17A-231. Bulk regulations — Generally. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2]
The bulk regulations contained in sections 17A-231 through 17A-234 shall
apply to all buildings and land in R1 districts.
§ B17A-232. One-family dwellings. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No.
2006-07, § 2; Ord. No. 2018-24 § 9]
§ B17A-233. Nonresidential buildings. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2.]
For churches and other places of worship, public and private schools,
libraries, public buildings, philanthropic institutions, hospitals, nursing
homes, clubhouses, railroad and public utility installations and buildings for
the exclusive use of an educational institution or for the exclusive use of a
non-profit organization serving the interests of such educational institution:
§ B17A-234. Other bulk regulations. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No.
83-38, § 3.]
The additional bulk regulations set forth in division 6, subdivision II of this
chapter and in section 17A-403 shall also apply in R1 districts.
(a) Maximum permitted:
(1) Height: three stories or 35 feet.
(2) FAR: 25%.
(b) Minimum required:
(1) Lot area per dwelling unit: 20,000 square feet.
(2) Lot width: 125 feet.
(3) Lot depth: 125 feet.
(4) Front yard10: 35 feet.
(5) Combined side yard: 30 feet.
(6) Smaller side yard: 10 feet.
(7) Rear yard: 35 feet.
(8) Building height to setback ratio (maximum): 1.5:1.
(a) The height shall not exceed four stories or 50 feet.
(b) The coverage shall not exceed 30%.
(c) No building shall be erected less than 50 feet from any street line or lot
line.
10.See section 17A-376.1
§ B17A-231 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-235
BAO:299
§ B17A-235. Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements —
Generally. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2]
In R1 districts, accessory off-street parking spaces, open or enclosed, shall
be provided for all new construction and for conversions, and accessory offstreet
loading berths, open or enclosed, shall be provided for new permitted
nonresidential uses, in accordance with the regulations set forth and
referred to in sections 17A-235 through 17A-238. All such parking spaces
and loading berths shall be subject to the provisions of division 6,
subdivision III of this chapter.
§ B17A-236. Required parking — One-family dwellings and
secondary residences. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No. 78-26, § 5]
Required parking spaces
Per one-family dwelling 2
For accessory use:
Per rented room 1
Per accessory professional office 1
Per secondary residence 1
§ B17A-237. Nonresidential uses. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2]
At least one parking space for
each:
Public and private secondary
schools
6 seats or students
Public and private elementary
schools
12 seats or students
Churches and other places of
worship, libraries
200 square feet of floor area but not
less than 1 space for each 5 seats,
where provided
Hospitals 1 bed
Nursing homes and philanthropic
institutions
3 beds
For any other permitted buildings and uses, for which no requirements
are set forth above, appropriate and comparable off-street parking
requirements shall be determined by the planning board, taking into
consideration the amount of traffic likely to be generated thereby, the
likelihood of all day or short term use of parking spaces, the location and the
availability of other means of access and other factors affecting the amount
of traffic likely to be generated and the need for parking.
§ B17A-235 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-238
BAO:300
§ B17A-238. Required loading for nonresidential uses. [Ord. No.
77-1, § 2.]
Accessory loading berths, open or enclosed, shall be provided for nonresidential
uses, except churches, as follows:
For floor area of 10,000 to 25,000
square feet
1 berth
For each additional 75,000 square
feet of floor area or fraction thereof
1 additional berth
§ B17A-238 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-238
BAO:301

SUBDIVISION II
R2 Districts
§ B17A-239. Use, bulk, parking and loading regulations generally.
[Ord. No. 77-1, § 2]
The use, bulk and parking and loading regulations in R2 districts are the
same as in R1 districts; except, that one-family dwellings are subject to
different bulk regulations, as set forth in section 17A-240.
§ B17A-240. Bulk regulations for one-family dwellings. [Ord. No.
77-1, § 2; Ord. No. 2006-07, § 3; Ord. No. 2018-24 § 9]
The following bulk regulations shall apply to all one-family dwellings in R2
districts:
(a) Maximum permitted:
(1) Height: three stories or 35 feet.
(2) FAR: 30%.
(b) Minimum required:
(1) Lot area per dwelling unit: 10,000 square feet.
(c) Minimum required:
(1) Lot width: 75 feet.
(2) Lot depth: 100 feet.
(3) Front yard11: 30 feet.
(4) Combined side yard: 25 feet.
(5) Smaller side yard: 10 feet.
(6) Rear yard: 35 feet.
(7) Building height to setback ratio (maximum): 2.0:1.
11.See section 17A-376.1
§ B17A-239 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-240
BAO:303

SUBDIVISION III
R3 Districts
§ B17A-241. Use regulations — Generally. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2.]
In R3 districts, land and buildings may be used only for the purpose set forth
in sections 17A-241 through 17A-244.
§ B17A-242. Uses permitted as of right. [Ord. No. 81-39, § 2]
The following uses are permitted as of right, subject to the bulk regulations,
parking requirements and other regulation set forth or referred to below:
§ B17A-243. Conditional uses. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No. 95-21,
§ I; Ord. No. 98-9, § I]
The following additional uses may be authorized as conditional uses, subject
to the provisions of section 17A-208 and to the bulk regulations set forth or
referred to below:
(a) Residential uses.
(1) One-family dwellings.
(2) Two-family dwellings.
(b) Nonresidential uses.
(1) Public parks and playgrounds.
(c) Accessory uses.
(1) Accessory signs as permitted in division 6, subdivision I, sections
17A-367 through 17A-372 of this chapter.
(2) Accessory parking spaces and other accessory uses as permitted in
the R1 district including secondary residences, subject to the
limitations set forth in R1 districts, section 17A-228: except that
within a dwelling other than a one-family dwelling, only one room
may be rented for residential purposes, for occupancy by not more
than two persons; and no secondary residence shall be permitted.
(a) Residential uses.
(1) Attached dwellings or multiple dwellings, on lots of three acres or
more; provided, that no building length shall exceed 120 feet.
(b) Nonresidential uses.
(1) Churches and other places of worship.
(2) Public schools, and private schools not operated for profit.
(3) Private parks and playgrounds.
§ B17A-241 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-243
BAO:305
§ B17A-244. Other use regulations. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No.
83-38, § 3]
All uses permitted under the provisions of Sections 17A-242 and 17A-243
shall be subject to the additional use regulations set forth in sections
17A-364, 17A-365, 17A-366, and 17A-373.
§ B17A-245. Bulk regulations — Generally. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2]
The bulk regulations contained in sections 17A-245 through 17A-248 apply
to all buildings and land in R3 districts.
§ B17A-246. Residential buildings. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No.
2006-07, § 4; Ord. No. 2018-24 § 10]
One-Family
Dwellings
Two-Family
Dwellings
Attached
Dwellings
Multiple
Dwellings
Maximum
permitted:
Height
Feet 35 40 40 40
Stories 3 3 3 3
Coverage
(percent)
n/a n/a 25 30
FAR (percent) 40 45 45 45
(4) Public buildings, libraries, philanthropic institutions, nursing
homes and buildings for the exclusive use of an educational
institution or for the exclusive use of a nonprofit organization
serving the interests of such educational institution.
(5) Clubhouses, except for clubs whose principal activity is usually
carried on as a business.
(6) Railroad and public utility buildings, installations and rights-of-way
needed to serve the general welfare of all or a significant part of
the community; provided, that the board of adjustment determines
that no other reasonable location in a less restricted district can be
used for the purpose contemplated.
(7) Amateur radio receiving and transmitting towers more than 15 feet
but less than 50 feet in height; provided, that any such tower shall
not be located closer to any lot line or street line than its height,
and in no event within a front yard or side yard.
(8) Personal wireless telecommunications facilities and personal
wireless telecommunications equipment facilities, as defined in
section 17A-201 shall be permitted as a conditional use, subject to
the provisions of section 17A-208.
§ B17A-243 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-246
BAO:306
One-Family
Dwellings
Two-Family
Dwellings
Attached
Dwellings
Multiple
Dwellings
Minimum
required:
Total lot area
Square feet 130,680 130,680
For each
dwelling unit
(sq. ft.)
Lot area 7,200 5,000 4,000*
Lot area per
number of
habitable
rooms
One or two 3,600
Three 4,000
Four 4,200
Each
additional
200
Usable open
space per
number of
habitable
rooms
600*
One or two 200
Each
additional
200
Lot width 60 60
End lot 40**
Interior lot 20**
Lot depth 100 100 80**
Front yard*** 25 25 20** 20
Side yards
Combined
side yard
20 20 40
Smaller side
yard
8 8 20
End lot, one
side yard
20**
Rear yard 35 35 25** 35
§ B17A-246 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-246
BAO:307
One-Family
Dwellings
Two-Family
Dwellings
Attached
Dwellings
Multiple
Dwellings
Building height
to setback ratio
(maximum)
3.0:1 3.0:1 n/a na
Maximum
number of units
per structure
3 3
* For attached dwellings, part of this area may be provided as common
land, directly accessible from the lot of each individual dwelling unit,
provided that the lot of each individual dwelling unit shall have not less
than the minimum lot width and lot depth
** For lot of individual dwelling unit
*** See section 17A-376.1
Dimensions in feet unless otherwise noted
§ B17A-247. Nonresidential buildings. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2]
For churches and other places or worship, public and private schools,
libraries, public buildings, philanthropic institutions, hospitals, nursing
homes, clubhouses, railroad and public utilities installations and buildings
for the exclusive use of an educational institution or for the exclusive
use of a nonprofit organization serving the interests of such educational
institution:
§ B17A-248. Other bulk regulations. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No.
83-38, § 3]
The additional bulk regulations set forth in division 6, subdivision II of this
chapter and in section 17A-403 shall also apply in R3 districts.
§ B17A-249. Off-street parking and loading requirements —
Generally. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2]
In R3 districts, accessory off-street parking spaces, open or enclosed, shall
be provided for all new construction and for conversions, and accessory offstreet
loading berths, open or enclosed, shall be provided for new permitted
nonresidential uses, in accordance with the regulations set forth and
referred to in sections 17A-249 through 17A-252. All such parking spaces
and loading berths shall be subject to the provisions of division 6,
subdivision III of this chapter.
(a) The height shall not exceed four stories or 50 feet.
(b) The coverage shall not exceed 30%.
(c) No building shall be erected less than 50 feet from any street line or lot
line.
§ B17A-246 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-250
BAO:308
§ B17A-250. Required parking — Residential uses. [Ord. No. 77-1,
§ 2.]
One-Family
Dwellings
Two-Family
Dwellings
Attached
Dwellings
Multiple
Dwellings
Required
parking
spaces
Per dwelling
unit
1 1 1/2 1 1 1/2
For
accessory
uses
Per rented
room
1 1 1
Per
accessory
professional
office
1 1 1 1
§ B17A-251. Nonresidential uses. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2]
At least one parking space for each:
Public and private secondary
schools
6 seats or students
Public and private elementary
schools
12 seats or students
Places of worship, libraries 200 square feet of floor area, but
not less than one space for each 5
seats
Hospitals 1 bed
Nursing homes and philanthropic
institutions
3 beds
For any other permitted buildings and uses for which no requirements
are set forth above, appropriate and comparable off-street parking
requirements shall be determined by the planning board; taking into
consideration the amount of traffic to be generated thereby, the likelihood of
all day or short term use of parking spaces, the location and the availability
of other means of access and other factors affecting the amount of traffic
likely to be generated and the need for parking.
§ B17A-250 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-252
BAO:309
§ B17A-252. Required loading for nonresidential uses. [Ord. No.
77-1, § 2]
Accessory loading berths, open or enclosed, shall be provided for nonresidential
uses, except churches, as follows:
(a) For floor area of 10,000 to 25,000 square feet: one berth
(b) For each additional 75,000 square feet of floor area or fraction thereof:
one additional berth
§ B17A-252 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-252
BAO:310
SUBDIVISION IV
R4 Districts
§ B17A-253. Use regulations — Generally. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2]
In R4 districts, land and buildings may be used only for the purposes set
forth in sections 17A-253 through 17A-256.
§ B17A-254. Uses permitted as of right. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No.
81-39, § 3]
The following uses are permitted as of right, subject to the bulk regulations,
parking requirements and other regulations set forth or referred to below:
§ B17A-255. Conditional uses. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No. 95-21,
§ I; Ord. No. 98-9, § I]
The following additional uses may be authorized as conditional uses, subject
to the provisions of section 17A-208, and to the bulk regulations, parking
requirements and other regulations referred to or set forth below:
(a) Residential uses.
(1) One-family dwellings.
(2) Two-family dwellings.
(3) Attached dwellings.
(4) Multiple dwellings.
(b) Nonresidential uses.
(1) Public parks and playgrounds.
(c) Accessory uses.
(1) Accessory signs, as permitted in division 6, subdivision I, sections
17A-367 through 17A-372 of this chapter.
(2) Accessory parking spaces and other accessory uses as permitted in
the R1 district including secondary residences, subject to the
limitations set forth in R1 districts, section 17A-228: except that
within a dwelling other than a one-family dwelling, only one room
may be rented for residential purposes, for occupancy by not more
than two persons; and no secondary residence shall be permitted.
(a) Residential uses.
(1) Conversion of a residential building in existence on November 19,
1968, to a rooming house; provided, that:
a. No structural alterations or other construction shall create a
new noncompliance or increase the degree of noncompliance.
§ B17A-253 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-255
BAO:311
§ B17A-256. Other use regulations. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No.
83-38, § 3.]
All uses permitted under the provisions of sections 17A-254 and 17A-255
shall be subject to the additional use regulations set forth in sections
17A-364, 17A-365, 17A-366 and 17A-373.
§ B17A-257. Bulk regulations — Generally. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2]
The bulk regulations contained in sections 17A-257 through 17A-260 apply
to all buildings and land in R4 districts.
b. The same number of parking spaces shall be provided for such
conversions as are required for new construction of similar
buildings.
(b) Nonresidential uses.
(1) Churches and other places of worship.
(2) Public schools, and private schools not operated for profit.
(3) Private parks and playgrounds.
(4) Public buildings, libraries, philanthropic institutions, nursing
homes and buildings for the exclusive use of an educational
institution or for the exclusive use of a nonprofit organization
serving the interests of such educational institution.
(5) Clubhouses, except for clubs whose principal activity is usually
carried on as a business.
(6) Railroad and public utility buildings, installations and rights-of-way
needed to serve the general welfare of all or a significant part of
the community; provided, that the planning board determines that
no other reasonable location in a less restricted district can be used
for the purpose contemplated.
(7) Amateur radio receiving and transmitting towers over 15 feet but
less than 50 feet in height; provided, that such tower shall not be
located closer to any lot line or street line than its height, and in no
event within a front yard or side yard.
(8) Personal wireless telecommunications facilities and personal
wireless telecommunications equipment facilities, as defined in
section 17A-201 shall be permitted as a conditional use, subject to
the provisions of section 17A-208.
§ B17A-255 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-258
BAO:312
§ B17A-258. Residential buildings. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No.
2006-07, § 5; Ord. No. 2018-24 § 11]
One-Family
Dwellings
Two-Family
Dwellings
Attached
Dwellings
Multiple
Dwellings
Maximum
permitted:
Height
Feet 35 40 40 40
Stories 3 3 3 3
Coverage
(percent)
n/a n/a 30 30
FAR (percent) 40 45 45 45
Minimum
required:
Lot area (sq.
ft.)
For each
dwelling
6,000 3,300 3,000*
Per number of
habitable
rooms, each
dwelling unit
One or two 2,600
Three 3,000
Four 3,300
Each
additional
200
Usable open
space (sq. ft.)
For each
dwelling unit
600
Per number of
habitable
rooms, each
dwelling unit
One or two 200
Each
additional
200
Lot width 60 60
End lot 40**
§ B17A-258 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-258
BAO:313
One-Family
Dwellings
Two-Family
Dwellings
Attached
Dwellings
Multiple
Dwellings
Interior lot 20**
Lot depth 100 100 80**
Front yard*** 25 20 15** 20
Side yards
Combined
side yard
20 20 30
Smaller side
yard
8 8 15
End lot, one
side yard
20**
Rear yard 35 35 25** 25
Building height
to setback ratio
(maximum)
3.0:1 3.0:1 n/a n/a
Maximum
number of units
per structure
3 3
* For attached dwellings, part of this area may be provided as common
land, directly accessible from the lot of each individual dwelling unit;
provided, that the lot of each individual dwelling unit shall have not less
than the minimum lot width and lot depth
** For lot of individual dwelling unit
*** See section 17A-376.1
Dimensions in feet unless otherwise noted.
§ B17A-259. Nonresidential buildings. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2]
For churches and other places of worship, public and private schools,
libraries, public buildings, philanthropic institutions, hospitals, nursing
homes, clubhouses, railroad and public utility installations and buildings for
the exclusive use of a nonprofit organization serving the interests of such
educational institution:
(a) The height shall not exceed four stories or 50 feet.
(b) The coverage shall not exceed 30%.
(c) No building shall be erected less than 50 feet from any street line or lot
line.
§ B17A-258 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-260
BAO:314
§ B17A-260. Other bulk regulations. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No.
83-38, § 3]
The additional bulk regulations set forth in division 6, subdivision II of this
chapter and in section 17A-403 shall also apply in R4 districts.
§ B17A-261. Off-street parking and loading requirements —
Generally. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2.]
In R4 districts, accessory off-street parking spaces, open or enclosed, shall
be provided for all new construction and for conversions, and accessory offstreet
loading berths, open or enclosed, shall be provided for new permitted
nonresidential uses, in accordance with the regulations set forth and
referred to in sections 17A-261 through 17A-264. All such parking spaces
and loading berths shall be subject to the provisions of division 6,
subdivision III of this chapter.
§ B17A-262. Required parking — Residential uses generally. [Ord.
No. 77-1, § 2.]
One-Family
Dwellings
Two-Family
Dwellings
Attached
Dwellings
Multiple
Dwellings
Required
parking
spaces
Per dwelling
unit
1 1-1/2 1 1-1/2
For
accessory
uses
Per rented
room
1 1 1
Per
accessory
professional
office
1 1 1 1
§ B17A-263. Rooming houses and nonresidential uses. [Ord. No.
77-1, § 2]
At least one parking space for each:
Public and private secondary
schools
4 seats or students
Public and private elementary
schools
12 seats or students
§ B17A-260 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-263
BAO:315
Places of worship, libraries 200 square feet of floor area, but
not less than one space for each 5
seats, where provided
Hospitals 1 bed
Nursing homes and philanthropic
institutions
3 beds
Rooming houses Guest room
For any other permitted buildings and uses, for which no requirements
are set forth above, appropriate and comparable off-street parking
requirements shall be determined by the planning board, taking into
consideration the amount of traffic to be generated thereby, the likelihood
of all day or short term use of parking spaces, and the location and the
availability of other means of access and other factors affecting the amount
of traffic likely to be generated and the need for parking.
§ B17A-264. Required loading for nonresidential uses. [Ord. No.
77-1, § 2]
Accessory loading berths, open or enclosed, shall be provided for nonresidential
uses, except churches, as follows:
(a) For floor area of 10,000 to 25,000 square feet: one berth.
(b) For each additional 75,000 square feet of floor area or fraction thereof:
one additional berth.
§ B17A-263 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-264
BAO:316
SUBDIVISION V
Summary Bulk and Parking Tables
§ B17A-265. One-family dwellings in R1, R2, R3 and R4 districts.
[Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No. 2006-07, § 6; Ord. No. 2018-24 § 9]
R1 R2 R3 R4
Maximum
permitted:
Height
Feet 35 35 35 35
Stories 3 3 3 3
FAR
(percent)
25 30 40 40
Minimum
required:
Lot area per
dwelling
unit (sq. ft.)
20,000 10,000 7,200 6,000
Lot width 125 75 60 60
Lot depth 125 100 100 100
Front yard* 35 30 25 25
Side yards
Combined
side yards
30 25 20 20
Smaller
side yard
10 10 8 8
Rear yard 35 35 35 35
Building
height to
setback
ratio
(maximum)
1.5:1 2.0:1 3.0:1 3.0:1
Dimensions are in feet, unless otherwise noted
* See section 17A-376.1
§ B17A-265 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-266
BAO:317
§ B17A-266. Two-family dwellings in R3 and R4 districts. [Ord. No.
77-1, § 2; Ord. No. 2006-07, § 7; Ord. No. 2018-24 § 9]
R3 R4
Maximum permitted:
Height
Feet 35 35
Stories 3 3
FAR (percent) 45 45
Minimum required:
Lot area per dwelling
unit (sq. ft.)
5,000 3,300
Lot width 60 60
Lot depth 100 100
Front yard* 25 20
Side yards
Combined side yards 20 20
Smaller side yard 8 8
Rear yard 35 35
Building height to
setback ratio
(maximum)
3.0:1 3.0:1
Dimensions are in feet, unless otherwise noted
* See section 17A-376.1
§ B17A-267. Attached dwellings in R3 and R4 districts. [Ord. No.
77-1, § 2; Ord. No. 2006-07, § 8]
R3 R4
Maximum permitted:
Height
Feet 35 35
Stories 3 3
Coverage (percent) 25 30
Building length 120
FAR (percent) 45 45
Minimum required:
Lot area
§ B17A-266 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-267
BAO:318
R3 R4
Total area (acres) 3
Required average lot
area per dwelling (sq.
ft.)*
4,000 3,000
Usable open space
per dwelling unit (sq.
ft.)
600 600
Required for lot of
individual dwelling
unit
Width
End lot 40 40
Interior lot 20 20
Depth 80 80
Front yard** 20 15
Side yards
End lot, one side
yard
20 20
Interior lot — —
Rear yard 25 25
Smaller side yard 8 8
Rear yard 35 35
Building height to
setback ratio
(maximum)
3.0:1 3.0:1
Required parking
spaces
Per dwelling unit 1 1
For accessory uses
Per accessory 1 1
Professional office 1 1
*Part of this area may be provided as common land, directly accessible
from the lot of each individual dwelling unit; provided, that the lot of each
individual dwelling unit shall not be less than the minimum lot width and
lot depth
**See section 17-376.1
Dimensions are in feet, unless otherwise noted
§ B17A-267 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-268
BAO:319
§ B17A-268. Multiple dwellings in R3 and R4 districts. [Ord. No.
77-1, § 2; Ord. No. 2006-07, § 9]
R3 R4
Maximum permitted:
Height
Feet 35 35
Stories 3 3
Coverage (percent) 30 30
FAR (percent) 45 45
Minimum required:
Lot area
Total area (acres) 3
For each dwelling unit
(sq. ft.)
Lot area per number
of habitable rooms:
One or two 3,600 2,600
Three 4,000 3,000
Four 4,200 3,300
Each additional 200 200
Usable open space
per number of
habitable rooms (sq.
ft.)
One or two 200 200
Each additional 200 200
Front yard** 20 20
Side yards
Combined side yards 40 30
Smaller side yard 20 15
Rear yard 35 25
Building height to
setback ratio
(maximum)
3.0:1 3.0:1
Required parking
spaces
Per dwelling unit 1 1/2 1 1/2
§ B17A-268 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-268
BAO:320
R3 R4
Per accessory
professional office
1 1
** See section 17-376.1
Dimensions are in feet, unless otherwise noted
§ B17A-268 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-268
BAO:321

SUBDIVISION VI
AH District
§ B17A-268.1. AH District — Use, bulk and other development
regulations. [Ord. No. 2003-9, § III]
(a) Permitted uses. Within the AH zoning district the following uses shall
be permitted.
(1) Principal permitted uses. Buildings may be erected or used and the
tract may be used for age-restricted low and moderate income
multi-family housing restricted to persons 62 years of age and
older, adults with disabilities, and a manager's dwelling unit that
need not be age-restricted. "Multi-family housing" is defined as a
building containing at least three units, each unit sharing with
another unit or units one or more vertical or horizontal common
walls.
(2) Accessory uses. Multi-family housing management office, common
rooms, kitchen and dining facilities, laundry rooms, maintenance
and storage areas, congregate services for residents, off-street
parking, recreation facilities, street furniture, home occupations,
fences and walls, signs, satellite dishes, storm water management
facilities, greenways, open space, and other customary uses which
are clearly incidental to the principal use and buildings.
(b) Gross density. The permitted gross density in the AH zoning district
shall be 40 dwelling units per acre. Density shall be calculated using
the entire tract size irrespective of individual lot area.
(c) Minimum tract size. The minimum tract size shall be the AH zoning
district designated on the revised Zoning Map of the Borough of
Princeton.
(d) Mandatory set aside for affordable housing. Subdivision and site plan
approvals for developments within the district may only be approved if
all of the dwelling units are age restricted affordable units, or units
restricted to income eligible disabled adults, with the exception of a
manager's dwelling unit, as defined in this chapter.
(e) Development requirements. For the purposes of determining
compliance with this section, individual interior lot lines within the zone
designation shall not be considered when determining setbacks. All
measurements shall be taken from the boundary of the tract.
(1) Maximum floor area ratio: 0.60
(2) Minimum yard requirements:
From property zoned R-1: 0.
From property in Princeton Township: 0.
§ B17A-268.1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-268.1
BAO:323
(3) Maximum impervious coverage: 65%
(4) Maximum building height: three stories not to exceed 45 feet.
(5) Parking requirement: 0.5 parking spaces per unit.
(f) Site improvements. Streets, parking, water supply, sanitary sewers,
storm water management facilities and other site improvements shall
be subject to the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs,
Residential Site Improvement Standards ("RSIS") as set forth in N.J.A.C.
5:21. An alternative off-street parking standard pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:21-4.14(c), which shall be 0.5 parking spaces per unit, will be used
due to the demonstrated reduced need for off-street parking by
residents of age-restricted low and moderate income housing.
(g) Unnecessary cost generating features. In order to eliminate
unnecessary cost generating features for affordable housing
developments, as required by the Fair Housing Act, N.J.S.A.
52:27D-314b, any development in the AH zoning district shall be
entitled to the rights and relief provided in the rules of the New Jersey
Council on Affordable Housing for inclusionary development and as set
forth in N.J.A.C. 5:93-10.1(b).
§ B17A-268.1 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-268.1
BAO:324
SUBDIVISION VII
R4A Districts
§ B17A-268.2. R4A districts — Generally. [Ord. No. 2006-21, § 1.]
In the R4A district, land and buildings may be used only for the purposes
set forth in sections 17A-268.2 through 17A-268.31.
§ B17A-268.21. Uses permitted as of right. [Ord. No. 2006-21, § 1.]
The following uses are permitted as of right, subject to the bulk regulations,
parking requirements and other regulations set forth or referred to below:
§ B17A-268.22. Conditional uses. [Ord. No. 2006-21, § 1]
The following additional uses may be authorized as conditional uses, subject
to the provisions of section 17A-208, and to the bulk regulations, parking
requirements and other regulations referred to or set forth below:
(a) Residential uses.
(1) One-family dwellings.
(2) Two-family dwellings.
(3) Attached dwellings.
(4) Multiple dwellings.
(b) Nonresidential uses.
(1) Public parks and playgrounds.
(c) Accessory uses.
(1) Accessory signs, as permitted in division 6, subdivision I, sections
17A-367 through 17A-372 of this chapter.
(2) Accessory parking spaces and other accessory uses as permitted in
the R1 district including secondary residences, subject to the
limitations set forth in R1 districts, section 17A-228: except that
within a dwelling other than a one-family dwelling only one room
may be rented for residential purposes, for occupancy by not more
than two persons; and no secondary residence shall be permitted.
(a) Nonresidential uses.
(1) Churches and other places of worship.
(2) Public schools, and private schools not operated for profit.
(3) Private parks and playgrounds.
(4) Personal wireless telecommunications facilities and personal
wireless telecommunications equipment facilities, as defined in
§ B17A-268.2 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-268.22
BAO:325
§ B17A-268.23. Other use regulations. [Ord. No. 2006-21, § 1]
All uses permitted under the provisions of sections 17A-268.21 and
17A-268.22 shall be subject to the additional use regulations set forth in
sections 17A-364, 17A-365, 17A-366 and 17A-373.
§ B17A-268.24. Mandatory set-aside for affordable housing. [Ord.
No. 2006-21, § 1.]
§ B17A-268.25. Bulk regulations. [Ord. No. 2006-21, § 1.]
The bulk regulations contained in sections 17A-268.2 through 17A-268.31
apply to all buildings and land in R4A districts.
§ B17A-268.26. Residential buildings. [Ord. No. 2006-21, § 1]
Maximum
permitted
One-Family
Dwellings
Two-Family
Dwellings
Attached
Dwellings
Multiple
Dwellings
Height
Feet 35 35 35 35
Stories 3 3 3 3
Coverage
(percent)
30 30 30 30
FAR 40 45 45 45
Minimum
required
Lot area (sq.
ft.)
For each
dwelling
6,000 3,300 3,000*
Per number
of habitable
rooms, each
dwelling
unit
One or two 2,600
Three 3,000
Four 3,300
section 17A-201 shall be permitted as a conditional use, subject to
the provisions of section 17A-208.
(a) Subdivision and site plan approvals for residential developments within
the district may only be approved if at least 20% of the units are
affordable units meeting the standards in section 17A-202.2.
§ B17A-268.22 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-268.26
BAO:326
Maximum
permitted
One-Family
Dwellings
Two-Family
Dwellings
Attached
Dwellings
Multiple
Dwellings
Each
additional
200
Usable open
space (sq.
ft.)
For each
dwelling
unit
600
Per
number of
habitable
rooms,
each
dwelling
unit
One or two 200
Each
additional
200
Lot width 60 60
End lot 40**
Interior lot 20**
Lot depth 100 100 80**
Front yard 25 20 15** 20
Side yards
Combined
side yards
20 20 30
Smaller
side yard
8 8 15
End lot,
one side
yard
20**
Rear yard 35 35 25** 25
Building
height to
setback ratio
(maximum)
3.0:1 3.0:1 n/a n/a
Maximum
number of
units per
structure
n/a n/a 6 12
§ B17A-268.26 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-268.26
BAO:327
* For attached dwellings, parts of the lot area may be provided as
common land, directly accessible from the lot of each individual dwelling
unit; provided, that the lot of each individual dwelling unit shall have not
less than the minimum lot width and lot depth
** For lot of individual dwelling unit
Dimensions are in feet, unless otherwise noted
§ B17A-268.27. Nonresidential buildings. [Ord. No. 2006-21, § 1.]
For churches and other places of worship, public and private schools:
§ B17A-268.28. Other bulk regulations. [Ord. No. 2006-21, § 1.]
§ B17A-268.29. Off-site parking requirements.
In the R4A districts, accessory off-street parking spaces, open or enclosed
shall be provided for all new construction in accordance with the regulation
set forth and referred to in sections 17A-268.2 through 17A-268.31. All such
parking spaces shall be subject to the provisions of division 6, subdivision
III of this chapter off-street parking may be provided in a structured parking
facility within 1,000 feet of the zone line, on an adjacent lot in an adjoining
municipality if in common ownership.
(a) The height shall not exceed four stories or 50 feet.
(b) The coverage shall not exceed 30%.
(c) No building shall be erected less than 50 feet from any street line or lot
line.
(a) The additional bulk regulations set forth in division 6, subdivision II of
this chapter and in section 17A-403 shall apply in the R4A zone.
(b) Wherever property in the R4A zone directly abuts a property in the R-3
zone a buffer area of 35 feet in width must be provided. Within the
required buffer area, a solid and continuous landscape screen shall be
planted and maintained, and the remaining area of the buffer shall be
appropriately planted. Such landscaping shall consist of a mixture of
evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs of such species and size as
will provide a screen at least eight feet in height within two growing
seasons.
(c) Setbacks along a cemetery may be reduced to eight feet.
§ B17A-268.26 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-268.30
BAO:328
§ B17A-268.30. Required parking — Residential uses generally.
[Ord. No. 2006-21, § 1.]
Required
Parking
spaces
One-Family
Dwellings
Two-Family
Dwellings
Attached
Dwellings
Multiple
Dwellings
Per dwelling
unit
1.0 1.5 1.0 1.5
For accessory
uses
Per rented
room
1 1 1
Per
accessory
professional
office
1 1 1 1
§ B17A-268.31. Nonresidential uses. [Ord. No. 2006-21, § 1.]
At least one parking space for
each:
Public and private secondary
schools
4 seats or students
Public and private elementary
schools
12 seats or students
Places of worship 200 square feet of floor area but not
less than one space for each 5 seats,
where provided.
For any other permitted buildings and uses, for which no requirements
are set forth above, appropriate and comparable off-street parking
requirements shall be determined by the planning board, taking into
consideration the amount of traffic to be generated thereby, the likelihood
of all day or short term use of parking spaces, and the location and the
availability of other means of access and other factors affecting the amount
of traffic likely to be generated and the need for parking.
§ B17A-268.30 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-268.31
BAO:329

SUBDIVISION VIII
Mixed Use (MX) District
§ B17A-268.32. Mixed Use district — Generally. [Ord. No. 2008-18,
§ 1]
In the mixed use (MX) district, land and buildings may be used for the
purposes set forth in Sections 17A-268.32 through 17A-268.47.
§ B17A-268.33. Uses permitted as of right. [Ord. No. 2008-18, § 1]
The following uses are permitted as of right, subject to the bulk regulations,
parking requirements and other regulations set forth or referred to below:
(a) Residential uses.
(1) One-family dwellings.
(2) Two-family dwellings.
(3) Attached dwellings.
(4) Multiple dwellings.
(5) Combined dwellings - combinations of the above housing types
within the same building.
(6) Age restricted housing intended for, and solely occupied by,
persons 62 years of age or older. No more than 30 of the units in the
MX zone may be age restricted.
(b) Nonresidential uses.
(1) Public parks and playgrounds.
(2) Private parks and playgrounds.
(3) Public buildings, not-for-profit community service organizations
offering on-site social and/or recreational programs available to the
Princeton community, and nursing homes.
(c) Accessory uses.
(1) Accessory signs, as permitted in division 6, subdivision I, sections
17A-367 through 17A-372 of this chapter.
(2) Accessory parking spaces.
(3) Other accessory uses as permitted in the R1 district including
secondary residences, subject to the limitations set forth in R1
districts, section 17A-228: except that within a dwelling other than
a one-family dwelling only one room may be rented for residential
purposes, for occupancy by not more than two persons; and no
secondary residence shall be permitted.
§ B17A-268.32 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-268.33
BAO:331
§ B17A-268.34. Conditional uses. [Ord. No. 2008-18, § 1]
The following additional uses may be authorized as conditional uses, subject
to the provisions of section 17A-208, and to the bulk regulations, parking
requirements and other regulations referred to or set forth below:
§ B17A-268.35. Other use regulations. [Ord. No. 2008-18, § 1]
All uses permitted under the provisions of sections 17A-268.21 and
17A-268.22 shall be subject to the additional use regulations set forth in
sections 17A-364, 17A-365, 17A-366 and 17A-373.
§ B17A-268.36. Permitted gross density for residential
development. [Ord. No. 2008-18, § 1.]
(4) Parking garages of no more than three stories above grade. Parking
garages shall not be included in calculating a lot's building
coverage.
(5) Accessory facilities to residential developments, including
community rooms, recreational facilities, management offices,
service and storage facilities, and such other facilities commonly
associated with multifamily residential use occupying no more than
20% of the aggregate habitable area of the residential buildings.
(a) Nonresidential uses.
(1) Churches and other places of worship.
(2) Personal wireless telecommunications facilities and personal
wireless telecommunications equipment facilities, as defined in
section 17A-201 shall be permitted as a conditional use, subject to
the provisions of section 17A-208.
(a) The permitted gross density for a project in the MX zone for residential
development shall be 14 dwelling units per acre.
(b) Any applicant who develops age restricted housing in the MX zone shall
be entitled to a density bonus of one market unit for each age restricted
unit up to a maximum of 30 additional bonus units.
(c) One-half of the age-restricted market rate units constructed within the
zone shall be marketed with an equal preference as follows:
(1) To current residents of the Borough and Township of Princeton;
(2) To parents and children of current residents of the Borough and
Township of Princeton;
(3) To persons who were either residents of the Borough or Township
of Princeton within the last five years of the date of the adoption of
this ordinance;12
§ B17A-268.33 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-268.36
BAO:332
§ B17A-268.37. Maximum nonresidential development. [Ord. No.
2008-18, § 1]
The maximum amount of nonresidential development in the MX zone shall
not exceed a total of 125,000 square feet excepting 75,000 square feet for
a nursing home. Parking garages providing either public or private parking
shall not be included in this calculation.
§ B17A-268.38. Mandatory set aside for affordable housing. [Ord.
No. 2008-18, § 1.]
(4) To current, active emergency service volunteers of the fire
department and the first aid and rescue squads;
(5) To current employees of the Borough of Princeton, Township of
Princeton, Princeton Public Library, Princeton Regional Board of
Education or employees of any of the Joint Borough and Township
of Princeton Municipal Agencies.
This preference for the sale or rental of the age restricted units
shall take place through the date the developer issues its final
construction documents and receives one-half of its construction
permits for the development.
In providing this preference, the developer shall maintain two
reservation lists. One list shall contain those qualifying for the
above referenced preference. A second list shall be maintained
for all others expressing an interest in purchasing or renting a
unit from the developer. While the aforementioned preference is
in effect, the developer may only offer binding contracts to those
qualifying for the preference. After the preference period has
expired, the developer then may offer binding agreements to any
potential purchaser or renter without preference. The Borough of
Princeton retains the right to review any marketing plans that the
developer has to reach the Princeton preference buyer or renter.
(a) Subdivision and site plan approvals for all residential developments
including age restricted housing within the district may only be
approved if at least 20% of the units are affordable units which meet the
standards for low and moderate income units as defined in the Council
of Affordable Housing rules, regulations and marketing requirements
and comply with the Borough of Princeton's land use requirements.
(b) Subdivision and site plan approvals for nonresidential developments
within the district may only be approved if the nonresidential
development complies with Borough of Princeton's Land Use Ordinance
requirements for nonresidential development.
12.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2008-18, codified herein as Subdivision VIII, Mixed Use (MX)
Zone, was adopted June 24, 2008.
§ B17A-268.36 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-268.39
BAO:333
§ B17A-268.39. General regulations for residential development.
[Ord. No. 2008-18, § 1.]
(a) It is not the intent of this zone to prescribe the form of ownership for
the dwelling units in the MX zone. However, for purposes of regulating
the location of buildings within the MX zone it is necessary to prescribe
lot sizes, dimensions and setbacks. In developments where the dwelling
units are not to be located on individually owned separate fee simple
title lots each dwelling unit or structure shall be located so that it would
comply with the prescribed lot standards if imaginary lot lines were
superimposed on the development.
(b) In the MX zone, there shall be a mix of at least three dwelling unit types
consisting of single-family, two-family, attached dwellings and multiple
dwellings or a combination of these housing types within the same
building. Reasonable efforts shall be made to insure that the proposed
development is compatible with adjacent land uses.
(c) Any residential development in the MX zone must provide at least two
means of vehicular access to the proposed development.
(d) At least 25% of the site shall be devoted to common open space. The
following, or the land under the following, shall not be considered
common open space: streets, driveways and parking areas, and the lot
areas of privately owned individual subdivided lots. All other areas,
including all undeveloped land, plazas, outdoor recreational areas and
other open areas available for the use of the residents of the
development shall be considered common open space. In developments
where dwelling units are not located on individually owned lots the
common area between units may be counted toward meeting the
common open space requirements.
(e) Reasonable efforts shall be made to preserve and protect natural
wooded areas as part of any development's open space.
(f) If uses other than a one-family or two-family dwelling abut the R-4 or
R-1 zones a forty-foot landscaped buffer must be provided.
(g) Sidewalk and bicycle paths shall be provided so as to connect
pedestrian and bicycle circulation systems already developed adjacent
to the tract. Pedestrian and bicycle circulation systems should be
designed in a manner to reduce actual boundaries between the
properties in the zone as well as to the adjacent residential uses.
(h) All areas not occupied by buildings, plazas or parking areas shall be
suitably landscaped. Shade trees shall be provided along walks,
driveways and parking areas.
(i) The minimum tract size shall be five acres.
(j) All residential units shall be handicapped accessible/adaptable to the
extent required by the New Jersey Barrier Free Subcode of the Uniform
§ B17A-268.39 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-268.39
BAO:334
§ B17A-268.40. Bulk regulations residential buildings. [Ord. No.
2008-18, § 1.]
Maximum
Permitted
One-
Family
Dwellings
Two-
Family
Dwellings
Attached
Dwellings
Multiple
Dwellings
Combined
Dwellings
Height
Feet 35 35 35 45 40
Stories 2.5 2.5 2.5 3 3
Coverage
(percent)
30 30 45 60 60
Lot area
per
dwelling
unit
(square
feet)
6,000 3,300 3,000 n/a n/a
Minimum
required*
Lot area
per
dwelling
unit
(square
feet)
3,000 2,000 2,000 n/a n/a
Lot
frontage
35 25 20 100 20
Lot depth 80 80 80 n/a 80
Front
yard
15 15 15 25 15
Rear
yard
25 25 25 30 25
Construction Code, The Council of Affordable Housing or the Federal
Fair Housing Act in addition to any other governing statute/regulation.
When a unit is required to be adaptable, the term "adaptable" shall
mean that the dwelling unit has:
(1) An accessible entrance (including the landing level area extending
for latch side pull side or push side clearances.)
(2) An accessible route of travel into and throughout the unit.
(3) An adaptable kitchen on the first level.
(4) An adaptable bath on the first level.
§ B17A-268.39 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-268.40
BAO:335
Maximum
Permitted
One-
Family
Dwellings
Two-
Family
Dwellings
Attached
Dwellings
Multiple
Dwellings
Combined
Dwellings
Side yard 5 ** ** 20 **
Maximum
number
of units
per
structure
n/a n/a 6 24 12
Garages:
Front
loaded
attached
(front
yard
measured
from
street
right-ofway
or
sidewalk
whichever
is closer)
20 20 20 n/a n/a
Sideloaded
garage
10 10 10 n/a n/a
Frontloaded
detached
20 20 20 n/a n/a
* Front, rear and side yard setbacks shall be measured from the right-ofway
line for public roads and from the edge of pavement for private roads
** Interior lots (both) zero feet; end units (one) 5 feet
Dimensions are in feet, unless otherwise noted
§ B17A-268.41. Arrangement of buildings. [Ord. No. 2008-18, § 1.]
(a) Reasonable efforts shall be made to site structures on the least
environmentally vulnerable land as determined by the information
submitted as required in section 17A-198 (Environmental information
statement).
(b) Structures may be sited in one or more clusters in a manner most
appropriate to the natural features and critical areas of the tract.
§ B17A-268.40 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-268.41
BAO:336
§ B17A-268.42. Bulk regulations nonresidential buildings. [Ord. No.
2008-18, § 1.]
(c) Each dwelling unit shall be located so that it is accessible by police,
firefighting and emergency vehicles.
(d) Each dwelling unit location shall be reasonably related to the
appurtenant parking areas or shall have a guaranteed parking space in
the MX zone.
(e) Attached, combined, and multifamily structures shall not have a length
in excess of 180 feet and shall be designed with offsets or other
architectural features so as to provide breaks in the linear plane of the
structure.
(f) Multifamily and combined structures shall provide for variety in roof
height and avoid the appearance of one continuous three-story
structure. Developers are encouraged to include buildings which have
both two and three story portions.
(a) The height shall not exceed three stories or 50 feet.
(b) The minimum tract size shall be 40,000 square feet.
(c) The minimum building setback from any street line or property line
shall be 25 feet.
(d) The minimum parking setback shall be 50 feet from a public street and
20 feet from a residential use.
(e) Building coverage shall not exceed 30%. Parking garages shall not be
included in calculating a lot's building coverage.
(f) A 40,000 square foot open space area suitable for active recreation
must be provided.
(g) Any nonresidential development lot must have frontage on two major
collector roadways, or higher classification, as identified in the
Princeton Community Master Plan.
(h) Wherever a nonresidential building abuts a residential use a forty-foot
landscape buffer must be provided which shall include evergreen
landscape material and fencing.
(i) Sidewalk and bicycle paths shall be provided so as to connect
pedestrian and bicycle circulation systems already developed adjacent
to the tract. Pedestrian and bicycle circulation systems should be
designed in a manner to reduce actual boundaries between the
properties in the zone as well as to the adjacent residential uses.
(j) All areas not occupied by buildings or parking areas shall be suitably
landscaped. Shade trees shall be provided along walks, driveways and
parking areas.
§ B17A-268.41 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-268.43
BAO:337
§ B17A-268.43. Arrangement of nonresidential buildings. [Ord. No.
2008-18, § 1]
§ B17A-268.44. Bulk regulations conditional uses. [Ord. No.
2008-18, § 1.]
§ B17A-268.45. Off-street parking requirements. [Ord. No. 2008-18,
§ 1.]
In the MX zone, accessory off-street parking spaces, open or enclosed shall
be provided for all new construction in accordance with the regulation set
forth and referred to in sections 17A-268.32 through 17A.268.47. All such
parking spaces shall be subject to the provisions of division 6, subdivision
III of this a chapter.
(a) Reasonable efforts shall be made to site structures on the least
environmentally vulnerable land as determined by the information
submitted as required in section 17A-198 (Environmental information
statement).
(b) Structures shall provide for variety in roof height and avoid the
appearance of one continuous three-story structure to the extent
practical.
(a) Any conditional use must have direct access to two major collector
roadways, or higher classification, as identified in the Princeton
Community Master Plan.
(b) The height shall not exceed three stories or 50 feet.
(c) The lot coverage shall not exceed 30%.
(d) No building shall be erected less than 50 feet from any street line or lot
line.
(e) The minimum parking setback shall be 50 feet from a public street, 20
feet from a residential use.
(f) Wherever a nonresidential use abuts a residential use a forty-foot
landscape buffer must be provided which shall include evergreen
landscape material and fencing.
(g) Sidewalk and bicycle paths shall be provided so as to connect
pedestrian and bicycle circulation systems already developed adjacent
to the tract. Pedestrian and bicycle circulation systems should be
designed in a manner to reduce actual boundaries between the
properties in the zone as well as to the adjacent residential uses.
(h) All areas not occupied by buildings or parking areas shall be suitably
landscaped. Shade trees shall be provided along walks, driveways and
parking areas.
§ B17A-268.43 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-268.46
BAO:338
§ B17A-268.46. Required parking — Residential uses generally.
[Ord. No. 2008-18, § 1.]
Required
Parking
Spaces
One-
Family
Dwellings
Two-
Family
Dwellings
Attached
Dwellings
Multiple
Dwellings
Combined
Dwellings
Per
dwelling
unit
1.0 1.5 1.0 1.5 1.0
For
accessory
uses
Per
rented
room
1 1 1
Per
accessory
professional
office
1 1 1 1 1
§ B17A-268.47. Required parking — Nonresidential uses. [Ord. No.
2008-18, § 1.]
At least one parking space for
each:
Public and private secondary
schools
6 seats or students
Public and private elementary
schools
12 seats or students
Places of worship 200 square feet of floor area but not
less than one space for each 5 seats,
where provided
Not-for-profit community
organizations
500 square feet of floor area
For any other permitted buildings and uses, for which no requirements
are set forth above, appropriate and comparable off-street parking
requirements shall be determined by the planning board, taking into
consideration the amount of traffic to be generated thereby, the likelihood
of all day or short term use of parking spaces, and the location and the
availability of other means of access and other factors affecting the amount
of traffic likely to be generated and the need for parking.
§ B17A-268.46 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-268.47
BAO:339

Division 4
Business Districts
SUBDIVISION I
Residence-Office (RO) Districts
§ B17A-269. Use regulations — Generally. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord.
No. 97-2, § I]
In RO districts, land and buildings may be used only for the purposes set
forth in sections 17A-269 through 17A-272.
§ B17A-270. Uses permitted as of right. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No.
97-16, § I]
The following uses are permitted as of right, subject to the bulk regulations,
parking requirements and other regulations set forth or referred to below:
(a) Residential uses.
(1) One-family dwellings.
(2) Two-family dwellings.
(3) Attached dwellings.
(4) Multiple dwellings.
(5) Rooming houses.
(6) Medical and dental offices.
(b) Nonresidential uses.
(1) Churches and other places of worship.
(2) Public schools, and private schools not operated for profit.
(3) Parks, playgrounds and public buildings.
(4) Office buildings.
(5) Parking garages and other off-street parking spaces, open or
enclosed, subject to the provisions of division 6, subdivision III of
this chapter.
(c) Mixed uses.
(1) Joint-occupancy buildings; provided, that:
a. The residential portion shall have an entrance upon a street,
either directly or via an unobstructed passage at least 10 feet
in width, 10 feet in height and with a maximum depth of 35
feet.
§ B17A-269 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-270
BAO:341
§ B17A-271. Conditional uses. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No. 79-5,
§ 3; Ord. No. 95-21, § I; Ord. No. 98-9, § I.]
The following additional uses may be authorized as conditional uses, subject
to the provisions of section 17A-208 and to the bulk regulations, parking
requirements and other regulations set forth or referred to below:
b. No floor may be used for both residential and business use
unless a separate entrance, hallway and stairway provide
direct access from the street to each use.
(d) Accessory uses.
(1) Accessory signs, as permitted in division 6, subdivision I, sections
17A-367 through 17A-372 of this chapter.
(2) Accessory parking spaces and other accessory uses, subject to the
limitations set forth in R1 districts, section 17A-228; except, that
within a dwelling unit other than a one-family dwelling, only one
room may be rented for residential purposes, for occupancy by not
more than two persons.
(a) Residential and mixed uses.
(1) Conversion of a residential building in existence on November 19,
1968, to a joint occupancy building, or that conversion of a part of
the residential portion of a joint occupancy building to an office or
other nonresidential use; provided that:
a. No structural alterations or other construction shall create a
new noncompliance or increase the degree of noncompliance.
b. The same number of parking spaces shall be provided for such
conversions as are required for new construction of similar
buildings.
c. In the case of conversion to a joint occupancy building, at least
20 square feet of usable open space shall be provided for each
habitable room.
(b) Nonresidential uses.
(1) Conversion of a residential or joint occupancy building to an office
or other nonresidential building; provided, that:
a. No structural alterations or other construction shall create a
new noncompliance or increase the degree of noncompliance.
b. The same number of parking spaces shall be provided for such
conversions as are required for new construction of similar
buildings.
(2) Nursing homes and private schools operated for profit.
§ B17A-270 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-271
BAO:342
§ B17A-272. Other use regulations. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No.
83-38, § 3]
All uses permitted under the provisions of sections 17A-270 and 17A-271
shall be subject to the additional use regulations set forth in section
17A-364, 17A-365, 17A-366 and 17A-373.
§ B17A-273. Bulk regulations — Generally. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2]
The bulk regulations contained in sections 17A-273 through 17A-276 apply
to all buildings and land in RO districts.
§ B17A-274. Residential buildings, joint occupancy buildings and
rooming houses. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2]
One-family
Dwellings
Two-Family
Dwellings
Attached
Dwellings
Multiple
Dwellings
Joint
Occupancy
Buildings
and Rooming
Houses
Maximum
permitted
Floor area
ratio
— — — 0.9 0.6
Height
Feet 35 35 35 35 35
Stories 3 3 3 3 3
(3) Educational institutions.
(4) Clubhouses, except for clubs whose principal activity is usually
carried on as a business.
(5) Railroad and public utility buildings, installations and rights-of-way
needed to serve the general welfare of all or a significant part of
the community; provided, that the planning board determines that
no other reasonable location in a less restricted business district
can be used for the purpose contemplated.
(6) Amateur radio receiving and transmitting towers over 15 feet but
less than 50 feet in height; provided, that any such tower shall not
be located closer to any lot line or street line than its height, and in
no event within a front yard or side yard.
(7) Personal wireless telecommunications facilities and personal
wireless telecommunications equipment facilities, as defined in
section 17A-201 shall be permitted as a conditional use, subject to
the provisions of section 17A-208.
§ B17A-271 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-274
BAO:343
One-family
Dwellings
Two-Family
Dwellings
Attached
Dwellings
Multiple
Dwellings
Joint
Occupancy
Buildings
and Rooming
Houses
Coverage
(percent)
30 30 30 30 30
Minimum
required
For each
dwelling unit
Lot area
(sq. ft.)
6,000 3,300 3,000*
Per no. of
habitable
rooms:
One or
two
1,500 1,500
Three 2,000 2,000
Four 2,600 2,600
Each
additional
800 800
Usable open
space (sq. ft.)
600
Per number
of habitable
rooms:
One or two 200 200
Each
additional
200 200
Lot width 60 60
End lot 40**
Interior lot 20**
Lot depth 100 100 80**
Front yard 25 20 15 15 15
Side yards
Combined
side yards
20 20 30 25
Smaller
side yard
8 8 15 10
§ B17A-274 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-274
BAO:344
One-family
Dwellings
Two-Family
Dwellings
Attached
Dwellings
Multiple
Dwellings
Joint
Occupancy
Buildings
and Rooming
Houses
End lot, one
side yard
20**
Rear yard 35 35 25** 25 25
* For attached dwellings, part of this lot area may be provided as common
land, directly accessible from the lot of each individual dwelling unit;
provided, that the lot of each individual dwelling unit shall have not less
than the minimum lot width and lot depth
** For lot of individual dwelling units
Dimensions are in feet, unless otherwise noted.
§ B17A-275. Nonresidential buildings. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2]
Offices and Other
Nonresidential
Buildings Parking Garages
Maximum permitted
Floor area ratio 6 3
Height
Feet 35 35
Stories 3
Coverage (percent) 30 80
Minimum required
Front yard 15 15
Side yards
Side yard 10 10
Side yard abutting
lot in R1, R2, R3 or
R4 districts
15 15
Side yard abutting
lot in CB district
* *
Rear yards
Rear yard 20 20
Rear yard abutting
lot in CB district
* *
§ B17A-274 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-275
BAO:345
Offices and Other
Nonresidential
Buildings Parking Garages
Rear yard abutting
lot in R1, R2, R3 or
R4 districts
20 20
No yard required. However, if a yard is provided, it shall be not less than
10* feet
Dimensions are in feet, unless otherwise noted
§ B17A-276. Other bulk regulations. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No.
83-38, § 3; Ord. No. 97-2, § I.]
The additional bulk regulations contained in division 6, subdivision II of this
chapter, with the exception of section 17A-379 and section 17A-395, shall
also apply in RO districts.
§ B17A-277. Off-street parking and loading requirements —
Generally. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No. 83-25, § 6; Ord. No. 97-2, § I]
In RO districts, accessory off-street parking spaces, open or enclosed, shall
be provided for all construction and for conversions, and accessory offstreet
loading berths, open or enclosed, shall be provided for new permitted
nonresidential uses, in accordance with the regulations set forth and
referred to in sections 17A-277 through 17A-280. All such parking spaces
and loading berths shall be subject to the provisions of division 6,
subdivision III of this chapter.
§ B17A-278. Required parking — Residential buildings and dwelling
units in joint occupancy buildings. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2]
One-
Family
Dwellings
Two-
Family
Dwellings
Attached
Dwellings
Multiple
Dwellings
Joint
Occupancy
Buildings
Required
parking
spaces
Per
dwelling
unit
1 1-1/2 1 1-1/2 1-1/2
For
accessory
uses
Per
rented
room
1 1 1 — —
§ B17A-275 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-278
BAO:346
One-
Family
Dwellings
Two-
Family
Dwellings
Attached
Dwellings
Multiple
Dwellings
Joint
Occupancy
Buildings
Per
accessory
professional
officer
1 1 1 1 1
§ B17A-279. Required parking — Rooming houses and
nonresidential uses. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2]
At least one parking space for
each:
Public and private secondary
schools
6 seats or students
Public and private elementary
schools
12 seats or students
Places or worship, libraries 200 square feet of floor area, but
not less than one space for each 5
seats, where provided
Hospitals 1 bed
Nursing homes and philanthropic
institutions
3 beds
Rooming houses Guest room
Office buildings 300 square feet of floor area on
ground floor
450 square feet of floor area on
other floors.
For any other permitted building and uses, for which no requirements
are set forth above, appropriate and comparable off-street parking
requirements shall be determined by the planning board, taking into
consideration the amount of traffic to be generated thereby, the likelihood of
all day or short term use of parking spaces, the location and the availability
of other means of access and other factors affecting the amount of traffic
likely to be generated and the need for parking.
§ B17A-280. Required loading for nonresidential uses. [Ord. No.
77-1, § 2.]
Accessory loading berths, open or enclosed, shall be provided for
nonresidential uses, except churches, as follows:
(a) For floor area of 10,000 to 25,000 square feet: one berth.
§ B17A-278 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-280
BAO:347
(b) For each additional 75,000 square feet of floor area or fraction thereof:
one additional berth.
§ B17A-280 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-280
BAO:348
SUBDIVISION II
(Reserved)
§ B17A-281. through 17A-282. (Reserved)13
13.Editor's Note: Former sections 17A-281 and 17A-282, previously codified herein and
containing portions of Ordinance No. 77-1, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No.
97-2.
§ B17A-281 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-281
BAO:349

SUBDIVISION III
Residence-Business (RB) Districts
§ B17A-283. Use regulations — Generally. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2.]
In RB districts, land and buildings may be used only for the purposes set
forth in sections 17A-283 through 17A-286.
§ B17A-284. Uses permitted as of right. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No.
97-16, § I]
The following uses are permitted as of right, subject to the bulk regulations,
parking requirements and other regulations set forth or referred to below:
(a) Residential uses.
(1) One-family dwellings.
(2) Two-family dwellings.
(3) Attached dwellings.
(4) Multiple dwellings.
(5) Rooming houses.
(b) Nonresidential uses.
(1) Churches and other places of worship.
(2) Public schools, and private schools not operated for profit.
(3) Parks and playgrounds.
(c) Mixed uses.
(1) Joint occupancy buildings, provided, that:
a. The residential portion shall have a direct entrance upon a
street, either directly or via an unobstructed passage at least
10 feet in width and 15 feet in height.
b. No floor shall be used for both residential and business use,
unless a separate entrance, hallway and stairway provides
direct access from the street to each use.
c. Business uses shall not occupy more than 40% of the
aggregate floor area of the building and shall not be located
above the ground floor.
d. Permitted business uses shall be limited to the following:
1. Offices.
§ B17A-283 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-284
BAO:351
§ B17A-285. Conditional uses. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No. 83-25,
§ 2]
The conditional use regulations in the RB districts are the same as in
the RO district, section 17A-271; except, (a) the portion of a residential
building converted to nonresidential use shall not exceed more than 40%
of the aggregate floor area of the building and shall not be located above
the ground floor, and (b) that public buildings are also permitted as a
conditional use.
2. Retail stores and bakeries, excluding automotive sales or
service establishments.
3. Eating and drinking places.
4. Barbershops, beauty parlors, tailors, dressmakers and
millinery shops, photographic studios, shoe repair,
shoeshine and hat cleaning shops, and similar personal
service stores dealing directly with consumers.
5. Studios for dancing and music instruction.
6. Private vocational and trade schools.
7. Outlets and pick-up stations for laundries and cleaning
establishments.
8. Radio and television repair, locksmith, watch, clock and
jewelry repair, upholstery and furniture repair, and other
similar service establishments, furnishing services other
than of a personal nature, but not including gasoline filling
stations and other automotive services.
9. Medical and dental offices.
(d) Accessory uses.
(1) Accessory signs, as permitted in division 6, subdivision I, sections
17A-367 through 17A-372 of this chapter.
(2) Accessory parking spaces and other accessory uses, subject to the
limitations set forth in R1 districts, section 17A-228; except, that
within a dwelling unit other than a one-family dwelling, only one
room may be rented for residential purposes, for occupancy by not
more than two persons.
(3) Other accessory uses, as defined in section 17A-201.
§ B17A-284 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-286
BAO:352
§ B17A-286. Other use regulations. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No.
83-38, § 3]
All uses permitted under the provisions of sections 17A-284 and 17A-285
shall be subject to the additional use regulations set forth in sections
17A-364, 17A-365, 17A-366, and 17A-373.
§ B17A-287. Bulk regulations — Generally. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2]
The bulk regulations for uses permitted as of right and for conditional uses
in RB districts are the same as the bulk regulations in RO districts, set forth
in subdivision I, sections 17A-273 through 17A-276 of this division; except
that the bulk regulation for parking garages are not applicable.
§ B17A-288. Off-street parking and loading requirements —
Generally. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2]
The off-street parking and loading requirements in RB districts are the same
as in RO districts, as set forth in subdivision I, sections 17A-277 through
17A-280 of this division.
§ B17A-289. Requirements for conversions to certain nonresidential
uses. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2]
Requirements for off-street parking and loading in RB districts shall apply
in the case of conversions to any of the following uses: Eating and drinking
places; vocational and trade schools; and studios for dancing or musical
instruction. These requirements are the same as in the NB districts.
§ B17A-286 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-289
BAO:353

SUBDIVISION IV
Neighborhood Business (NB) Districts
§ B17A-290. Use regulations — Generally. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2]
In NB districts, land and buildings may be used only for the purposes set
forth in sections 17A-290 through 17A-294.
§ B17A-291. Uses permitted as of right — Generally. [Ord. No. 77-1,
§ 2; Ord. No. 97-16, § I.]
The following uses are permitted as of right, subject to the bulk regulations,
parking requirements and other regulations set forth or referred to below:
(a) Residential uses.
(1) One-family dwellings.
(2) Two-family dwellings.
(3) Attached dwellings.
(4) Multiple dwellings.
(5) Rooming houses.
(b) Nonresidential uses.
(1) Churches and other places of worship.
(2) Public schools and private schools not operated for profit.
(3) Parks, playgrounds and public buildings.
(4) Office buildings.
(5) Banks.
(6) Parking garages and other off-street parking spaces, open or
enclosed, subject to the provisions of division 6, subdivision III of
this chapter.
(7) Medical and dental offices.
(c) Mixed uses.
(1) Joint occupancy buildings; provided, that:
a. The residential portion shall have an entrance upon a street,
either directly or via an unobstructed passage at least 10 feet
in width and 10 feet in height, and with a maximum depth of 35
feet.
§ B17A-290 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-291
BAO:355
§ B17A-292. Uses — Subject to floor area limitation. [Ord. No. 77-1,
§ 2.]
The following uses are permitted as of right; provided, that not more
than 5,000 square feet of floor area per establishment shall be devoted
to such use. Such uses shall be subject to the bulk regulations, parking
requirements and other regulations set forth or referred to below:
b. No floor may be used for both residential and business uses,
unless a separate entrance, hallway and stairway provides
direct access from the street to each use.
(d) Accessory uses.
(1) Accessory signs, as permitted in division 6, subdivision I, sections
17A-367 through 17A-372 of this article.
(2) Accessory parking spaces and other accessory uses, subject to the
limitations set forth in R1 districts, section 17A-228, except, that
within a dwelling unit other than a one-family dwelling, only one
room may be rented for residential purposes, for occupancy by not
more than two persons.
(a) Nonresidential uses.
(1) Retail stores and bakeries, excluding automotive sales or service
establishments.
(2) Eating and drinking places.
(3) Barbershops, beauty parlors, tailors, dressmakers and millinery
shops, photographic studios, shoe repair, shoeshine and hat
cleaning shops and similar personal service stores dealing directly
with consumers.
(4) Studios for dancing and music instruction.
(5) Private vocational and trade schools.
(6) Outlets and pick-up stations for laundries and cleaning
establishments.
(7) Self-service automatic laundry and dry cleaning establishments,
containing a total of not more than 30 machines for washing,
cleaning and drying. The use of flammable solvent is prohibited,
except for the incidental removal of spots.
(8) Radio and television repair, locksmith, watch, clock and jewelry
repair, upholstery and furniture repair and other similar service
establishments furnishing services other than of a personal nature,
but not including gasoline filling stations and other automotive
services.
§ B17A-291 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-293
BAO:356
§ B17A-293. Conditional uses. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No. 98-9,
§ I.]
Bus stations, taxi offices, hotels and any conditional uses specified in RO
districts, may be authorized as conditional uses subject to the provisions
of section 17A-208 and to the bulk regulations, parking requirements and
other regulations set forth or referred to in this chapter.
Personal wireless telecommunications facilities and personal wireless
telecommunications equipment facilities, as defined in section 17A-201
shall be permitted as a conditional use, subject to the provisions of section
17A-208.
§ B17A-294. Other use regulations. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No.
83-38, § 3.]
All uses permitted under the provisions of sections 17A-291, 17A-292 and
17A-293 shall be subject to the additional use regulations set forth in
sections 17A-364, 17A-365, 17A-366 and 17A-373.
§ B17A-295. Bulk regulations — Generally. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2]
The bulk regulations contained in sections 17A-295 through 17A-298 apply
to all buildings and land in NB districts.
§ B17A-296. Residential uses. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2]
The bulk regulations for permitted residential buildings, joint occupancy
buildings and rooming houses are the same as in RO districts, section
17A-274.
§ B17A-297. Nonresidential uses. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2]
Offices
Other Nonresidential
Uses
Maximum permitted
Floor area ratio 0.6 0.6
Height
Feet 35 35
Stories 3 3
Coverage (percent) 30 40
Minimum required
Front yard 15 15
Side yards
Side yard * *
§ B17A-293 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-297
BAO:357
Offices
Other Nonresidential
Uses
Side yard abutting
lot in R1, R2, R3 or
R4 districts
15 15
Rear yard
Rear yard 20 20
Rear yard
Rear yard abutting
lot in R1, R2, R3 or
R4 districts
20 75
* No yard required. However, if a yard is provided, it shall be not less than
10 feet
Dimensions are in feet, unless otherwise noted
§ B17A-298. Other bulk regulations. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No.
83-38, § 3]
The additional bulk requirements contained in division 6, subdivision II of
this chapter with the exception of section 17A-379 shall also apply in NB
districts.
§ B17A-299. Off-street parking and loading requirements —
Generally. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No. 83-25, § 7]
In NB districts, accessory off-street parking spaces, open or enclosed, shall
be provided for all construction and for conversions and accessory offstreet
loading berths, open or enclosed, shall be provided for all permitted
nonresidential uses in accordance with the regulations set forth and
referred to in sections 17A-299 through 17A-303. All such parking spaces
and loading berths shall be subject to the provisions of division 6,
subdivision III of this chapter.
§ B17A-300. Required parking — Residential buildings and dwelling
units in joint occupancy buildings.
One-
Family
Dwellings
Two-
Family
Dwellings
Attached
Dwellings
Multiple
Dwellings
For Joint
Occupancy
Dwellings
Required
parking
spaces
Per
dwelling
unit
1 1-1/2 1 1-1/2 1-1/2
§ B17A-297 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-300
BAO:358
One-
Family
Dwellings
Two-
Family
Dwellings
Attached
Dwellings
Multiple
Dwellings
For Joint
Occupancy
Dwellings
For
accessory
uses
Per
rented
room
1 1 1
Per
accessory
professional
office
1 1 1 1 1
§ B17A-301. Parking — Rooming houses and new nonresidential
uses. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2.]
At least one parking space for
each:
Public and private secondary
schools
6 seats or students
Public and private elementary
schools
12 seats or students
Places of worship, libraries 200 square feet of floor area, but
not less than one space for each 5
seats, where provided
Hospitals 1 bed
Nursing homes and philanthropic
institutions
3 beds
Eating and drinking places 5 seats
Hotels and rooming houses Guest room
Retail, office and service business
uses not listed above
For ground floor: 300 square feet of
floor area; for other floors: 450
square feet of floor area
For any other permitted buildings and uses, for which no requirements
are set forth above, appropriate and comparable off-street parking
requirements shall be determined by the planning board, taking into
consideration the amount of traffic to be generated thereby, the likelihood of
all day or short-term use of parking spaces, the location and the availability
of other means of access and other factors affecting the amount of traffic
likely to be generated and the need for parking.
§ B17A-300 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-302
BAO:359
§ B17A-302. Parking — Conversions to nonresidential uses. [Ord.
No. 77-1, § 2.]
Requirements for off-street parking and loading shall apply in the case of
conversion to any of the following uses: Eating and drinking places, theatres
and places of assembly, vocational and trade schools and studios for dancing
or musical instruction.
§ B17A-303. Required loading for nonresidential uses. [Ord. No.
77-1, § 2.]
Accessory loading berths, open or enclosed, shall be provided for nonresidential
uses, except churches, as follows:
(a) For floor area of 10,000 to 25,000 square feet: one berth.
(b) For each additional 75,000 square feet of floor area, or fraction thereof:
one additional berth.
§ B17A-302 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-303
BAO:360
SUBDIVISION V
Central Business (CB) Districts
§ B17A-304. Use regulations — Generally. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2]
In CB districts, land and buildings may be used only for the purposes set
forth in sections 17A-304 through 17A-308.
§ B17A-305. Uses permitted as of right — Generally. [Ord. No. 77-1,
§ 2; Ord. No. 81-13, § 1; Ord. No. 81-24, § 2; Ord. No. 88-2, § 1; Ord.
No. 95-20, § 2; Ord. No. 97-16, § I.]
The following uses are permitted as of right, subject to the bulk regulations,
parking requirements and other regulations set forth or referred to below:
(a) Residential uses.
(1) One-family dwellings.
(2) Two-family dwellings.
(3) Attached dwellings.
(4) Multiple dwellings.
(5) Rooming houses.
(b) Nonresidential uses.
(1) Churches and other places or worship.
(2) Public schools, and private schools not operated for profit.
(3) Parks, playgrounds and public buildings.
(4) Office buildings, provided that the first story of any structure
containing office or banks must consist of those nonresidential uses
permitted, subject to floor area limitation, by section 17A-306(a)(1)
to (10) and excluding offices and banks or other financial uses. For
purposes of this section, offices shall include, but shall not be
limited to real estate brokers, stockbrokers, financial planner,
insurance agencies and other service professionals.
(5) Banks, provided the first story of any structure containing offices or
banks must consist of those nonresidential uses permitted, subject
to floor area limitations by section 17A-306(a)(1) to (10) and
excluding offices and banks or other financial uses.
(6) Parking garages and other off-street parking spaces, open or
enclosed, subject to the provisions of (b) division 6, subdivision III
of this article.
(7) Hotels.
§ B17A-304 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-305
BAO:361
§ B17A-306. Uses — Subject to floor area limitation. [Ord. No. 77-1,
§ 2; Ord. No. 88-2, § 2; Ord. No. 92-22, § 1.]
The following uses are permitted as of right; provided, that not more
than 10,000 square feet of floor area per establishment shall be devoted
to such use. Such uses shall be subject to the bulk regulations, parking
requirements and other regulations set forth or referred to below:
(8) Theaters.
(9) Medical and dental offices, provided the first story of any structure
containing medical and/or dental offices must consist of those
nonresidential uses permitted, subject to floor area limitations by
section 17A-306(a)(1) to (10) and excluding medical and/or dental
offices.
(c) Mixed uses.
(1) Joint occupancy buildings; provided, that:
a. The residential portion shall have an entrance upon a street,
either directly or via an unobstructed passage, at least 10 feet
in width and 10 feet in height and with a maximum depth of 35
feet.
b. No floor may be used for both residential and business uses,
unless a separate entrance, hallway and stairway provides
direct access to each use.
(2) Planned commercial developments subject to the provisions of
section 17A-306.1.
(3) Mixed uses are subject to the sue restrictions set forth in section
17A-305(b)(4) and (5).
(d) Accessory uses.
(1) Accessory signs, as permitted in division 6, subdivision I, sections
17A-367 through 17A-372 of this chapter.
(2) Accessory parking spaces and other accessory uses, subject to the
limitations set forth in R1 districts, section 17A-228; except, that
within a dwelling unit other than a one-family dwelling, only one
room may be rented for residential purposes, for occupancy by not
more than two persons.
(e) Continuing care retirement community (CCRC). A continuing care
retirement community (CCRC) within a planned commercial
development regulated under the provisions of section 17A-306.1.
(a) Nonresidential uses.
(1) Radio and television broadcasting.
§ B17A-305 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-306
BAO:362
§ B17A-306.1. Planned commercial developments. [Ord. No. 81-24,
§ 3; Ord. No. 2002-9, § I.]
Planned commercial developments are permitted subject to the regulations
set forth below as to the bulk regulations and to the parking requirements:
(2) Blueprinting, photostating and similar business services.
(3) Retail stores and bakeries, excluding automotive sales or service
establishments.
(4) Places serving food or food and drink, whether or not the food and
drink served are to be consumed on the premises or elsewhere.
(5) Barbershops, beauty parlors, tailors, dressmakers and millinery
shops, photographic studios, shoe repair, shoeshine and hat
cleaning shops and similar personal service stores dealing directly
with consumers.
(6) Studios for dancing and music instructions.
(7) Private vocational and trade schools.
(8) Outlets and pick-up stations for laundries and cleaning
establishments.
(9) Self-service automatic laundry and dry cleaning establishments
containing a total of not more than 30 machines for washing,
cleaning and drying. The use of flammable solvent is prohibited,
except for the incidental removal of spots.
(10)Radio and television repair, locksmith, watch, clock and jewelry
repair, upholstery and furniture repair and other similar service
establishments, furnishing services other than of a personal nature,
but not including gasoline filling stations and other automotive
services.
(11) Newspaper reporting and distribution activities, open to the
general public.
(12) Non-profit philanthropic agencies providing services to the
community.
(a) Planned commercial development means a contiguous tract of at least
two acres to be developed according to a plan containing one or more
structures with appurtenant common areas to accommodate a
combination of the nonresidential, residential, and joint occupancy uses
permitted in the CB district. For this purpose a contiguous tract means
one or more contiguous lots, or parts thereof, under common ownership
and control, designated by the owner as a tract to be developed
together according to a plan. Lots shall be deemed contiguous if they
have one or more common lot lines or, notwithstanding that they are
separated by a street, if the extension of the lot lines on their existing
§ B17A-306 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-306.1
BAO:363
bearings to the centerline of the street would result in a common lot
line of at least 20 feet along the centerline of the street. The tract
may be consolidated into one lot or it may be subdivided into two or
more lots; provided, that all such lots conform to the regulation for the
district.
(b) The bulk regulations of section 17A-311.1 and the off-street parking and
loading requirements of sections 17A-314 and 17A-318 shall apply.
(c) The following design standards shall apply:
(1) Building heights shall be varied within the development.
(2) Buildings adjacent to other portions of the CB district shall be
designed with such variations in height, bulk, and scale so as to
avoid unreasonably adverse impacts on such areas.
(3) Buildings of greater than three stories adjacent to residential
districts shall be of varying size and heights and with varying
setbacks so as to avoid long building lines, which tend to act as a
barrier.
(4) The common open space available for public use shall be designed
to include a setting for outdoor cultural or entertainment activities.
(5) The common open space available for public use shall connect with
existing or planned adjacent pedestrian ways, plazas, and other
open space and to public and private parking garages and shall be
readily accessible to the public.
(6) All building facades visible from the common areas and the public
way shall include architectural elements and landscaping so as to
avoid monotony and enhance their visual appeal.
(d) The design standards and plat details of the subdivision article shall
apply even if only site plan approval is required.
(e) Existing residential uses in the development shall be preserved and no
residential use shall be subsequently converted to nonresidential use.
(f) Prior to the approval of a planned commercial development, the
planning board shall make the findings required by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-45.
(g) The applicant shall be responsible for assuring adequate parking and
circulation during the construction of the development and shall submit
a plan, acceptable to the planning board, which sets forth the manner in
which this result will be assured. The planning board may require the
development to be built in stages if this is necessary to assure that
there is adequate parking and circulation during construction. If the
development is to be constructed in stages, the applicant shall provide
appropriate assurances, which may include an agreement with the
municipality pursuant to section 17A-191, that the development will be
completed.
§ B17A-306.1 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-307
BAO:364
§ B17A-307. Conditional uses. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No. 81-13,
§ 3; Ord. No. 83-38, § 3; Ord. No. 92-22, § 2; Ord. No. 95-21, § I; Ord.
No. 98-9, § I]
The following additional uses may be authorized as conditional uses subject
to the provisions of section 17A-208, and to the bulk regulations, parking
requirements and other regulations set forth or referred to below:
(a) Residential and mixed uses.
(1) Conversion of a residential building in existence on November 19,
1968, to a joint occupancy building, or the conversion of a part of
the residential portion of a joint occupancy building to office or
other nonresidential use; provided, that:
a. No structural alterations or other construction shall create a
new noncompliance or increase the degree of noncompliance.
b. The same number of parking spaces shall be provided for such
conversions as are required for new construction of similar
buildings; such parking spaces to be provided in accordance
with the provisions of section 17A-388 and said spaces may not
be satisfied by waiver pursuant to section 17A-389.
c. The Floor Area Ratio for the nonresidential portion of the
structure after the proposed conversion shall not exceed 1.5.
d. In the case of conversion to a joint occupancy building, at least
20 square feet of usable open space shall be provided for each
habitable room.
e. The remaining residential portion of the structure shall have a
separate entrance upon a street either directly or via an
unobstructed passageway.
f. The proposed conversion conforms with the additional
specifications and standards set forth for all conditional uses in
section 17A-208 of this chapter.
(b) Nonresidential uses.
(1) Conversion of a residential or joint occupancy building to an office
or other nonresidential building; provided, that:
a. No structural alterations or other construction shall create a
new noncompliance or increase the degree of noncompliance.
b. The same number of parking spaces shall be provided for such
conversions as are required for new construction of similar
buildings; such parking spaces to be provided in accordance
with the provisions of section 17A-388 and said spaces may not
be satisfied by waiver pursuant to section 17A-389.
§ B17A-307 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-307
BAO:365
§ B17A-308. Other use regulations. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No.
83-38, § 3.]
All uses permitted under the provisions of sections 17A-305, 17A-306 and
17A-307 shall be subject to the additional use regulations set forth in
sections 17A-364, 17A-365, 17A-366 and 17A-373.
§ B17A-309. Bulk regulations — Generally. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2.]
The bulk regulations contained in sections 17A-309 through 17A-313 apply
to all buildings and land in CB districts.
c. The proposed conversion conforms with the additional
specifications and standards set forth for all conditional uses in
section 17A-208 of this article.
(2) Places with more than 10,000 square feet of floor area serving food
and drink, whether or not the food and drink are to be consumed on
the premises or elsewhere.
(3) Assembly halls, bowling alleys and pool parlors, excluding
amusement parks and penny arcade galleries.
(4) Bus stations and taxi offices.
(5) Private vocational trade schools with more than 10,000 square feet
of floor area.
(6) Nursing homes and private schools operated for profit.
(7) Educational institutions.
(8) Clubhouses, except for clubs whose principal activity is usually
carried on as a business.
(9) Railroad and public utility buildings, installations and rights-of-way
needed to serve the general welfare of all or a significant part of
the community; provided, that the planning board determines that
no other reasonable location in a less restricted business district
can be used for the purposes contemplated.
(10) Amateur radio receiving and transmitting towers over 15 feet but
less than 50 feet in height; provided, that any such tower shall not
be located closer to any lot line or street line than its height, and in
no event within a front yard or side yard.
(11) Personal wireless telecommunications facilities and personal
wireless telecommunications equipment facilities, as defined in
section 17A-201 shall be permitted as a conditional use, subject to
the provisions of section 17A-208.
§ B17A-307 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-310
BAO:366
§ B17A-310. Residential buildings, joint occupancy buildings and
rooming houses. [Ord. No. 80-24, § 3]
One-family, two-family, attached and multiple dwellings, rooming houses,
and joint occupancy buildings are subject to the following bulk regulations.
One-Family
and Two-
Family
Dwellings
Attached
Dwellings
Multiple
Dwellings
and
Rooming
Houses
Joint
Occupancy
Buildings
Maximum
permitted:
Floor area
ratio
— — 1.5 1.5
Height: feet 35 35 65 65
stories 3 3 5 5
Coverage
(percent)
— — 60 60
Minimum
required:
Lot area per
dwelling unit
(sq. ft.)
3,000 3,000(1)
Common
open space
per dwelling
unit (sq. ft.)
603 603
Lot width 20
End lot 40(2)
Interior lot 20(2)
Lot depth 80
Side yards
Smaller side
yard, if
provided
8 12 12
End lot, one
side yard
20(2)
Rear yard 25 25(2)
§ B17A-310 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-310
BAO:367
Notes for table:
(1)For attached dwellings, part of this lot area may be provided as common
land, directly accessible from the lot of each individual dwelling unit;
provided, that the lot of each individual dwelling unit shall have not less
than the minimum lot width and lot depth.
(2)For lot of individual dwelling units.
(3)Land, courtyards, outdoor athletic facilities, roof gardens and atriums
with a minimum area of 200 square feet and a minimum dimension of 10
feet, and balconies with a minimum area of 60 square feet and a minimum
dimension of 6 feet, may be counted as common open space. Each such
balcony shall be directly accessible to the occupants of only one dwelling
unit from the interior of that dwelling unit.
Dimensions are in feet, unless otherwise noted.
The Board of Adjustment may authorize not more than one story of
additional height for residential purposes, and the Board may authorize an
increase in floor-area-ratio to 2.5 overall for an increase in the residential
floor area of joint occupancy buildings, in accordance with the same
findings as are provided for in section 17A-210.
§ B17A-310.1. Multiple dwellings, rooming houses and residential
portion of joint occupancy buildings - Window area and light and
air. [Ord. No. 80-24, § 4.]
§ B17A-311. Nonresidential buildings. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No.
81-24, § 4; Ord. No. 81-43, § 1]
Parking Garages
Other Nonresidential
Buildings
Maximum permitted:
Floor area ratio 3.0 1.5
Coverage 100% 100%
Height 55 feet 5 stories not exceeding
65 feet
Front yard
Side yards
Side yard * *
Side yard abutting lot
in R1, R2, R3 or R4
districts
10 feet 10 feet
(a) Every living room and sleeping room in a multiple dwelling and rooming
house and in the residential portion of a joint occupancy building shall
have a window area equal to at least 10% of the floor area of such room.
§ B17A-310 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-311
BAO:368
Parking Garages
Other Nonresidential
Buildings
Rear yard
Rear yard * *
Rear yard abutting lot
in residence districts
R1, R2, R3 or R4
10 feet 10 feet
*No yard required. However, if a yard is provided, it shall be not less than
10 feet.
§ B17A-311.1. Planned commercial developments. [Ord. No. 81-24,
§ 4]
(a) All bulk regulations for the CB district shall apply to a planned
commercial development, except that:
(1) The floor area ratio for the tract, including the portions thereof
which are already developed, shall not exceed 2.5; but the
nonresidential uses may not exceed a floor area ratio of 1.5. Floor
area ratios otherwise applicable shall not apply.
(2) If the tract includes an area designated on the plan for the
construction of one or more above grade parking garages, then, at
the applicant's option, the computation under subsection (b)(1)
above may be based on the area of the tract, excluding the area
designated for parking garage use, in which case the applicant
shall also be permitted a floor area ratio of 3.0 for parking garage
use for the area of the tract so designated on the plan. If the area
designated for parking garage use is in excess of the foundation
area of the garage, such excess area shall be adjacent to the
parking garage and not separate by a street; and shall remain
undeveloped except for appurtenant structures or facilities
necessary to serve the parking garage use.
(3) No new buildings, other than parking garages, shall have a floor
area in excess of 100,000 square feet.
(4) The common open space available for public use, serving the
development, including but not limited to, pedestrian ways, plazas,
and green areas but excluding the public right-of-way, shall
comprise at least 25% of the tract.
(5) Lot area, dimension and yard requirements shall not apply to the
residential uses, but outdoor space per dwelling unit shall be
provided in accordance with the requirements for common open
space for multiple dwellings.
(6) A basement used for parking and only incidentally for other
permitted building facilities, shall not be considered a story for
§ B17A-311 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-311.1
BAO:369
§ B17A-312. Reconstruction of legally existing noncomplying
buildings. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2]
A noncomplying building legally existing on November 19, 1968, may be
reconstructed to the same floor area ratio as existed on such date; provided,
that such reconstruction shall not create a new noncompliance. When such
reconstruction occurs, only that amount of accessory off-street parking will
be required for the new building as existed prior to reconstruction.
§ B17A-313. Other bulk regulations. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No.
83-38, § 3]
The additional bulk regulations contained in division 6, subdivision II of
this chapter, with the exception of section 17A-379, shall also apply in CB
districts.
§ B17A-314. Off-street parking and loading requirements —
Generally. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No. 83-25, § 8]
In CB districts, accessory off-street parking spaces, open or enclosed, shall
be provided for all construction, and accessory off-street loading berths,
open or enclosed, shall be provided for all permitted nonresidential uses
in accordance with the regulations set forth and referred to in sections
17A-314 through 17A-319. All such parking spaces and loading berths shall
be subject to the provisions of division 6, subdivision III of this chapter.
§ B17A-315. Required parking — Residential buildings and dwelling
units in joint occupancy buildings. [Ord. No. 77-5, § 1.]
One-
Family
Dwellings
Two-
Family
Dwellings
Attached
Dwellings
Multiple
Dwellings
Occupancy
Dwellings
Required
Parking
Spaces
Per
dwelling
unit*
Housing
for
elderly
1 1-1/2 1/3 1/3 1/3
Three or
less
habitable
rooms
1 1-1/2 3/4 3/4 3/4
height purposes when the average height structural ceiling of the
basement, around the perimeter of the exterior of the basement,
measured from curb grade, is not more than six feet.
§ B17A-311.1 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-315
BAO:370
One-
Family
Dwellings
Two-
Family
Dwellings
Attached
Dwellings
Multiple
Dwellings
Occupancy
Dwellings
Required
Parking
Spaces
Other 1 1-1/2 1 1-1/2 1-1/2
For
accessory
uses
Per
rented
room
1 1
Per
accessory
professional
office
1 1 1 1 1
* Where by special circumstance or condition a development will require
parking that is different from the above, the applicant may request that
the required parking for a particular development be determined by the
planning board, taking into consideration the amount of traffic to be
generated thereby, the likelihood of all day or short-term use of parking
spaces, the location and availability of other means of access and other
factors affecting the amount of traffic likely to be generated and the need
for parking.
§ B17A-316. Parking — Rooming houses and nonresidential uses.
[Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No. 80-24, §§ 5, 6; Ord. No. 83-38, § 2]
At least one parking space for
each:
Public and private secondary
schools
6 seats or students
Public and private elementary
schools
12 seats or students
Places of worship, libraries 200 square feet of floor area, but
not less than one space for each five
seats, where provided
Hospitals 1 bed
Nursing home and philanthropic
institutions
3 beds
Eating and drinking places 400 square feet of floor area
Rooming houses Guest room
Theatres and assembly halls 5 seats
§ B17A-315 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-316
BAO:371
At least one parking space for
each:
Service business uses not listed
above
For ground floor: 300 square feet of
floor area; For other floors: 450
square feet of floor area
Office 370 square feet of floor area
Retail 475 square feet of floor area
Institutional 360 square feet of floor area
Hotel 580 square feet of floor area
For any other permitted buildings and uses, for which no requirements
are set forth above, appropriate and comparable off-street parking
requirements shall be determined by the planning board, taking into
consideration the amount of traffic to be generated thereby, the likelihood of
all day or short term use of parking spaces, the location and the availability
of other means of access and other factors affecting the amount of traffic
likely to be generated and the need for parking.
§ B17A-316A. Off-street parking exception. [Ord. No. 2009-33, § II.]
In the CB zone eating and drinking places that generate a calculated need
for one parking space and for other use that generates a calculated need for
two or fewer parking spaces shall be exempt from providing those parking
spaces if the following conditions are met:
§ B17A-317. (Reserved)14
§ B17A-318. Required loading for nonresidential uses. [Ord. No.
80-24, § 7]
Accessory loading berths, open or enclosed, shall be provided for
nonresidential uses, except churches, parks, playgrounds, public buildings,
public schools, private schools not operated for profit, parking garages or
joint occupancy buildings with nonresidential floor area of less than 15,000
square feet, and movie theatres, as follows:
(a) The change in use does not include any new construction that adds
additional new floor area, adds an additional story or expands a
building foot print; and,
(b) Only one such exception shall be granted to any structure.
(a) For floor area of 10,000 to 25,000 square feet: one berth.
14.Editor's Note: Former section 17A-317, Same — Conversions to nonresidential uses,
previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 77-1, 80-24 and
92-22, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2009-33.
§ B17A-316 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-318
BAO:372
§ B17A-319. (Reserved)15
(b) For each additional 75,000 square feet of floor area or fraction thereof:
one additional berth.
15.Editor's Note: Former section 17A-319, Nonresidential buildings on lots or not more than
5,000 square feet, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos.
77-1, 82-3 and 92-22, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2009-33.
§ B17A-318 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-319
BAO:373

SUBDIVISION VI
Service Business (SB) Districts
§ B17A-320. Use regulations — Generally. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2]
In SB districts, land and buildings may be used only for the purposes set
forth section 17A-320 through 17A-324.
§ B17A-321. Uses permitted as of right — Generally. [Ord. No. 77-1
§ 2; Ord. No. 84-9, § 1; Ord. No. 97-16 § I; Ord. No. 2002-1 § 1; Ord.
No. 2012-12 § 2]
The following uses are permitted as of right, subject to the bulk regulations,
parking requirements and other regulations set forth or referred to below:
(a) Nonresidential uses.
(1) Offices, limited to the uses permitted by section 17A-322(a)(1) to
(10), but excluding offices on the first floor. For purposes of this
section, offices shall include, but shall not be limited to, the
following uses: real estate broker, stockbroker, financial planner,
insurance agency, and other service professionals.
(2) Parks, playgrounds and Public buildings.
(3) Churches and other places of worship.
(4) (Reserved)
(5) Banks on the first floor of any multi story building subject to the
following standards:
a. The design of the bank shall include exterior public space
between the building and the street that includes public
seating, bike racks, refuse and recycling containers,
landscaping, and decorative pavement (i.e. pavers, concrete
with an attractive scoring pattern, stamped concrete, etc.).
b. The vision glass portion of the front facade of the bank shall be
a minimum of 35%.
c. The ATM design shall be consistent with the building
aesthetics and shall not be visible from a residential district.
d. No more than 4,500 square feet of the first floor of any building
may be devoted to bank uses.
e. For ground floor banks one parking space for every 300 square
feet of floor area shall be provided.
f. Any/all floors above the ground floor must be residential use,
which must be equal to or greater than the square footage of
the first floor.
§ B17A-320 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-321
BAO:375
g. Banks shall not occupy more than 50% of the ground floor of
any building.
h. Banks are permitted only in buildings with more than one
story.
(6) Parking garages and other off-street parking spaces, open or
enclosed, subject to the provisions of division 6, subdivision III of
this chapter.
(7) Medical and dental offices.
(8) Gasoline service stations, subject to the following conditions:
a. The minimum lot size shall be 10,000 square feet, and the
minimum width along the street line shall be 100 feet.
b. Automobile repair work shall be performed within a building,
except for minor servicing, such as change of tires or sale of
gasoline or oil. Auto body shops, paint shops, radiator repair,
tire retreading and automobile laundries are not permitted.
c. No merchandise shall be sold or kept for sale, except
petroleum products and automobile accessories reasonably
necessary for the safe, lawful or convenient operation of motor
vehicles.
d. All automobile parts shall be stored within a fully enclosed
building.
e. No oil or oil drums shall be kept or displayed in tanks or other
receptacles outside of the building and aboveground, except
for immediate use in servicing cars; and such oil shall be kept
in neatly racked or stacked containers of not more than 5
quarts.
f. Gasoline or flammable oils in bulk shall be stored fully
underground, not nearer than 25 feet from any lot line.
g. No gasoline pumps shall be located within 60 feet of the
centerline of any street. No more than one service island shall
be permitted at any station. A maximum of three dispensing
towers per service island shall be permitted. A maximum of six
dispensing hoses with triggered nozzles shall be permitted on
the service island.
h. A wall, fence or suitable evergreen hedge or screen planting at
least six feet in height shall be constructed and maintained
between the service facility and any abutting lot. The design of
such wall, fence or planting strip shall be subject to the
approval of the planning board, which may also require
additional planting to screen gasoline service stations, which
may detract from the view of adjoining lots or residential uses
§ B17A-321 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-321
BAO:376
and to preserve property values in the neighborhood. Where
the lot abuts another service facility or a parking yard, the
planning board may modify or waive this requirement for such
abutting portion of the lot.
i. Any lighting shall be arranged so as to avoid reflection and
glare into any abutting R1, R2, R3 or R4 district or residential
use. Each service island shall be illuminated by low glare
lighting set at a height not lower than eight feet nor higher
than 15 feet. The source of any lighting located on a service
island shall not be directly visible from any adjoining
residential lot.
j. In addition to the usual accessory signs, as permitted in
Division 6, Subdivision 1, sections 17A-367 through 17A-372 of
this Article.
1. One freestanding sign advertising the name of the station
or garage and the principal products sold on the premises,
including any special company or branch name, insignia or
emblem; provided, that such sign shall not exceed 16
square feet in area on each side and shall be not less than
10 feet or more than 18 feet above the ground.
2. Directional signs or lettering displayed over individual
entrance doors or bays, consisting only of the words
"washing," "lubrication," "repairs," "mechanic on duty" or
other words similar in import; provided, that there shall be
not more than one such sign over each entrance or bay,
that the letters thereof shall not exceed six inches in
height and that the total area of each sign shall not exceed
three square feet.
3. Customary lettering on, or other insignia which are a
structural part of, a gasoline pump, consisting only of the
brand name of gasoline sold, lead warning sign, a price
indicator and any other sign required by law, and not
exceeding a total of three square feet on each pump.
4. A non-illuminated credit card sign, displayed on or near
the gasoline pumps, not exceeding two square feet in area.
5. Two temporary signs, specifically advertising special
seasonal servicing of automobiles; provided, that each sign
does not exceed seven square feet in area and is not
displayed for more than 60 days twice per year.
(b) Residential uses.
(1) Attached dwellings.
(2) Multiple dwellings.
§ B17A-321 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-321
BAO:377
§ B17A-322. Subject to floor area limitation. [Ord. No. 77-1 § 2; Ord.
No. 2012-12 § 3]
The following uses are permitted as of right; provided, that not more
than 5,000 square feet of floor area per establishment shall be devoted
to such use. Such uses shall be subject to the bulk regulations, parking
requirements and other regulations set forth or referred to below:
(c) Joint occupancy uses.
(1) The residential portion shall have an entrance upon a street, either
directly or via an unobstructed passage/access drive, at least 10
feet in width and 10 feet in height and with a maximum depth of 35
feet.
(2) (Reserved)
(3) Nonresidential uses are limited to the first floor level.
(d) Accessory uses.
(1) Accessory signs, as permitted in Division 6, Subdivision 1, Part 2 of
this Article.
(2) Accessory parking spaces, accessory buildings and other accessory
uses.
(3) Accessory parking spaces and parking lots shall not be permitted to
be located in the front yard or between the street line and the front
of a building for any use except gasoline service stations. Parking
lots located in side and rear yards shall be designed to allow
interconnection with parking lots on adjoining properties by way of
joint access easements.
(4) Kiosks shall be permitted to be located within 25 feet of the Nassau
Street right-of-way and shall be exempted from any bulk
regulations and off-street parking and loading requirements.
Kiosks shall be sited and designed in a manner that is integrated
with the sidewalk and streetscape so as to engage, enliven and
articulate the pedestrian experience for passersby and patrons. A
kiosk shall be situated within an area of textured paving,
landscaping, outdoor seating, pedestrian scale lighting and other
high quality streetscape improvements as deemed appropriate by
the Board of Jurisdiction.
(a) Nonresidential uses.
(1) Retail stores and bakeries, excluding automotive sales or service
establishments.
(2) Eating and drinking places as long as no outdoor dining is
permitted adjacent to residentially zoned and used properties on
Murray Place.
§ B17A-321 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-322
BAO:378
§ B17A-323. Conditional uses. [Ord. No. 77-1 § 2; Ord. No. 98-9 § 1;
Ord. No. 2012-12 § 4]
The following additional uses may be authorized as conditional uses, subject
to the provisions of section 17A-208 and to the bulk regulations, parking
requirements and other regulations set forth or referred to below:
(3) Barbershops, beauty parlors, tailors, dressmakers and millinery
shops, photographic studios, shoe repair, shoeshine and hat
cleaning shops and similar personal service stores dealing directly
with consumers.
(4) Studios for dancing and music instruction.
(5) Private vocational and trade schools and college preparatory and
tutoring services.
(6) Outlets and pick-up stations for laundries and cleaning
establishments.
(7) Self-service automatic laundry and dry cleaning establishments,
containing a total of not more than 30 machines for washing,
cleaning and drying. The use of flammable solvent is prohibited,
except for the incidental removal of spots.
(8) Electronic repair, locksmith, watch, clock and jewelry repair,
upholstery and furniture repair and other similar service
establishments furnishing services.
(9) Art galleries and museums.
(10) Crafting or arrangement of materials resulting in a finished
product or commodity such as apparel, home decoration, jewelry,
toys, furniture, leather goods, flowers, art work or similar products.
(a) Theatres, assembly halls, bowling alleys and pool parlors, but excluding
amusement parks and penny arcade galleries.
(b) Bus stations and taxi offices.
(c) Personal wireless telecommunications facilities and personal wireless
telecommunications equipment facilities, as defined in section 17A-201
shall be permitted as a conditional use, subject to the provisions of
section 17A-208.
(d) Mixed Use Public Space, subject to the following conditions:
(1) Minimum lot width of 75 feet.
(2) Minimum rear yard of 100 feet for building setbacks.
(3) Joint occupancy buildings that are over 1.0 FAR and are part of a
mixed use public space development are permitted to be threestories
and 45 feet in height, may contain office space on the upper
§ B17A-322 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-323
BAO:379
floors and shall receive a FAR bonus of three square feet of
additional floor area (beyond the floor area ratio for joint
occupancy buildings) for each one square foot of public space
provided up to a maximum FAR of 1.2 provided the following is
complied with.
(a) A public space shall be framed by setting buildings or a
portion of a building a minimum of five feet further than the
minimum required front yard facing Nassau Street. Such
public space shall be framed by buildings and other
streetscape elements and contain a minimum area of 1,000
square feet in area as measured in the front yard along
Nassau Street. Public rights-of-way and driveway access
easements crossing a public space shall not count toward the
calculation of the minimum area. Portions of a building, not
exceeding two stories in height, framing the side edges of a
public space, may have a reduced front yard of 10 feet in
order to increase the enclosure of the public space and
compensate for the additional setback required to create
such public space.
(b) Such public space shall be framed by joint occupancy
buildings containing ground floor business uses that relate to
and are oriented to activate the public space, such as
restaurants with outdoor cafes and specialty food stores with
sidewalk displays which may occupy the perimeter edges of a
public space. Buildings or portions of buildings framing the
public space shall be designed to contain a mix of
architectural styles, facade widths, storefront designs, and
frame the public space with well-articulated facades
containing large pane display windows, projections such as
awnings and balconies, recesses and other design treatments
that create variety in the streetscape.
(c) The public space shall be dimensioned and designed to meet
the needs for informal gathering and socializing by business
patrons, residents, employees and visitors. The developer is
encouraged to seek input from the neighborhood as well as
the community regarding the design of public space in order
to create a landmark focal point for East Nassau Street to
provide accessible quality open space. The developer shall be
responsible for extending the surface treatment and other
design elements of the public space into adjacent portions of
the public right-of-way in order to create a seamless
integration of the public space with the adjacent sidewalk
and streetscape resulting in a public space that appears and
functions as larger than solely the portion of the lot area
reserved for such public space.
(d) The developer shall provide a plan for ownership,
maintenance and use of the public space to be approved by
the Planning Board.
§ B17A-323 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-323
BAO:380
§ B17A-324. Other use regulations. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No.
83-38, § 3; Ord. No. 2012-12 § 5]
All uses permitted under the provisions of section 17A-322 and 17A-323
shall be subject to the additional use regulations set forth in sections
17A-364, 17A-365, 17A-366 and 17A-373. Drive-in/through uses are not
permitted within the district.
§ B17A-325. Bulk regulations — Generally. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord.
No. 2012-12 § 6]
The bulk regulations contained in sections 17A-325 through 17A-327 apply
to all buildings and land in SB districts. Individual storefront facades within
the district shall be designed with significantly different features in not
greater than forty-foot intervals so as to give the appearance of separate
buildings along a common lot street frontage.
§ B17A-326. All permitted nonresidential or conditional uses. [Ord.
No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No. 2002-1, § 2; Ord. No. 2012-12 § 7]
(e) Access, parking, loading, and HVAC shall be designed and
oriented to minimize disturbances from traffic flow, light,
noise, exhaust, and other nuisances to adjacent or nearby
residential properties.
(f) Existing mature vegetation that helps to act as a buffer from
neighboring residential properties shall be preserved to the
maximum extent feasible. Where mature buffering vegetation
does not exist or is destroyed, the developer shall comply
with the buffering requirements of Section 17A-390c.
(g) Sixty percent of the first floor area, of any building utilizing
the mixed use public space provisions, must be occupied by
retail uses, eating and drinking places, laundry and dry
cleaning establishment, dance studios, manufacturing and
producing artworks and galleries or museums.
(a) Maximum permitted:
(1) Floor area ratio: 0.6.
(2) Building height: 35 feet.
(3) Number of stories: three.
(4) Coverage: 40%.
(b) Minimum required:
(1) Front yard: 15 feet.
(2) Side yards.
a. Side yard: *
§ B17A-323 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-326
BAO:381
§ B17A-326.1. All permitted residential or joint occupancy uses.
[Ord. No. 2002-1, § 1; Ord. No. 2012-12 § 7]
b. Side yard abutting R1, R2, R3 or R4 districts: 20**.
(3) Rear yards.
a. Rear yard: 25 feet.
b. Rear yard abutting R1, R2, R3 or R4 districts: 50 feet.
* No yard required. However, if a yard area is provided, it
shall be not less than 10 feet
(a) Residential uses.
(1) Maximum permitted:
a. Floor area ratio: 1.0.
b. Building height: 45.
c. Number of stories: three.
d. Coverage: 40%.
(2) Minimum required:
a. Front yard: 15.
b. Side yard: 0/10.
c. Side yard, abutting R1, R2 R3 or R4: 20**.
d. Rear yard: 25.
e. Rear yard, abutting R1, R2, R3 or R4: 50.
(b) Joint occupancy buildings provided all floors above the first floor are
residential.
(1) Maximum permitted:
a. Floor area ratio: 1.0.
b. Building height: 45.
c. Number of stories: three.
d. Coverage: 40%.
(2) Minimum required:
a. Front yard: 15.
b. Side yard: 0/10.
§ B17A-326 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-326.1
BAO:382
§ B17A-327. Other bulk regulations. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No.
83-38, § 3.]
The additional bulk regulations set forth in sections 17A-375, 17A-376,
17A-378, 17A-382 and 17A-403 shall also apply in SB districts.
§ B17A-328. Off-Street parking and loading requirements —
Generally. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No. 2002-1, § III]
The off-street parking and loading requirements in SB districts shall be the
same as the parking and off-street loading requirements for nonresidential
and residential uses in the NB district, section 17A-301 and 17A-303. In
addition, theatres, other places of assembly and vocational and trade
schools shall provide at least one parking space for each five seats.
c. Side yard, abutting R1, R2, R3 or R4: 20*.
d. Rear yard: 25.
e. Rear yard, abutting R1, R2, R3 or R4: 50.
** A landscaped buffer a minimum of 20 feet in width shall be
provided along any side yard that abuts a Murray Place
residence. This landscape buffer shall include, but not be
limited to, a fence and a double staggered row of evergreen
trees 12 to 14 feet in height at time of planting
§ B17A-326.1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-328
BAO:383

SUBDIVISION VII
Summary Bulk Tables
§ B17A-329. Residential buildings, joint occupancy buildings and
rooming houses. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No. 97-2, § I; Ord. No.
2002-1, § IV.]
The bulk regulations for residential buildings, joint occupancy buildings
and rooming houses in RO-1 districts, section 17A-274, are applicable to
such buildings in all business districts. Moreover, in the CB district, some
multiple dwellings and joint occupancy buildings are subject to different
bulk regulations, as set forth in sections 17A-210 and 17A-310.
§ B17A-330. Nonresidential buildings. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No.
2002-1, § 5; Ord. No. 2012-12 § 8]
Nonresidential
Uses
Offices
Only
Parking
garages Only
Other Nonresidential
Uses
Zoning
district RO-1 NB RO-1 CB NB CB** SB
Maximum
permitted
Floor
area ratio
0.6 0.6 3.0 3.0 0.6 1.5 0.6
Height:
Feet 35 35 35 50 35 65 35
Stories 3 3 — — 3 5 3
Coverage
(percent)
30 30 80 100 40 100 40
Minimum
required:
Front
yard
15 15 15 — 15 — 15
Side
yards
Side
yard
10 * 10 * * * *
Side
yard
abutting
lot in
R1, R2,
R3, or
R4
districts
15 15 15 10 15 10 20
§ B17A-329 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-330
BAO:385
Nonresidential
Uses
Offices
Only
Parking
garages Only
Other Nonresidential
Uses
Zoning
district RO-1 NB RO-1 CB NB CB** SB
Side
yard
abutting
lot in CB
district
* * * — * — *
Rear
yards
20 20 20 * 20 * 25
Rear
yard
abutting
lot in CB
district
* * * — * — *
Rear
yard
abutting
lot in
R1, R2,
R3, or
R4
districts
20 20 20 10 75 10 50
* No yard required. However, if a yard is provided, it shall be not less than
10 feet
** Special provision for reconstruction of building with floor area ratio of
more than 1.5. See section 17A-312
Dimensions are in feet, unless otherwise noted
§ B17A-330 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-330
BAO:386
Division 5
Education Districts
SUBDIVISION I
E1 Districts
§ B17A-331. Use regulations — Generally. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2]
In E1 districts, land and buildings may be used only for the purposes set
forth in sections 17A-331 through 17A-334.
§ B17A-332. Uses permitted as of right. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No.
90-27, § 6]
The following uses are permitted as of right, subject to the bulk regulations,
parking requirements and other regulations set forth or referred to below:
(a) Residential uses.
(1) One-family dwellings.
(2) Two-family dwellings.
(b) Educational uses.
(1) Instructional, reference, and classroom uses, excluding laboratory
buildings and uses, but including computer facilities.
(2) Office uses.
(3) Library uses.
(c) Other nonresidential uses.
(1) Churches and other places of worship.
(2) Public schools and private academic schools.
(3) Parks, playgrounds and public buildings.
(4) Clubhouses, except for clubs whose principal activity is usually
carried on as a business.
(5) Child care facilities.
(d) Accessory uses.
(1) Accessory signs, as permitted in division 6, subdivision I, sections
17A-367 through 17A-372 of this chapter.
(2) Accessory open parking spaces and other accessory uses, subject
to the limitations set forth in R1 districts, section 17A-228; except,
that within a dwelling unit other than a one-family dwelling, only
§ B17A-331 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-332
BAO:387
§ B17A-333. Conditional uses. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No. 90-27,
§ 7; Ord. No. 98-9, § I]
The following additional uses may be authorized as conditional uses, subject
to the provisions of section 17A-208, and to the bulk regulations, parking
requirements and other regulations set forth or referred to below:
one room may be rented for residential purposes, for occupancy by
not more than two persons.
(a) Residential uses.
(1) Attached dwellings.
(2) Multiple dwellings.
(3) Conversion of a residential building in existence on November 19,
1968, to a multiple dwelling with not more than four dwelling units
or to a rooming house; provided that:
a. No structural alterations or other construction shall create a
new noncompliance or increase the degree of noncompliance.
b. The same number of parking spaces shall be provided for such
conversions as are required for new construction of similar
dwellings.
(b) Educational uses.
(1) Dormitories and combined dormitories and residences.
(2) Indoor or outdoor athletic facilities.
(3) Theatres, lecture halls, practice rooms, chapels, and other areas of
public assembly.
(4) Retail stores and uses devoted primarily to the sale of educational
or athletic supplies.
(5) Buildings or portions of buildings for permanent storage of
equipment, used primarily for construction or maintenance of more
than one building.
(6) Laboratory buildings and uses; provided, that no machinery or
equipment installed in the laboratory or in connection with the
laboratory which is capable of causing to nearby residential uses
dangerous, injurious, noxious or otherwise objectionable fire,
explosive or other hazard; noise or vibration; smoke, dust, odor or
other form of air pollution; heat, cold or dampness; excessive
radiation or electromagnetic or other disturbance; glare; liquid or
solid refuse or other wastes, emissions from gas storage and/or
deliveries; or other objectionable substance, condition or element
or any similar disturbance.
§ B17A-332 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-333
BAO:388
§ B17A-334. Other use regulations. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No.
83-38, § 3]
All uses permitted under the provisions of sections 17A-332 and 17A-333
shall be subject to the additional use regulations set forth in sections
17A-364, 17A-365, 17A-366 and 17A-373.
§ B17A-335. Bulk regulations — Generally. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2]
The bulk regulations contained in this subdivision apply to all buildings and
land in E1 districts.
§ B17A-336. Residential buildings. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2]
The bulk regulations for residential buildings in E1 districts are the same as
in R3 districts, section 17A-246.
§ B17A-337. Educational and other nonresidential buildings — On
lots of not more than one acre. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2.]
The following bulk regulations shall apply to all educational and other
nonresidential buildings on lots of not more than one acre in E1 districts:
(7) Dining halls, subject to the same provisions as for laboratory
buildings or uses.
(8) All other educational and related activities and uses, except those
listed in section 17A-347 as conditional uses.
(9) Parking garages and other off-street parking spaces, open or
enclosed, subject to the regulations of division 6, subdivision III of
this chapter.
(c) Other nonresidential uses.
(1) Infirmaries, medical treatment centers, and philanthropic
institutions related to the primary education functions in the
district.
(2) Personal wireless telecommunications facilities and personal
wireless telecommunications equipment facilities, as defined in
section 17A-201 shall be permitted as a conditional use, subject to
the provisions of section 17A-208.
(a) The floor area ratio shall not exceed 0.6.
(b) The height shall not exceed 60 feet.
(c) The coverage shall not exceed 30%.
(d) No building shall be erected closer to a street line or lot line than 25
feet, and no portion of a building shall be erected closer to a street line
or lot line than the height in feet of that portion.
§ B17A-333 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-338
BAO:389
§ B17A-338. Educational and other nonresidential buildings — On
lots of more than one acre. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2]
The following bulk regulations shall apply to all educational and other
nonresidential buildings on lots of more than one acre in E1 districts:
§ B17A-339. Other bulk requirements. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No.
83-38, § 3]
The additional bulk regulations contained in division 6, subdivision II of this
chapter, with the exception of section 17A-379 and section 17A-403, shall
also apply in E1 districts.
§ B17A-340. Off-street parking and loading requirements —
Generally. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No. 83-25, § 9]
In E1 districts, accessory off-street parking spaces, open or enclosed, shall
be provided for all construction and for conversions, and accessory offstreet
loading berths, open or enclosed, shall be provided for new permitted
non-residential uses, in accordance with the regulations set forth and
referred to in sections 17A-340 through 17A-344. All such parking spaces
and loading berths shall be subject to the provisions of division 6,
subdivision III of this chapter.
§ B17A-341. Required parking — Residential uses. [Ord. No. 77-1,
§ 2]
One-Family
Dwelling
Two-Family
Dwelling
Attached
Dwelling
Multiple
Dwelling
Required
Parking
Spaces
Per dwelling
unit
1 1-1/2 1 1-1/2
For accessory
uses
Per rented
room
1 1 1 —
Per
accessory
professional
office
1 1 1 1
(a) The height shall not exceed 60 feet.
(b) No building shall be erected closer to a street line or lot line than 25
feet, and no portion of a building shall be erected closer to a street line
or lot line than the height in feet of that portion.
§ B17A-338 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-342
BAO:390
§ B17A-342. Educational uses. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No. 90-27,
§ 8; Ord. No. 2005-13, § I]
At the time of any application for a zoning permit, every educational
institution shall certify to the development enforcement officer the number
of additional employees (faculty and staff) and students to be
accommodated in the proposed structure and the aggregate number of all
employees and students by category, i.e., employees, graduate students,
student research fellows, and other students projected to be employed by
or enrolled in the educational institution after the proposed structure is
constructed and occupied.
(a) For each 1.25 employees, one parking space shall be provided within
the educational district, within adjacent educational districts, or within
contiguous properties in adjoining municipalities.
(b) For each 2.5 graduate students employed as research fellows and/or
assistants and for each five students not so employed, one parking
space shall be provided within the educational district, within adjacent
educational districts, or within contiguous properties in adjoining
municipalities.
(c) For places of public assembly, such as lecture halls of over 100 seats,
auditoriums, theatres, chapels or gymnasiums, but not including
libraries or dining halls, one space shall be provided for each five seats.
Parking spaces provided for normal daytime activity for other purposes
shall be considered to be available for such public uses as are normally
conducted in the evening or weekends.
(d) At least once a year following approval of a structure, every educational
institution shall certify to the development enforcement officer the
aggregate number of employees (faculty and staff) and students
currently employed or enrolled. Whenever that number exceeds the
number certified at the time of application, the development
enforcement officer shall notify the board of original jurisdiction, if
there was one, and recommend such additional parking spaces as may
be required. In the case of prior approval by a board of jurisdiction,
such board shall reopen the application, and the educational institution
shall propose such changes to the approved site plan as are necessary
to provide the additional parking spaces in accordance with the
standards as to the number, location, and design of such spaces set
forth in this chapter. In the case of prior approval by the development
enforcement officer, such officer shall require that the educational
institution provide the additional parking spaces in accordance with the
standards as to the number, location, and design of such spaces set
forth in this chapter, and the institution shall promptly do so. With every
application for development, the applicant shall submit an affidavit that
it has submitted all the certifications required by this section for all
property within the borough under its ownership or control. No
application for development shall be deemed complete if the applicant
§ B17A-342 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-342
BAO:391
§ B17A-343. Other nonresidential buildings and uses. [Ord. No.
77-1; § 2; Ord. No. 90-27, § 9]
At least one parking space for
each:
Public and private secondary
schools
6 seats or students
Public and private elementary
schools
12 seats or students
Places of worship, libraries and
other public buildings
200 square feet of floor area, but
not less than one space for each 5
seats, where provided
Infirmaries and medical treatment
centers
1 bed
Philanthropic institutions 370 square feet of floor area
Child care facilities 6 seats or students
Theatres and dining halls 5 seats
fails to submit such affidavit or if the certifications required by this
section have not been submitted.
(e) Some or all of the required number of parking spaces may be located at
off-site parking areas or on properties in other municipalities if those
spaces are serviced by a certified shuttle system. Cessation of such a
shuttle system will require that the required number of parking spaces
be provided within the educational district subject to review and
approval of the board of jurisdiction, provided that such replacement
parking shall not be provided east of Olden Street. Certification that the
shuttle system is effective shall be filed annually with the development
enforcement officer by a recognized transportation management
consulting organization with expertise in assessing shuttle systems; all
costs for this assessment are to be paid for by the educational
institution whose development is utilizing such a shuttle operation. The
development enforcement officer will evaluate the certification and
report on the adequacy of the shuttle operation to the board of
jurisdiction.
The shuttle system will provide regular and frequent scheduled service
that promotes and encourages use of the shuttle. Shuttle vehicles
should be appropriately sized to maximize fuel efficiency and to limit
exhaust and noise emission. Privately owned and operated shuttles
will endeavor to avoid use of streets that are primarily residential
in character where practical including Aiken Avenue, Murray Place,
Patton Avenue or Princeton Avenue. Any future joint privately-publicly
operated shuttle can provide limited neighborhood services including
senior citizens and handicapped residents on a call-in pickup/drop-off
"Dial-a-Ride" type basis to these streets.
§ B17A-342 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-343
BAO:392
For any other permitted buildings and uses for which no requirements
are set forth above, appropriate and comparable off-street parking
requirements shall be determined by the planning board, taking into
consideration the amount of traffic to be generated thereby, the likelihood
of all day or short term use of parking spaces, the location and availability
of other means of access and other factors affecting the amount of traffic
likely to be generated and the need for parking.
§ B17A-344. Required loading for nonresidential uses. [Ord. No.
77-1, § 2]
Accessory loading berths, open or enclosed, shall be provided for
nonresidential uses, except churches, as follows:
(a) For floor area of 10,000 to 25,000 square feet: one berth.
(b) For each additional 75,000 square feet of floor area or fraction thereof:
one additional berth.
§ B17A-343 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-344
BAO:393

SUBDIVISION II
E2 Districts
§ B17A-345. Use regulations — Generally. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2]
In E2 districts, land and buildings may be used only for the purposes set
forth in sections 17A-345 through 17A-348.
§ B17A-346. Uses permitted as of right. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No.
90-27, § 10]
The following uses are permitted as of right, subject to the bulk regulations,
parking requirements and other regulations set forth or referred to below:
(a) Residential uses.
(1) One-family dwellings.
(2) Two-family dwellings.
(3) Attached dwellings.
(4) Multiple dwellings.
(5) Rooming houses.
(b) Educational uses.
(1) Dormitories and combined dormitories and residences.
(2) Instructional, reference and classroom buildings, including
computer facilities.
(3) Office uses.
(4) Library uses.
(5) Indoor or outdoor athletic facilities.
(6) Theatres, lecture halls, practice rooms, chapels, and other areas of
public assembly.
(7) Retail stores and uses devoted primarily to the sale of educational
or athletic supplies.
(8) Buildings or portions of buildings for permanent storage of
equipment used primarily for construction or maintenance of more
than one building.
(9) Laboratory buildings and uses; provided, that no machinery or
equipment installed in the laboratory or in connection with the
laboratory which is capable of causing to nearby residential uses
dangerous, injurious, noxious or otherwise objectionable fire,
explosive or other hazard; noise or vibration; smoke, dust, odor or
other form of air pollution; heat, cold or dampness; excessive
§ B17A-345 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-346
BAO:395
§ B17A-347. Conditional uses. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No. 79-5,
§ 6; Ord. No. 90-27, § 11; Ord. No. 98-9, § I]
The following additional uses may be authorized as conditional uses, subject
to the provisions of section 17A-208, and to the bulk regulations, parking
requirements and other regulations set forth or referred to below:
radiation or electromagnetic or other disturbance; glare; liquid or
solid refuse or other wastes; emissions from gas storage and/or
deliveries; or other objectionable substance, condition or element
or any similar disturbance.
(10) Dining halls, subject to the same provisions as for laboratory
buildings or uses.
(11) All other educational and related activities and uses, except those
listed in section 17A-347 as conditional uses.
(c) Other nonresidential uses.
(1) Churches and other places of worship.
(2) Public schools and private academic schools.
(3) Parks, playgrounds and public buildings.
(4) Clubhouses, except for clubs whose principal activity is usually
carried on as a business.
(5) Child care facilities.
(d) Accessory uses.
(1) Accessory signs, as permitted in division 6, subdivision I, sections
17A-367 through 17A-372 of this chapter.
(2) Accessory parking spaces and other accessory uses, subject to the
limitation set forth in R1 districts, section 17A-228; except, that
within a dwelling unit other than a one-family dwelling, only one
room may be rented for residential purposes, for occupancy by not
more than two persons.
(a) Residential uses.
Deleted
(b) Educational uses.
(1) Any new building or use of an educational institution, which is of
greater height, or greater width at any height, than permitted in
section 17A-352; provided, that there is no increase in the total
cubic feet of volume permitted to portions of the building over 60
feet in height.
§ B17A-346 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-347
BAO:396
§ B17A-348. Other use regulations. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No.
83-38, § 3]
All uses permitted under the provisions of sections 17A-346 and 17A-347
shall be subject to the additional use regulations set forth in sections
17A-364, 17A-365, 17A-366 and 17A-373.
§ B17A-349. Bulk regulations — Generally. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2]
The bulk regulations contained in sections 17A-349 through 17A-353 apply
to all buildings and land in E2 districts.
§ B17A-350. Residential buildings on lots of not more than one
acre. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2]
The bulk regulations for residential buildings on lots of not more than one
acre in E2 districts are the same as in R4 districts, section 17A-258.
§ B17A-351. Educational and other nonresidential buildings on lots
of not more than one acre. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2]
The following bulk regulations shall apply to educational and other
nonresidential buildings in E2 districts on lots of not more than one acre.
(2) Heating and power plants and similar facilities needed to serve an
educational institution.
(3) Parking garages and other off-street parking spaces, open or
enclosed, subject to regulations of division 6, subdivision III of this
chapter.
(c) Other nonresidential uses.
(1) Infirmaries, medical treatment centers, and philanthropic
institutions related to the primary education functions in the
district.
(2) Railroad and public utility buildings, installations and rights-of-way
needed to serve the general welfare of all or a significant part of
the community; provided, that the planning board determines that
no reasonable location in a business district can be used for the
purpose contemplated.
(3) Amateur radio receiving and transmitting towers, over 15 feet in
height; provided, that any such tower shall not be located closer to
any lot line or street line than its height.
(4) Personal wireless telecommunications facilities and personal
wireless telecommunications equipment facilities, as defined in
section 17A-201 shall be permitted as a conditional use, subject to
the provisions of section 17A-208.
(a) The floor area ratio shall not exceed 0.6.
§ B17A-347 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-351
BAO:397
§ B17A-352. Buildings on lots of more than one acre. [Ord. No.
77-1, § 2]
No building on a lot of more than one acre shall be erected closer to a street
line or lot line than 25 feet, and no portion of a building shall be closer to a
street line or lot line than the height in feet of that portion.
The height shall not exceed 60 feet; except, that portions of buildings in
which the maximum horizontal dimension is not more than 75 feet may
extend to a maximum height of 130 feet; provided, that there be maintained
between any two buildings or portions thereof which exceed 60 feet in
height a minimum distance, computed by adding the amount by which one
such building exceeds 60 feet to the amount by which the other exceeds 60
feet and multiplying the total by 1.5.
§ B17A-353. Other bulk regulations. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No.
90-27, § 12]
The additional bulk regulations contained in division 6, subdivision II of this
chapter, with the exception of section 17A-379, and in section 17A-403 shall
also apply in E2 district.
§ B17A-354. Off-street parking and loading requirements —
Generally. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2]
The off-street parking and loading requirement in E2 districts are the
same as in E districts, subdivision I, sections 17A-340 through 17A-344
of this division; except, that loading berths are not required for education
buildings and other nonresidential buildings on lots greater than one acre.
(b) The height shall not exceed 60 feet.
(c) The coverage shall not exceed 30%.
(d) No building shall be erected closer to a street line or lot line than 25
feet, and no portion of a building shall be erected closer to a street line
or lot line than the height in feet of that portion.
§ B17A-351 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-354
BAO:398
SUBDIVISION III
E3 Districts
§ B17A-354.1. Use regulations — Generally. [Ord. No. 90-27, § 13]
In E3 districts, land and buildings may be used only for the purposes set
forth in sections 17A-354.1 through 17A-354.4.
§ B17A-354.2. Uses permitted as of right. [Ord. No. 90-27, § 13]
The following uses are permitted as of right, subject to the bulk regulations,
parking requirements and other regulations set forth or referred to below:
(a) Residential uses.
(1) One-family dwellings.
(2) Two-family dwellings.
(3) Attached dwellings.
(4) Multiple dwellings.
(5) Conversion of a residential building in existence prior to November
19,1968, to a multiple dwelling with not more than four dwelling
units or to a rooming house; provided, that:
a. No structural alterations or other construction shall create a
new noncompliance or increase the degree of noncompliance.
b. The same number of parking spaces shall be provided for such
conversions as are required for new construction of similar
dwellings.
(b) Educational uses.
(1) Instructional, reference, and classroom uses, including computer
facilities.
(2) Office uses.
(3) Library uses.
(4) Dormitories and combined dormitories and residences.
(5) Indoor or outdoor athletic facilities.
(6) Theatres, lecture halls, practice rooms, chapels, and other areas
for public assembly.
(7) Retail stores and uses devoted primarily to the sale of educational
and athletic supplies.
§ B17A-354.1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-354.2
BAO:399
§ B17A-354.3. Conditional uses. [Ord. No. 90-27, § 13; Ord. No.
98-9, § I]
The following additional uses may be authorized as conditional uses, subject
to the provisions of section 17A-208 and to the bulk regulations, parking
requirements and other regulations set forth or referred to below:
(8) Buildings or portions of buildings for permanent storage of
equipment used primarily for construction or maintenance of more
than one building.
(c) Other nonresidential uses.
(1) Churches and other places of worship.
(2) Public schools and private academic schools.
(3) Parks, playgrounds and public buildings.
(4) Clubhouses, except for clubs whose principal activity is carried on
as a business.
(5) Child care facilities.
(d) Accessory uses.
(1) Accessory signs, as permitted in division 6, subdivision I, sections
through 17A-367 17A-372 of this chapter.
(2) Accessory parking spaces and other accessory uses, subject to the
limitations set forth in R1 districts, section 17A-228; except, that
within a dwelling unit other than a one-family dwelling, only one
room may be rented for residential purposes, for occupancy by not
more than two persons.
(a) Laboratory buildings and uses; provided, that no machinery or
equipment installed in the laboratory or in connection with the
laboratory which is capable of causing to nearby residential uses
dangerous, injurious, noxious or otherwise objectionable fire, explosive
or other hazard; noise or vibration; smoke, dust, odor or other form of
air pollution; heat, cold or dampness; excessive radiation or
electromagnetic or other disturbance; glare, liquid or solid refuse or
other wastes; emissions from gas storage and/or deliveries; or other
objectionable substance, condition or element or any similar
disturbance.
(b) Dining halls, subject to the same provisions as for laboratory buildings
or uses.
(c) Heating and cooling plants, power plants, and other similar utilities
needed to serve an educational institution.
(d) Infirmaries, medical treatment centers, and philanthropic institutions
related to the primary education functions in the district.
§ B17A-354.2 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-354.3
BAO:400
§ B17A-354.4. Other use regulations. [Ord. No. 90-27, § 13]
All uses permitted under the provisions of sections 17A-354.2 and
17A-354.3 shall be subject to the additional use regulations set forth in
sections 17A-364,17A-365, and 17A-366.
§ B17A-354.5. Bulk regulations — Generally. [Ord. No. 90-27, § 13]
The bulk regulations contained in this subdivision apply to all buildings and
land in E3 districts.
§ B17A-354.6. Residential buildings. [Ord. No. 90-27, § 13]
The bulk regulations for residential buildings in E3 districts are the same as
in R4 districts, section 17A-258.
§ B17A-354.7. Educational and other nonresidential buildings.
[Ord. No. 90-27, § 13; Ord. No. 2005-13, § II]
The following bulk regulations shall apply to all educational and other nonresidential
buildings.
(e) Parking garages and other off-street parking spaces, open or enclosed,
subject to the limitations of sections 17A-354.7(a) and 17A-354.9 and
regulations of division 6, subdivision III of this chapter other than those
set forth in section 17A-388, except that any parking garage for which a
development application was filed prior to April 1, 1990 and situated on
Block 48.01, Lots 2 and 15 shall be treated as a permitted use.
(f) Personal wireless telecommunications facilities and personal wireless
telecommunications equipment facilities, as defined in section 17A-201
shall be permitted as a conditional use, subject to the provisions of
Section 17A-208.
(a) For all lots not owned or used by institutions of higher education or
their affiliates, the floor area ratio shall not exceed 0.6. For land owned
by or used by institutions of higher education or their affiliates, up to
300,000 square feet of floor area for uses other than parking garage use
and up to 140,000 square feet of floor area for a parking garage shall be
permitted east of Olden Street and up to 200,000 square feet of floor
area inclusive of parking garage use shall be permitted west of Olden
Street. The above stated floor area square footage figures are in
addition to the amount of floor area on land owned or used by
institutions of higher education or their affiliates existing as of April 1,
1990. If a parking garage is constructed east of Olden Street, it may be
converted to another use only if the converted space would be allowed
to be newly constructed without exceeding the limits on floor area.
Floor area existing on April 1,1990 which is removed or destroyed may,
subject to applicable zoning, be replaced within the E3 district and shall
not be subject to the floor area square footage limitations set forth in
this section.
§ B17A-354.3 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-354.7
BAO:401
(b) The height shall not exceed 39 feet, except that, within the area
bounded by a line set back 50 feet from the rights-of-way lines of
Prospect Avenue on the south and Olden Street on the west, 50 feet
from the SB district line on the north, and 250 feet from the R3 district
line on the east, the height shall not exceed elevation 236. Buildings
within the area in which buildings over 39 feet are permitted shall be
screened so that they are not visible from the second floor of structures
in adjacent residential districts not separated from the E3 district by a
public street.
(c) The overall site design for the E-3 district at full build out shall include
courtyards and walkways similar to those that exist elsewhere on the
University campus and shall include the twenty-five-foot landscaped
buffer behind the residential properties on Murray Place. Upon
approval of the first site plan or sooner in the E-3 zone, this twenty-fivefoot
buffer will be replanted and well maintained with appropriate
under story planting. In addition to the replanting of the twenty-fivefoot
buffer adjacent to the rear yards of the residences on Murray
Place, a comprehensive landscape plan shall be developed and followed
for the E-3 zone. This plan, to be implemented in stages appropriate to
proposed improvements on the site, shall indicate how areas not
covered by structures; parking lots or walkways shall be treated. Each
site plan must include shade trees, lawn area, ground cover, foundation
plantings; ornamental shrubs and trees appropriate to a campus setting
and must be replaced as necessary. All plantings shall be selected
considering energy conservation. Native tree species shall be used
where possible.
(d) No building shall be erected closer to a street line or lot line (unless the
line is for a lot under common ownership not devoted to a different use)
than 25 feet, except that (1) no portion of a building may be erected
closer to the public right-of-way or to a lot line (unless the line is for a
lot under common ownership not devoted to a different use) than the
height of that portion; (2) no uses other than parks, playgrounds, and
open parking shall be permitted within 250 feet of any district not
separated from the E3 district by a public street; and (3) no building
shall be erected closer to Prospect Avenue than a line set back 60 feet
from and running parallel to the structure known as the McKim, Mead
and White gates for a distance of 40 feet on each side of the center
point of said gates.
(e) Vehicular and pedestrian circulation in and surrounding the E-3 zone
will be carefully reviewed by the board of jurisdiction to limit impacts
on surrounding residential property owners.
(f) Any newly constructed buildings on the E-3 site will be carefully
designed from inception to deflect all possible light, HVAC noise, and
other sounds away from the adjacent residential neighborhood.
(g) In applying the site plan standard of section 17A-193 (f), (g), (h), and (i),
the impact of the proposed site development and the conditions to
§ B17A-354.7 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-354.7
BAO:402
§ B17A-354.8. Site development standards within the district east
of Olden Street. [Ord. No. 90-27, § 13; Ord. No. 2005-25, § III]
In addition to the other applicable ordinance standards, the following site
performance standards shall apply to proposed developments in the E3
district in the area east of Olden Street also known as the E-quad:
ameliorate the adverse impacts shall be judged and imposed on the
basis of the block in which the proposed site development is located and
not limited to its lot. For this purpose, the block shall mean the lot and
its contiguous area bounded by public streets and zone district lines.
(a) Upon issuance of certificates of occupancy for new buildings in the EQuad
totaling 1,000 square feet or more, the driveway immediately
behind the Murray Place residences shall be permanently closed to
vehicular traffic and only be used for emergencies. Breakaway barriers
shall be placed at the northern end of such driveway, and signage
indicating no through traffic and no parking shall be placed at the
northern and southern ends.
(b) A landscaped buffer generally of twenty-five-foot width shall be
constructed along the rear of the Murray Place residences. This
landscaped buffer shall include, but not be limited to, adequate under
story plantings in addition to the required tree screen plantings
pursuant to section 17A-354.7(b). The additional under story plantings
shall be required as part of any site plan for development in the E-3
zone east of Olden Street.
(c) The parking places in front of the eastern facade of Von Neumann Hall
shall be removed to provide a landscaped buffer on the property line for
the nearest neighbors.
(d) All remaining on-grade parking areas shall have additional shade trees
planted and islands installed in accordance with the following
standards:
One tree for every 3.4 spaces;
Island strips five feet wide;
At least one island terminus (at least nine feet wide and coterminous
with the length of the parking space) every 20 spaces.
It is recognized that additional lighting may be necessary for security
concerns because of increased landscaping.
(e) The existing exterior lighting of the eastern edge of the E-Quad shall be
modified to eliminate the effect of glare (if any) on the adjacent Murray
Place residences by shielding, redirecting, or replacing the existing
lighting. The Von Neumann Building lighting shall be modified and
made consistent with security and safety concerns.
§ B17A-354.7 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-354.8
BAO:403
(f) The parking lot for the Prospect Avenue Apartments shall be
landscaped with a ten-foot wide buffer on the north, east, and south to
improve the appearance of the area, provided that there may be an
opening in the eastern buffer for a walkway to Murray Place.
Additionally, the existing dumpsters shall be either shielded or
relocated so as not to be viewable from the adjacent Murray Place
residences or from the street. It is understood that the same number of
parking spaces for the Prospect Avenue Apartments shall be provided
behind the Prospect Avenue Apartments and the three buildings
immediately to the west.
(g) Geometry improvements with landscaping shall be made to the drive to
the E-Quad from Prospect Avenue to permit left and right turns to be
made while exiting therefrom onto Prospect Avenue.
(h) Conditional uses permitted in the E-3 zone shall not be permitted within
250 feet of the rear of the homes along Murray Place.
(i) Any renovation or reconstruction of the Von Neumann building will not
increase the building's height or change the building's footprint and the
buildings HVAC units servicing the building's will not generate any
more noise than the existing units and the building will not generate
any more light than it currently does. Given the close proximity of the
buildings, uses will be limited to offices, classrooms, small computer
facilities and libraries. No laboratory facilities will ever be constructed
in the Von Neumann building. Any new building on the site of the Von
Neumann building will be subject to review and approval of the board of
jurisdiction with careful consideration of the impacts from those uses
on the surrounding residential properties.
(j) The existing breakaway behind the E-Quad and the thoroughfare to
Nassau Street will remain in place permanently to prevent the flow of
traffic from the E-Quad parking area to/from Nassau Street.
(k) Any newly constructed buildings will be required to comply with
Chapter 21 of the Borough Code regarding noise and section 17A-365.1
regarding lighting.
(l) Loading docks, delivery areas or chemical storage area shall not be
permitted to face Murray Place if they are within 250 feet of the rear
property line of the homes along Murray Place. Any relocated or new
storage tanks must be shielded from residential properties by buildings
or other appropriate containments. Deliveries shall be limited to
weekdays between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Delivery
vehicles shall not utilize Aiken Avenue, Murray Place, Patton Avenue or
Princeton Avenue. Certification shall be provided annually to the
development enforcement officer of compliance with these
requirements.
(m) An emergency call box will be installed in the eastern end of the E-Quad
site to provide greater security.
§ B17A-354.8 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-354.8
BAO:404
§ B17A-354.9. Other bulk regulations. [Ord. No. 90-27, § 13; Ord.
No. 2005-13, IV]
The additional bulk regulations contained in division 6, subdivision II of this
chapter, with the exception of section 17A-379, 382 and 383, shall also apply
in E3 districts.
§ B17A-354.10. Off-street parking and loading requirements —
Generally; location. [Ord. No. 90-27, § 13; Ord. No. 2005-13, § V]
The off-street parking and loading requirements in E3 districts are the same
as in E1 districts, except that:
(n) Trash receptacles will be provided and maintained in the eastern end of
the E-Quad to prevent litter from blowing onto the lawns of the homes
along Murray Place.
(o) The site will be permanently maintain the existing site motorized
vehicular thoroughfares that only enter and egress the site from
Prospect Avenue and Olden Street. Furthermore, no motorized
vehicular thoroughfares will ever be constructed onto Murray Place
and no additional pedestrian/bicycle thoroughfares will ever be
constructed other than the existing extension of McCosh Walk.
(a) Parking spaces for new uses or for replacement of spaces existing as of
April 1,1990 within the area designated the E3 district by this chapter
shall be provided within the E3 district or within that portion of the E2
district south of Prospect Avenue and east of Washington Road.
(b) The number of parking spaces existing as of April 1,1990 north of
William Street within the area designated the E3 district by this chapter
and located on lands owned by institutions of higher education shall
continue to be provided in that portion of the E3 or E4 district north of
William Street, east of Washington Road, and west of Charlton Street.
(c) The above locational requirements shall not apply to the extent that a
certified shuttle system is utilized as provided in section 17A-342(e).
However, the shuttle system serving buildings in the E3 zone must
connect to parking spaces east of Washington Road in adjoining
municipalities, as well as to parking spaces at other off-site locations.
(d) The E-3 district east of Olden Street shall not be permitted to have more
than 648 parking spaces on-site exclusive of any available on-street
parking.
§ B17A-354.8 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-354.10
BAO:405

SUBDIVISION IV
E4 Districts
§ B17A-354.11. Use regulations — Generally. [Ord. No. 90-27, § 13]
In E4 districts, land and buildings may be used only for the purposes set
forth in sections 17A-354.11 through 17A-354.14.
§ B17A-354.12. Uses permitted as of right. [Ord. No. 90-27, § 13]
The following uses are permitted as of right, subject to the bulk regulations,
parking requirements and other regulations set forth or referred to below:
§ B17A-354.13. Conditional uses. [Ord. No. 90-27, § 13; Ord. 98-9,
§ I]
The following additional uses may be authorized as conditional uses, subject
to the provisions of section 17A-208, and to the bulk regulations, parking
requirements and other regulations set forth or referred to below:
(a) Residential uses.
(1) One-family dwellings.
(2) Two-family dwellings.
(b) Educational uses.
(1) Instructional, reference, and classroom uses, excluding laboratory
buildings and uses, but including computer facilities.
(2) Office uses.
(3) Library uses.
(c) Other nonresidential uses.
(1) Parks, playgrounds and public buildings.
(2) Child care facilities.
(d) Accessory uses.
(1) Accessory signs, as permitted in division 6, subdivision 1, sections
17A-367 through 17A-372 of this chapter.
(2) Accessory open parking spaces and other accessory uses, subject
to the limitations set forth in R1 districts, section 17A-228; except,
that within a dwelling unit other than a one-family dwelling, only
one room may be rented for residential purposes, for occupancy by
not more than two persons.
(a) Residential uses.
(1) Attached dwellings.
§ B17A-354.11 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-354.13
BAO:407
(2) Multiple dwellings.
(3) Conversion of a residential building in existence on November
19,1968, to a multiple dwelling with not more than four dwelling
units or to a rooming house; provided, that:
a. No structural alterations or other construction shall create a
new noncompliance or increase the degree of noncompliance.
b. The same number of parking spaces shall be provided for such
conversions as are required for new construction of similar
dwellings.
(b) Educational uses.
(1) Dormitories and combined dormitories and residences.
(2) Indoor or outdoor athletic facilities.
(3) Theatres, lecture halls, practice rooms, chapels, and other areas
for public assembly.
(4) Retail stores and uses devoted primarily to the sale of educational
and athletic supplies.
(5) Buildings or portions of buildings for permanent storage of
equipment used primarily for construction or maintenance of more
than one building.
(6) Laboratory buildings and uses; provided, that no machinery or
equipment installed in the laboratory or in connection with the
laboratory which is capable of causing to nearby residential uses
dangerous, injurious, noxious or otherwise objectionable fire,
explosive or other hazard; noise or vibration; smoke, dust, odor or
other form of air pollution; heat, cold or dampness; excessive
radiation or electromagnetic or other disturbance; glare; liquid or
solid refuse or other waste; emissions from gas storage and/or
deliveries; or other objectionable substance, condition or element
or any similar disturbance.
(7) Dining halls, subject to the same provisions as for laboratory
buildings or uses.
(8) All other educational and related activities and uses.
(c) Other nonresidential uses.
(1) Clubhouses, except for clubs whose principal activity is usually
carried on as a business.
(2) Heating and cooling plants, power plants, and other similar utilities
needed to serve an educational institution.
§ B17A-354.13 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-354.13
BAO:408
§ B17A-354.14. Other use regulations. [Ord. No. 90-27, § 13.]
All uses permitted under the provisions of sections 17A-354.16 and
17A-354.17 shall be subject to the additional use regulations set forth in
sections 17A-364, 17A-365, and 17A-366.
§ B17A-354.15. Bulk regulations — Generally. [Ord. No. 90-27, § 13]
The bulk regulations contained in this subdivision apply to all buildings and
land in E4 districts.
§ B17A-354.16. Residential buildings. [Ord. No. 90-27, § 13]
The bulk regulations for residential buildings in E4 districts are the same as
in R3 districts, section 17A-246.
§ B17A-354.17. Educational and other nonresidential buildings.
[Ord. No. 90-27, § 13]
The following bulk regulations shall apply to all educational and other nonresidential
buildings in E4 districts:
(3) Infirmaries, medical treatment centers, and philanthropic
institutions related to the primary education functions in the
district.
(4) Personal wireless telecommunications facilities and personal
wireless telecommunications equipment facilities, as defined in
section 17A-201 shall be permitted as a conditional use, subject to
the provisions of section 17A-208.
(a) The floor area ratio shall not exceed 0.6. For purposes of this section,
floor area ratio shall mean the number of square feet of aggregate floor
area of all buildings on a block divided by the number of square feet of
block area, and block shall mean all lots within an E4 zone not
separated by a public street.
(b) The height shall not exceed 39 feet.
(c) The coverage shall not exceed 30%.
(d) No building shall be erected closer to a street line or lot line (unless the
line is for a lot under common ownership not devoted to a different use)
than 25 feet, and no portion of a building shall be erected closer to a
street line or lot line (unless the line is for a lot under common
ownership not devoted to a different use) than the height of that
portion, except that no building shall be erected closer than 50 feet to a
residential district not separated from the E4 district by a public street.
§ B17A-354.13 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-354.18
BAO:409
§ B17A-354.18. Other bulk regulations. [Ord. No. 90-27, § 13]
The additional bulk regulations contained in division 6, subdivision II of
this chapter, with the exception of section 17A-379, shall also apply in E4
districts.
§ B17A-354.19. Off-street parking and loading requirements —
General: location. [Ord. No. 90-27, § 13; Ord. No. 2005-13, § VI]
The off-street parking and loading requirements in the E4 districts are the
same as in the E1 districts, except that:
(a) All parking spaces shall be provided within the E4 district in which the
use to which the spaces are accessory is located or on lots contiguous to
such E4 district and located either in an adjacent E2 district or
adjoining municipality; provided that for the E4 district bordering
William Street, the parking spaces may be located in the adjacent E3
district.
(b) The number of parking spaces existing as of April 1, 1990 north of
William Street within the area designated the E4 district by this chapter
and located on lands owned by institutions of higher education shall
continue to be provided in that portion of the E3 or E4 district north of
William Street, east of Washington Road, and west of Charlton Street.
(c) The locational requirements of subsection (a) above shall not apply to
the extent that a certified shuttle system is utilized as provided in
section 17A-342(e).
§ B17A-354.18 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-354.19
BAO:410
SUBDIVISION V
E5 Districts
§ B17A-354.20. Use regulations — Generally. [Ord. No. 2011-24]
In E5 districts, land and buildings may be used only for the purposes set
forth in Sections 17A-354.20 through 17A-354.23.
§ B17A-354.21. Uses permitted as of right. [Ord. No. 2011-24]
The following uses are permitted as of right, subject to the bulk regulations,
parking requirements and other regulations set forth or referred to below
(a) Educational uses.
(1) Instructional, reference, and classroom uses, excluding laboratory
buildings and uses, but including computer facilities.
(2) Office uses.
(3) Library uses.
(4) Theatres, performance halls, lecture halls, practice rooms,
exhibition space and other areas of public assembly.
(5) All other educational and related activities and uses, except those
listed in section 17A-354.22 as conditional uses and that no parking
spaces, whether at or below grade or in parking garages, are
permitted.
(b) Transit uses.
(1) Rail, light rail, street car, bus, taxis and taxi stands, jitney lines,
innovative and/or alternative modes of transportation, facilities and
stations, buildings and service infrastructure, and public utility
buildings, and rights-of-way. Buildings used as rail stations shall be
opened to the public and be lighted, air conditioned, heated and
shall provide public restrooms during the time when the rail system
is in operation. Such rail stations shall have electronic signage and
audio announcements together with prominently posted schedule.
(2) Bicycle storage, sales, rentals and repairs.
(3) Parking garages provided that they are wrapped with retail uses on
the street side or otherwise suitable screening. Off-street surface
parking spaces and below grade parking spaces associated with
transit uses.
(4) Railroad sidings and other necessary railroad uses.
(c) Other Nonresidential Uses.
(1) Museums, galleries and studios.
§ B17A-354.20 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-354.21
BAO:411
§ B17A-354.22. Conditional uses. [Ord. No. 2011-24]
The following additional uses may be authorized as conditional uses, subject
to the provisions of section 17A-208, and to the bulk regulations, parking
requirements and other regulations set forth or referred to below.
§ B17A-354.23. Other use regulations. [Ord. No. 2011-24]
All uses permitted under the provisions of sections 17A-354.20, 17A-354.21
and 17A-354.22 shall be subject to the additional use regulations set forth
in section 17A-364, sections 17A-365 and 17A-373.
§ B17A-354.24. Bulk regulations — Generally. [Ord. No. 2011-24]
The bulk regulations contained in this subdivision apply to all buildings and
land in E5 districts.
§ B17A-354.25. Educational and other nonresidential buildings.
[Ord. No. 2011-24]
The following bulk regulations shall apply to all educational and other
nonresidential buildings on lots of more than one acre in E5 districts:
(2) Retail stores, restaurants, cafes, pubs, and convenience stores.
(3) Parks, playgrounds and public buildings.
(4) Off-street surface parking spaces and below grade parking spaces
associated with transit uses.
(d) Accessory Uses.
(1) Accessory uses on the same or, in the case of a multi-lot
development, adjoining lots with, and customarily incidental to,
restaurants, cafes or pubs within the E5 district, including outdoor
restaurant seating and service, food vending facilities and/or food
service carts.
(a) Personal wireless telecommunications facilities and personal wireless
telecommunications equipment facilities as defined in section 17A-201
shall be permitted as a conditional use subject to the provisions of
section 17A-208.
(a) No building shall be erected closer to a lot line (excluding lot lines
technically created by the boundary between the borough and township
separating parcels in common ownership, or lot lines between lots in
common ownership within a multi-lot project) than 20 feet.
(b) Parking setback shall be 20 feet in a yard fronting on Alexander Street
with a sidewalk and full screening of the parking, including features
such as landscaping, walls, and other architectural and landscape
architectural features, provided in the setback area.
§ B17A-354.21 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-354.25
BAO:412
(c) Side yard and rear yard setbacks: (i) shall not be required for lots
adjacent to nonresidential districts or lots; and, (ii) shall be 10 feet for
every 25 feet of building height that is adjacent to lots used for singlefamily
residential purposes, within the E5 district, and, a minimum 15
feet every 25 feet of building height that is adjacent to lots used for
single-family residential purposes in the adjacent R-3 district unless
separated by a public street.
(d) The height shall not exceed 60 feet, except that the building height may
be increased to a maximum of 100 feet provided that the following
standards are met:
(1) The maximum horizontal dimension of the portion of the building
over 60 feet is no greater than 75 feet.
(2) The minimum distance between the portions of buildings over 60
feet in height is at least 150 feet.
(3) The portion of the building exceeding 60 feet in height is setback
from any public street on which it fronts an additional one foot for
every one foot by which the building exceeds 60 feet.
(4) The square footage of the footprints of the portions of all buildings
over 60 feet in height is no greater than 8% of the square footage of
land in the zone owned by the applicant.
Towers are permitted to a maximum of 132 feet on buildings within
the E5 zone that existed on the date of adoption of this subdivision
V. (December 6, 2011).
(e) At least 25% of the site shall be devoted to open space. The following, or
the land under the following, shall not be considered common open
space: streets, driveways and parking area. All other areas, including
all undeveloped land, plaza, outdoor recreational areas and other open
areas available for the use shall be considered open space. Plazas,
outdoor recreation areas, pathways and roadways shall be designed
with amenities and signage to encourage public awareness, access and
use. Projects shall provide pathways and roadways for both pedestrian
and vehicular public access and use of the transit facilities in the
district. In an effort to encourage public access to the public spaces and
the transit facilities there shall be appropriate signage provided that
clearly indicates that the area is open to the public.
(f) The aggregate floor area of nonresidential uses, excluding education
uses, shall not exceed a 0.15 ratio to total project lot area.
(g) Design standards:
(1) Streetscape Standards.
a. Road edge landscape — A landscape area between the curb
and any proposed sidewalk shall be provided parallel to the
road edge and should be a minimum of six feet wide (eight feet
§ B17A-354.25 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-354.25
BAO:413
preferred) and contain a planting strip with street trees to
provide a roadside shade canopy. Interruption of the tree
canopy to invite entrance to the site and buildings and for
architectural effect is encouraged. Where parking is provided
along the road, a 2 1/2 foot walkway and access points to the
street edge shall be provided in the landscaped area. Paved
access points should be provided across this area in locations
where public access through the site is encouraged.
b. Sidewalks — Sidewalks that are a minimum of eight feet wide
shall be provided parallel to Alexander Street and University
Place beyond the road edge landscape. Road edge landscape
and sidewalk placement may be reversed to preserve existing
landscaping or other existing natural conditions.
c. Building edge landscape — Landscapes of a minimum depth of
four feet including grass, planting beds, and trees where
practicable, shall be provided in a landscaped zone adjacent to
buildings in the E5 district. Paved access points should be
provided across this area in locations where public access
through the site is encouraged. Additionally, paved access
providing major and minor access to building entrances is
permitted. Hardscape areas for seating and recreation are
encouraged, but shall be limited to a 150-foot frontage along
Alexander Street and University Place before interruption by
at least 20 feet of planting or other softscape in the building
edge landscape area.
(2) Building design guidelines. Creative design, visual interest and
access to open space shall be encouraged by the following design
standards:
a. Building heights shall be varied within the development.
b. Buildings of greater than three stories adjacent to residential
districts shall be of varying size and heights and with varying
setbacks so as to avoid long building lines, which tend to act as
a barrier.
c. The common open space available for public use shall be
designed to include a setting for outdoor cultural or
entertainment activities.
d. The common open space available for public use shall connect
with existing or planned adjacent pedestrian ways, plazas, and
other open space and shall be readily accessible to the public.
Open walkways between building masses to access common
open space shall be encouraged.
e. All building facades shall have full architectural treatment and
architectural elements equivalent in quality to those on the
facade of the front entrance and landscaping, so as to avoid
§ B17A-354.25 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-354.25
BAO:414
§ B17A-354.26. Other bulk regulations. [Ord. No. 2011-24.]
The additional bulk regulations contained in division 6, subdivision II of this
chapter, with the exception of section 17A-379, section 17A-382 and section
17A-403, shall also apply in E5 districts.
§ B17A-354.27. Off-street parking and loading requirements —
Generally. [Ord. No. 2011-24.]
In E5 districts, accessory off-street parking spaces, open or enclosed, shall
be provided for all construction and for conversions, and accessory offstreet
loading berths, open or enclosed, shall be provided for new permitted
nonresidential uses, in accordance with the regulations set forth and
referred to in sections 17A-354.27 through 17A-354.30, except that loading
berths are not required for education buildings and other nonresidential
buildings on lots greater than one acre. All such parking spaces (except
higher educational institutions, which shall be governed by section
17A-354.28, below) and loading berths shall be subject to the provisions of
division 6, subdivision III of this chapter.
Parking spaces made available to the proposed use whether within the E5
or adjacent zoning districts shall be included in the calculation of parking
spaces provided for a proposed use. In addition, shared use of parking
spaces for different demand time uses, e.g., theater use would use parking
spaces in the evening that would be available to a commuter use during
the daytime, shall be encouraged, and shared parking spaces shall be
counted for each such use in determining compliance with the parking
space requirements in E5 districts in accordance with accepted standards
and methodology for shared parking analysis. These methodologies consist
in applying a percent presence ratio for each critical time period to the
respective parking and zoning ratio of each proposed use. Applicant shall
produce a matrix showing this calculation for each use and each typical
critical time period. The total parking demand for the time period with
the highest sum of the parking demands for each use shall be used as the
required parking supply. The shared parking methodology can also be used
for a single proposed use whereby the applicant can demonstrate that for
certain critical time periods for that use there is a guaranteed supply of
available parking spaces in nearby parking facilities.
Commuter parking shall be provided within the E5 zone in the borough or in
the AET zone in Princeton Township on parcels held in common ownership
within a multi-lot project or on lots adjacent thereto, and consistent with
any then existing agreements between the property owner and the rail
service operator. Train stations for rail service to/from Princeton Junction
shall have within 1,000 feet thereof a minimum of 180 parking spaces for
monthly permit, daily metered, and partial-day users within the project
monotony and enhance their visual appeal. A significant
proportion of windows shall be provided on all sides of the
building, including especially the ground floor.
§ B17A-354.25 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-354.27
BAO:415
parcel or lots adjacent, which spaces shall be considered and shared
parking provisions of this section after 7:00 p.m. and on weekends. Special
provisions shall provide for twenty-four-hour, forty-eight-hour, and seventytwo-
hour overnight permits. Parking spaces for kiss-and-ride users shall be
provided adjacent to the rail station and shall not be used to satisfy the
minimum 180 space requirement.
§ B17A-354.28. Educational uses. [Ord. No. 2011-24]
At the time of any application for a zoning permit, every higher educational
institution shall certify to the development enforcement officer the number
of additional employees (faculty and staff) and students to be
accommodated in the proposed structure and the aggregate number of
all employees and students by category, i.e., employees (permanent and
contract), graduate students, student research fellows, and other students
projected to be employed by or enrolled in the educational institution after
the proposed structure is constructed and occupied. Parking spaces shall be
provided in campus facilities or adjoining municipalities in accordance with
the standards for higher education institution parking set forth in section
17A-342.
§ B17A-354.29. Other nonresidential buildings and uses. [Ord. No.
2011-24]
At least one separate or shared
parking space for each
Libraries and other public buildings 200 square feet of floor area, but
not less than one space for each 5
seats, where provided
Philanthropic institutions, galleries
and museums
820 square feet of floor area
Theatres and dining halls 5 seats
Service/retail 475 square feet
Restaurants, cafes and pubs 400 square feet
Office buildings 370 square feet
For any other permitted buildings and uses for which no requirements
are set forth above, appropriate and comparable off-street parking
requirements shall be determined by the planning board, taking into
consideration Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) or other industry
statistics and standards, the likelihood of all day or short term use of
parking spaces, the location and availability of other means of access and
other factors affecting the need for parking.
The total number of parking spaces determined to be required for the uses
set forth in this section 354.29 shall be reduced by the number of parking
spaces provided for those employees of any such use who are employees
of a higher educational institution, who have been provided parking spaces
§ B17A-354.27 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-354.29
BAO:416
elsewhere in accordance with the calculation of parking space requirements
pursuant to section 17A-354.28, above.
§ B17A-354.30. Required loading for nonresidential uses. [Ord. No.
2011-24.]
Subject to section 17A-354.27, accessory loading berths, open or enclosed,
shall be provided for non-residential uses, except churches, as follows:
§ B17A-354.31. Signage — Generally. [Ord. No. 2011-24]
In E5 districts section 17A-367 through section 17A-372 shall apply subject
to the exceptions and/or modifications set forth below:
(a) Educational uses on more than one acre: zero berth.
(b) For floor area of zero to 10,000 square feet: zero berth.
(c) For floor area of 10,001 to 100,000 square feet: one berth.
(d) For each additional 75,000 square feet of floor area or fraction thereof:
one additional berth.
In a comprehensive multi-lot development shared and/or common
loading berths may be provided to serve one or more uses, including offsite
loading areas with below ground connection to one or more uses.
(a) Educational and Arts Uses.
(1) One facade sign is permitted for each face of each above ground
building mass fronting on a public street. Signs on educational use
buildings that name the building or do not face a public street are
exempt from section 17A-368.
(2) Facade signs on educational use buildings may have an area of not
more than 24 square feet.
(3) Marquee signs, wall-mounted program signs, kiosks and temporary
banners for community, theater and arts events are encouraged to
promote an active public sense of place, and may include video and
electronic components providing information and schedules
regarding programs, events, performances and the like. Each
marquee or wall mounted program sign shall not exceed 100
square feet, and, each kiosk shall not exceed a total volume of 800
cubic feet. Banners shall be a minimum of eight feet above finish
grade.
(b) Transportation uses. Transportation facilities may have:
(1) Up to two free standing signs on University Place and two on
Alexander Road.
(2) One facade sign of not more than 24 square feet on each face of a
train station identifying the train station.
§ B17A-354.29 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-354.31
BAO:417
§ B17A-354.32. Public access. [Ord. No. 2011-24]
The applicant shall provide an easement with dimensions and at a location
acceptable to the municipal engineer permitting public pedestrian access
from University Place to the rail station, if relocated.
§ B17A-354.33. Amendment of Zoning Map. [Ord. No. 2011-24.]
The "Official Map for the Borough of Princeton, Mercer County, New Jersey"
adopted and codified in section 17A-124, is hereby amended to incorporate
the changes shown on attachment A and such amendment shall be
incorporated into the Official Map for the Borough of Princeton.
(3) Additional facade signs for a retail/commercial use located in a
train station.
(c) Retail and other nonresidential uses. Main business signs, signs on
windows, doors and awnings, directory signs, special signs are
permitted as set forth in section 17A-368, hereof.
(d) Wayfinding signs. Wayfinding signs are important due to the gateway
nature of Alexander Road and the concentration of arts, educational
and transportation uses. Wayfinding signs for educational and arts uses
shall be permitted consistent with the wayfinding signage throughout
the campus of the educational institution. Wayfinding signs for
transportation uses shall be encouraged at strategic street and
driveway locations, and throughout any train station project site to
guide automobiles, pedestrians and bicyclists to the train station,
parking areas, services, entrances and exits.
§ B17A-354.31 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-354.33
BAO:418
Division 6
Mixed Residential-Retail-Office - MRRO District
SUBDIVISION I
MRRO Districts
§ B17A-355. Use regulations — Generally. [Ord. No. 82-30, § 5; Ord.
No. 2006-19, § 1]
In zoning district MRRO, the land and any improvement thereon may be
used for the purposes as set forth herein below in Sections 17A-355 through
17A-356.2.
§ B17A-356. Uses permitted as of right. [Ord. No. 82-30, § 5; Ord.
No. 2006-19, § 1; Ord. No. 2012-08]
The following uses are permitted as of right, subject to the bulk regulations,
parking requirements and other regulations set forth or referred to below:
(a) Hospital Uses.
(1) Hospitals properly licensed by the state which provide health,
medical and surgical care for sick or injured human beings,
including accessory uses as set forth below.
(2) Dental and medical clinics operated by the principal hospital and
medical offices.
(3) Hospital pharmacies.
(4) Convalescent and extended care facilities sponsored by or affiliated
with the principal licensed hospital which are located on or
adjacent to the hospital.
(b) Accessory Hospital Uses.
(1) Laboratories incidental to a permitted use.
(2) Out-patient departments.
(3) Training facilities.
(4) Management, medical and dental staff offices.
(5) Medical staff residential facilities for doctors, nurses, interns and
students.
(6) Off-street parking and parking structures.
(7) Accessory signs as permitted in division 6, subdivision I, Sections
17A-367 through 17A-372 of this chapter.
(c) Residential Uses.
§ B17A-355 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-356
BAO:419
(1) One-family dwellings.
(2) Two-family dwellings.
(3) Attached dwellings.
(4) Multiple dwelling.
(5) Continuing care retirement communities.
(6) Aged restricted housing intended for, and solely occupied by,
persons 55 years of age or older. No more than 50% of the total
number of units in the zone may be age restricted.
(d) Accessory Residential Uses.
(1) Meeting rooms to serve the residential component of any new
development.
(2) Congregate dining areas.
(3) Doctor or nurses stations that primarily serve the residential
component.
(4) Exercise area.
(5) Indoor and/or outdoor pools.
(6) Home occupations as defined in section 17A-228(c)(2).
(7) Off-street parking and parking structures.
(8) Accessory signs as permitted in division 6, subdivision I, part 2 of
this article and as permitted below.
a) Each development in the MRRO district may have either a
facade sign or a free standing sign and one marquee or canopy
sign. Signs are not to be internally illuminated.
i. A facade sign shall be located on the wall surface of the
principal frontage or facade of the area occupied by such
development and extending not more than four inches
from such wall. The total area of such sign shall not exceed
10 square feet.
ii. A free-standing sign shall be located between the principal
building and the street but no closer than five feet to the
property line. The total area of the sign shall not exceed 10
square feet. The height of any free-standing sign shall not
exceed four feet.
iii. The marquee or canopy sign shall not exceed eight square
feet.
§ B17A-356 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-356
BAO:420
§ B17A-356.1. Conditional uses. [Ord. No. 98-9, § I; Ord. No.
2006-19, § 1]
The following additional use may be authorized as a conditional use subject
to the provisions of section 17A-208 and to the bulk regulations, parking
requirements and other regulations set forth and referred to below:
Personal wireless telecommunications facilities and personal wireless
telecommunications equipment facilities, as defined in section 17A-201
shall be permitted as a conditional use.
b) Parking rate sign. Operators of parking garages and open lots
shall post a sign at each entrance setting forth all pertinent
rate information. Such information shall be readily visible to
potential patrons before they pull into the entryway but beyond
the building frontage zone. Such rate sign may be no more
than eight square feet and may be in addition to such other
signage as is permitted herein.
c) Incidental signs. Incidental signs such as "no parking,"
"entrance," "loading only," or other similar directives that meet
the standards of this subsection are allowed in the MRRO
district and are not counted in determining the total area of all
signs on the lot. Freestanding incidental signs may be up to six
square feet in area and 42 inches in height. Wall-mounted
incidental signs may be up to six square feet in area and 12 feet
in height.
(e) Nonresidential uses.
(1) Medical Services Uses.
(2) Medical and Professional Office Uses.
(3) Restaurant Uses.
(4) Banks.
(5) Neighborhood Service Retail Uses That Include: barbershop,
beauty parlors, tailors, dressmakers, photographic studios, shoe
repair, self service automatic laundry, dry cleaning establishments
and similar personal service uses dealing directly with consumers.
(6) Retail stores, convenience food stores and bakeries excluding
automotive sales or services.
(7) Child Care Facilities.
(8) Leasing office for on premises leasing.
(9) Art and craft studios.
§ B17A-356 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-356.2
BAO:421
§ B17A-356.2. Mandatory set-aside for affordable housing. [Ord.
No. 2006-19, § 1]
§ B17A-357. Bulk regulations — Generally. [Ord. No. 82-30, § 5;
Ord. No. 2006-19, § 1]
The bulk regulations contained in Sections 17A-357 through 17A-359 apply
to all buildings and land in the MRRO district, except as indicated herein.
Existing structures, as of July 1, 2006 may be renovated and maintain their
existing building heights and setbacks.
§ B17A-358. Hospital uses, residential uses and nonresidential
uses. [Ord. No. 82-30, § 5; Ord. No. 2006-19, § 1; Ord. No. 2012-08]
(a) Subdivision and site plan approvals for residential developments within
the district may only be approved if at least 20% of the units are
affordable units meeting the standards in section 17A-202.2.
(b) Subdivision and site plan approvals for nonresidential developments
within the district may only be approved if the nonresidential
development complies with section 17A-202.4.
(a) Maximum Permitted for the Zone.
(1) Floor area ratio: 1.8.
(2) Height: five stories the height of which shall not exceed 67.5 feet.
Notwithstanding the height limit of five stories for new or
reconstructed buildings, there currently exists in the southwest
section of this MRRO zone a building which exceed five stories and
may remain. Elevator shafts shall not be considered in determining
the heights of buildings.
(3) Coverage (%): 60%.
(4) Up to 280 residential units shall be permitted in the zone.
(5) Nonresidential space shall be no more than 6% of the total square
footage permitted in the district excluding any parking garage(s)
and any areas shared by residential and nonresidential uses.
(6) First floor nonresidential development shall not extend for more
than 180 feet along Witherspoon Street in the MRRO zone.
(7) First floor nonresidential development may not front on Franklin
Avenue.
(8) Except for restaurant use, nonresidential development must be
limited to 3,000 square feet per user.
(b) Minimum requirements.
§ B17A-356.2 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-358
BAO:422
§ B17A-359. Additional bulk regulations. [Ord. No. 82-30, § 5; Ord.
No. 2006-19, § 1]
The additional bulk regulations contained in division 6 of this chapter, shall
also apply in MRRO districts.
§ B17A-360. Off-street parking and loading requirements —
Generally. [Ord. No. 82-30, § 5; Ord. No. 2006-19, § 1.]
(1) All buildings shall be setback 25 feet from any right-of-way or
property line.
a) Buildings shall not be required to meet the twenty-five-foot
setback when such building abuts a parking garage on the
same lot or on a lot in common ownership. For the purposes of
this section the Borough/Township boundary line shall not be
considered a property line.
(2) Building setback height ratio 1:1.35.
a) All parts of every building shall lie below planes sloping inward
and upward from the lot lines with the horizontal to vertical
ratio shown except that the building referred to in subsection
(a)(2) shall be exempt from this requirement.
b) Architectural elements may project into the permitted building
setback height ratio by up to three feet.
(3) A lot size of 5.6 acres is required.
(c) Buffer Areas, Plazas and Other Open Areas.
(1) Open space (areas not occupied by buildings or parking) for both
public and private use shall be integrated into and throughout the
site. A minimum of 20% of land area shall be devoted to open space.
(2) At least 20% of the required open space shall be located along
Witherspoon Street and have a depth of at least 50 feet for a
distance of at least 100 feet.
(d) Distance between buildings. Shall be a minimum distance equal to the
average of the two heights of said buildings at the points where such
buildings are nearest to one another but not less than 20 feet. This
provision shall not apply to two or more buildings which are connected
together to form a complex of buildings.
(a) Accessory off-street parking spaces, open or enclosed, shall be provided
for all new construction and for conversions, and accessory off-street
loading berths, open or enclosed, shall be provided for new permitted
uses, in accordance with the regulations set forth and referred to in
Sections 17A-360 through 17A-363. All such parking spaces and loading
berths shall be subject to the provisions of division 6, subdivision III of
this chapter. The majority of the on-site parking must be provided in a
§ B17A-358 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-360
BAO:423
§ B17A-361. Required parking — Residential uses. [Ord. No. 82-30,
§ 5; Ord. No. 2006-19, § 1]
Housing Unit Type/Size Parking Requirement
Single-family detached 1.0
Two-family dwellings 1.5
Attached dwelling 1.0
Multiple dwellings 1.5
§ B17A-362. Required parking — Nonresidential uses. [Ord. No.
82-30, § 5; Ord. No. 2006-19, § 1]
At least one parking space for
each:
Hospitals, hospital dental and
medical clinics, hospital out-patient
departments and accessory uses
440 square feet of floor area
Dental and medical offices 250 square feet of floor area
Restaurants 5 seats
Retail, office and service business
uses
Ground floor: 300 square feet of
floor area Other floors: 450 square
feet of floor area
Continuing care retirement
community
Independent living units: 1.4 units
Assisted living units: 0.35 per bed
Nursing beds: 0.35 per bed Staff
positions: 1.0 per staff member on
maximum shift
Visitors: 5% of required total
§ B17A-363. Required loading for nonresidential uses. [Ord. No.
82-30, § 5; Ord. No. 2006-19, § 1.]
Accessory loading berths, open or enclosed, shall be provided for
nonresidential uses, as follows:
parking garage either on site or on an adjacent lot. No more than 10%
of the total parking on site may be surface parking.
(a) For floor area of 10,000 to 25,000 square feet: one berth.
(b) For each additional 75,000 square feet of floor area or fraction thereof:
one additional berth.
§ B17A-360 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-363
BAO:424
Division 7
Supplementary District Regulations
SUBDIVISION I
Use Regulations
§ B17A-364. Prohibited uses. [Ord. No. 2014-37; Ord. No. 77-1, § 2;
Ord. No. 82-30, § 4; Ord. No. 2001-4, § I]
The following uses of buildings or of land shall not be located anywhere in
the borough:
§ B17A-365. Lighting and sound systems. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord.
No. 78-26, § 6; Ord. No. 82-30, § 4]
(a) Junk yards and automobile wrecking yards.
(b) Auto body and paint shops, radiator repair, tire retreading and
automobile laundries.
(c) Bus terminals.
(d) Manufacture of monuments.
(e) The storage, parking or use of a trailer by any person; except that
trailers used for construction purposes, including related offices and
storage and for theatrical, musical, or dance events or similar cultural
events open to the public, may be permitted by the development
enforcement officer, but only for the duration of a specified project or
event. A zoning permit for such activities must be obtained from the
development enforcement officer pursuant to Borough Ordinance
Section 17A-214.
(f) Drilling for natural gas, using the drilling technique of hydraulic
fracturing and exploring for natural gas beyond the reconnaissance
phase.
No land or building in any district shall be used or occupied in any
manner so as to create any dangerous, injurious, noxious or otherwise
objectionable fire, explosive, or other hazards; noise or vibration;
smoke, dust, odor or other form of air pollution; heat, cold or dampness;
electromagnetic or other disturbance; glare; liquid or solid refuse or
waste; or other substance, condition or element in such manner or
in such amount as to adversely affect the reasonable use of the
surrounding area of adjoining premises.
(a) The provisions of this section shall apply to all principal uses, secondary
residence uses and accessory uses or activities permitted within R1, R2,
R3 and R4 districts or located within 200 feet of the boundary line of
any such R1, R2, R3 or R4 district, and to all nonconforming uses so
located.
§ B17A-364 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-365
BAO:425
§ B17A-365.1. Lighting. [Ord. No. 97-25, § I; Ord. No. 2009-01, § III]
(b) Any outdoor lighting shall be adequately shielded and directed away
from the adjoining properties.
(c) No public address system or loudspeaker devices shall emit noises
which can be heard beyond the property lines.
(d) The permanent illumination of all or any part of a building, such as a
facade, gable, roof, side wall or corner shall not be permitted, except as
allowed by the board of adjustment as a decision upon a special
question.
(a) Purpose. Regulation of outdoor lighting including recreational and
sports facility lighting is necessary to prevent the cause of unnecessary
sky glow, to prevent light trespass and to reduce unnecessary glare
caused by inappropriate or misaligned light fixtures and/or the
inappropriate location of light poles. These standards are intended to
promote energy efficiency, preserve and protect adjacent residential
neighborhoods from unnecessary lighting impacts and discourage
overlighting consistent with public safety.
(b) Definitions.
AUTOMATIC TIMING DEVICE — A switching device, a part of which is
a clock, set to the prevailing time (Eastern Standard Time or Daylight
Saving Time), that will control the period of illuminating outdoor light
fixtures and outdoor signs.
FOOT-CANDLE — The measurement of light on a surface of one square
foot in area on which there is uniformly distributed a light flux of one
lumen.
GLARE — The sensation produced by luminance within the visual field
that is sufficiently greater than the luminance to which the eyes are
adapted to cause annoyance, discomfort, or loss in visual performance
and visibility.
ILLUMINATING ENGINEERING SOCIETY OF NORTH AMERICA
(IESNA) — An organization that establishes standards for the lighting
industry.
LIGHT TRESPASS — Any form of artificial illumination emanating from
a light fixture or illuminated sign on a property that penetrates across
the property line or lines into another property.
MOTION SENSOR DEVICE — A device that will sense motion
electronically and switch on security lighting during the activity and for
a brief duration thereafter.
OBJECTIONABLE DIRECT LIGHT EMISSIONS — Direct light emissions
visible above a height of five feet at the subject property line. A bulb,
a reflective device, a refractive lens device, a globe, or diffuse panels,
shall be considered a direct light emission source.
§ B17A-365 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-365.1
BAO:426
OUTDOOR LIGHT FIXTURE — An electrically powered illuminating
device containing a total light source of more than 1,800 initial lumens
per fixture (this is greater than a single 100 watt incandescent, or 275
watt reflectorized incandescent bulbs), which is permanently installed
outdoors, including but not limited to, devices used to illuminate any
site, architectural structure, or sign.
SHIELDED LIGHT FIXTURE — A light fixture with cutoff optics that
allows no direct light emissions above a vertical cutoff angle of 90°
for street lighting and 80° for all other lighting, through the light
fixture's lowest light emitting part. Any structural part of the light
fixture providing this cutoff angle must be permanently affixed.
(c) Standards. All outdoor light fixtures installed and thereafter
maintained, other than those serving one- and two-family dwellings,
shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) Only shielded light fixtures shall be used. Any fixture mounted
above 10 feet shall have no more than 10% of its light distribution
at a vertical angle of 80° above nadir and 2.5% at an angle of 90°
above nadir.
(2) Where used for commercial, educational, or institutional purposes
or for sports or recreational facilities, all light fixtures shall be
equipped with automatic timing devices set to be turned off during
nonoperating hours or when not necessary for safety and security
purposes.
(3) Light fixtures used to illuminate flags, statues or other objects
mounted on a pole, pedestal or platform shall use a narrow column
beam of light that will not extend beyond the maximum extension of
the illuminated object.
(4) Other upward directed architectural, landscape or decorative
direct light emissions shall have at least 90% of their total
distribution pattern within the profile of the illuminated structure.
(5) Lighting for freestanding signs shall use shielded light fixtures or
other device(s) to shield the light source.
(6) All outdoor lighting shall be metal halide, incandescent, light
emitting diode (LED), induction or compact florescence unless
otherwise approved by the board of jurisdiction.
(7) When not necessary for safety and security purposes all outdoor
lighting during nonoperating hours of the business or use, shall be
turned off by 11:00 p.m. or limited to parking areas essential for
night use. The use of lights activated by motion-sensor devices is
permissible in all parking lots or walking paths.
(8) All lighting shall be designed to prevent misdirected or excessive
artificial light and to be energy efficient.
§ B17A-365.1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-365.1
BAO:427
(9) All light fixtures shall be designed, installed and maintained to
prevent light trespass.
(10) Illumination levels shall not exceed those recommended in the
IESNA Lighting Handbook, 8th Edition, and IESNA publication RP
6-88, Sports Lighting.
(11) Except for lights located along public or private streets, the
maximum height of freestanding lights shall not exceed the height
of the principal building, or 14 feet, whichever is less in residential
zones, historic districts or properties adjacent to residential zones
or uses. In nonresidential zones where the light will not be seen
from a residential use a height of up to 20 feet is permitted for
freestanding lights.
(12) The style of the light and light standards (poles) shall be consistent
with the architectural style of the principal building or surrounding
area. Nonresidential uses constructed in residential areas shall
maintain a residential character in the type and style of lighting
installed. In historic districts the style of the light and light
standards shall comply with the district requirements.
(13) Floodlight-type fixtures attached to buildings shall be prohibited
unless other lighting is not suitable for its intended use.
(14) Freestanding lights shall be so located and protected to avoid
being damaged by vehicles.
(15) All wiring shall be underground.
(16) Where allowed to be used for sports or recreational facilities, all
lighting fixtures shall comply with the following:
a. For field sports such as football, soccer, baseball and track and
field, a maximum pole height of 40 feet, but a higher pole
height may be approved by a waiver granted by the board of
jurisdiction upon a showing of necessity, together with
restrictions on use which limit the adverse impacts on
surrounding properties.
b. The minimum distance of the pole to any property line shall be
twice the height of the pole. For example, a forty-foot pole must
be a minimum of 80 feet from any property line.
c. Light trespass shall not be more than one-tenth foot-candle at
any adjacent residential property line measured at grade.
d. A berm, landscape buffer, where feasible, shall be required to
screen the source of light and the lit object from any adjacent
residences.
§ B17A-365.1 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-365.1
BAO:428
e. When not in use or not later than 10:30 p.m., all lighting shall
be turned off unless specifically permitted by the board of
jurisdiction.
(d) Illuminance Requirements.
(1) Street lighting. Average maintained illuminances shall not exceed
IESNA recommendations listed below and be consistent with safety
standards. IESNA average to minimum illuminance uniformity
ratios are to be used as a guide for designing safe and adequate
roadway lighting. Lighting fixtures shall be chosen to blend into the
existing character of the area.
Average Maintained Illuminance
Arterial roadway nonresidential
area
1.2 to 1.7 foot-candles
Arterial roadway residential
area
0.6 to 0.9 foot-candles
Collector roadway
nonresidential area
1.2 to 0.8 foot-candles
Collector roadway residential
area
0.6 to 0.4 foot-candles
Local roadway nonresidential
area
0.9 to 0.6 foot-candles
Local roadway residential area 0.4 to 0.3 foot-candles
(2) Open parking facilities. Lighting fixture shall be chosen to blend
into the existing character of the area. Illuminance requirements
shall be determined by the location, type of uses, safety and activity
levels indicated below. Average illuminance shall not be exceeded.
Minimum illuminance shall not be less.
a. Some examples of levels of activity may include:
High activity area:
Regional shopping centers containing retail spaces of
200,000 square feet or greater;
Low activity area:
Neighborhood shopping area near residential neighborhoods
School parking lot Church or place of worship parking
b. Maintained horizontal illuminance for open parking facilities
based on level of activity:
§ B17A-365.1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-365.1
BAO:429
Level of Activity
General Parking
and Pedestrian
Traffic Footcandles*
(minimum on
pavement)
Vehicle Use Area
Only Footcandles**
(average on
pavement)
High 0.5 1.0
Medium 0.3 0.5
Low 0.2 0.5
* General parking and pedestrian area is defined as one
where pedestrian conflicts with vehicles are likely to occur
** A vehicle use area only is defined as one where conflicts
with pedestrians are not likely to occur (service areas or
access roads)
(3) Covered parking facilities. Covered parking facilities require
lighting both day and night subject to the standards set forth in
subsection (c)(7) above. The standards for roof area lighting of
parking garages shall be similar to open parking facilities. Listed
below are the recommended maintained horizontal illuminance for
covered parking facilities.
Areas
Day Time Foot-
Candles
(average on
pavement)*
Night Time Foot-
Candles
(average on
pavement)
General parking and
pedestrian areas
5.0 5.0
Ramps and corners 10.0 5.0
Entrance areas 50.0 5.0
* Sum of electric lighting and daylight.
(4) Walkways. Minimum average foot-candles shall be as follows:
a. Sidewalks (roadside):
Commercial areas: five-tenths
Residential areas: two-tenths
b. Walkways, stairways and bikeways (distant from roadways):
two-tenths.
c. Entrances and stairways should maintain an average
footcandle of five-tenths.
§ B17A-365.1 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-365.1
BAO:430
(e) Light trespass. All light fixtures, except street lighting and those used
on one or two family dwellings, shall be designed, installed, and
maintained to prevent light trespass, as specified below.
(1) At the property line of subject property, illumination from light
fixtures shall not exceed one-tenth foot-candles on residentially
used property or five-tenths foot-candles on nonresidential used
property, in a vertical plane.
(2) Outdoor light fixtures properly installed and thereafter maintained
shall be directed so that there will be no objectionable direct light
emissions.
(3) Where a nonresidential use abuts a residential use, the side(s) of
the nonresidential building which fronts a residential use must
demonstrate that there is adequate screening to buffer the
buildings interior lights from the residential use or provide interior
light opaque window shading.
(4) Interior lights in nonresidential buildings not necessary for safety
or security purposes shall be turned off after normal business
hours.
(f) Site plan applications and major subdivision applications. Plans for all
lighting other than street lighting shall be submitted in accordance with
the following:
(1) Description of outdoor lighting fixtures including component
specifications such as lamps, reflectors, optics, angle of cutoff,
supports, poles, color of lighting and include manufacturers'
catalog cuts.
(2) Location and description of every outdoor light fixture and hours of
operation.
(3) Maintained horizontal illuminance shown as foot-candles (after
depreciation).
Maximum
Minimum
Average, during operating and non-operating hours
Maximum to minimum ratio
Average to minimum ratio
(4) Computer generated photometric grid showing foot-candle
readings every 10 feet, and the average foot-candles. Small areas
may require the average to be computed from positions no greater
than five feet apart.
(5) Foundation details for light poles.
§ B17A-365.1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-365.1
BAO:431
§ B17A-366. Uses to be located in enclosed buildings; exceptions.
[Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No. 81-43, § 2; Ord. No. 82-30, § 4; Ord. No.
93-24, § 1; Ord. No. 2012-12 § 9]
All uses shall be carried on in buildings fully enclosed on all sides, with the
following exceptions:
(6) When using IES recommendations, submit supporting
documentation.
(g) Applicability of lighting standards. The requirements of this section
shall apply to any development application approved after the effective
date of this section.
(1) If the development application is for a developed site and:
a. If the existing parking area is being expanded to accommodate
30% or more of the existing number of spaces (but at least five
or more spaces); or
b. If the square footage of the structure is to be expanded by 30%
or more (but at least 1,000 square feet); or
c. If more than 40% of the structure or parking area (but at least
1,000 square feet of new structure or five parking spaces) is
being substantially renovated, then the new requirements shall
apply both to the new and to the existing development on the
site.
(2) If the development is less than the above, but involves an expansion
or renovation project meeting at least 50% of any of the above
standards, then the applicant may be required to upgrade its site
by expending 50% of the cost of full compliance to be allocated to
such elements of the lighting as the board of jurisdiction shall
determine.
(3) The provisions of section 17A-365 shall continue to apply to all uses
which exist as of the date of this new section 17A-365.1 and which
are not affected by subsequently filed development applications.
(a) Parking lots.
(b) Gasoline sales.
(c) Incidental sales of newspapers, books, magazines, fruits, vegetables,
and flowers provided that such merchandise shall not exceed a total
length of 30 feet along the principal frontage or facade of the area
occupied by the business, and shall be placed so that a minimum of five
feet of an unobstructed sidewalk shall be maintained.
(d) Outdoor service of diners seated at tables placed on a porch, sidewalk
or yard, accessory to a permitted eating place.
§ B17A-365.1 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-366
BAO:432
§ B17A-367. Accessory signs — Permitted in all districts. [Ord. No.
77-1, § 2; Ord. No. 82-30, § 4; Ord. No. 93-24, § I]
The following accessory signs are permitted in all districts in the borough:
§ B17A-368. Accessory signs — Permitted in business districts.
[Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No. 82-30 § 4; Ord. No. 83-25, § 3; Ord. No.
83-38, § 3; Ord. No. 92-26, § I; Ord. No. 92-31, § 1; Ord. No. 93-24,
§ I; Ord. No. 2015-36]
The following main business signs, signs on windows, doors and awnings,
directory signs, special signs, paper signs, and parking rate signs are
permitted accessory to each business building in RO, RB, NB, CB and SB
districts:
(e) (Reserved)
(f) Telephone booths.
(a) A non-illuminated nameplate, with the name of the principal occupant
and the street number and name of a private dwelling or both, with an
area of not more than 144 square inches.
(b) A sign, illuminated or not, for a church, educational institution or public
or quasi-public building or use, with an area of not more than 16 square
feet.
(c) The following nonilluminated temporary signs:
(1) A single sign pertaining to the lease or sale of the premises upon
which it is placed, with an area of not more than eight square feet;
provided, that such sign shall be removed within seven days after
the consummation of a lease or sale of the premises.
(2) Signs for a building, premises or part thereof, under construction
or renovation, with the street number of a building and the name of
the architect, engineer, landscaper, the general contractor and
subcontractors, and the project title during construction on the
premises. Such signs shall be located at the principal entrance and
within the street line and lot lines of the premises and shall be
removed within seven days after the completion of the construction
work. The total area of all such signs on a lot shall not exceed eight
square feet.
(3) Class reunion signs or banners of a college or university.
(4) Signs announcing or advertising any political, educational,
religious or like campaign, drive or event; provided that the total
area of all such signs on a lot shall not exceed eight square feet.
(a) Main Business Signs.
§ B17A-366 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-368
BAO:433
(1) Each business use located at the street level may have one business
sign. Such sign may be either a facade sign or a free-standing sign.
a. A facade sign shall be located on the wall surface of the
principal frontage or facade of the area occupied by such
business and extending not more than four inches from such
wall. Such business use, if located on a corner lot, may have a
second sign located on the wall facing the other street. The
total area of such sign (or signs) shall not exceed 20 square
feet and shall in no event exceed 10% of the front wall surface,
including window and door area, attributable to such business.
If such signs are illuminated, the area shall not exceed 10
square feet and shall in no event exceed 5% of the total area of
the front wall attributable to such business.
b. Free-standing signs shall be located between the principal
structure and the street and may be located in the front yard
setback. The business use, if located on a corner lot, may have
a second sign located between the second side of the building
facing a street and the street. The total area of the sign (or
signs) shall not exceed 10 square feet and a height of four feet
from grade. If the sign (or signs) has two sides, the total of both
sides shall not exceed 10 square feet. If the sign (or signs) is
illuminated, the area shall not exceed five square feet,
including all sides. The sign or signs may include information
about uses in addition to the main business use, but if
information is provided about business uses located in the rear
or the upper floors, then the freestanding sign shall be in lieu
of the eight square foot sign permitted by section 17A-368
(a)(4), but in such case, the two square foot sign permitted by
section 17A-368 (a)(4) shall still be allowed.
(2) Each business located at the basement level of any building may
have one main business sign, located on the wall surface of the
principal frontage or facade of the area occupied by such business,
and extending not more than four inches from such wall. The total
area of such sign shall not exceed 10 square feet and shall in no
event exceed 5% of the total inside front wall area attributable to
such business. If such sign is illuminated, the total area shall not
exceed five square feet and shall in no event exceed 2 1/2% of the
total inside front wall attributable to such business.
(3) A sign on a marquee or canopy shall be considered part of a main
business sign and shall be counted in determining the maximum
aggregate area permitted on the front wall of the building
attributable to such use.
(4) Business uses located in the rear or on the upper floors may have
one non-illuminated business sign to be shared by all such uses on
the premises. It shall be located on a wall surface immediately
adjacent to the main entrance to such uses and may extend not
§ B17A-368 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-368
BAO:434
more than four inches from such wall. The total area of such sign
shall not exceed eight square feet. It may not include more than
one set of graphics for each use, such as an identification sign and
inclusion of the use in a directory sign. Such uses may, in addition,
have one painted sign, to be shared by all such uses, on the glass
of a glass or partially glass door serving as the main entrance to
such uses. The total area of such painted sign shall not exceed two
square feet.
(b) Signs on windows, doors, and awnings. Each business located at the
street level may have the following signs, for the name, street, number
or type of business or any combination thereof:
(1) Two signs, with a total area not to exceed six square feet, painted
on the windows or doors, or both, but with not more than one such
sign on any window or door; except that an establishment serving
food may post its menu and hours of service on the first floor facade
in reasonable proximity to the front entry. Such menu sign may be
no more than six square feet and may be in addition to the two
signs permitted herein.
(2) One sign on the valance of an awning, the total area of which sign
shall not exceed eight square feet.
(c) Directory Signs.
(1) Each business use located in the rear or on the upper floors may
have one non-illuminated sign, with an area not exceeding 72
inches, at a side or rear entrance serving such business.
(2) One additional directory sign for any business building, other than
a gasoline service station; provided, that such business building is
set back more than 20 feet beyond the front yard of such premises
and may be illuminated, set at right angles to the street and
lettered on both sides. Each side of such sign may have the names
of all principal tenants of the building. The area of such sign
devoted to each tenants of the building. The area of such sign
devoted to each tenant shall not exceed 72 square inches, and the
total area of such sign shall not exceed eight square feet.
(d) Special Signs.
(1) Special signs serving the public convenience, such as "Notary
Public," "Public Telephones," "Public Rest Rooms" or words or
directions of similar import. The area of such sign shall not exceed
72 square inches. Only one sign of each type shall be displayed.
(2) One temporary free-standing advertisement or menu sign may be
displayed during hours of business operation for each business
located at the street level and basement level, subject to the
following restrictions:
§ B17A-368 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-368
BAO:435
a. Maximum dimensions. The height of the sign shall not exceed
four feet and the width of the sign shall not exceed three feet.
The sign may be single- or double-sided. The total square
footage of each side of the sign shall not exceed 12 feet.
b. Proximity to business facade. The sign shall be located no more
than four feet from the business facade it advertises.
c. Sidewalk placement. The sign shall be located to ensure that
there shall be a minimum of six feet of unobstructed sidewalk
along Nassau Street and a minimum of four feet of
unobstructed sidewalk along all other streets.
d. Safety and stability. The sign shall be kept orderly, safe and
upright at all times it is displayed, including during inclement
weather, and shall not create a danger or hazard (including
tripping hazard) to pedestrians using the sidewalk. At the end
of each business day, the sign shall be removed from the
sidewalk.
e. Miscellaneous. The sign shall not be illuminated.
(3) In lieu of the temporary free-standing advertisement or menu sign
permitted in subsection 17A-368(d)(2) immediately above, three or
more businesses otherwise permitted to display a sign in
accordance with subsection 17A-368(d)(2) may display one multibusiness
free-standing advertisement or menu sign representing
those businesses, subject to the following restrictions:
a. Maximum dimensions. The height of the sign shall not exceed
five feet and the width of the sign shall not exceed three feet.
The sign may be single- or double-sided. The total square
footage of each side of the sign shall not exceed 15 feet.
b. Proximity to business facade. The sign shall be located no more
than four feet from at least one of the business facades it
advertises.
c. Sidewalk placement. The sign shall be located to ensure that
there shall be a minimum of six feet of unobstructed sidewalk
along Nassau Street and a minimum of four feet of
unobstructed sidewalk along all other streets.
d. Safety and stability. The sign shall be kept orderly, safe and
upright at all times it is displayed, including during inclement
weather, and shall not create a danger or hazard (including
tripping hazard) to pedestrians using the sidewalk. At the end
of each business day, the sign shall be removed from the
sidewalk.
e. Miscellaneous. The sign shall not be illuminated.
§ B17A-368 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-368
BAO:436
§ B17A-369. Prohibited signs. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No. 82-30,
§ 4.]
The following types of signs or artificial lighting are prohibited:
f. One sign per business. Any business advertised by a sign
permitted in this subsection 17A-368(d)(3) shall not be
permitted to have a sign under subsection 17A-368(d)(2)
above.
(4) A zoning permit shall be secured from the development
enforcement officer in accordance with section 17A-214 prior to
the placement of any sign under the provisions of subsections
17A-368(d)(2) and (3) above. The following shall accompany the
request for zoning permit:
1. A scaled drawing or survey of the proposed location of the sign
and its location relative to the business facade. Said drawing or
survey shall also demonstrate that pedestrian traffic along the
sidewalk upon which the sign is be located will in no way be
impeded, and that there shall be a minimum of six feet of
unobstructed sidewalk on Nassau Street and a minimum of
four feet on other streets; and
2. A colored rendering of each side of the proposed sign,
including its dimensions.
(e) Temporary paper signs. Temporary signs made out of paper or similar
material and containing extraordinary information pertaining to
matters of limited duration, such as sales, product promotion,
community, cultural, or other public events, and employment
opportunities. Such signs shall not have an area exceeding 10% of the
total square footage of the glass frontage of the establishment and shall
be displayed no more than 14 consecutive days.
(f) Parking rate sign. Operators of parking garages and open lots shall post
a sign setting forth all pertinent rate information. Such information
shall be readily visible to potential patrons before they pull into the
entryway. Such rate sign may be no more than 10 square feet and may
be in addition to such other signage as is permitted herein.
(a) Billboards.
(b) Flashing signs or moving signs, including any sign or device or which
the artificial light is not maintained stationary and constant in intensity
and color at all times when in use.
(c) Neon signs.
(d) Signs which compete for attention with, or may be mistaken for, a
traffic signal.
§ B17A-368 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-370
BAO:437
§ B17A-370. Sign location. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No. 82-30, § 4]
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no sign shall project into a
required yard or beyond the lot or street line.
No sign shall be placed, inscribed or supported upon the roof, or upon
any structure which extends above the roof, of any building, except such
directional devices as may be required by federal or state aeronautical
authorities.
No sign shall be so placed as to interfere with the opening of an exit door
or to obstruct any window opening of a room which is used for dwelling
purposes.
No part of any business sign shall project above the top or beyond the ends
of the wall surface upon which it is placed.
§ B17A-371. Sign lighting. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No. 82-30, § 4]
Permitted lighting for illuminated signs shall be limited to that concentrated
upon the face of the sign. If any such sign is situated within 20 feet of a
street, the direct source of light shall not be visible from the street or any
neighboring lots or uses.
§ B17A-372. "Area" of sign defined. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No.
82-30, § 4]
"Area" shall mean the maximum projected area of the oblong, parallelogram
or other shape which encloses the sign structure, device or representation.
For a free standing or projecting sign, all sides which are used as a sign
shall be included in the computation of the area of the sign.
§ B17A-370 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-372
BAO:438
SUBDIVISION II
Bulk Regulations
§ B17A-373. Exceptions to lot size requirements — Existing small
lots. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No. 78-26, § 7; Ord. No. 81-43, § 3;
Ord. No. 82-30, § 4; Ord. No. 2006-07, § 10; Ord. No. 2009-01, § IV;
Ord. No. 2018-24 § 12]
(a) Existing Small Lots Exceptions.
(1) If a lot with a total area, lot width or lot depth less than prescribed
in this chapter appears as a separate lot or parcel, was designated
as such on the tax map of the former Borough of Princeton on
November 19, 1968, and continues as such at all times thereafter,
to and including the date of any application for a zoning permit,
such a lot may be used for a one-family dwelling, except in the SB
districts, and subject further to the provisions of section 17A-403
below (R1 through R4 districts only). However, each substandard
lot shall be developed in conformity with all applicable district
regulations, other than the minimum lot area, lot width and lot
depth, and subject further to the provisions of section 17A-403
applicable to the R1 through R4 districts. In no event shall a
secondary residence be permitted on a lot that is less than 125% of
the minimum lot area that is specific in this chapter for the zoning
district in which the lot is located.
(b) Proportional FAR - Alteration and Enlargement of Structures:
Nonconforming Lots. A nonconforming structure or a conforming
structure on a nonconforming lot may be altered or enlarged provided
that such alteration or enlargement neither increases existing
nonconformity nor creates a new noncompliance; except, the gross
floor area of a single-family house or a two-family house that occupies a
lot that is smaller than the required lot area for the district in which the
house is located may be increased proportionately by using the
following formula for determining the adjusted FAR that may be applied
to the existing area (in square feet) of the nonconforming lot:
[1+ [(required lot area - Existing lot area)/required lot area]] x FAR for
the district required lot area
For purposes of this calculation:
(1) Subtract the existing lot area from the required lot area.
(2) Divide the result by the required lot area.
(3) Add 1 to the result.
(4) Multiply the result by the district FAR expressed as a decimal to
determine the adjusted FAR.
§ B17A-373 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-373
BAO:439
§ B17A-374. Lot depth. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No. 82-30, § 4]
The required lot depth at any point may be decreased by 25% if the average
lot depth conforms with the minimum requirement.
§ B17A-375. Exceptions to height restrictions. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2;
Ord. No. 82-30, § 4; Ord. No. 90-27, § 14]
Penthouses, bulkheads, television antennae, ornamental spires, elevator
walls, stair enclosures, etc., covering less than 20% of the roof area, are
exempt from height restrictions; except, that penthouses for residential or
nonresidential use may not extend more than 10 feet above the maximum
height permitted in the district, if such height is less than 55 feet or more
than 15 feet above the maximum height permitted in the district, if such
height is 55 feet or greater. All such structures must be 10 feet from the
front and rear wall of a building and three feet from the side walls; except,
that walls of elevators and stair enclosures may be built on the side wall,
when required by the plan of the building.
§ B17A-376. Side and rear yards. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No.
78-26, § 8; Ord. No. 82-30, § 4; Ord. No. 2006-07, § 11; Ord. No.
2018-24 § 13]
(5) To obtain the maximum gross floor area for the existing lot,
multiply the adjusted FAR by the existing lot area.
By way of an example, on a 16,000 square foot lot in the R-1 zoning
districts where the required lot area is 20,000 square feet and the
maximum FAR is 25% the adjusted FAR stated as a decimal is 0.30
(i.e., 1.20 x 0.25) and the permitted gross floor area is 4,800 square
feet (i.e., 16,000 x 0.30).
If such single-family house is in a zoning district in which
residential use is not permitted, the district referred to in the first
paragraph shall be the residence district nearest to such house.
If a variance is granted to allow a single-family house to be
constructed on a vacant lot that is smaller than the required lot
area for the district in which the house is to be located, then the
above formula shall also apply in determining the permitted gross
floor area.
(a) In all cases where side and rear yards are not required but are
provided, such yards shall not be less than 10 feet.
(b) Principal or accessory or secondary residence buildings which are not
of "fire resistive" construction, as defined in the Construction Code,
shall have side yards and rear yards as required in the R4 districts,
unless located in a district requiring larger side yards or rear yards, in
which case the stricter requirements shall apply.
§ B17A-373 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-376
BAO:440
§ B17A-376.1. The mean prevailing front setback. [Ord. No.
2006-07, § 12; Ord. No. 2016-42 § 5]
The mean prevailing front yard setback to be applied to a lot shall be
determined as follows:
(c) Subject to the provisions set forth in section 17A-403 (R1 through R4
districts only), if an existing residential building does not, as of the date
of the final adoption of this ordinance, conform to the building height to
setback ratio with respect to any side yard, an addition to the existing
building along that side yard may be built which violates the building
height to setback ratio, provided that: (1) the proposed addition's
building height to setback ratio for that side yard is no more
nonconforming than the building height to setback ratio for the existing
building; and (2) the proposed addition's length along that side yard is
no more than the length of the existing portion of the building which
violates the building height to setback ratio. (3) The minimum side yard
requirement shall be met.16
(a) The front yard setback for the principal dwellings on each lot fronting
on the same side of the street within 500 feet in either direction of the
lot for which the prevailing front setback is to be measured and within
the same zoning district shall be determined. The measurement shall
not include the setback from the street for corner lots, where the front
yard of the corner lot is measured from a different street. In calculating
the mean prevailing setback, the largest and smallest setback shall not
be included in the calculation. Setbacks shall be measured to the
nearest part of the house excluding porches and stoops.
(b) If the mean prevailing front setback as calculated for a lot is more than
five feet or less than five feet of the minimum required setback, the
developer shall be required to conform to the mean setback figure, plus
or minus two feet.
(c) If the mean prevailing setback as calculated for a lot is not more than
five feet greater or five feet less than the required setback, then the
developer shall comply with the minimum required setback.
(d) If utilization of the mean prevailing setback would limit the
construction of a dwelling to a size which is less than 80% of the
maximum building size permitted in the district, then the mean
prevailing setback shall be adjusted to a setback which permits the
construction of a dwelling which is 80% of the maximum building size
permitted in the district, for a lot with the minimum lot sit size but not
less than the minimum required front yard setback.
(e) If the side of the block in which is located the lot contains three or fewer
dwellings then the property owner shall have the option to match either
front yard setback.
16.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2006-07, codified herein, was adopted April 25, 2006.
§ B17A-376 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-377
BAO:441
§ B17A-377. Projections into yards; fences or walls; paved areas.
[Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No. 82-30, § 4; Ord. 2009-01, § V.; Ord. No.
2016-42 § 3; Ord. No. 2018-24 § 14]
§ B17A-377.1. Residential design standards. [Ord. No. 2016-42 § 2;
Ord. No. 2018-24 § 15]
§ B17A-378. Corner lots — Location of front, side and rear yards.
[Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No. 82-30, § 4]
A corner lot shall have one front yard, which shall face on either street, and
one side yard facing the other street. The rear yard shall be that yard which
is generally opposite the front yard.
§ B17A-379. Obstructions to vision at street intersections. [Ord. No.
77-1, § 2; Ord. No. 82-30, § 4]
At all street intersections in all R1, R2, R3, and R4 districts, that portion of
any corner lot within the triangle formed by the curb lines of such lot and a
(a) Cornices, gutters, downspouts and cantilevered roofs may project not
more than three feet into a yard.
(b) Belt courses, window sills and other ornamental features may project
not more than nine inches into a yard.
(c) Fire escapes may project not more than six feet into a yard.
(d) (Reserved) (Deleted by Ord. No. 2016-42 § 3).
(e) Fences or walls, not over six feet in height, may be erected anywhere on
the lot, except as set forth in section 17A-379.
(f) Paved areas, other than such as are needed for access to the building on
the lot, shall not be located less than four feet from a lot line.
(g) For allowable projections into yards in the R1 through R4 districts, see
section 17A-403.
(a) These regulations shall apply to all single family and two family homes,
except that in the R1 through R4 districts only, the provisions of section
17A-403 regarding porches and projections into front yards shall
govern.
(1) Porches:
a. Roofed front porches may encroach into the front setback a
maximum of eight feet provided the porch does not exceed 200
square feet and the majority of the structures within 500 feet
in either direction of the lot have roofed porches that encroach
on the front setback area. Porches which encroach into the
front setback may not have a second floor, balcony, deck or be
enclosed on all side.
§ B17A-377 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-379
BAO:442
line drawn between points on each curb line 40 feet distant from their point
of intersection shall be cleared of all growth and obstructions above the
level three feet higher than the center line of the street, except for isolated
trees trimmed to provide necessary sight distance.
§ B17A-380. Accessory buildings and secondary residence buildings
— In side or rear yards. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No. 78-26, § 10;
Ord. No. 82-30, § 4; Ord. No. 2006-07, § 13]
Accessory buildings which are accessory to a residential use and secondary
residence buildings may be located in any side or rear yard; except, that
in the case of a corner lot, such buildings shall not be located in that part
of the side or rear yard which is nearer to a street line than the front yard
setback required for a principal building on the adjacent lot; provided that;
§ B17A-381. Accessory building not in side or rear yards. [Ord. No.
77-1, § 2; Ord. No. 78-26, § 10; Ord. No. 82-30, § 4]
An accessory building or secondary residence building on that portion of a
lot not included in any yard shall conform with the height regulations for
principal buildings.
§ B17A-382. Distances between buildings on single lot. [Ord. No.
77-1, § 2; Ord. No. 78-26, § 11; Ord. No. 81-24, § 6; Ord. No. 82-30,
§ 4; Ord. No. 2009-01, § VI]
Where more than one building is located on a single lot, except on lots of
more than one acre in E1 or E2 districts, the following minimum distances
between buildings shall apply:
(a) No such accessory building or secondary residence building shall
exceed 15 feet in height.
(b) No such accessory building or secondary residence building shall be
closer to a lot than five feet. However, on contiguous lots, accessory
buildings constructed at the same time may be located in pairs or
groups along the common lot line and may have a common wall.
(c) All such accessory buildings, and secondary residence buildings, in the
aggregate, shall not occupy more than 20% of the area of the side yard
or rear yard.
(a) Between a one-family dwelling and a one-story accessory building, or
between a one-family dwelling and a one-story secondary residence
building: five feet.
(b) Between a principal building, except a one-family or two-family
dwelling, and a one-story accessory building: 10 feet.
(c) Between any other two buildings, principal or accessory or secondary
residence: A distance equal to that required for the individual wall
types required by section 17A-383.
§ B17A-379 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-383
BAO:443
§ B17A-383. Distances between buildings and windows in habitable
rooms of other buildings. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No. 81-24, § 7;
Ord. No. 82-30, § 4]
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, no building on any lot
or on the same lot shall intrude into the area required for the individual wall
types as follows:
(a) Type of wall.
(1) Primary wall is that wall of a building which contains windows
other than of the window types of a secondary wall as defined
herein, included but not limited to the windows of offices, principal
work areas and the habitable rooms of dwelling units.
(2) Secondary wall is that wall of a building in which more than 60% of
the windows in said wall are of rooms such as hallways, bathrooms,
kitchens, mechanical room, storage areas, and entirely enclosed
areas such as environmentally controlled computer and
communication rooms.
(3) Windowless wall is that wall which contains no windows.
(b) Minimum distance from the building wall to the walls of other buildings,
a wall of the same building or to a lot line other than a street lot line.
(1) Primary wall. Six feet plus two feet for each story(s) in height plus
one foot for each 10 feet of length (L.). D = 6 + 2 x s + L/10.
(2) Secondary wall. Two feet plus one foot for each story(s) in height
plus one foot for each 10 feet of length (L), minimum distance five
feet. D + 2 + s + L/10.
(3) Windowless wall. Where opposing walls have no windows, there is
no required distance between buildings, other than for fire
protection.
Where a window wall is opposite a windowless wall, the distance
between buildings is determined by the required space for the
window wall.
All measurements shall be performed in horizontal projection at the
sill level of the subject window.
Where walls are opposite each other, the minimum distance (D)
between building walls (S), shall be measured at that point where
the buildings are closest to each other and the length (L) shall be
equal to the length of that portion of the shorter wall measured
from that point where it is closest to the opposite wall to the end of
the shorter wall.
§ B17A-383 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-384
BAO:444
§ B17A-384. Courts in multiple dwellings, joint occupancy
buildings, dormitories and boarding houses. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2;
Ord. No. 82-30, § 4]
In multiple dwellings, joint occupancy buildings, dormitories and boarding
houses, courts are permitted only as follows:
§ B17A-385. Access to streets; conditional use approval of nonaccess.
[Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No. 82-30, § 4]
No building shall be constructed or altered upon a lot that does not have
access to a street, except in an E2 district when the entire subject building
is located more than 150 feet from a public street; provided, however, that
such building may be authorized as a conditional use:
(a) Inner courts. An inner court is permitted if the minimum dimension of
such court is not less than 60 feet or two times the height of the
building, whichever is less.
(b) Outer courts. The minimum width of an outer court shall be 20 feet, and
its depth shall not exceed its width.
(a) In an E2 district, when some part of the building is located within 150
feet of a public street, upon a finding by the municipal agency that
access to a street is not required for the subject building in its proposed
location.
(b) In an E1 district, upon a finding by the municipal agency that access to
a street is not required for the subject building in its proposed location.
§ B17A-384 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-385
BAO:445

SUBDIVISION III
Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements
§ B17A-386. Permitted accessory parking — Generally. [Ord. No.
77-1, § 2; Ord. No. 82-30, § 4]
Off-street parking spaces, open or enclosed, may be provided accessory to
any use; provided, that no automobile service, repair or fuelling shall be
provided, except in SB districts.
§ B17A-387. Required parking spaces — Size, design; signs. [Ord.
No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No. 78-26, § 12, Ord. No. 81-30, § 1; Ord. No.
82-30, § 4]
(a) A parking space shall be either a standard size parking space or a
compact size space. A standard size parking space shall contain 1071
square feet of area with minimum width and minimum length of nine
feet and 19 feet respectively when constructed at 90° to the travel aisle.
A compact size parking space shall contain 115 square feet of area with
minimum width and minimum length of 7 1/2 feet and 15 feet
respectively when constructed at 90° to the travel aisle. When parking
spaces are constructed at an angle of other than 90° to the travel aisle,
the minimum area for standard size and compact size space shall apply
and the design shall be subject to the approval of the borough engineer.
(b) Areas counted as parking spaces include any private garage, carport or
other paved off-street area available for parking, other than a driveway;
except, that in the cases of one-family and two-family dwelling, and
secondary residence buildings, driveway space not in the front yard
may be counted as parking spaces.
(c) Parking spaces shall not be provided within a required front yard. If in a
rear or side yard, parking spaces shall not be located within four feet of
any lot line.
(d) Unobstructed access to and from a street shall be provided.
(e) Non-illuminated identification and directional signs shall have an area
of not more than six square feet per sign. The number of signs shall be
limited to such as are essential for the purpose, as determined by the
development enforcement officer. All compact size parking spaces shall
be identified with a sign reading "small car(s) only" or its equivalent.
(f) The allowable number of compact size parking spaces is as follows:
(1) In parking areas and parking structures of less than 100 spaces, a
maximum of 15% of such spaces may be designed as compact
spaces,
(2) In parking areas and parking structures of greater than 100
spaces, a maximum of 30% of such spaces may be designed as
compact spaces,
§ B17A-386 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-387
BAO:447
§ B17A-388. Parking — Location; ownership. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2;
Ord. No. 82-30, § 4]
§ B17A-389. (Reserved)17
§ B17A-390. Parking lots and garages. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No.
81-13, § 5; Ord. No. 82-30, § 4; Ord. No. 90-27, § 15; Ord. No.
2004-3A, § I]
The following provisions unless otherwise indicated shall apply to all
parking lots with more than 10 spaces. Two or more parking lots on the
same tax lot (or lots, if under common ownership) which contain a total of
10 or more spaces and are separated by a distance of less than 150 feet
shall be treated as a lot with 10 or more spaces for purposes of this section.
(3) In parking structures, the maximum percentages of parking spaces
designed as compact spaces may be increased without limitation by
the planning board subject to a finding during the course of a
conditional use review that a greater percentage of compact
automobiles exists and are planned for in the future which may
utilize said spaces and that in the physical design of the parking
structure, an advantage exists for such an increased percentage of
compact spaces.
The location and design of compact spaces within each parking
area and parking structure shall be subject to the approval of the
borough engineer who may allow the maximum number of such
spaces only when the site will permit proper space for access and
maneuvering.
(a) Required parking spaces shall be provided upon the same lot as the use
to which they are accessory or within 100 feet of such lot, measured by
straight line from the nearest of such spaces. All parking spaces located
on a different lot from the use to which they are accessory shall be
permanently established for such accessory use as follows: Deed
restrictions approved by the borough attorney shall be placed upon
them and filed with the county clerk, binding an owner and his heirs
and assigns to maintain the required number of spaces available, either
for the entire life of the use to which they are accessory or until such
spaces are provided elsewhere.
(b) When a use is located on a lot which is partly in one district and partly
in another district, parking spaces for such lot may be located without
regard to district lines; provided, that no such parking spaces shall be
located in any R1, R2, R3 or R4 district, unless the use to which they are
accessory is permitted in such district or is approved by the board of
adjustment as a decision upon a special question.
17.Editor's Note: Former section 17A-389, Required parking spaces - Waiver by board of
adjustment, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 80-17,
was repealed in its entirety by Ord. No. 2002-20.
§ B17A-387 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-390
BAO:448
(a) All off-street parking lots with more than 10 spaces shall be graded,
paved, landscaped, lighted and maintained by the owner, in accordance
with site plan approval, if any, first duly obtained in accordance with
this section and other applicable requirements of this chapter.
(b) No entrance or exit for any parking lot with more than 10 spaces shall
be located within 50 feet of the intersection of any two street lines.
However, the board of adjustment may authorize minor adjustments in
this rule, in accordance with section 17A-209 and upon a finding by the
planning board in the course of conditional use review that a location
closer to an intersection is not hazardous to pedestrian or vehicular
traffic and is essential to the proper functioning of the parking lot.
Driveways providing access to parking lots with more than 10 spaces
and parking garages in an E district shall not pass through any
residential district before connecting to a street. For such lots and
garages, no more than 320 vehicles may enter or exit by way of a single
driveway onto a public street during any one hour, and the party
proposing such lots and garages shall submit a traffic analysis to the
board or officer of jurisdiction demonstrating compliance with this
provision.
(c) Off-street parking lots with more than 10 spaces shall have planting
strips at least four feet in width around the perimeter of the parking
area. Such planting strips shall be interrupted only at points of ingress
and egress and where the parking area or access drive abuts a building
on the same lot. The board of jurisdiction, or the zoning officer if there
is no site plan review, shall require that the design of parking areas and
the plantings to be placed upon these parking areas shall be adequate
to screen the parking area from the view of the street or any adjoining
lots and to achieve the maximum amount of green space consistent with
the parking requirement. This shall be accomplished by the installation
and maintenance of a solid planting of contiguous evergreen shrubs.
Plantings shall be of a size and type and shall be spaced so as to achieve
a visible barrier within three growing seasons and shall be at least six
feet high when planted. The plantings shall include an appropriate
number of shade trees. Dead or dying plantings shall be replaced as
soon as is practicable. If such lot abuts a gasoline service station or
another parking lot with more than 10 spaces, the planning board may
modify or waive this requirement for such abutting portion of the lot.
The board or officer of jurisdiction may permit a suitable screening wall
or fence upon determining that plantings are impracticable or
inappropriate. When required screening cannot be accomplished in a
manner consistent with sight triangle requirements, the maximum
amount of screening consistent with such requirements shall be put in
place.
However, when such parking lot is a corner lot at a street intersection
in an R1, R2, R3, or R4 district, within the triangle formed by the curb
lines of such lot and a line drawn between points on each curb line 40
feet distant from their point of intersection, such wall, fence or planting
§ B17A-390 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-390
BAO:449
shall be no more than three feet higher than the center line of the street
within the triangle formed by the curb lines of such lot and a line drawn
between points on each curb line 40 feet distant from their point of
intersection, as required in section 17A-379.
(d) In E districts, off-street parking lots with more than 10 spaces and
access drives for such lots and for parking garages shall be set back at
least 25 feet from public rights-of-way and residential district boundary
lines except that access drives may be located within the setback area
where necessary to connect the parking area with the public right-ofway;
and in the E4 district off-street parking lots shall be set back at
least 50 feet from an adjacent residential district not separated from
the E4 district by a public or private street. The setback area shall be
landscaped its full width and in such a manner to screen the parking lot
and access drive so that it is not visible from such rights-of-way and
boundary lines. This shall be accomplished by the installation and
maintenance of a solid planting of contiguous evergreen shrubs.
Plantings shall be of a size and type and shall be spaced so as to achieve
a visible barrier within three growing seasons and shall be at least six
feet high when planted. An appropriate number of shade trees not in
the visual barrier shall also be provided. Dead or dying plantings shall
be replaced as soon as is practicable. The board or officer of jurisdiction
may permit a suitable screening wall or fence upon determining that
plantings are impracticable or inappropriate and may, in addition to
plantings, require a wall or fence if necessary to fully screen the
parking area and access drive from adjoining residential districts.
When required screening cannot be accomplished in a manner
consistent with sight triangle requirements, the maximum amount of
screening consistent with such requirements shall be put in place.
(e) Lighting for parking lots shall be arranged so as to avoid reflection and
glare toward any R1, R2, R3 or R4 district or residential use and shall
be shielded so that light is not cast directly into such districts or uses.
(f) Adequate security measures shall be taken for the protection of persons
and vehicles in parking lots and garages.
(g) Off-street parking lots with 25 or more spaces shall have shade trees
planted to the extent of at least one tree for each 3.4 parking spaces or
fraction thereof in an arrangement that assures that all spaces are
shaded to the extent possible. Such trees shall be large, spreading-type
shade trees acceptable to the board or officer of jurisdiction and shall at
the time of planting have a caliper of at least 2 1/2 inches. They shall be
properly maintained, and all dead or dying trees shall be replaced as
soon as is practicable.
(h) The requirements set forth in subsections (c) to (g) hereof shall apply to
any parking lot approved after the effective date of this ordinance. They
shall also apply to any existing parking lot whenever a 10% or greater
increase in the square footage of buildings or impervious cover located
on the same lot is approved after the effective date of this ordinance.
§ B17A-390 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-390
BAO:450
(i) Subject to the conditions set forth below, "stacked parking" shall be
permitted in any existing parking garage with 100 or more parking
spaces located in the CB district provided the stacked parking plan has
been reviewed and received site plan approval as an administrative
waiver under section 17A-174. Staff may also seek the comments of the
borough fire official.
"Stacked parking" is defined as parking spaces created by a parking
arrangement which would not be available in a parking arrangement
satisfying the stall width and aisle requirements or for which a variance
has been granted.
(1) The review of the stacked parking plan shall be based on the
criteria of section 17A-193 of the Borough Land Use Code and the
other provisions of this section 17A-390(i).
(2) All applications for stacked parking shall comply with and include
the following:
a. At no time shall any fire lane, entrance or exit be blocked or
used for stacked parking.
b. At least one attendant, dedicated to moving vehicles and with
the ability and authority to move the vehicle, must be in
attendance whenever one or more vehicle is parked in a
stacked parking space. This provision may be waived for
approved parking areas assigned for use by registered parkers
from the same residential or commercial unit.
c. A certification from a qualified engineer or architect that the
existing structure has the structural capacity to accommodate
the additional weight associated with stacked parking.
d. Stacked parking operations shall not interfere with traffic flow
and general public access along, in or out of dedicated right-ofway
and private drives, nor shall the public right-of-way be
used for drop-off, pickup or storage purposes.
e. The applicant must demonstrate that the parking garage
facility will have easily accessible self-parking areas available
to the general public that do not conflict with stacked parking
areas.
f. A sketch plan showing the existing parking layout including
aisle width, stall dimensions and the location of all entrances
and exits.
g. The proposed parking layout plan indicating both stacked
parking spaces and parking spaces available to the general
public that are not stacked. The proposed parking layout must
also include aisle width, parking stall dimensions and all
entrances, exits and fire lanes.
§ B17A-390 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-390
BAO:451
§ B17A-391. Loading berths — Permitted. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord.
No. 78-26, § 13; Ord. No. 82-30, § 4]
Off-street loading berths, open or enclosed, are permitted accessory to any
use, except one-family and two-family dwellings and secondary residence
buildings.
§ B17A-392. Loading berths — Size, location, access and buffering.
[Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No. 82-30, § 4; Ord. No. 90-27, § 16]
h. An operations narrative describing how the stacked parking
will operate including hours of operation, days of the week and
staffing levels.
(3) A nonrefundable fee of $300 shall be paid to cover the cost of
processing the application. An escrow fee of $1,500 shall be paid to
cover the cost of professional services, including but not limited to
engineering, zoning, professional planning, legal and other
expenses connected with the review of the submitted materials.
The provisions of section 17A-36(b) shall apply.
(4) Approvals granted under this section shall be valid for two years
and thereafter subject to annual review to insure that the stacked
parking operations are in compliance with the approved or
amended plan.
(5) The stacked parking spaces in a garage shall not be considered to
be available parking spaces when cited by an applicant:
a. In support of a variance from its on-site parking requirement;
or
b. Within the planned commercial development seeking
expansion.
(a) Each required loading berth shall be at least 12 feet wide and 33 feet
long and shall have a minimum clear height of 14 feet.
(b) Unobstructed access to and from a street, with a minimum width of at
least 12 feet, shall be provided. Such access may be combined with
access to a parking facility.
(c) No entrance or exit for any loading berth shall be located within 50 feet
of the intersection of any two street lines.
(d) All permitted or required loading berths shall be on the same lot as the
use to which they are accessory; except, that loading berths may be
provided in spaces designed to serve jointly two or more
establishments, whether or not located on the same lot; provided, that
the number of required loading berths in such joint facilities shall be
not less than the total required for all such establishments, and subject
to a finding by the planning board, in the course of conditional use
§ B17A-390 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-392
BAO:452
§ B17A-393. Storage and overnight parking of inoperable vehicles,
trucks, boats, etc. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No. 82-30, § 4; Ord. No.
97-2, § I; Ord. No. 2001-2, § I]
review, that any such joint facility is in conformity with the intent of this
chapter.
(e) When a use is located on a lot which is partly in one district and partly
in another district, loading berths may be located without regard to
district lines; provided, that no such loading berth shall be located in
any R1, R2, R3 or R4 district, unless the use to which it is accessory is
permitted in such district or upon conditional use approval by the board
of adjustment or planning board.
(f) No open off-street loading berth shall be located in a required front
yard but, where feasible, shall be in the rear of the building.
(g) All off-street loading areas shall be set back at least 25 feet from public
rights-of-way and from residential district boundary lines. The setback
area shall be landscaped its full width and in such a manner to screen
the loading area so that it is not visible from such rights-of-way and
boundary lines.
(a) Inoperable, unregistered or uninspected motor vehicles shall not be
stored on private land or premises for more than five days after receipt
of a warning notice from the borough, except in enclosed garages.
(b) Except for canoes and open boats of under 15 feet in length, boats shall
not be stored for more than 48 hours, except in enclosed garages.
(c) Trucks and other business vehicles of over one-half ton capacity shall
not be parked overnight, except in enclosed garages or in off-street
parking facilities which are located in RO, RB, NB, CB or SB districts.
(d) In R1, R2, R3 and R4 districts, vehicles which are used for business
purposes and which can be readily identified as such, such as a truck of
any size or a passenger vehicle displaying business signs, may not be
parked overnight, except in enclosed garages.
§ B17A-392 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-393
BAO:453

SUBDIVISION IV
Of Right Modification of Bulk and Parking Requirements for
Approved Relocation Preservation Structures
§ B17A-393.1. Designation of preservation structures. [Ord. No.
86-20, § 4.]
Any owner of a structure within or without the borough may apply to
the development enforcement officer for designation of that structure as a
preservation structure as provided herein. In making such determination
the development enforcement officer shall consult the historic preservation
review committee, or its designated subcommittee, which shall make its
recommendation in writing.
§ B17A-393.2. Notice of designation. [Ord. No. 86-20, § 4]
If the development enforcement officer determines that a structure is a
preservation structure, he shall cause to be published twice in a newspaper
of general circulation in the borough a notice which announces the
designation and sets forth a description of the structure, the address of the
structure, and the name(s) of the owner(s) of the structure. The notice shall
contain an invitation to the public to submit proposals for the acquisition
and relocation of the structure pursuant to this subdivision; and the notice
shall set forth telephone number and mailing address at which inquiries and
submissions may be made.
§ B17A-393.3. Proposals for the acquisition and relocation of
preservation structures. [Ord. 86-20, § 4.]
(a) Any person may submit a proposal to the historic preservation review
committee for the acquisition and relocation of a preservation
structure. Such proposal shall include such information as may be
required by rules promulgated by the historic preservation review
committee, including:
(1) Identification of the applicant,
(2) A detailed description of the means by which applicant intends to
move the structure, including all streets and properties in the
borough likely to be affected,
(3) A detailed description of the relocation site and of the work
required to prepare the site,
(4) A sketch plat reflecting the proposed location of the structure on
the relocation site,
(5) An analysis of the extent of any noncompliance with bulk zoning
requirements applicable to the relocated structure at the relocation
site,
§ B17A-393.1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-393.3
BAO:455
§ B17A-393.4. Minimum criteria for relocation plans. [Ord. 86-20,
§ 4]
(6) A detailed description of plans for restoration of the exterior and, if
applicable, the interior of the structure, and
(7) A description of the means by which applicant intends to comply
with the terms and conditions imposed upon acquisition and
relocation as further set forth herein. Prior to any meeting at which
the historic preservation review committee makes a final decision
accepting a relocation plan, the committee shall give reasonable
written notice of the meeting to all owners of properties located in
whole or in part within 200 feet of the proposed relocation sites.
(b) Upon acceptance of any relocation plan by the historic preservation
review committee, in conformance with the standards and criteria set
forth herein the owner of the preservation structure may transfer
ownership of the structure to the successful applicant subject to the
following terms and conditions:
(1) The successful applicant shall remove the structure at its sole
expense;
(2) The successful applicant shall provide a bond or other security or
assurance acceptable to the borough in an amount sufficient to
guarantee the costs of moving the structure; and
(3) The successful applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of
the borough that it is adequately insured against liability for
damage to persons and property resulting from the relocation of
the structure.
(c) The acceptance of a relocation plan shall not be construed to affect the
continuing right of the owner of the preservation structure to transfer
or otherwise dispose of the structure in any manner and to any person
he chooses, except only the successful proponent of a relocation plan
shall be relieved of zoning requirements at the relocation site as further
provided herein.
(d) Review and approval of a relocation plan by the historic preservation
review committee pursuant to this section, regardless of the location of
the affected property, shall include and substitute for any review which
otherwise may be required by the site plan review advisory board
pursuant to section 17A-173, and the historic preservation review
committee shall have in this respect the same powers and its decisions
shall have the same effect as prescribed for the site plan review
advisory board.
(a) No proposal for the acquisition and relocation of a preservation
structure shall be accepted unless the applicant demonstrates the
following:
§ B17A-393.3 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-393.4
BAO:456
§ B17A-393.5. Criteria governing selection among competing
proposals. [Ord. 86-20, § 4]
(1) An intention and capacity to meet the terms and conditions set
forth above;
(2) Proposed means for relocating the structure in a safe and orderly
manner substantially restoring to original condition all properties
affected by the move, except restoration of the site on which the
structure was originally located shall be the responsibility of the
owner;
(3) A plan for locating the structure on the relocation site in a manner
which:
a. Complies with all zoning requirements except such
requirements as may be modified for preservation structures
pursuant to this subdivision,
b. Preserves the distinguishing original qualities or character of
the preservation structure,
c. Involves repair and replacement of deteriorated architectural
features in a manner consistent with the original composition,
design, texture and other visual qualities of the original
structure,
d. Involves only such alterations of the structure as preserve or
restore the essential form and integrity of the structure, and
e. Results in a restored and relocated structure which is
compatible with the size, scale and character of structures on
adjoining properties and with the visual aspects of the
streetscape.
(a) In the event of more than one proposal for acquisition and relocation of
a preservation structure, the historic preservation review committee
shall select and approve that proposal which meets the minimum
requirements set forth above and best accomplishes the following
objectives:
(1) Restoration of the exterior of the structure to its original
architecture;
(2) Location of the structure in a manner which ensures greatest
compatibility with adjoining properties and existing streetscapes;
(3) Moving of the structure with least damage or threat of damage to
trees and other properties;
(4) Closest possible compliance with existing zoning and parking
requirements; and
§ B17A-393.4 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-393.5
BAO:457
§ B17A-393.6. Modification of zoning requirements for relocated
preservation structures. [Ord. 86-20, § 4]
(5) Visibility of the relocated structure from public streets.
(b) In choosing between proposals which in other respects are
substantially similar, the historic preservation review committee shall
give preference to relocation plans which result in the following end
uses, in order of preference:
(1) Low-and-moderate-income housing, as same is defined by
regulations of the department of housing and urban development;
(2) Residential use;
(3) Mixed residential and commercial use;
(4) Commercial use.
(a) To the extent required for implementation of an approved relocation
plan, the following zoning requirements otherwise applicable to
structures on the relocation site shall be modified as necessary,
provided the location of the relocated structure on the site is
compatible with the streetscape:
(1) Floor-area-ratio and lot-coverage requirements, provided the floorarea-
ratio applicable to a relocated preservation structure devoted
to commercial use or mixed commercial and residential use shall
not exceed the requirements otherwise applicable by more than
15%;
(2) Minimum lot areas, lot widths and lot depths;
(3) Minimum front-yard requirements;
(4) Minimum back-yard requirements and minimum smaller-side-yard
requirements, provided the location of the structure complies with
the requirements for minimum distances between buildings on
adjacent properties as set forth in section 17A-382 and 17A-383, or
with the relaxed side-yard requirements for existing small lots as
set forth in sections 17A-373 or 17A-376 (b), whichever permits in a
particular case the smaller side-yard;
(5) Parking requirements, provided any such requirement applicable
to commercial or mixed uses may only be reduced by up to one-half,
and provided further that there shall be no reduction whatsoever
for eating and drinking establishments; and,
(6) In a commercial district, set-back requirements relating to paving
for parking spaces.
§ B17A-393.5 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-393.7
BAO:458
§ B17A-393.7. Violations. [Ord. 86-20, § 4.]
Any proponent of a relocation plan adopted by the historic preservation
review committee which after acquisition of the preservation structure fails
to perform the commitments it has undertaken in such relocation plan shall
be subject to an action for performance of said commitments and shall
otherwise be liable in contract and tort to the full extent permitted by law,
in addition to such other penalties as are provided for violations of this
chapter.
§ B17A-393.7 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-393.7
BAO:459

SUBDIVISION V
Buffering Requirements
§ B17A-393.8. Buffering of residential districts and uses. [Ord. No.
90-27, § 17.]
The side or rear lot line of a lot shall be screened by a landscaped buffer
strip designed in accordance with section 17A-390(c) wherever the lot is
proposed to be improved with a nonresidential use and the lot line borders
a residential use or district.
§ B17A-393.8 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-393.8
BAO:461

Division 8
Nonconforming Uses And Noncomplying Buildings
SUBDIVISION I
Nonconforming Uses
§ B17A-394. Continuance of nonconforming use. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2;
Ord. No. 82-30, § 4]
A nonconforming use existing lawfully on November 19, 1968, may be
continued, subject to the provisions of this chapter.
§ B17A-395. Buildings containing — Maintenance, repairs and
structural alterations. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No. 82-30, § 4; Ord.
No. 85-12, § 17]
Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to prevent ordinary
maintenance or repair of any building substantially occupied by a
nonconforming use, and structural alterations may be made in such a
building, when necessary in the interest of public health, safety,
convenience or appearance, except in a historic preservation district, all
such structural alterations which would affect the exterior of the structure
and would be visible from a public way in the district shall be subject to the
standards and criteria set forth in section 17A-193A. In granting any permit
for such alterations, the development enforcement officer shall file a written
statement indicating the precise reason why such alterations were deemed
necessary.
§ B17A-396. Nonconforming uses — Damage or partial destruction.
[Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No. 82-30, § 4.]
If a building substantially occupied by a nonconforming use is damaged or
destroyed by any means to the extent of 80% or more of its true value, such
nonconforming use shall not be resumed.
§ B17A-397. Changes to other uses. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No.
82-30, § 4.]
A nonconforming use may be changed to any conforming use but shall
not be changed to another nonconforming use. If a nonconforming use is
changed to a conforming use, it shall not thereafter be changed back to a
nonconforming use.
§ B17A-398. Extension, enlargement or relocation. [Ord. No. 77-1,
§ 2; Ord. No. 82-30, § 4.]
A nonconforming use shall not be extended, enlarged or placed on a
different portion of the lot or parcel of land occupied by such use on
November 19, 1968, or on the effective date of a subsequent amendment to
this chapter which makes the use nonconforming.
§ B17A-394 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-399
BAO:463
§ B17A-399. Cessation of operations. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No.
82-30, § 4.]
If, for a continuous period of one year, no substantial operations are carried
on in a building or on land occupied by a nonconforming use, the building
or land shall thereafter be used only for a conforming use. Intent to resume
active operations shall not effect the foregoing.
§ B17A-399 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-399
BAO:464
SUBDIVISION II
Noncomplying Buildings
§ B17A-400. Continuance of use of noncomplying buildings. [Ord.
No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No. 82-30, § 4]
The use of a noncomplying building existing on November 19, 1968, may be
continued, subject to the provisions of this chapter.
§ B17A-401. Maintenance, repairs and structural alterations. [Ord.
No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No. 82-30, § 4; Ord. No. 85-12, § 18]
Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to prevent ordinary
maintenance, repair or structural alterations to any noncomplying building,
except in a historic preservation district, all structural alterations which
would affect the exterior of the structure would be visible from a public
way in the district, shall be subject to the standards and criteria set forth in
section 17A-193A.
§ B17A-402. Enlargement. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 2; Ord. No. 82-30, § 4;
Ord. No. 2018-24 § 16]
Except with respect to permitted residential uses in the R1 through R4
districts, a noncomplying building shall not be enlarged in any way which
would either:
(a) Create a new noncompliance; or
(b) Increase the degree of noncompliance with respect to any bulk
regulations or off-street parking and loading requirements contained in
this chapter.
For noncomplying residential uses in the R1 through R4 districts, see
section 17A-403.
§ B17A-400 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-402
BAO:465

Division 9
Neighborhood Residential Zoning Standards
§ B17A-403. Neighborhood Residential Zoning Standards. [Ord. No.
2018-24 § 1]
Except as otherwise specifically noted in the provisions that follow, the
requirements set forth in this section shall apply to all lots developed or
to be developed with a residential use in the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6,
R-7, R-8, and R-9 zoning districts of the former Township and the R1, R2,
R3, and R4 zoning districts of the former Borough, and in the event of a
conflict between the provisions of this section and any other provision of
this Chapter, the provisions of this section shall prevail.
(a) House Orientation & Access.
(1) Applicability. The provisions of this subsection shall apply to lots 1/
2 acre (21,780 square feet) or less in lot area.
(2) Orientation.
a. The dwelling and front entrance shall be oriented to face
toward and relate to the street (and the public sidewalk, if
present).
(3) Private Walkways. (see Figs. 1 and 2).
a. (A) Private walkways shall be located on a property to facilitate
pedestrian access between the front entrance of the dwelling
(and the public sidewalk, if present), with the following
exceptions:
Lots with no public sidewalk
Lots with a front yard setback 75 feet or greater
Lots with a motor-court garage
Lots with a U-shaped driveway
b. Width of Walkway: Min. three feet (B).
c. Setback from Driveway (except for portions of the private
walkway providing access between driveway and front
entrance): min one feet (C).
§ B17A-403 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-403
BAO:467
Figure 1
Figure 2
(b) Facade articulation - walls facing a street.
(1) Applicability. The provisions of this subsection shall apply to each
wall facing a street.
(2) Street Wall Articulation (see Figs. 3 through 6).
a. (A) The maximum length of any wall facing the street shall be
45 feet.
b. (B) Such wall may extend beyond 45 feet in length by stepping
inward or outward by a minimum offset distance of four feet.
c. (C) The minimum length of any wall facing the street shall be
eight feet.
(3) Street Wall Fenestration.
a. The maximum length of blank wall not containing windows,
doors, garage doors or other openings shall not exceed 15 feet
on each floor.
§ B17A-403 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-403
BAO:468
b. A minimum of 10% of the total area of any wall facing a street
shall consist of windows and doors, except for garage bay
doors.
Figure 3
Figure 4.
Figure 5.
§ B17A-403 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-403
BAO:469
Figure 6.
(c) Facade articulation - walls not facing a street.
(1) Applicability. Except for in the former Township R-9 zoning district
and the former Borough R4 zoning district, the provisions of this
subsection shall apply to any wall not facing a street or a rear lot
line.
(2) Side Wall Articulation (see Fig. 7).
a. (A) The maximum length of side wall facing the side lot line
shall be 40 feet.
b. (B) Such wall may extend beyond 40 feet in length by stepping
inward or outward by a minimum offset distance of two feet.
c. (C) The minimum length of side wall facing the side lot line
shall be eight feet.
(3) Side Wall Fenestration (see Fig. 8).
a. (D) The maximum length of blank wall not containing windows,
doors, garage doors or other openings, shall not exceed 10 feet
from the front facade and 25 feet elsewhere, as measured on
each floor.
b. (E) A minimum of 5% of the total area of any side wall shall
consist of windows and doors, except for garage bay doors.
§ B17A-403 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-403
BAO:470
Figure 7
Figure 8
Note: For the purposes of this subsection, walls shall be
measured vertically from average finished grade to top of
wall and horizontally from edge of framing to edge of
framing. Fascia boards and areas behind a roof shall not be
included. Permitted openings shall be measured by the area
of their rough openings. The above illustration depicts 5%
openings.
(d) Front entry garages (see Figs. 9 through 12)
(1) Location and Recess Requirements.
a. (A) That portion of a one- or two-bay front entry garage facing
a street that is part of the principal structure shall be recessed
behind the nearest portion of the principal structure's facade
by a minimum distance of 16 feet. Front-entry garages with
more than two bays shall not be permitted.
b. (C) Up to four feet of a one-story roofed porch may count
towards the garage recess requirement, provided that such
porch has the following dimensions:
1. Depth: Min. six feet (D)
2. Width: Min. 12 feet (E)
§ B17A-403 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-403
BAO:471
(2) Width.
a. (B) A one- or two-bay garage that is part of the principal
structure shall not be wider than 50% of the overall width of
the structure or 30 feet, whichever is less.
Figure 9
Figure 10
Figure 11
§ B17A-403 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-403
BAO:472
Figure 12
(e) Side- or Rear-Entry Garages (see Figs. 13 and 14).
(1) Location & Recess Requirements.
a. (A) The portion of a garage that is part of the principal
structure and facing the side or rear of the property shall be
recessed behind the nearest portion of the facade by a
minimum distance of eight feet.
(2) Width.
a. (B) A side- or rear-entry garage that is part of the principal
structure shall not be wider than 50% of the overall width of
the structure or 30 feet, whichever is less.
Figure 13
§ B17A-403 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-403
BAO:473
Figure 14
(f) Garage on Corner Lots.
(1) Applicability. The following provisions shall apply to corner lots.
(2) Location & Recess Requirements (see Figs. 15 through 17).
a. (A) A garage shall be located on the side of the dwelling
farthest away from the street intersection.
b. (B) On lots 75 feet or less in width, the garage shall be
accessed by a driveway from the secondary street (not the
primary street), and that portion of the garage facing the street
that is part of the principal structure shall be recessed behind
the nearest portion of the facade of the principal structure by a
minimum distance of eight feet.
Figure 15
§ B17A-403 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-403
BAO:474
Figure 16
Figure 17
(g) Garage on Narrow Lots.
(1) Applicability. The following provisions shall apply to all lots other
than corner lots that are 60 feet wide or less, but only in the R-7,
R-8 and R-9 zoning districts in the former Township, and the R3 and
R4 zoning districts in the former Borough.
(2) Design Provisions (see Figs. 18 and 19).
a. An attached garage, porte-cochere or carport may extend into
the side yard setback as follows:
1. (A) The structure may extend no greater than five feet into
the setback.
2. (B) The structure shall be no closer than five feet from a
property line.
3. (C) The structure shall not be greater than 30 feet in
length within the portion of the structure that extends into
the setback.
§ B17A-403 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-403
BAO:475
4. (D) The structure shall be no greater than one story and a
maximum of 15 feet in height to the peak of the roof,
within the portion of the structure that extends into the
setback.
b. (E) Habitable space may be located above the garage, provided
the habitable space is located within the permissible building
envelope and does not extend into the setback.
(3) Screening.
a. Porte-cocheres and carports that extend into the setback shall
be screened from view from the side property line with
evergreen landscaping at least six feet in height along the
entire side of the structure.
Figure 18
Figure 19
(h) Motorcourt Garages on Large Lots.
(1) Applicability. The following provisions shall apply to lots 125 feet or
greater in width, except corner lots.
(2) Design Provisions (see Fig. 20).
§ B17A-403 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-403
BAO:476
a. (A) A motor-court garage may be located in front of the
foremost portion of the dwelling.
b. (B) The garage shall be oriented toward the interior of the lot,
and not the street or the side of the property.
c. (C) The garage shall be limited to parking for three vehicles.
d. (D) The garage shall be no higher than one story and a
maximum of 25 feet as measured to the peak of the roof, or the
height of the principal structure, whichever is less.
e. The garage shall not contain habitable space above.
f. (E) The bottom of the roof eave shall be no greater than 12 feet
above average finished grade, as measured along the foremost
portion of the garage facing the street.
Figure 20
(i) Driveway location and design (see Figs. 21 through 23).
(1) Access.
a. Every lot shall have a maximum of one driveway opening
providing access to a street.
b. Where there is a common or shared driveway between two
properties, neither property shall be allowed another driveway
opening.
(2) Setbacks.
a. (A) From intersecting lot lines at street corners: Min. 40 feet.
b. (B) From side lot lines on lots greater than 50 feet in lot width:
Min. five feet.
c. (B) From side lot lines on lots 50 feet or less in lot width: Min.
three feet.
§ B17A-403 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-403
BAO:477
d. (B) From side lot lines with shared driveway with adjoining
lots: None.
(3) Width.
a. (C) Min. eight feet, clear of any obstructions to a height of
eight feet.
b. (C) At face of curb: Max. 14 feet.
c. (C) At property line: Max. 10 feet.
d. (D) Within front yard (for first 75 feet only (E)): Max. 22 feet.
(4) Parking Setbacks.
a. The minimum front parking setback shall be equal to the front
yard setback of the dwelling or 25 feet, whichever is less.
b. Parking of vehicles shall be located on a driveway or in a
garage.
Figure 21
Figure 22
§ B17A-403 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-403
BAO:478
Figure 23
(j) U-shaped driveway location and design (see Fig. 24).
(1) Applicability. The following additional provisions shall apply to lots
100 feet or greater in width at the street line.
(2) Access.
a. (C) One additional driveway opening shall be permitted for the
purposes of creating a connected or U-shaped driveway in the
front yard.
(3) Setbacks.
a. (A) Between driveway openings on subject lot: Min. 50 feet.
b. (B) From side lines: Min. five feet.
Figure 24
(k) Narrow and non-conforming lot conditions.
(1) Non-Conforming Lots.
a. Any existing permitted single-family dwelling on a lot that is
non-conforming as to area, frontage, width or depth may be
§ B17A-403 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-403
BAO:479
altered or enlarged, provided that all other bulk requirements
of this Chapter are complied with.
(2) Non-Conforming Yard Setbacks.
a. The provisions of this subsection (2) shall apply only to lots
located in the Township R-9 district or the Borough R4 district,
or lots that are no greater than 6,000 square feet in area or 60
feet in width.
b. For those lots defined in subsection (2)a above, a permitted
single-family dwelling with non-conforming yard setbacks may
be altered or enlarged, provided that such alteration or
enlargement does not affect, extend or increase the nonconformity,
except as follows:
1. The alteration or enlargement involves the extension of an
existing exterior side wall with a non-conforming side yard
setback that is a minimum of 50% of the individual side
yard setback requirement for the district in which it is
located. In no case shall an individual side yard setback be
permitted to be less than three feet from a side or rear
property line.
2. The alteration or enlargement involves the extension of an
existing exterior side wall with a non-conforming side yard
setback that is a minimum of 75% of the combined side
yard setback requirement for the district in which it is
located.
3. The alteration or enlargement within the setback area
shall be limited to 15 feet in length and one story in height.
This provision shall not apply to two-story additions or
additions involving the third floor.
4. All other bulk requirements of this Chapter are complied
with.
(3) Non-Conforming Height-to-Setback Ratio Planes.
a. A permitted single-family dwelling with non-conforming
height-to-setback ratio may be altered or enlarged, provided
that such does not affect, extend or increases any nonconforming
height-to-setback ratio, except in the case of the
reconstruction, alteration or enlargement of dormers that
project into the required height-to-setback ratio plane, subject
to the provisions of subsection (1) "Supplementary provisions"
below.
(4) Adjusted Height-to-Setback Ratio for Narrow Lots.
a. On lots 45 feet or less in width, the height-to-setback ratio shall
be 4.5:1.
§ B17A-403 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-403
BAO:480
(5) Proportional FAR - alteration and enlargement of structures;
nonconforming lots. See section 17A-373(b) of the "Code of the
Borough of Princeton, New Jersey, 1974" and section 10B-330 of
the "Code of the Township of Princeton, New Jersey, 1968."
(6) Non-Conforming Height.
a. Any permitted single-family or two-family dwelling in existence
prior to December 1, 2018 that is non-conforming as to height
may be altered or enlarged, provided that such alteration or
enlargement does not affect or increase the nonconformity.
(l) Supplementary Provisions.
(1) First Floor Finished Floor Elevation.
a. On lots 1/2 acre or less in size, the finished floor elevation
(F.F.E.) of the first floor shall not be raised more than 48 inches
above the average finished grade, as measured along the front
wall closest to the street.
(2) Permitted Projections.
a. Cornices, eaves, chimneys, gutters, downspouts, awnings,
canopies, cantilevered roofs, uncovered balconies and bay
windows may project not more than three feet into any yard
setback and height-to-setback ratio plane.
b. Belt courses, window sills and other similar ornamental
features may project not more than nine inches into any yard
setback.
c. Window wells may project not more than three feet into any
yard setback.
d. Fire escapes may project not more than six feet into a side or
rear yard setback.
e. Non-enclosed one-story porches, porticos, stoops and entrance
platforms leading to the front entrance may project not more
than eight feet into a front yard setback. Such porch, stoop and
entrance platform may have an uncovered balcony directly
above provided it has the same footprint as, and is attached to,
the structure below.
f. Non-enclosed one-story porches, porticos, stoops, entrance
platforms, uncovered decks, and basement entrances may
project not more than four feet into a side or rear yard setback.
g. In no case shall a permitted projection be less than three feet
from a side or rear property line.
§ B17A-403 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-403
BAO:481
h. Steps leading to a porch or stoop may project into a yard
setback without limitation, provided that the steps do not
encroach upon the public right-of-way.
(3) Dormers Projecting into Height-to-Setback Ratio Planes (see Fig.
25).
a. Dormers may project into the height-to-setback ratio plane as
follow:
1. (A) The front wall of any dormer shall not project beyond
the wall of the story directly below.
2. (B) In no case shall any dormer project above the ridgeline
of the roof in which the dormer is built.
3. The cumulative width of the front wall(s) of the dormer(s)
shall not exceed 50% of the width of the roof containing
such dormer(s).
4. The side walls of any dormer shall not be closer than 18
inches to the projected plane of the wall below.
Figure 25
(4) A/C Condenser Units, Generators, Transformers, and Above-
Ground Fuel Tanks.
a. A/C condenser units, generators, transformers, aboveground
fuel tanks and other similar devices shall be subject to the
following provisions:
1. No such device shall be located in a front yard. On corner
lots and through lots, such device may be located on the
side of the property fronting on a secondary street
provided it is set back a minimum distance of 10 feet from
the property line along the secondary street.
2. Such devices shall be set back a minimum distance of
three feet from the side and rear lot lines, except
§ B17A-403 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-403
BAO:482
generators, which shall be set back a minimum distance of
five feet from the side and rear lot lines.
§ B17A-403 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-403
BAO:483

Division 10
Miscellaneous
§ B17A-404. Regular membership on planning board and board of
adjustment continued; new appointments. Continued; New
Appointments. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 3; Ord. No. 82-30, § 4.]
Members of the board of adjustment and the regional planning board at
the time of the adoption of this chapter shall continue in office until the
completion of their terms, except that the terms of alternate members of
the board of adjustment shall end upon the adoption of this chapter. Any
new appointments or reappointments hereafter made to said boards shall
be governed by the provisions of the Code adopted by this chapter.
§ B17A-405. Pending applications for development. [Ord. No. 77-1,
§ 4; Ord. No. 82-30, § 4.]
Applications and appeals for development that are pending at the time of
the adoption of this chapter may be continued.
§ B17A-406. Text of Code provisions readopted by reference. [Ord.
No. 77-1, § 5; Ord. No. 82-30, § 4.]
Three copies of this chapter, each including the text and any maps of the
parts of the Code that are noted above as being readopted by reference
without text, are on file in the office of the borough clerk, where they
will remain for public inspection until final action is taken on this chapter
according to law.
§ B17A-407. Repealer. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 6; Ord. No. 82-30, § 4.]
Chapters 12A, 23, 27, 29 and 35 of the "Code of the Borough of Princeton,
New Jersey, 1974", are repealed to the extent that they are not readopted
by reference by or included in the text of this chapter. To the extent that the
same are readopted by reference or included in the text of this chapter, they
shall be deemed continued.
§ B17A-408. Effective date. [Ord. No. 77-1, § 7; Ord. No. 82-30, § 4.]
This chapter shall take effect on February 1, 1977, and upon the filing of a
copy thereof with the Mercer County Planning Board, as provided by law.
§ B17A-404 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § B17A-408
BAO:485
Chapter B18
LIBRARIES
Editor's Note: This Chapter 18 to be adopted in the Princeton Code.
§ B17A-408 PRINCETON CODE § B17A-408
BAO:486
ARTICLE I
Princeton Public Library
§ 18-1. Princeton Public Library. [Ord. No. 2014-16]
There is hereby established and continued a Princeton Public Library for
the benefit of the inhabitants of Princeton.
§ 18-2. Board of Trustees; Terms of Appointment; Vacancies;
Removal. [Ord. No. 2014-16]
§ 18-3. Power and Authority of Board of Trustees. [Ord. No.
2014-16]
The board of trustees shall have such powers and authority as established
by law, N.J.S.A. 40:54-1 et seq., and this Code.
a. There is hereby established and continued a board of trustees of the
Princeton Public Library consisting of nine members, one of whom shall
be the mayor and one of whom shall be the superintendent of schools.
At least four of the regular members shall be residents of Princeton. Of
the seven regular appointments initially made, one shall be appointed
for one year, one for two years, one for three years, one for four years
and three for five years. The mayor shall make such appointments upon
the consent of the council. The mayor and the superintendent of schools
may, respectively, appoint an alternate to act in their stead with
authority to attend all meetings of the board and, in their absence, to
vote on all questions before the board.
b. The trustees shall elect from its members a president, treasurer and
secretary, who shall hold their offices for one year and until their
successors are elected.
c. Upon the expiration of the term of office of any trustee, the mayor shall
appoint a successor to serve for a term of five years in the same manner
as the original appointment was made.
d. Vacancies occurring shall be filled for the unexpired term only, in the
same manner as the original appointments are made.
e. The council shall be authorized to remove any trustee from office for
cause, and only after a public hearing upon a written complaint setting
forth the charge or charges against said trustee.
§ 18-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 18-3
BAO:487

ARTICLE II
Use and Return of Library Material
§ 18-4. Failure to Return Property. [Ord. No. 2014-16]
No person shall detain or fail to return any book, periodical, pamphlet,
artistic reproduction, phonograph recording, audio-visual material or any
other article borrowed from the Princeton Public Library after 30 days have
elapsed from the date of posting by certified mail, return receipt requested
of a notice demanding return thereof, addressed to said person at the last
address furnished.
§ 18-5. Damage to Property. [Ord. No. 2014-16]
No person shall cut, tear, deface, disfigure, damage or destroy any book,
periodical, pamphlet, artistic reproduction, phonograph recording, audiovisual
material or other article, or any part thereof, which is borrowed from,
owned by or is in the custody of the Princeton Public Library.
§ 18-6. Posting of Notice. [Ord. No. 2014-16]
The board of trustees shall adopt and post in a conspicuous place in the
Princeton Public Library building, rules, regulations and procedures
governing the borrowing of books, periodicals, pamphlets, or any other item
or article which may be available for such borrowing to the public.
§ 18-7. Illegal Use of Library Cards. [Ord. No. 2014-16]
No person shall remove any book, periodical, pamphlet, artistic
reproduction, phonograph recording, audio-visual material or any other
item or article from the Princeton Public Library building without
presenting first a valid library card and complying with all of the rules,
regulations and procedures of the library for borrowing such items or
articles.
§ 18-8. False Identification. [Ord. No. 2014-16]
No person shall register or furnish a false name or address, or use any card
other than the one issued to said person for the purpose of borrowing any
book or other article from the Princeton Public Library.
§ 18-9. Filing of Complaint for Overdue Property. [Ord. No.
2014-16]
If a person fails to return any book, periodical, pamphlet, artistic
reproduction, phonograph recording, audio-visual material or any other
article borrowed from the Princeton Public Library after notice is served
upon said person pursuant to section 18-4 of this Code, and said property
remains overdue for an additional 30 days, the director of the library or his
designee shall forward to said person a second certified mail notification
that said material is overdue and that unless said person returns said
§ 18-4 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 18-9
BAO:489
material within 30 days of receipt of this second notice, that person is
subject to prosecution in the Princeton municipal court for having violated
section 18-4 of the Code.
§ 18-10. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2014-16]
Any person who violates or refuses to comply with the regulations and
provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the
penalties as provided in section 1-6. Repeat offenders, as that term is
defined in section 1-6, shall be subject to the penalties set forth in section
1-6.
§ 18-9 PRINCETON CODE § 18-10
BAO:490
Chapter B19
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Editor's Note: Chapter 19, Motor Vehicles and Traffic was repealed
and replaced in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2009-03, adopted
February 24, 2009 and certified by the borough engineer that the
standards contained herein adhere to the standards of the Manual
on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways as
adopted by the Commissioner of the New Jersey Department of
Transportation. Prior ordinance history includes portions of
Ordinance Nos. 97-5, 97-19, 98-1, 98-22, 99-1, 2000-1, 20002,
2000-3, 2000-25, 2001-2, 2001-5, 2004-02, 2004-08, 2005-16,
2006-01, 2007-12 and 2008-19.
§ 18-10 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 18-10
BAO:491

ARTICLE I
In General
§ 19-1. Definitions and Rules of Construction. [Ord. No. 2009-03,
§ I]
(a) Definitions and rules of construction. Whenever any words and phrases
are used in this chapter the meanings respectively ascribed to them in
subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey shall be
deemed to apply to such words and phrases used herein.
In addition, the following terms not defined in such Title 39 are hereby
determined and defined with reference to this chapter as follows:
CURB — The lateral boundary of that portion of the street designated
for the use of vehicles, whether marked by curbing or not.
DAYTIME PARKING — The parking of a vehicle at any time and for any
length of time between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
DAYTIME PARKING PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to section
19-31 authorizing daytime parking in any available daytime parking
space.
DAYTIME PARKING SPACE — A parking space designated for daytime
parking pursuant to section 19-31.
DISTANCES — All distances contained in this chapter are measured
from the point of intersection of the closest extended curblines, unless
otherwise stated.
EVENING PARKING — The parking of any vehicle at any time and for
any length of time between 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
EVENING PARKING PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to section
19-31 authorizing evening parking in any available unlimited parking
space.
PARKED AT AN ANGLE OR PARKING AT ANGLES — Shall apply to
vehicles drawn up alongside one another, not parallel to the curb.
SIDE (I.E., THE SOUTH SIDE OF MERCER STREET) — The curbline as
defined in this section.
SMARTCARD — A replenishable parking debit card issued by the
borough for use in any municipal parking meter or municipal parking
garage.
TIME — Whenever certain periods of time are set forth in this chapter,
they shall be construed to mean either Eastern Standard Time or
Eastern Daylight Time, during such periods when each shall be in effect
in the borough.
UNLIMITED PARKING — The parking of a vehicle at any time and for
any length of time.
§ 19-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-1
BAO:493
§ 19-2. Traffic and Transportation Committee. [Ord. No. 2009-03,
§ I]
§ 19-3. Trucks Over Four Tons Excluded from Certain Streets.18
[Ord. No. 2009-03, § I]
UNLIMITED PARKING PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to section
19-31 authorizing unlimited parking in any available unlimited parking
space.
UNLIMITED PARKING SPACE — A parking space designated for
unlimited parking pursuant to section 19-31.
(a) Creation; composition; qualification of members; terms; removal;
expenses and compensation of members.
(1) This section hereby creates a traffic and transportation committee,
which shall consist of seven regular members who shall be
residents of the borough, holding no other municipal office or
employment therein, who shall be appointed by the mayor and
council. Of the regular members first appointed, one shall have a
term of one year, two shall have a term of two years and four shall
have a term of three years; thereafter, the term of a regular
member shall be three years. A majority of the committee shall
constitute a quorum for the conduct of business. All members of the
committee shall serve after the expiration of their terms, until their
successors shall be appointed and qualified. Vacancies occurring
other than by expiration of term shall be filled by the mayor and
council for the unexpired term only. Members shall be removed by
the mayor and council for cause upon written charges after
hearing. Members shall serve without compensation, but shall be
entitled to reimbursement within budgetary limitations for
reasonable and necessary expenses incurred by them in the
performance of their duties.
(b) Powers and duties generally.
(1) The traffic and transportation committee shall advise and assist the
borough council in reviewing traffic and transportation issues
which may arise in the borough. The traffic and transportation
committee shall have the further responsibility to carry out such
other advisory, educational and informational functions as will
promote traffic and transportation issues in the borough.
(a) Trucks over four tons gross weight are hereby excluded from the
following streets or parts of streets in the borough, except for the
pickup and delivery of materials on such streets:
18.For state law as to authority of borough to pass ordinance establishing truck routes and
excluding trucks from other streets, see N.J.S.A 40:67-16.1.
§ 19-1 PRINCETON CODE § 19-3
BAO:494
Alexander Street between University Place and Mercer Street
Bank Street between Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) and Chambers
Street
Boudinot Street between Route NJ 206 (Bayard Lane) and Library
Place
Cedar Lane Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) and Prospect Avenue
Charlton Street between Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) and William
Street
Chestnut Street between Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) and Hamilton
Avenue
Cleveland Lane between Route NJ 206 (Bayard Lane) and Elm Road
Dickinson Street between University Place and Alexander Street
Edgehill Street between Route NJ 206 (Stockton Street) and Mercer
Street
Ewing Street between Harrison Street North and Franklin Avenue
Franklin Avenue between Harrison Street and Princeton Borough -
Princeton Township corporate line
Hamilton Avenue between Moore Street and Snowden Lane
Harriet Drive between Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) and Hamilton
Avenue
Hawthorne Avenue between Harrison Street North and Linden Lane
Hawthorne Avenue between Moore Street and Walnut Lane
Hibben Road between Route NJ 206 (Stockton Street) and Mercer
Street
Hodge Road between Route NJ 206 (Bayard Lane) and Elm Road
Horner Lane between Hamilton Avenue and Harrison Street North
Houghton Road between Moore Street and Walnut Lane
Jefferson Road between Wiggins Street and Franklin Avenue
John Street between Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) and Hulfish Street
John Street between Paul Robeson Place and the Princeton Borough -
Princeton Township corporate line
Leavitt Lane between Hamilton Avenue and the Princeton Borough -
Princeton Township corporate line
Library Place between Mercer Street and Westcott Road
Linden Lane between Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) and Franklin
Avenue
Madison Street between Park Place and Wiggins Street
Maple Street between Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) and Spruce Street
Markham Road between Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) and Patton
Avenue
§ 19-3 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-3
BAO:495
Mercer Street between Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) and the
Princeton Borough-Princeton Township corporate line
Moore Street between Route NJ. 27 (Nassau Street) and Franklin
Avenue
Moran Avenue between Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) and Spruce
Street
Murray Place between Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) and Prospect
Avenue
North Tulane Street between Spring Street and Wiggins Street
Olden Street between Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) and Prospect
Avenue
Palmer Square East between Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) and Hulfish
Street
Patton Avenue between Murray Place and Cedar Lane
Pelham Street between Harrison Street and Wilton Street
Pine Street between Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) and Spruce Street
Princeton Avenue between Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) and Prospect
Avenue
Prospect Avenue between Washington Road and Riverside Drive
Scott Lane between Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) and Bainbridge
Street
Sergeant Street between Harrison Street and Wilton Street
South Tulane Street between Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) and Spring
Street
Spring Street between Witherspoon Street and Vandeventer Avenue
Stanley Avenue between Hamilton Avenue and Erdman Avenue
Robert Road between Riverside Drive and Prospect Avenue
Westcott Road between Elm Road and Route NJ 206 (Bayard Lane)
William Street between Washington Road and Olden Street
Wilton Street between Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) and Patton
Avenue
Witherspoon Street between Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) and
Franklin Avenue
Vandeventer Avenue between Route NJ 206 (Nassau Street) and
Wiggins Street
(b) This section shall not be deemed to prevent the use of such streets by
trucks owned by the borough or by public utility corporations, when
such vehicles are engaged in the installation, repair or maintenance of
public utilities along such streets.
§ 19-3 PRINCETON CODE § 19-3
BAO:496
§ 19-4. Lane Use Reservation.
§ 19-5. Mid-Block Crosswalks. [Ord. No. 2009-03, § I; Ord. No.
2014-36; Ord. No. 2015-21]
(c) Unless another penalty is expressly provided by state law, any person
convicted of a violation of any provision of this section shall be punished
as provided in section 1-6 of this Code.
(a) Inside or center lanes for left turns only.
(Reserved)
(a) Designated. The following portions of municipally controlled streets in
Princeton are hereby designated as mid-block crosswalks for
pedestrian crossing:
Alexander Street, from a point 150 feet south of County Bridge No.
330.1 to a point 6 feet southerly therefrom
Alexander Street, from a point approximately 250 feet south of the
center of the roundabout at the intersection with University Place
extending 20 feet south
Alexander Street, from a point approximately 1,120 feet south of the
center of the roundabout at the intersection with University Place
extending 8 feet southerly therefrom
[Ord. No. 2015-21]
Bunn Drive, from a point 680 feet south of the southerly curb of Karl
Light Boulevard and extending 6 feet southerly therefrom
Chambers Street, from a point 355 feet north of Route NJ 27 (Nassau
Street) and extending 8 feet northerly therefrom
Cleveland Lane, beginning at a point 552 feet east of the easterly
curbline of the northerly approach of Library Place and extending 8
feet easterly therefrom
Edgehill Street, from a point approximately 400 feet north of the
northerly curb line of Mercer Street extending 6 feet northerly
therefrom
[Ord. No. 2015-21]
Ewing Street from a point 90 feet south of the southerly curb of North
Harrison Street and extending 6 feet southerly therefrom
Guyot Avenue, beginning at a point 280 feet east of Walnut Lane and
extending 6 feet easterly therefrom
Harriet Drive, beginning at a point 499 feet south of Hamilton Avenue
and extending 8 feet southerly therefrom
Harrison Street North, from a point 486 feet south of Hamilton
Avenue and extending 8 feet southerly therefrom
§ 19-3 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-5
BAO:497
§ 19-6. No Passing Zones. [Ord. No. 2009-03, § I]
Jefferson Road, beginning at a point 332 feet south of the northerly
curbline of the intersection of Jefferson Road and Moore Street and
extending 6 feet southerly therefrom
John Street, from a point 340 feet north of Route NJ 27 (Nassau
Street) and extending 12 feet northerly therefrom
Library Place, from a point 282 feet north of Mercer Street and
extending 10 feet northerly therefrom
Olden Street, from a point 308 feet southerly of Route NJ 27 (Nassau
Street) and extending 8 feet southerly therefrom
Palmer Square East, from a point 195 feet south of Hulfish Street and
extending 8 feet southerly therefrom
Palmer Square West, from a point 209 feet south of Hulfish Street and
extending 8 feet southerly therefrom
University Place, beginning at a point 331 feet south of College Road
and extending 6 feet southerly therefrom
Washington Road, 830 feet south of the south line of Route NJ 27
(Nassau Street)
Witherspoon Street, beginning at a point 355 feet north of Guyot
Avenue and extending 6 feet northerly therefrom
Witherspoon Street, beginning at a point 268 feet south of Guyot
Avenue and extending 6 feet southerly therefrom
Witherspoon Street, beginning at a point 22 feet north of Hulfish
Street and extending 8 feet northerly therefrom
(b) Markings. The mid-block crosswalks hereinabove designated shall be
distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other marking on
the surface in conformance to M.U.T.C.D. standards.
(a) Designated. No passing zones are hereby established and designated,
and shall be maintained, as follows:
Alexander Street, all traffic, entire length
Elm Road, northbound traffic, from the northerly curbline of Rosedale
Road-Cleveland Lane to 760 feet north of the center of Rosedale
Road-Cleveland Lane, a distance of approximately 740 feet
Elm Road, southbound traffic, from 260 feet south of the center of
Westerly Road (Princeton Township-Princeton Borough corporate line)
to 160 feet south of the center of Westcott Road, a distance of
approximately 540 feet
Elm Road, southbound traffic, from 300 feet north of the center of
Rosedale Road-Cleveland Lane, to the northerly curbline of Rosedale
Road-Cleveland Lane, a distance of approximately 280 feet
Hamilton Avenue, all traffic, entire length
§ 19-5 PRINCETON CODE § 19-6
BAO:498
§ 19-7. Penalties Generally. [Ord. No. 2009-03, § I]
Harrison Street, all traffic, entire length
Hodge Road, all traffic, entire length
Mercer Street, all traffic between Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) (Route
NJ 27) and Lovers Lane, a distance of approximately 4,050 feet
Paul Robeson Place, all traffic, entire length
Wiggins Street, all traffic, entire length
Witherspoon Street, between Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) and
Franklin Avenue
(a) As to general penalty for violation of Chapter, see section 1-6 of this
Code.
§ 19-6 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-7
BAO:499

ARTICLE II
One-Way Streets
§ 19-8. One-way streets designated. [Ord. No. 2009-03, § I; Ord. No.
2010-19, § I]
(a) Designated. The following municipally controlled streets and portions
of municipally controlled streets in the borough are hereby designated
as one-way streets in the direction indicated:
Bank Street. From south to north and from west to east, from Route
NJ 27 (Nassau Street) to Chambers Street.
Charlton Street. From north to south, from Route NJ 27 (Nassau
Street) to William Street.
Clay Street. From west to east, from John Street to Witherspoon
Street.
Green Street. From west to east, from John Street to Witherspoon
Street.
Greenview Avenue, that portion that runs east and west. From east to
west, from Humbert Street to that portion of Greenview Avenue that
runs north and south.
Humbert Street. From south to north, from Wiggins Street to
Greenview Avenue.
John Street. From south to north, from Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) to
Hulfish Street.
John Street. From south to north, from Paul Robeson Place to the
Princeton Borough-Princeton Township corporate line.
Leigh Avenue. From east to west, from the Princeton Borough-
Princeton Township corporate line to Route NJ 206 (Bayard Lane).
Lytle Street. From east to west, from Witherspoon Street to John
Street.
Maclean Street. From west to east, from John Street to Witherspoon
Street.
Mercer Street Extension. From west to east, from Mercer Street to
University Place.
Moran Avenue. From south to north, from Route NJ 27 (Nassau
Street) to Spruce Street.
Palmer Square East. From south to north, from Route NJ 27 (Nassau
Street) to Palmer Square South and from Palmer Square South to
Hulfish Street.
Palmer Square South. From west to east, from the northerly portion
of Palmer Square West to the northerly portion of Palmer Square
East.
§ 19-8 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-8
BAO:501
Palmer Square West. From north to south, from Hulfish Street to
Palmer Square South and from Palmer Square South to Route NJ 27
(Nassau Street).
Pine Street. From south to north, from Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) to
Spruce Street.
Quarry Street. From east to west, from Witherspoon Street to John
Street.
South Tulane Street. From south to north, from Route NJ 27 (Nassau
Street) to Spring Street.
Spring Street. From west to east, from Witherspoon Street to
Vandeventer Avenue.
Sylvia Beach Way. From Wiggins Street to Wiggins Street.
Torrey Lane. From west to east, from Witherspoon Street to Maclean
Street parking yard
§ 19-8 PRINCETON CODE § 19-8
BAO:502
ARTICLE III
Through Streets, Stop Intersections and Yield Intersections
§ 19-9. Through Streets, Stop Intersections and Yield Intersections.
§ 19-9.1. Through Streets.
(a) Through streets designated. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the
following municipally controlled streets and portions of municipally
controlled streets in the borough are hereby designated as through
streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the near right side of each street
intersecting the through street except where yield signs are provided
for in the designation.
Alexander Street, from Mercer Street to the Princeton Borough-
Princeton Township corporate line
Chambers Street, from Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) to Paul Robeson
Place
Cleveland Lane, from Route NJ 206 (Bayard Lane) to Elm Road
Elm Road, from Rosedale Road (CR 604) to the Princeton Borough-
Princeton Township corporate line
Franklin Avenue, from the Princeton Borough-Princeton Township
corporate line to the easterly Princeton Borough-Princeton Township
corporate line
Hamilton Avenue, from Moore Street to Snowden Lane
Harrison Street, from Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) to the Princeton
Borough-Princeton Township corporate line
Harrison Street North, from Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) to the
Princeton Borough-Princeton Township corporate line
Hodge Road, from Route NJ 206 (Bayard Lane) to Elm Road
Hulfish Street, from Witherspoon Street to Chambers Street
Jefferson Road, from Wiggins Street to the Princeton Borough-
Princeton Township corporate line
John Street, from Paul Robeson Place to the Princeton Borough-
Princeton Township corporate line
Linden Lane, from Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) to Hamilton Avenue
Linden Lane, from Hamilton Avenue to the Princeton Borough-
Princeton Township corporate line
Markham Road, from Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) to Patton Avenue
Mercer Street, from Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) to the Princeton
Borough-Princeton Township corporate line
Moore Street, from Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) to Wiggins Street-
Hamilton Avenue
§ 19-9 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-9.1
BAO:503
§ 19-9.2. Stop Intersections. [Ord. No. 2009-03, § I]
Moore Street, from Wiggins Street-Hamilton Avenue to the Princeton
Borough-Princeton Township corporate line
Murray Place, from Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) to Prospect Avenue
Patton Avenue, from Harrison Street to Cedar Lane
Princeton Avenue, from Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) to Prospect
Avenue
Prospect Avenue, from Washington Road to Harrison Street
Prospect Avenue, from Harrison Street to the Princeton Borough-
Princeton Township corporate line
Spring Street, from Witherspoon Street to Vandeventer Avenue
Springdale Road, from Mercer Street to the Princeton Borough-
Princeton Township corporate line
Spruce Street, from Chestnut Street to Linden Lane
University Place, from Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) to Alexander
Street
Vandeventer Avenue, from Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) to Wiggins
Street
Walnut Lane, from Hamilton Avenue to the Princeton Borough-
Princeton Township corporate line
Washington Road, from Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) to the Princeton
Borough-Princeton Township corporate line
Wilton Street, from Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) to Patton Avenue
Witherspoon Street, from Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) to the
Princeton Borough-Princeton Township corporate line
(a) Stop intersections designated. The following intersections in the
Borough are hereby designated as stop intersections, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 39:4-140. Stop signs shall be installed on the near right side of
each street intersecting the through street:
Boudinot Street and Morven Place. Stop sign shall be installed on
Morven Place.
Campbelton Road and Armour Road. Stop sign shall be installed on
Armour Road.
Chestnut Street and Spruce Street. Stop signs shall be installed on
Spruce Street.
College Road and College Road West (private). Stop signs shall be
installed on College Road West (private).
Erdman Avenue and Stanley Avenue. Stop sign shall be installed on
Stanley Avenue.
§ 19-9.1 PRINCETON CODE § 19-9.2
BAO:504
§ 19-9.3. Yield Intersections. [Ord. No. 2009-03, § I]
Fisher Avenue and Leavitt Lane. Stop sign shall be installed on Fisher
Avenue.
Fisher Avenue and Stanley Avenue. Stop sign shall be installed on
Fisher Avenue.
Franklin Avenue and Harris Road. Stop sign shall be installed on
Harris Road.
Hunter Road and Westcott Road. Stop sign shall be located on Hunter
Road.
Lafayette Road and Hunter Road. Stop sign shall be installed on
Hunter Road.
Library Place and Boudinot Street. Stop sign shall be installed on
Boudinot Street.
Library Place and Westcott Road. Stop sign shall be installed on
Westcott Road at its westerly intersection with Library Place.
Linden Lane and Spruce Street. Stop sign shall be installed on Spruce
Street.
Olden Street and William Street. Stop sign shall be installed on
William Street.
Park Place and Madison Street. Stop sign shall be installed on
Madison Street.
Robert Road and Forester Drive. Stop sign shall be installed on
Forester Drive.
South Tulane Street and Lincoln Court. Stop sign shall be installed on
Lincoln Court.
Spruce Street and Moran Avenue. Stop sign shall be installed on
Moran Avenue.
Westcott Road and Wilson Road. Stop sign shall be installed on Wilson
Road.
William Street and Charlton Street. Stop sign shall be installed on the
northwest corner of Charlton Street.
(a) Yield Intersections Designated. The following intersections in the
borough are hereby designated as yield intersections, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 39:4-140. Yield sign shall be installed on the near right side of
each street intersecting the through street.
Intersection of Cleveland Lane and Library Place, with yield sign on
Cleveland Lane and on Library Place at all approaches
Intersection of Cleveland Lane and Lafayette Road, with yield sign on
Cleveland Lane and on Lafayette Road at all approaches
Palmer Square Bypass and Palmer Square West with yield sign on the
northwest corner of Palmer Square Bypass
§ 19-9.2 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-9.3
BAO:505
Palmer Square East and Palmer Square South with yield sign on the
northeast corner of Palmer Square East
Western Leg of Lafayette Road and Eastern Leg of Lafayette Road
with yield sign on Western Leg of Lafayette Road
§ 19-9.3 PRINCETON CODE § 19-9.3
BAO:506
ARTICLE IV
Loading Zones
§ 19-10. Loading Zones Designated. [Ord. No. 2009-03, § I; Ord. No.
2010-12, § I; Ord. No. 2010-19, § II; Ord. No. 2018-23 § 1; Ord. No.
2019-23 § 1]
(a) Designated. The following areas upon the municipally controlled streets
of Princeton are hereby designated as loading zones:
Street Side Location
Bank Street East Beginning at a point 175 feet north of
the northerly curbline of Route NJ 27
(Nassau Street) and extending to a point
50 feet northerly therefrom
Chambers
Street
East From a point 160 feet north of Route NJ
27 (Nassau Street) to a point 80 feet
northerly
John Street
Alley
East Extending from a point 145 feet north of
Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) to a point
270 feet northerly
Palmer Square
East
East From a point 70 feet north of the
northerly curb line on Palmer Square
South to a point 30 feet northerly
Palmer Square
East
East From a point 170 feet south of the
southerly curb line of Hulfish Street to a
point 40 feet northerly
Palmer Square
East
West From a point 120 feet south of the
southerly curb of Hulfish Street to a
point 55 feet southerly
Palmer Square
South
North From a point 10 feet east of the west
curb line of southerly Palmer Square
East to a point 40 feet easterly
Spring Street South Extending from a point 25 feet east of
Witherspoon Street, easterly a distance
of 50 feet
Spring Street South Extending from a point 241 feet east of
Witherspoon Street, easterly a distance
of 25 feet
South Tulane
Street
West Between Lincoln Court and Spring
Street
Sylvia Beach
Way
East Extending from a point 90 feet south of
Wiggins Street to a point 30 feet
southerly
§ 19-10 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-10
BAO:507
Street Side Location
University Place East Running in a northeasterly direction
along the east curbline of University
Place, from a point 197 feet east of the
easterly line of Alexander Street,
extended to a point 370 feet east of the
easterly line of Alexander Street
Witherspoon
Street
East Extending from a point 93 feet south of
Spring Street, southerly a distance of
122 feet
Witherspoon
Street
West Extending from a point 203 feet south of
Hulfish Street, southerly a distance of
78 feet
Leigh Avenue North From a point beginning at the
intersection of Leigh Avenue and
Witherspoon Street and proceeding a
distance of 83 feet westerly therefrom
Leigh Avenue North From the intersection of John Street and
proceeding a distance of 55 feet
westerly therefrom
(b) Parking Prohibited.
(1) Parking Prohibited. No person shall park any vehicle within a
loading zone designated in Section 19-10(a), except as set forth in
Section 19-10(c) below.
(c) Exemptions.
(1) Commercial Vehicles. A commercial vehicle may park in a
designated loading zone, except on the west side of Palmer Square
East, for a period not to exceed 30 minutes, for the sole purpose of
expeditious loading or unloading of materials and merchandise,
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through
Saturday. Commercial vehicles shall only be permitted to park in
the loading zone on the west side of Palmer Square East for a
period not to exceed 30 minutes, for the sole purpose of expeditious
loading or unloading of passengers.
(2) Noncommercial Vehicles.
a. A noncommercial vehicle may park in the designated loading
zone on Bank Street, for a period not to exceed 30 minutes, for
the sole purpose of expeditious loading or unloading of
passengers, materials and merchandise.
b. A noncommercial vehicle may park in the designated loading
zone on the west side of Palmer Square East for a period not to
exceed 30 minutes, for the sole purpose of expeditious loading
§ 19-10 PRINCETON CODE § 19-10
BAO:508
or unloading of passengers, materials, and merchandise,
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through
Saturday, and 5:00 p.m. Saturday until 7:00 a.m. Monday
c. A noncommercial vehicle may stop and stand in the remaining
designated loading zones, for a period not to exceed three
minutes, for the sole purpose of expeditious loading or
unloading of passengers, during which time the vehicle
operator must be present, between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and
7:00 Monday through Saturday, and 5:00 p.m. Saturday until
7:00 a.m. Monday.
§ 19-10 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-10
BAO:509

ARTICLE V
Taxi Zones
§ 19-11. Taxi Zones Designated. [Ord. No. 2009-03, § I]
(a) Designated. The following areas upon the municipally controlled streets
of the borough are hereby designated as taxi zones:
University Place, east side, running in a northeasterly direction along
the east curbline of University Place from a point 370 feet east of the
easterly line of Alexander Street, extended to a point 430 feet east of
the easterly line of Alexander Street.
As to taxicabs and other vehicles for hire generally, see Chapter 31 of
this Code.
§ 19-11 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-11
BAO:511

ARTICLE VI
Bus Stops
§ 19-12. Bus Stops Designated. [Ord. No. 2009-03, § I; Ord. No.
2015-30; Ord. No. 2015-42; Ord. No. 2017-29]
(a) Designated. The following areas upon the municipally controlled streets
of Princeton are hereby designated as bus stops:
(1) Along Alexander Street, northbound, on the easterly side thereof
at:
a. Basin Street - (near side)
Beginning at prolongation of the southerly curbline of Basin
Street and extending 100 feet southerly therefrom (location
22553).
b. Between Faculty Road and University Place - (mid-block)
Beginning 135 feet north of the northerly curbline of Faculty
Road and extending 93 feet northerly therefrom (location
22554).
(2) Along Alexander Street, southbound, on the westerly side thereof
at:
a. Between Faculty
Beginning 157 feet north of the prolongation of the northerly
curbline of Faculty Road and extending 98 feet northerly
therefrom (location 22555).
b. Basin Street - (far side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Basin Street and
extending 100 feet southerly therefrom (location 22556)
(3) Along Billie Ellis Lane, southbound, on the westerly side thereof at:
a. Cherry Valley Road - (far side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Cherry Valley Road and
extending 142 feet southerly therefrom (location 31141).
(4) Along Bunn Drive, northbound, on the easterly side thereof at:
a. Between Harrison Street North and Karl Light Boulevard -
(mid-block)
Beginning 172 feet north of the northerly curbline of Harrison
Street North and extending 100 feet northerly therefrom
(location 22580).
§ 19-12 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-12
BAO:513
b. Between Harrison Street North and Karl Light Boulevard -
(mid-block)
Beginning 1,090 feet north of the northerly curbline of
Harrison Street North and extending 105 feet northerly
therefrom (across from Princeton Professional Park) (location
32401).
(5) Along Bunn Drive, southbound, on the westerly side thereof at:
a. Karl Light Boulevard - (near side)
Beginning at the extended centerline of Karl Light Boulevard
and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom (location 22557).
b. Between Karl Light Boulevard and Harrison Street North -
(mid-block)
Beginning 1,181 feet north of the northerly curbline of
Harrison Street North and extending 105 feet southerly
therefrom (Location 32402).
c. Between Karl Light Boulevard and Harrison Street North -
(mid-block)
Beginning 423 feet north of northerly curbline of Harrison
Street North and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom
(Location 30171).
(6) Along Ewing Street, northbound, on the easterly side thereof at:
a. Mount Lucas Road - (near side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Mount Lucas Road and
extending 134 feet southerly therefrom (location 22546).
(7) Along Ewing Street, southbound, on the westerly side thereof at:
a. Mount Lucas Road - (near side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Mount Lucas Road and
extending 105 feet northerly therefrom (location 22547).
(8) Along Griggs Drive, northbound, on the easterly side thereof at:
a. William Livingston Court - (far side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of William Livingston Court
and extending 85 feet northerly therefrom (location 22570).
(9) Along Griggs Drive, southbound, on the westerly side thereof at:
a. Between David Brearly Court and William Patterson Court -
(mid-block)
§ 19-12 PRINCETON CODE § 19-12
BAO:514
Beginning 66 feet north of the extended curbline of William
Livingston Court and extending 85 feet northerly therefrom
(location 30495).
(10) Along Harrison Street North, northbound, on the easterly side
thereof at:
a. Nassau Street - (far side)
Beginning 130 feet north of the northerly curbline of Nassau
Street and extending 85 feet northerly therefrom (location
22512).
b. Mershon Drive- (far side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Mershon Drive and
extending 123 feet northerly therefrom (location 22513).
c. Hornor Lane- (near side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Hornor Lane and
extending 85 feet southerly therefrom (location 22514).
d. Franklin Avenue - (far side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Franklin Avenue and
extending 85 feet northerly therefrom (location 22548).
e. Clearview Avenue - (near side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Clearview Avenue and
extending 105 feet southerly therefrom (location 22549).
(11) Along Harrison Street North, southbound, on the westerly side
thereof at:
a. Clearview Avenue - (near side)
Beginning 12 feet south of the extended northerly curbline of
Clearview Avenue and extending 70 feet northerly therefrom
(location 22551).
b. Franklin Avenue - (near side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Franklin Avenue and
extending 102 feet northerly therefrom (location 22552).
c. Ewing Street - (near side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Ewing Street and
extending 105 feet northerly therefrom (location 22510).
d. Spruce Circle - (far side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Spruce Circle and
extending 184 feet southerly therefrom (location 22511).
§ 19-12 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-12
BAO:515
(12) Along Karl Light Boulevard, northbound, on the easterly side
thereof at:
a. Mulberry Row - (near side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Mulberry Row and
extending 105 feet southerly therefrom (location 30377).
b. Butternut Row - (near side)
Beginning 115 feet east of the easterly curbline of Bunn Drive
and extending 90 feet easterly therefrom (location 30378).
(13) Along Mount Lucas Road, southbound, on the westerly side thereof
at:
a. Between Ewing Street and Redding Circle - (mid-block)
Beginning 195 feet north of the northerly curbline of Ewing
Street and extending 135 feet northerly therefrom (location
22558).
(14) Along Redding Circle, northbound, on the easterly side thereof at:
a. Redding Circle North - (far side)
Beginning westerly curbline of Redding Circle North and
extending 77 feet westerly therefrom (location 30328).
b. Mount Lucas Road - (near side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Mount Lucas Road and
extending 105 feet westerly therefrom (location 22571).
(15) Along Sassafras Row, westbound, on the northerly side thereof at:
a. Holly House Cul-De-Sac - (near side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Holly House Cul-De-Sac
and extending 70 feet easterly therefrom (location 30379).
(16) Along Terhune Road, eastbound, on the southerly side thereof at:
a. Jefferson Road - (far side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Jefferson Road and
extending 103 feet easterly therefrom (location 22559).
b. Walnut Lane - (near side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Walnut Lane and
extending 105 feet westerly therefrom (location 22560).
(17) Along Terhune Road, westbound, on the northerly side thereof at:
a. North Harrison Street - (far side)
§ 19-12 PRINCETON CODE § 19-12
BAO:516
Beginning at the westerly curbline of North Harrison Street
and extending 166 feet westerly therefrom (location 22561).
b. Walnut Street - (near side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Walnut Street and
extending 105 feet easterly therefrom (location 22562).
c. Jefferson Road - (near side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Jefferson Road and
extending 100 feet westerly therefrom (location 22563).
(18) Along University Place, northbound, on the easterly side thereof at:
a. Edwards Place - (near side)
Beginning 50 feet north of the prolongation of the northerly
curbline of Edwards Place and extending 155 feet southerly
therefrom (location 22517).
(19) Along University Place, southbound, on the westerly side thereof
at:
a. Edwards Place - (near side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Edwards Place and
extending 105 feet northerly therefrom (location 22515).
(20) Along Witherspoon Street, northbound, on the easterly side thereof
at:
a. Between Hullfish Street and Wiggins Street - (mid-block)
Beginning 30 feet north of the prolongation of northerly
curbline of Hullfish Street extending 142 feet northerly
therefrom (location 30511).
b. Green Street - (near side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Green Street and
extending 105 feet southerly therefrom (location 22521).
c. Shirley Court - (far side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Shirley Court and
extending 77 feet northerly therefrom (location 22522).
d. Franklin Avenue - (far side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Franklin Avenue and
extending 102 feet northerly therefrom (location 32265).
e. Guyot Avenue - (near side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Guyot Avenue and
extending 105 feet southerly therefrom (location 22565).
§ 19-12 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-12
BAO:517
f. Valley Road - (near side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Valley Road and
extending 89 feet southerly therefrom (location 22566).
(21) Along Witherspoon Street, southbound, on the westerly side
thereof at:
a. Valley Road - (far side)
Beginning at southerly curbline of Valley Road and extending
239 feet southerly therefrom (location 22567).
b. Guyot Avenue - (far side)
Beginning at the prolongation of the southerly curbline of
Guyot Avenue and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom
(location 22568).
c. Henry Avenue - (near side)
Beginning at the prolongation of the northerly curbline of
Henry Avenue and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom
(location 22569).
d. Clay Street - (far side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Clay Street and
extending 75 feet southerly therefrom (location 32454).
e. Maclean Street - (near side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Maclean Street and
extending 73 feet northerly therefrom (location 22519).
f. Green Street - (far side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Green Street and
extending 137 feet southerly therefrom (location 22520).
§ 19-12 PRINCETON CODE § 19-12
BAO:518
ARTICLE VII
Turn Prohibitions
§ 19-13. Turn Prohibitions.
§ 19-13.1. "U" Turns. [Ord. No. 2009-03, § I]
§ 19-13.2. No Turn on Red. [Ord. No. 2009-03, § I]
(a) "U" Turn Prohibitions. No person shall make a "U" turn at any of the
following locations:
Alexander Street, all traffic, entire length.
Elm Road, northbound traffic, from the northerly curbline of Rosedale
Road
Cleveland Lane to 760 feet north of the center of Rosedale Road-
Cleveland Lane, a distance of approximately 740 feet.
Elm Road, southbound traffic, from 260 feet south of the center of
Westerly Road (Princeton Township-Princeton Borough corporate line)
to 160 feet south of the center of Westcott Road, a distance of
approximately 540 feet.
Elm Road, southbound traffic, from 300 feet north of the center of
Rosedale Road-Cleveland Lane, to the northerly curbline of Rosedale
Road-Cleveland Lane, a distance of approximately 280 feet.
Hamilton Avenue, all traffic, entire length.
Harrison Street, all traffic, entire length.
Hodge Road, all traffic, entire length.
Mercer Street, all traffic between Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) and
Lovers Lane, a distance of approximately 4,050 feet.
Paul Robeson Place, all traffic, entire length.
Wiggins Street, all traffic, entire length.
Witherspoon Street, upon any part thereof.
(a) No turn on red.
(1) At certain intersections prohibited. In accordance with N.J.S.A.
39:4-115, right turns upon a "stop" or "caution" signal in the
following street intersections within the jurisdiction of the
borough, where traffic is controlled by traffic control signals, are
hereby prohibited as indicated:
Harrison Street and Hamilton Avenue. For traffic eastbound on
Hamilton Avenue and turning right (south) onto Harrison Street.
§ 19-13 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-13.2
BAO:519
§ 19-13.3. Left Turns Prohibited. [Ord. No. 2009-03, § I]
Harrison Street and Hamilton Avenue. For traffic southbound on
Harrison Street turning right onto Hamilton Avenue.
Washington Road and Prospect Avenue. For traffic westbound on
Prospect Avenue turning right (north) onto Washington Road.
Witherspoon Street and Paul Robeson Place. For traffic southbound
on Witherspoon Street turning right (west) onto Paul Robeson
Place.
Witherspoon Street and Wiggins Street. For traffic westbound on
Wiggins Street turning right (north) onto Witherspoon Street.
(2) Signs required.
a. Official signs pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 shall be placed at
the aforesaid intersections prohibiting said turns.
(a) Left turns prohibited.
(1) No person shall make a left turn at any of the following locations
during the period or periods indicated:
Chambers Street and Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street). For traffic
southbound on Chambers Street, between the hours of 4:00 p.m.
and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday.
(2) Signs. Official signs pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 shall be placed at
the aforesaid intersections prohibiting said turns.
§ 19-13.2 PRINCETON CODE § 19-13.3
BAO:520
ARTICLE VIII
Speed Limits
§ 19-14. Speed Limits Designated. [Ord. No. 2009-03, § I; Ord. No.
2015-17]
(a) Fifteen miles per hour on certain streets.
(1) Designated. The speed limit for traffic along the following streets
or parts of streets in the borough is hereby established as 15 miles
per hour:
Bank Street, for its entire length.
Edwards Place, for its entire length.
Pine Street, for its entire length.
(2) Signs. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and
maintained on such streets or parts of streets to effect such speed
limit.
(b) Twenty miles per hour on certain streets.
(1) Designated. The speed limit for traffic along the following streets
or parts of streets in the Borough is hereby established as 20 miles
per hour.
Chestnut Street, for its entire length.
Clay Street, for its entire length.
Edgehill Street, for its entire length.
John Street, from Paul Robeson Place to the Princeton Borough-
Princeton Township corporate line.
(2) Signs. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and
maintained on such streets or parts of streets to effect such speed
limit.
§ 19-14 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-14
BAO:521

ARTICLE IX
Storage of Certain Vehicles, Automotive Parts, Miscellaneous
§ 19-15. Storage of Certain Vehicles, Automotive Parts,
Miscellaneous. [Ord. No. 2009-03, § I]
(a) Definitions.
(1) As used in this article, "person," "owner" or "occupier" shall mean
and include any individual person, group of persons, partnership,
corporation, firm or association or any other entity.
(b) Storage on public property.
(1) No person shall park, leave or store any inoperable, unregistered
or uninspected motor vehicle, or any automotive parts, on any
public lands or premises, except in case of emergency, and then
only for a period of not more than 48 hours.
(c) Storage on private property — Generally.
(1) No person shall park, leave, store, or maintain any inoperable,
unregistered or uninspected motor vehicle, or any automotive
parts, for a period of more than 30 days upon any private lands or
premises.
(d) Same — Responsibility of owner or occupier of lands or premises.
(1) No owner or occupier of any private lands or premises shall permit
or suffer any inoperable, unregistered or uninspected motor
vehicle, or any automotive parts, to be parked, left, stored or
maintained on such lands or premises for more than 30 days.
(e) Exemptions.
(1) This article shall not apply to any motor vehicle or automotive part
that is:
a. Located or stored in an enclosed garage or other enclosed
building; or
b. On the premises and associated with the operation of a
commercial garage; provided, that such vehicle or part is
stored or located in an area screened from the public highways
and surrounding properties by fence, hedge or evergreens.
(f) Penalties for Violation of Article.
(1) Any person who shall violate any provisions of this article shall be
subject to the penalties as provided in section 1-6. Each day in
which such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Repeat offenders, as that term is defined in section 1-6, shall be
subject to the penalties set forth in section 1-6.
§ 19-15 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-15
BAO:523

ARTICLE X
Stopping and Standing
§ 19-16. General Provisions. [Ord. No. 2009-03, § I]
§ 19-17. No Stopping or Standing Zones. [Ord. No. 2009-03, § I;
Ord. No. 2014-1 § 1; Ord. No. 2014-19 § 1; Ord. No. 2017-50]
(a) In General.
(1) Provisions of Article Not Exclusive. The provisions of this article
imposing a time limit on parking shall not relieve any person of the
duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions prohibiting or
limiting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles as set forth in
N.J.S.A. 39:4-138, any other state law or as hereinafter provided.
(b) Stopping or standing for more than five minutes for certain purposes
prohibited.
(1) No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle for more than five
minutes upon any municipally controlled street in the borough for
the purpose of selling food, products or merchandise.
(a) Designated. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle at any time or for
any purpose upon any of the following streets or parts of streets:
Alexander Street, east side, from College Road to a point 45 feet
southerly, from College Road to a point 55 feet northerly, from
Dickinson Street to a point 95 feet southerly, from Dickinson Street to a
point 55 feet northerly.
Alexander Street, east side beginning at the centerline of the University
Place/Alexander Street roundabout, running south along the centerline
on Alexander Street a distance of approximately 185 feet.
Alexander Street, west side, beginning at the centerline of the
University Place/Alexander Street roundabout, running south along the
centerline on Alexander Street a distance of approximately 620 feet.
Alexander Street, west side, beginning at a point approximately 865
feet south of the centerline of the University Place/Alexander Street
roundabout, continuing south a distance of approximately 60 feet.
Bank Street, east side, from Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) to a point 200
feet northerly.
Bank Street, west side, from Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) to a point 200
feet northerly.
Chambers Street, west side, from Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) to a
point 128 feet north of Bank Street.
§ 19-16 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-17
BAO:525
Chambers Street, west side, from a point 350 feet north of Bank Street
to Paul Robeson Place.
Chambers Street, east side, from a point 220 feet north of Route NJ 27
(Nassau Street) to a point 42 feet northerly.
Chambers Street, east side, from a point 326 feet north of Route NJ
27 (Nassau Street) to a point 466 feet north of Route NJ 27 (Nassau
Street).
Chambers Street, east side, from a point 45 feet south of Hulfish Street
to a point 35 feet north of Hulfish Street.
Chambers Street, east side from a point 80 feet north of Hulfish Street
to a point 180 feet north of Hulfish Street.
Chambers Street, east side, from a point 286 feet north of Huffish
Street to Paul Robeson Place.
Chambers Street, along the traffic islands located at the intersection
with Paul Robeson Place.
Elm Road, both sides, from a point 260 feet north of the north curbline
of Cleveland Lane-Rosedale Road to a point 240 feet south of the south
curbline of Cleveland Lane-Rosedale Road.
Hamilton Avenue, south side, from the west line of Harrison Street
North to a point 222 feet westerly.
Hamilton Avenue, south side, from the east line of Harrison Street
North to a point 152 feet easterly.
Hibben Road, west side, from Stockton Street to a point 120 feet
southerly.
John Street, east side, from Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) to a point 200
feet northerly.
John Street, west side, from Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) to Hulfish
Street.
Mercer Street, north side, from Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) to a point
210 feet westerly.
Moran Avenue, east side, from Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) to a point
230 feet northerly.
Palmer Square East, west side from a point 105 feet north of Palmer
Square South to a point 170 feet south of Hulfish Street.
Palmer Square East, east side from the southerly line of Palmer Square
South to a point 64 feet northerly.
Paul Robeson Place, south side, from a point 345 feet east of Chambers
Street to a point therefrom 87 feet easterly.
§ 19-17 PRINCETON CODE § 19-17
BAO:526
§ 19-18. Areas Designated as no Stopping or Standing, no Parking,
etc., Zones as Well as Limited Parking Zones. [Ord. No. 2009-03, § I]
§ 19-19. Removal and Redemption of Illegally Parked Vehicles.
[Ord. No. 2009-03, § I]
[Ord. No. 2017-50]
Riverside Drive west side, from the southerly curbline of route 27 to a
point 110 feet southerly.
South Tulane Street, east side, from Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) to
Lincoln Court.
South Tulane Street, west side, from Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) to a
point 185 feet northerly.
University Place, east side, from a point 600 feet south of Route NJ 27
(Nassau Street) to a point 150 feet southerly.
University Place, north side, beginning at the easterly curbline of
Alexander Street, then easterly 88 feet.
Walnut Lane west side, from Franklin Avenue to Guyot Avenue.
Witherspoon Street, east side, beginning at a point 320 feet south of
the southerly curbline of Wiggins Street then northerly to the Princeton
Borough-Princeton Township corporate line.
(a) Whenever any particular area on the municipally controlled streets of
the borough is designated in this article as part of a no stopping or
standing, no parking, taxi, bus stop or loading zone, and also as part of
any other limited parking zone, the provisions of this article with
respect to no stopping or standing, no parking, taxi, bus stop or loading
zone, as the case may be, shall control with respect to such particular
area.
(a) Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this article
shall be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper
regulation of traffic and parking, and any police officer of the borough
may provide for the removal of such vehicle. The owner shall pay the
reasonable costs of the removal, and storage which may result from
such removal, before regaining possession of the vehicle.
(b) The exercise of the remedy provided for in subsection (a) of this section
shall not be construed to prevent the prosecution of proceedings to
impose penalties for violations of this article or any other law or
Ordinance.
§ 19-17 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-19
BAO:527

ARTICLE XI
Parking
§ 19-20. General Provisions. [Ord. No. 2009-03, § I; Ord. No.
2009-13, § I; Ord. No. 2009-32, § I; Ord. No. 2018-23; Ord. No.
2019-7]
(a) In general.
(1) Provisions of article not exclusive.
a. The provisions of this article imposing a time limit on parking
shall not relieve any person of the duty to observe other and
more restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping,
standing or parking of vehicles as set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:
4-138, any other state law or as hereinafter provided.
(b) Parking for certain purposes prohibited.
(1) No person shall park any vehicle upon any municipally controlled
street in Princeton for the purpose of:
a. Displaying such vehicle for sale.
b. Cleaning, greasing or repairing such vehicle, except in the
case of repairs by reason of emergency or urgent necessity.
c. No person shall park any vehicle on any municipally controlled
street in Princeton for the primary purpose of advertising such
vehicle or to advertise any other thing or product. Parking
between the curb and sidewalk is prohibited.
(2) No person shall park any vehicle between the curb and sidewalk on
any municipally controlled street in Princeton.
(c) Parking Within Designated Stalls. Where parking stalls are marked on
the pavement, all vehicles shall be parked within such designated stalls.
(d) Parking between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. No person shall park any
vehicle on any day, including Sundays and holidays, on any municipally
controlled street of the Municipality for a period longer than one hour
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., unless otherwise
provided in this article or in the "Code of the Township of Princeton,
New Jersey (1968)".
(e) Parking Time Limits Inoperative on Certain Holidays. Except as
otherwise provided in this article or in the "Code of the Township of
Princeton, New Jersey (1968)", the parking time limits provisions in this
division shall not be operative on New Year's Day, Martin Luther King Jr.
Day, President's Day, Easter Sunday, Memorial Day, Independence Day,
Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day. The Council may from
time to time designate by resolution additional days or portions thereof
§ 19-20 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-20
BAO:529
§ 19-21. Parking Meters. [Ord. No. 2009-03, § I; Ord. No. 2018-23
§ 4; Ord. No. 2019-7 § 2]
in a given year on which the parking time limit provisions shall not be
operative.
(f) Angle Parking.
(1) The following locations on Princeton streets are hereby designated
for angle parking at an angle of 45° to 90°, as designated by
markings on the pavement or as otherwise indicated:
Charlton Street, west side, from a point 335 feet south of William
Street to a point 400 feet south of William Street.
University Place, east side, from College Road to Berlind crosswalk.
University Place, west side, from College Road to Berlind
crosswalk.
(g) Parking angle specified.
(1) Parking at an angle in municipal parking yards, other than Tulane
Street West and East municipal parking yards, shall be at an angle
of 45° to 90°, as designated by marking on the pavement or as
otherwise indicated.
(h) Head-in parking specified.
(1) Parking at an angle in the Tulane Street municipal parking yards
shall be at an angle of 45° to 90°, as designated by markings on the
pavement or as otherwise indicated, with the front of the vehicle
toward the meter. Parking within the Spring Street Municipal
Parking Garage shall be at 90° as designated by markings on the
floor or as otherwise indicated, with the front of the vehicle toward
the head of the stall.
(a) Parking Meter Defined. As used in this Chapter, the words "parking
meter" and "parking meters" shall refer to any mechanical or electronic
device used, placed, installed or erected at or near the curb adjacent to
the parking lane, or otherwise on property which is owned, leased,
operated by or otherwise under the control of the Municipality. "Parking
meter" and "parking meters" shall also be deemed to include, but not be
limited to, a single space meter, multi-space meters and pay stations as
designated by the Municipality.
(b) The Mayor and Council shall cause parking meters to be installed in the
metered parking areas established and designated in this chapter.
Parking meter areas have been established and described in Sections
19-24 and 19-25 of this Chapter.
(c) No parking meters shall be installed in any areas where parking is
prohibited by state law pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-138 et seq., nor where
§ 19-20 PRINCETON CODE § 19-21
BAO:530
parking is now or may hereafter be prohibited by appropriate action of
the mayor and council.
(d) Parking meters shall be installed in all parking meter areas near the
curb, sidewalk or other area adjacent to or near each parking space
that they are intended to regulate.
(e) The Mayor and Council shall cause lines or markings to be placed upon
the pavement in all parking meter areas upon the curb, sidewalk or
other area immediately adjacent to or near each parking meter, for the
purpose of designating the parking space(s) the respective meter
regulates.
(f) The Mayor and Council shall cause proper signs to be installed in all
metered parking areas, indicating the time limitations in such areas.
(g) Each parking meter shall, by proper legend, indicate the legal parking
time and the proper dollar amount to be paid and acceptable payment
method(s), including but not limited to payment by coins of the United
States, credit card or mobile payment, as established in Section 19-32.
Each parking meter shall, when operated in the proper manner,
indicate on its face the duration of the period of legal parking time and,
on the expiration of such period, shall indicate illegal or overtime
parking. When payment is made by mobile payment, the duration of the
period of legal parking shall be indicated on the mobile payment
application.
(h) The operator of every vehicle parked within any designated metered
parking areas shall, upon entering the respective parking space,
immediately deposit or cause to be deposited in the meter regulating
the use of such space proper coins of the United States or make
payment by credit card or mobile payment for use of such space in
accordance with the schedules set forth in Section 19-32 of this Code.
Such vehicle may remain parked in such space for only as long as the
parking meter does not display an illegal or over-time signal, or the
mobile payment app indicates an expired session or for a period of time
not to exceed that of the respective area in which it is located,
whichever is less. Such over-parked vehicle shall be issued additional
summonses for each additional authorized time period which is
overextended.
(i) Depositing slugs, etc. No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited
any slug, device or substitute for a proper coin of the United States in
any parking meter.
(j) Defacing, Tampering With, Etc. No person shall deface, injure, tamper
with, open, willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any
parking meter.
(k) Meter Feeding. No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited in a
meter any coin or coins, credit card payment or mobile payment for the
purpose of extending the parking time beyond the total lawful parking
§ 19-21 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-21
BAO:531
§ 19-22. No Parking Zones. [Ord. No. 2009-03, § I; Ord. No.
2009-13, § II; Ord. No. 2009-32, § II; Ord. No. 2010-12, § II; Ord. No.
time limit in accordance with the schedules set forth in section 19-32
of this Code. Such over-parked vehicle shall be issued additional
summonses for each additional authorized time period which is
overextended. This provision is directed at preventing what is
commonly termed "meter feeding" and is enacted to provide for the
convenience of legal "turn-over parking" within the municipality.
(l) Overtime Parking. No person shall re-park a vehicle on either side of
the same street in the same block in order to extend the vehicle's
parking time beyond the limits established in section 19-24. For
purposes of this section, a vehicle shall be deemed "re-parked" and in
violation hereof if a vehicle is parked in any space on the same street
within two hours of expiration of the vehicle's original parking time.
(m) Parking meter fees not required and time limit provisions on certain
holidays.
(1) Except in the Spring Street Municipal Parking Garage or as
otherwise indicated herein, payment of parking meter fees shall not
be required on New Year's Day, Martin Luther King Jr. Day,
President's Day, Easter Sunday, Memorial Day, Independence Day,
Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day. The Council may
from time to time designate by resolution additional days or
portions thereof in a given year on which the payment of parking
meter fees shall not be required.
(n) Certain vehicles exempt from fees and time limitations.
(1) The following vehicles shall be exempt from the payment of parking
meter fees and from parking time limitations.
a. Vehicles owned by federal, state, county or municipal
governments or bearing N.F. (No Fee) license plates, while
being used on official business.
b. Service vehicles bearing commercial license plates, while
being operated in connection with the making of emergency
repairs vital to the health and welfare of the community.
c. One vehicle belonging to a bona fide and active member of the
Princeton Fire Department or Princeton First Aid and Rescue
Squad, as verified in writing by the respective chiefs, while
such vehicle is being used by such member during times when
such member is available for call for the performance of duties
for the Princeton Fire Department or Princeton First Aid and
Rescue Squad; provided, that such vehicle has a valid permit
on file, which shall be approved by the chief of police, which
shall identify such vehicle as an exempt vehicle and which shall
be valid for one period of six months.
§ 19-21 PRINCETON CODE § 19-22
BAO:532
2010-19, § III.; Ord. No. 2014-33; Ord. No. 2014-39; Ord. No.
2014-42 § 1; Ord. No. 2015-3 § 1; Ord. No. 2015-18 §§ 1, 2; Ord. No.
2016-04; Ord. No. 2016-07 § 2; Ord. No. 2017-3 § 1; Ord. No. 2017-5
§ 1; Ord. No. 2017-42]
(a) No parking at any time.
(1) Designated. No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of
the following streets or parts thereof:
Aiken Avenue, north side, from Murray Place to dead end
Alexander Street, east side, from Mercer Street to a point 75 feet
southerly
Alexander Street, west side, from Mercer Street to the centerline
of the University Place/Alexander Street roundabout
[Ord. No. 2014-1 § 2]
Bank Street, both sides, from the east side of Bank Street to
Chambers Street
Bank Street, west side, from a point 200 feet north of Route NJ 27
(Nassau Street) to the north side of Bank Street
Battle Road, south side, from Springdale Road to the Princeton
Borough-Princeton Township corporate line
Boudinot Street, north side, from Route NJ 206 (Bayard Lane) to
Library Place
Boudinot Street, south side, from Route NJ 206 (Bayard Lane) to
a point 60 feet westerly
Branch Alley, both sides, from Park Place to Willow Street
Campbelton Circle, around center island
Chambers Street, west side form a point 35 feet south of Bank
Street to a point 105 feet north of Bank Street
[Ord. No. 2014-19 § 2]
Charlton Street, east side, from Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) to
William Street
Charlton Street, west side, from a point 94 feet north of William
Street to a point 39 feet northerly
Chestnut Street, east side, from Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) to a
point 268 feet northerly
Chestnut Street, west side, from Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) to
Hamilton Avenue
Clay Street, north side, from Witherspoon Street to John Street
Clay Street, south side, from John Street to a point 100 feet
easterly
§ 19-22 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-22
BAO:533
Clay Street, south side, from Witherspoon Street to a point 60
feet westerly
Cleveland Lane, south side, from Elm Road (County Route 604) to
Bayard Lane (US Route 206)
[Ord. No. 2015-3]
Cleveland Lane, north side, from the east curb of Elm Road to a
point 263 feet easterly
[Ord. No. 2015-3]
Cleveland Lane, north side, from a point 375 feet east of the east
curb line of Elm Road to a point 425 feet east of the east curb line
of Elm Road
[Ord. No. 2015-3]
Cleveland Lane, north side, from a point 289 feet west of the west
curb of Lafayette Road to a point 422 feet west of the west curb
of Lafayette Road
[Ord. No. 2015-3]
Cleveland Lane, north side, from the west curb of Lafayette Road
to a point 48 feet westerly
[Ord. No. 2015-3]
Cleveland Lane, north side, from the east curb of Lafayette Road
to a point 45 feet easterly
[Ord. No. 2015-3]
Cleveland Lane, north side from the west curb of Library Place to
a point 67 feet westerly
[Ord. No. 2015-3]
Cleveland Lane, north side from the east curb of Library Place to
a point 50 feet easterly
[Ord. No. 2015-3]
Cleveland Lane, north side, from a point 507 feet east of the east
curb of Library Place to a point 627 feet east of east curb of
Library Place
[Ord. No. 2015-3]
Cleveland Lane, north side, from the west curb of Bayard Lane
(US Route 206) to a point 75 feet westerly
[Ord. No. 2015-3]
College Road (private), south side, from University Place to
Alexander Street
§ 19-22 PRINCETON CODE § 19-22
BAO:534
College Road West (private), both sides, from Alexander Street to
Springdale Road
College Road West Extension (private), both sides, from College
Road West (private) to the Graduate College Campus
Edgehill Street, east side, from Route NJ 206 (Stockton Street) to
Mercer Street
Edgehill Street, west side, from Mercer Street to a point 120 feet
northerly
[Ord. No. 2015-18 § 1]
Edgehill Street, west side, from Route NJ 206 (Stockton Street) to
a point 75 feet southerly
[Ord. No. 2015-18 § 1]
Edwards Place, north side, from University Place to dead end
Edwards Place, south side, from University Place to a point 57
feet westerly and from a point 355 feet west of University Place
to the dead end
Evelyn Place, around center island
Evelyn Place, east side, from Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) to
circle
Ewing Street, south side, from Harrison Street North to west side
of Ewing Street
Ewing Street, west side, from south side of Ewing Street to
Franklin Avenue
Franklin Avenue, north side, from Witherspoon Street to Moore
Street and from the Princeton Borough-Princeton Township
corporate line to Tee Ar Place
Franklin Avenue, south side, from Witherspoon Street to a point
50 feet easterly
Franklin Avenue, south side, from a point 50 feet east of Jefferson
Road to a point 50 feet west of Jefferson Road
Green Street, north side, from Witherspoon Street to John Street
Greenview Avenue, north side, from the west side of Greenview
Avenue to the east side of Humbert Street
Greenview Avenue, west side, from Wiggins Street to the north
side of Greenview Avenue
Hamilton Avenue, north side, from Moore Street to the Princeton
Borough-Princeton Township corporate line
Hamilton Avenue, south side, from the east curb line of Moore
Street to a point 104 feet easterly
[Ord. No. 2014-42 § 1]
§ 19-22 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-22
BAO:535
Hamilton Avenue, south side, from Chestnut Street to a point 130
feet easterly
Hamilton Avenue, south side, from Linden Lane to a point 150
feet west of Linden Lane
Harriet Drive, west side, from Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) to
Hamilton Avenue
Harriet Drive, east side, from Hamilton Avenue to a point 220
feet south of Hamilton Avenue
Harris Road, west side, from Franklin Avenue to the Princeton
Borough-Princeton Township corporate line
Harrison Street, east side, from Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) to
the Princeton Borough-Princeton Township corporate line
Harrison Street, west side, from Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) to
the Princeton Borough-Princeton Township corporate line
Harrison Street North, east side, from Route NJ 27 (Nassau
Street) to the Princeton Borough-Princeton Township corporate
line
Harrison Street North, west side, from Route NJ 27 (Nassau
Street) to the Princeton Borough-Princeton Township corporate
line
Hawthorne Avenue, north side, from Jefferson Road to Walnut
Lane
Hibben Road, east side, from Route NJ 206 (Stockton Street) to
Mercer Street
Hodge Road, north side, from Route NJ 206 (Bayard Lane) to Elm
Road
Hodge Road, south side, from Route NJ 206 (Bayard Lane) to
Morven Place
Houghton Road, south side, from Moore Street to a point 75 feet
easterly
Houghton Road, south side, from Walnut Lane to a point 75 feet
westerly
Houghton Road, south side, from a point 25 feet west of the
western curb of the driveway to Christ Congregation Church,
running easterly to a point 25 feet east of the eastern curb of the
aforesaid driveway
Houghton Road, south side, from a point 290 feet east of Moore
Street to a point 420 feet east of Moore Street
Hulfish Street, north side, from Witherspoon Street to a point 25
feet westerly
Hulfish Street, south side, from Witherspoon Street to Chambers
Street
§ 19-22 PRINCETON CODE § 19-22
BAO:536
Humbert Street, west side, from Wiggins Street to Greenview
Avenue
Jefferson Road, west side, from Wiggins Street to the Princeton
Borough-Princeton Township corporate line
Jefferson Road, east side, from a point 50 feet north of Franklin
Avenue to a point 50 feet south of Franklin Avenue
Jefferson Road, east side, from a point 350 feet south of Franklin
Avenue to a point 420 feet south of Franklin Avenue
Jefferson Road, east side, from a point 50 feet north of
Hawthorne Avenue to a point 50 feet south of Hawthorne Avenue
Jefferson Road, east side, from a point 270 feet south of
Hawthorne Avenue to a point 320 feet south of Hawthorne
Avenue
John Street, east side, from Paul Robeson Place to Green Street
John Street, west side, from Paul Robeson Place to the Princeton
Borough-Princeton Township corporate line
John Street, east side, from Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) to
Hulfish Street
Lafayette Road, along the traffic island located at the intersection
with Hodge Road
Lafayette Road, west side, from Hodge Road to Cleveland Lane
Lafayette Road, west side, from a point 380 feet south of
Cleveland Lane to a point 445 feet south of Cleveland Lane
Library Place, east side, from Mercer Street to a point 400 feet
north of Route NJ 206 (Stockton Street)
Library Place, west side, from a point 150 feet south of Route NJ
206 (Stockton Street) to a point 150 feet north of Route NJ 206
(Stockton Street)
Library Place, west side, from Cleveland Lane to Westcott Road
Library Place, east side, from a point 110 feet south of Westcott
Road to Westcott Road
Lilac Lane, east side
Lilac Lane, west side, from Hodge Road to a point 105 feet north
of Hodge Road
Lilac Lane, west side, from a point 345 feet north of Hodge Road
to dead end
Lincoln Court, north side, from South Tulane Street to dead end
Lincoln Court, south side, from South Tulane Street to dead end
Linden Lane, east side, from Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) to the
Princeton Borough-Princeton Township corporate line
Lytle Street, south side, from Witherspoon Street to John Street
§ 19-22 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-22
BAO:537
Maclean Street, north side, from Witherspoon Street to John
Street
Maclean Street, south side, from John Street to a point 65 feet
easterly
Madison Street, west side, from Park Place to Wiggins Street
Maple Street, east side, from Spruce Street to dead end
Maple Street, west side, from Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) to
dead end
Markham Road, west side, from Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) to
Patton Avenue
[Ord. No. 2014-33; Ord. No. 2014-39]
Markham Road, east side, from Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) to a
point 155 feet south of Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street)
[Ord. No. 2014-33; Ord. No. 2014-39]
Mercer Street, east side, from Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) to
Mercer Street Extension
Mercer Street, north side, from a point 78 feet west of Library
Place to a point 321 feet east of Library Place
[Ord. No. 2017-5 § 1]
Mercer Street, north side, from a point 661 feet east of Library
Place to a point 901 feet east of Library Place
[Ord. No. 2017-5 § 1]
Mercer Street, south side, from a point 103 feet west of Mercer
Street Extension to Olden Lane
Mercer Street, north side, from a point 50 feet west of Edgehill
Street to a point 120 feet east of Edgehill Street
[Ord. No. 2015-18 § 2]
Monument Drive (private), east side, from Route NJ 206
(Stockton Street) to the south side of Monument Drive
Monument Drive (private), west side, from Route NJ 206
(Stockton Street) to the north side of Monument Drive extended
Moore Street, west side, from Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) to a
point 50 feet northerly
[Ord. No. 2014-42 § 1]
Moore Street, west side, from the north curb line of Park Place to
a point 50 feet northerly
[Ord. No. 2014-42 § 1]
§ 19-22 PRINCETON CODE § 19-22
BAO:538
Moore Street, west side, from a point 175 feet north of the north
curb line of Park Place to a point 75 feet northerly
[Ord. No. 2014-42 § 1]
Moore Street, west side, from a point 55 feet south of the south
curb line of Wiggins Street to a point 114 feet north of the north
curb line of Wiggins Street
[Ord. No. 2014-42 § 1]
Moore Street, west side, from a point 55 feet south of the
extended south curb line of Houghton Road to a point 55 feet
north of the extended north curb line of Houghton Road
[Ord. No. 2014-42 § 1]
Moore Street, west side, from a point 68 feet south of the south
curb line of Franklin Avenue to a point 72 feet north of the north
curb line of Franklin Avenue
[Ord. No. 2014-42 § 1]
Moran Avenue, west side, from Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) to
Spruce Street
Murray Place, east side, from Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) to a
point 120 feet southerly
Murray Place, west side, from Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) to
Prospect Avenue
North Tulane Street, east side, from Wiggins Street to a point 70
feet southerly
North Tulane Street, west side, from Spring Street to Wiggins
Street
Olden Street, east side, from Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) to
Prospect Avenue
Olden Street, west side, from Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) to a
point 50 feet southerly
Olden Street west side, from a point 150 feet south of William
Street to a point 50 feet north of William Street
Orchard Circle, around center island
Palmer Square East, west side, from Palmer Square South to a
point 25 feet northerly
Palmer Square East, west side, from Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street)
to Palmer Square South
Palmer Square East, west side, from Hulfish Street to a point 52
feet southerly
Palmer Square South, south side, from a point 63 feet west of the
southerly portion of Palmer Square West to the southerly portion
of Palmer Square East
§ 19-22 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-22
BAO:539
Palmer Square West, east side, from Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street)
to Palmer Square South
Park Place, north side, from Vandeventer Avenue to Moore Street
Park Place, south side, from Vandeventer Avenue to a point 30
feet easterly
[Ord. No. 2014-42 § 1]
Park Place, south side, from a point 40 feet west of the extended
west curb line of Madison Street to a point 45 feet east of the
extended east curb line of Madison Street
[Ord. No. 2014-42 § 1]
Park Place, south side, from the west curb line of Moore Street to
a point 82 feet westerly
[Ord. No. 2014-42 § 1]
Patton Avenue, north side, from Murray Place to Cedar Lane
Paul Robeson Place, along traffic island located at the
intersection with Route NJ 206 (Bayard Lane)
Paul Robeson Place, along traffic islands located at intersection
with Chambers Street
Paul Robeson Place, north side, from Route NJ 206 (Bayard Lane)
to a point 195 feet east of John Street and from Witherspoon
Street to a point 140 feet westerly
[Ord. No. 2016-07 § 2]
Paul Robeson Place, south side, from Chambers Street to a point
220 feet easterly and from Witherspoon Street to a point 175 feet
westerly
[Ord. No. 2016-07 § 2]
Paul Robeson Place, south side, from Route NJ 206 (Bayard Lane)
to Chambers Street
[Ord. No. 2016-07 § 2]
Pelham Street, north side, from Harrison Street to Wilton Street
Pine Street, west side, from Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) to
Spruce Street
Pine Street, east side, from Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) to a
point 35 feet northerly
[Ord. No. 2017-3 § 1]
Princeton Avenue, west side, from the intersection with Route NJ
27 (Nassau Street) south a distance of 100 feet
§ 19-22 PRINCETON CODE § 19-22
BAO:540
Prospect Avenue, north side, from a point 100 feet west of
Harrison Street to a point 100 feet east of Harrison Street
[Ord. No. 2016-04]
Prospect Avenue, north side, from Washington Road to Murray
Place
[Ord. No. 2016-04]
Prospect Avenue, south side from a point 40 feet west of the
westerly curbline of Olden Street, extended, to a point 40 feet
east of the easterly curbline of Olden Street, extended
[Ord. No. 2016-04]
Prospect Avenue, south side, from a point 100 feet west of
Harrison Street to a point 100 feet east of Harrison Street
[Ord. No. 2016-04]
Prospect Avenue, south side, from Washington Road to a point 71
feet easterly
[Ord. No. 2016-04]
Prospect Avenue, both sides, from a point 165 feet west of Cedar
Lane to a point 150 feet east of Cedar Lane
[Ord. No. 2016-04]
Quarry Street, south side, from Witherspoon Street to John Street
Scott Lane, eastern side, between Nassau Street and a point 200
feet north of Nassau Street
[Ord. No. 2014-3]
Sergeant Street, north side, from Harrison Street to Wilton Street
Sergeant Street, south side, from Harrison Street to a point 76
feet easterly
South Tulane Street, west side, from Witherspoon Alley to Spring
Street
Spring Street, north side, from Witherspoon Street to
Vandeventer Avenue
Spring Street, south side, from Witherspoon Street to a point 25
feet easterly
Spring Street, south side, from a point 171 feet east of
Witherspoon Street to a point 205 feet east of Witherspoon Street
Spring Street, south side, from a point 266 feet east of
Witherspoon Street to South Tulane Street
Springdale Road, east side, from Mercer Street to the Princeton
Borough-Princeton Township corporate line
§ 19-22 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-22
BAO:541
Springdale Road, west side, from a point 75 feet north of Battle
Road to the Princeton Borough-Princeton Township corporate line
Spruce Street, north side, from Moore Street to dead end east of
Linden Lane
Spruce Street, south side, from Moore Street to a point 50 feet
easterly
Sylvia Beach Way, both sides, from Wiggins Street to Wiggins
Street, except in designated loading zone
University Place, east side, from Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) to a
point 250 feet southerly
University Place, west side, from Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) to
College Road
Vandeventer Avenue, east side, from Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street)
to Wiggins Street
Walnut Lane, east side, from Hamilton Avenue to Houghton Road,
extended
Walnut Lane, west side, from Hamilton Avenue to Franklin
Avenue, extended
Washington Road, east side, from Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) to
the Princeton Borough-Princeton Township corporate line
Washington Road, west side, from Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) to
the Princeton Borough-Princeton Township corporate line
Westcott Road, north side, from Elm Road to Westcott Road
Westcott Road, south side, from a point 90 feet east of Elm Road
to Elm Road
Westcott Road, north side, from Westcott Road to Route NJ 206
(Bayard Lane)
Westcott Road, south side, from a point 126 feet west of Hunter
Road to a point 132 feet east of Hunter Road
Westcott Road, south side, from Westcott Road to a point 106 feet
east of Westcott Road
Westcott Road, south side, from a point 65 feet west of Wilson
Road to a point 75 feet east of Wilson Road
Wiggins Street, along traffic island located at the intersection
with Chambers Street
Wiggins Street, south side from Witherspoon Street to a point 75
feet east of Vandeventer Street
Wiggins Street, south side within 75 feet of Madison Street
Wiggins Street, south side within 75 feet of Moore Street
William Street, north side, from Washington Road to Olden Street
§ 19-22 PRINCETON CODE § 19-22
BAO:542
William Street, south side, from Charlton Street to a point 50 feet
westerly
Wilton Street, west side, from Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) to
Patton Avenue
Witherspoon Alley, south side, from South Tulane Street westerly
165 feet
Witherspoon Alley, north side, from Witherspoon Street to South
Tulane Street
Witherspoon Street, west side, from Hulfish Street to a point 40
feet southerly, and from a point 50 feet south of Paul Robeson
Place to Green Street, and from Clay Street to the Princeton
Borough-Princeton Township corporate line
(b) No parking between 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m.
(1) No person shall park a vehicle between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
10:00 a.m. upon any of the following streets or parts of streets:
Edwards Place, south side, from a point 57 feet west of University
Place to a point 355 feet west of University Place
(c) No parking between 9:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m. on certain weekdays.
(1) No person shall park any vehicle between the hours of 9:00 a.m.
and 11:00 a.m. upon any of the following streets or parts of streets
on the weekdays as set forth below in order to permit street
sweeping of these streets:
Birch Avenue, north side, from Bayard Lane to Witherspoon
Street on the first Wednesday of every month
Clay Street, south side, from John Street to Witherspoon Street
on the first Wednesday of every month
Green Street, south side, from John Street to Witherspoon Street
on the third Wednesday of every month
John Street, east side, from Maclean Street to the northerly
terminus at Community Park South on the first Wednesday of
every month
John Street, east side, from Paul Robeson Place to Maclean Street
on the third Wednesday of every month
Leigh Avenue, north side, from Bayard Lane to Witherspoon
Street on the first Wednesday of every month
Lytle Street, north side, from John Street to Witherspoon Street
on the first Wednesday of every month
MacLean Street, south side, from John Street to Witherspoon
Street on the third Wednesday of every month
§ 19-22 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-22
BAO:543
§ 19-23. Nonmetered on-street parking zones. [Ord. No. 2009-03,
§ I; Ord. No. 2009-09, § I; Ord. No. 2009-32, § III; Ord. No. 2012-14;
Ord. No. 2011-08; Ord. No. 2014-42 § 2; Ord. No. 2015-3 § 2; Ord.
No. 2015-18 § 3; Ord. No. 2017-3 § 2; Ord. No. 2017-5 § 2; Ord. No.
2017-58 § 2]
Quarry Street, north side, from John Street to Witherspoon Street
on the third Wednesday of every month
Race Street, east side, from Leigh Avenue to the northerly
terminus at Community Park South on the first Wednesday of
every month
(d) No parking between 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on public school days.
(1) No person shall park a vehicle between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
4:00 p.m., on days when public schools are in session, upon any of
the following streets or parts of streets:
Houghton Road north side, from Moore Street to Walnut Lane.
(e) No parking between 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m.
(1) No person shall park a vehicle on any day, including Sundays and
holidays upon any of the following streets or parts of streets
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m.:
Clay Street, both sides, from John Street to Witherspoon Street,
except by permit
Markham Road, east side, from Sergeant Street to 155 feet south
of Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street)
Murray Place, between Aiken Avenue and Route NJ 27 (Nassau
Street), both sides
Princeton Avenue, between Aiken Avenue and Route NJ 27
(Nassau Street), both sides
Wilton Street, east side, from Sergeant Street to Route NJ 27
(Nassau Street)
(f) No parking between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Mondays through Fridays.
(1) No person shall park a vehicle between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday on the following streets or parts
of streets:
Prospect Avenue, north side, between Murray Place and Princeton
Avenue.
(a) Parking time limited to 10 minutes.
§ 19-22 PRINCETON CODE § 19-23
BAO:544
(1) No person shall park a vehicle for longer than 10 minutes at any
time between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. upon any of the
following streets or parts of streets:
University Place, east side, running in a northeasterly direction
along the east curbline of University Place, from a point 472 feet to
a point 535 feet from the easterly line of Alexander Street.
(b) Parking time limited to 15 minutes.
(1) None designated.
(c) Parking time limited to 30 minutes.
(1) None designated.
(d) Parking time limited to two hours.
(1) No person shall park a vehicle for longer than two hours at any
time between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday
through Saturday, upon any of the following streets or parts of
streets:
Alexander Street, east side from Mercer Street to a point 55 feet
north of Dickinson Street
Bank Street, east side, from a point 200 feet north of Route NJ 27
(Nassau Street) to the south side of Bank Street
Battle Road, north side, from Springdale Road to the Princeton
Borough-Princeton Township corporate line
Boudinot Street, south side, from Route NJ 206 (Bayard Lane) to
Library Place
Chestnut Street, east side, from a point 270 feet north of Route
NJ 27 (Nassau Street) to Hamilton Avenue, except as permitted in
a designated handicapped parking zone
Cleveland Lane, north side, from a point 75 feet westerly of the
west curb of Bayard Lane to a point 627 feet easterly of the east
curb of Library Place
Cleveland Lane, north side, from a point 507 feet easterly of the
east curb of Library Place to a point 50 feet easterly of the east
curb of Library Place
Edgehill Street, west side, from a point 120 feet north of Mercer
Street to a point 75 feet south of Route NJ 206 (Stockton Street)
Franklin Avenue, south side, from Jefferson Road to Moore Street
Green Street, south side, from Witherspoon Street to John Street
Greenview Avenue, east side, from Wiggins Street to the south
side of Greenview Avenue
Greenview Avenue, south side, from the east side of Greenview
Avenue to Humbert Street
§ 19-23 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-23
BAO:545
Harris Road, east side, from Franklin Avenue to the Princeton
Borough-Princeton Township corporate line
Hawthorne Avenue, south side, from Jefferson Road to Walnut
Lane
Hodge Road, south side, from Morven Place to Library Place
Houghton Road, south side between Moore Street and Walnut
Lane
Humbert Street, east side, from Wiggins Street to Greenview
Avenue
Jefferson Road, east side, from Wiggins Street to the Princeton
Borough-Princeton Township corporate line
John Street, from Quarry Street to the Princeton Borough-
Princeton Township corporate line
Library Place, both sides, from Route NJ 206 (Stockton Street) to
Hodge Road
Library Place, west side, from Mercer Street to Route NJ 206
(Stockton Street)
Lilac Lane, west side, from a point 105 feet north of Hodge Road
to a point 345 feet north of Hodge Road
Maclean Street, south side, from John Street to Witherspoon
Street
Madison Street, east side, from Park Place to Wiggins Street
Mercer Street, north side, from Alexander Street to Library Place
Mercer Street, north side, from a point 321 feet east of Library
Place to a point 661 feet east of Library Place
Moore Street, west side, from a point 40 feet north of the north
curb line of Park Place to a point 125 feet northerly
Moore Street, west side, from a point 45 feet south of the south
curb line of Wiggins Street to a point 310 feet southerly
Morven Place, east side, from Boudinot Street to Hodge Road
Morven Place, west side, from Boudinot Street to Hodge Road
Pine Street, east side, from a point 35 feet north of Route NJ 27
(Nassau Street) to a point 780 feet northerly
Princeton Avenue, west side, from a point 100 feet south of the
intersection with Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) to Aiken Avenue
Prospect Avenue, south side, from Washington Road to a point
490 feet easterly
Quarry Street, north side, from Witherspoon Street to John Street
Springdale Road, west side, from Mercer Street to Battle Road
Spruce Street, south side, from Moran Avenue to Chestnut Street
§ 19-23 PRINCETON CODE § 19-23
BAO:546
§ 19-24. Metered On-Street Parking Areas Designated. [Ord. No.
2009-03, § I; Ord. No. 2009-09, § II; Ord. No. 2009-13, § III; Ord. No.
2009-32, § IV; Ord. No. 2010-12, §§ III, IV; Ord. No. 2011-23; Ord.
No. 2014-42 § 3; Ord. No. 2016-07 § 1; Ord. No. 2016-18; Ord. No.
2017-5 § 3; Ord. No. 2017-24 § 1; Ord. No. 2018-23 § 5; Ord. No.
2019-23 § 2; Ord. No. 2019-29 § 2]
Westcott Road, south side, from a point 75 feet east of Wilson
Road, to a point 75 feet west of Bayard Lane
Wiggins Street, south side, from a point 75 feet east of
Vandeventer Avenue to a point 75 feet west of Madison Street
Wiggins Street, south side, from Vandeventer Avenue to Moore
Street
Wiggins Street, south side, from a point 75 feet east of Madison
Street to a point 75 feet west of Moore Street
(e) Parking limited to two hours on certain days.
(1) No person shall park a vehicle for longer than two hours at any
time between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday on any of the following streets or parts of streets:
Aiken Avenue, south side, from Murray Place to the dead end
Library Place, both sides, between Hodge Road and Cleveland
Lane
Murray Place, east side, from a point 150 feet south of Route NJ
27 (Nassau Street) to Prospect Avenue
Patton Avenue, south side, between Harrison Street and
Princeton Avenue
Princeton Avenue, both sides, between Aiken Avenue and
Prospect Avenue
Prospect Avenue, north side, between Princeton Avenue, Murray
Place and Harrison Street
(a) No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit listed
below during the hours listed below upon any of the following streets or
parts of streets:
§ 19-23 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-24
BAO:547
Meter
Parking
Area Location
Location
Notes
Time
Limit
Hours of
Operation
All day
meters
Alexander
Street - east
side, between
Dickinson
Street &
University
Place
All day 9:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m. Monday
through
Thursday and
9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. Friday
through
Saturday and
1:00 p.m. to 8:00
p.m. Sunday
Three hour
meters -
Omnibus
Parking
Zone
Alexander
Street - west
side, between
the southern
most driveway
to the
Princeton
Station Lot
and a point
410 feet
northerly
Three
hours
7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m. Monday
through Sunday
All day
meters
Alexander
Street - east
side, between
University
Place &
southern most
driveway to
the Princeton
Station Lot
All day 9:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m. Monday
through
Thursday and
9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. Friday
through
Saturday and
1:00 p.m. to 8:00
p.m. Sunday
All day
meters
Alexander
Street - west
side, between
University
Place & a
point 410 feet
northerly of
the southern
most driveway
to the
Princeton
Station Lot
All day 9:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m. Monday
through
Thursday and
9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. Friday
through
Saturday and
1:00 p.m. to 8:00
p.m. Sunday
§ 19-24 PRINCETON CODE § 19-24
BAO:548
Meter
Parking
Area Location
Location
Notes
Time
Limit
Hours of
Operation
30 minute
meters
Chambers
Street - east
side, between
Nassau Street
& Hulfish
Street
1st space
north of
Nassau
Street
30
minutes
9:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m. Monday
through
Thursday and
9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. Friday
through
Saturday and
1:00 p.m. to 8:00
p.m. Sunday
Three hour
meters
Chambers
Street - east
side, between
Nassau street
& Hulfish
Street
Three
Hours
9:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m. Monday
through
Thursday and
9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. Friday
through
Saturday and
1:00 p.m. to 8:00
p.m. Sunday
Three hour
meters
Chambers
Street - both
sides,
between
Hulfish Street
& Paul
Robeson Place
Three
Hours
9:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m. Monday
through
Thursday and
9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. Friday
through
Saturday and
1:00 p.m. to 8:00
p.m. Sunday
Three-hour
meters
Charlton
Street - west
side, between
Nassau Street
& William
Street
3 hours 9:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m. Monday
through
Thursday and
9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. Friday
through
Saturday and
1:00 p.m. to 8:00
p.m. Sunday
§ 19-24 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-24
BAO:549
Meter
Parking
Area Location
Location
Notes
Time
Limit
Hours of
Operation
All day
meters
Dickinson
Street - both
sides,
between
University
Place &
Alexander
Street
All Day 9:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m. Monday
through
Thursday and
9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. Friday
through
Saturday and
1:00 p.m. to 8:00
p.m. Sunday
All day
meters
Edwards
Place - south
side
All Day 9:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m. Monday
through
Thursday and
9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. Friday
through
Saturday and
1:00 p.m. to 8:00
p.m. Sunday
All day
meters
Franklin
Avenue - south
side, between
Witherspoon
Street &
Jefferson Road
All day 9:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m. Monday
through
Thursday and
9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. Friday
through
Saturday and
1:00 p.m. to 8:00
p.m. Sunday
All day
meters
Henry Avenue
- south side,
between
Witherspoon
Street &
Harris Road
All Day 9:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m. Monday
through
Thursday and
9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. Friday
through
Saturday and
1:00 p.m. to 8:00
p.m. Sunday
§ 19-24 PRINCETON CODE § 19-24
BAO:550
Meter
Parking
Area Location
Location
Notes
Time
Limit
Hours of
Operation
30 minute
meters
Hulfish Street
- north side,
between
Chambers
Street & John
Street Alley
1st two
spaces
east of
Chambers
Street
30
minutes
9:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m. Monday
through
Thursday and
9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. Friday
through
Saturday and
1:00 p.m. to 8:00
p.m. Sunday
Three hour
meters
Hulfish Street
- north side,
between
Chambers
Street &
Witherspoon
Street
Three
hours
9:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m. Monday
through
Thursday and
9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. Friday
through
Saturday and
1:00 p.m. to 8:00
p.m. Sunday
All day
meters
Mercer Street
- north side,
between
Alexander
Street &
Mercer Street
extension
All day 9:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m. Monday
through
Thursday and
9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. Friday
through
Saturday and
1:00 p.m. to 8:00
p.m. Sunday
Three hour
meters
Mercer Street
extension -
both sides,
between
University
Place &
Mercer Street
Three
hours
9:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m. Monday
through
Thursday and
9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. Friday
through
Saturday and
1:00 p.m. to 8:00
p.m. Sunday
§ 19-24 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-24
BAO:551
Meter
Parking
Area Location
Location
Notes
Time
Limit
Hours of
Operation
Three hour
meters
Moore Street -
west side,
between
Nassau Street
& Park Place
Three
hours
9:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m. Monday
through
Thursday and
9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. Friday
through
Saturday and
1:00 p.m. to 8:00
p.m. Sunday
All day
meters
Olden Street -
west side,
between
William Street
& Prospect
Avenue
All day 9:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m. Monday
through
Thursday and
9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. Friday
through
Saturday and
1:00 p.m. to 8:00
p.m. Sunday
Three hour
meters
Olden Street -
west side,
between
Nassau Street
& William
Street
Three
hours
9:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m. Monday
through
Thursday and
9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. Friday
through
Saturday and
1:00 p.m. to 8:00
p.m. Sunday
Three hour
meters
Park Place -
south side,
between
Moore Street
& Vandeventer
Avenue
Three
hours
9:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m. Monday
through
Thursday and
9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. Friday
through
Saturday and
1:00 p.m. to 8:00
p.m. Sunday
§ 19-24 PRINCETON CODE § 19-24
BAO:552
Meter
Parking
Area Location
Location
Notes
Time
Limit
Hours of
Operation
Three hour
meters
Paul Robeson
Place - both
sides,
between John
Street/
Chambers
Street &
Witherspoon
Street
Three
hours
9:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m. Monday
through
Thursday and
9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. Friday
through
Saturday and
1:00 p.m. to 8:00
p.m. Sunday
All day
meters
Prospect
Avenue - south
side, between
Washington
Road &
Fitzrandolph
Road
All day 9:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m. Monday
through
Thursday and
9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. Friday
through
Saturday and
1:00 p.m. to 8:00
p.m. Sunday
30 minute
meters
Palmer
Square East -
east side,
between
Nassau Street
& Palmer
Square South
1st two
spaces
north of
Nassau
Street
30
minutes
9:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m. Monday
through
Thursday and
9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. Friday
through
Saturday and
1:00 p.m. to 8:00
p.m. Sunday
30 minutes
meters
Palmer
Square East -
west side,
between
Hulfish Street
& Palmer
Square South
1st space
south of
Hulfish
Street
30
minutes
9:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m. Monday
through
Thursday and
9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. Friday
through
Saturday and
1:00 p.m. to 8:00
p.m. Sunday
§ 19-24 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-24
BAO:553
Meter
Parking
Area Location
Location
Notes
Time
Limit
Hours of
Operation
Three hour
meters
Palmer
Square East -
east side,
between
Palmer
Square South
& Hulfish
Street
Four
spaces
within the
loading
zone north
of Palmer
Square
South
Three
hours
5:00 p.m. to 8:00
p.m. Monday
through
Thursday and
5:00 p.m. to 9:00
p.m. Friday
through
Saturday and
1:00 p.m. to 8:00
p.m. Sunday
Three hour
meters
Palmer
Square East -
east side,
between
Nassau Street
& Hulfish
Street
[Two]Three
hours
9:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m. Monday
through
Thursday and
9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. Friday
through
Saturday and
1:00 p.m. to 8:00
p.m. Sunday
Three hour
meters
Palmer
Square South
- north side,
between
Palmer
Square East &
Palmer
Square West
[Two]Three
hours
9:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m. Monday
through
Thursday and
9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. Friday
through
Saturday and
1:00 p.m. to 8:00
p.m. Sunday
30 minutes
meters
Palmer
Square West -
east side,
between
Hulfish Street
& Palmer
Square South
1st space
north of
Palmer
Square
South
30
minutes
9:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m. Monday
through
Thursday and
9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. Friday
through
Saturday and
1:00 p.m. to 8:00
p.m. Sunday
§ 19-24 PRINCETON CODE § 19-24
BAO:554
Meter
Parking
Area Location
Location
Notes
Time
Limit
Hours of
Operation
30 minute
meters
Palmer
Square West -
west side,
between
Hulfish Street
& Palmer
Square South
1st space
south of
Hulfish
Street
30
minutes
9:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m. Monday
through
Thursday and
9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. Friday
through
Saturday and
1:00 p.m. to 8:00
p.m. Sunday
30 minute
meters
Palmer
Square West -
west side,
between
Nassau Street
& Palmer
Square South
1st two
spaces
south of
Palmer
Square
South
30
minutes
9:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m. Monday
through
Thursday and
9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. Friday
through
Saturday and
1:00 p.m. to 8:00
p.m. Sunday
Three hour
meters
Palmer
Square West -
both sides,
between
Palmer
Square South
& Hulfish
Street
Three
hours
9:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m. Monday
through
Thursday and
9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. Friday
through
Saturday and
1:00 p.m. to 8:00
p.m. Sunday
Three hour
meters
Palmer
Square West -
west side,
between
Nassau Street
& Palmer
Square South
Three
hours
9:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m. Monday
through
Thursday and
9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. Friday
through
Saturday and
1:00 p.m. to 8:00
p.m. Sunday
§ 19-24 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-24
BAO:555
Meter
Parking
Area Location
Location
Notes
Time
Limit
Hours of
Operation
30 minute
meters
Spring Street
- south side,
between south
Tulane Street
&
Witherspoon
Street
1st space
west of
south
Tulane
Street
30
minutes
9:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m. Monday
through
Thursday and
9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. Friday
through
Saturday and
1:00 p.m. to 8:00
p.m. Sunday
Three hour
meters
Spring Street
- south side,
between
Witherspoon
Street &
Vandeventer
Avenue
Three
hours
9:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m. Monday
through
Thursday and
9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. Friday
through
Saturday and
1:00 p.m. to 8:00
p.m. Sunday
30 minute
meters
Spring Street
- south side,
between south
Tulane Street
& Vandeventer
Avenue
1st three
spaces
east of
south
Tulane
Street
30
minutes
9:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m. Monday
through
Thursday and
9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. Friday
through
Saturday and
1:00 p.m. to 8:00
p.m. Sunday
30 minute
meters
South Tulane
Street - east
side, between
Spring Street
& Lincoln
Court
30
minutes
9:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m. Monday
through
Thursday and
9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. Friday
through
Saturday and
1:00 p.m. to 8:00
p.m. Sunday
§ 19-24 PRINCETON CODE § 19-24
BAO:556
Meter
Parking
Area Location
Location
Notes
Time
Limit
Hours of
Operation
30 minute
meters
South Tulane
Street-west
side, between
Lincoln Court
& Nassau
Street
30
minutes
9:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m. Monday
through
Thursday and
9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. Friday
through
Saturday and
1:00 p.m. to 8:00
p.m. Sunday
Three hour
meters
North Tulane
Street - east
side, between
Spring Street
& Wiggins
Street
Three
hours
9:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m. Monday
through
Thursday and
9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. Friday
through
Saturday and
1:00 p.m. to 8:00
p.m. Sunday
All day
meters
University
Place - west/
north side,
between
College Road
& Alexander
Street
All day 9:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m. Monday
through
Thursday and
9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. Friday
through
Saturday and
1:00 p.m. to 8:00
p.m. Sunday
Three hour
meters
University
Place - east
side, between
College Road
& Berlind
Crosswalk
Three
Hours
9:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m. Monday
through
Thursday and
9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. Friday
through
Saturday and
1:00 p.m. to 8:00
p.m. Sunday
§ 19-24 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-24
BAO:557
Meter
Parking
Area Location
Location
Notes
Time
Limit
Hours of
Operation
All day
meters
University
Place - south
side, between
Berlind
Crosswalk &
Alexander
Street
All day 9:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m. Monday
through
Thursday and
9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. Friday
through
Saturday and
1:00 p.m. to 8:00
p.m. Sunday
All day
meters
University
Place - east
side, between
Nassau Street
& College
Road
All day 9:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m. Monday
through
Thursday and
9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. Friday
through
Saturday and
1:00 p.m. to 8:00
p.m. Sunday
Three hour
meters
Vandeventer
Avenue - west
side, between
Nassau Street
& Wiggins
Street
Three
Hours
9:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m. Monday
through
Thursday and
9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. Friday
through
Saturday and
1:00 p.m. to 8:00
p.m. Sunday
All day
meters
William Street
- south side,
between
Washington
Road & Olden
Street
All day 9:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m. Monday
through
Thursday and
9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. Friday
through
Saturday and
1:00 p.m. to 8:00
p.m. Sunday
§ 19-24 PRINCETON CODE § 19-24
BAO:558
Meter
Parking
Area Location
Location
Notes
Time
Limit
Hours of
Operation
All day
meters
Witherspoon
Street - east
side, between
Franklin
Avenue &
Henry Avenue
All day 9:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m. Monday
through
Thursday and
9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. Friday
through
Saturday and
1:00 p.m. to 8:00
p.m. Sunday
30 minute
meters
Witherspoon
Street - west
side, between
Nassau Street
& Spring
Street
1st two
spaces
north of
Nassau
Street
30
minutes
9:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m. Monday
through
Thursday and
9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. Friday
through
Saturday and
1:00 p.m. to 8:00
p.m. Sunday
Three Hour
Meters
Witherspoon
Street - West
side, between
Nassau Street
& Paul
Robeson Place
Three
hours
9:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m. Monday
through
Thursday and
9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. Friday
through
Saturday and
1:00 p.m. to 8:00
p.m. Sunday
Three hour
meters
Witherspoon
Street - west
side, between
Lytle Street &
Clay Street
Three
Hours
9:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m. Monday
through
Thursday and
9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. Friday
through
Saturday and
1:00 p.m. to 8:00
p.m. Sunday
§ 19-24 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-24
BAO:559
§ 19-25. Metered Parking Yards. [Ord. No. 2009-03, § I; Ord. No.
2009-09, § III; Ord. No. 2009-32, § V; Ord. No. 2014-1 § 4; Ord. No.
2017-20 § 2; Ord. No. 2018-23 § 6; Ord. No. 2019-36 § 1]
Meter
Parking
Area Location
Location
Notes
Time
Limit
Hours of
Operation
30 minute
meters
Witherspoon
Street - east
side, between
Hulfish Street
& Spring
Street
30
minutes
9:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m. Monday
through
Thursday and
9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. Friday
through
Saturday and
1:00 p.m. to 8:00
p.m. Sunday
30 minute
meters
Witherspoon
Street - west
side, between
Hulfish Street
& Paul
Robeson Place
1st four
spaces
south of
Paul
Robeson
30
minutes
9:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m. Monday
through
Thursday and
9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. Friday
through
Saturday and
1:00 p.m. to 8:00
p.m. Sunday
Three hour
meters
Witherspoon
Street - west
side, between
Green Street
& Lytle Street
Three
Hours
9:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m. Monday
through
Thursday and
9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. Friday
through
Saturday and
1:00 p.m. to 8:00
p.m. Sunday
(b) Parking in metered on-street parking areas designated in section
19-24(a) shall be in compliance with section 19-21.
(a) Designated.
(1) The following areas in the municipality are hereby designated as
municipal metered parking yards:
Park Place East Yard;
Park Place West Yard;
§ 19-24 PRINCETON CODE § 19-25
BAO:560
Princeton Station Lot;
Princeton Station Retail Lot;
Tulane Street Yard.
(b) Parking time limits; parking meter compliance.
(1) No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit listed
below during the hours listed below within any of the following
parking yards:
Area Street
Time
Limit Hours of Operation
30 minute
meters
Tulane Street
Yard
30 minutes 9:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
Monday through
Thursday and 9:00 a.m.
to 9:00 p.m. Friday
through Saturday and
1:00 p.m. to 8:00 p.m.
Sunday
Two hour
meters
Tulane Street
Yard
Two Hours 9:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
Monday through
Thursday and 9:00 a.m.
to 9:00 p.m. Friday
through Saturday and
1:00 p.m. to 8:00 p.m.
Sunday
15 minute
meters
Princeton
Station Retail
Lot
15 minutes 24 hours a day, 7 days a
week
Two hour
meters
Park Place East
Yard
2 hours 9:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
Monday through
Thursday and 9:00 a.m.
to 9:00 p.m. Friday
through Saturday and
1:00 p.m. to 8:00 p.m.
Sunday
All day
meters
Park Place
West Yard
All day 9:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
Monday through
Thursday and 9:00 a.m.
to 9:00 p.m. Friday
through Saturday and
1:00 p.m. to 8:00 p.m.
Sunday
All day
meters
Princeton
Station Lot
All day Up to 7 days (168
hours)
§ 19-25 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-25
BAO:561
§ 19-26. High School Parking Yard. [Ord. No. 2009-03, § I]
(2) Parking in metered parking yards designated in section 19-25(b)(1)
shall be in compliance with section 19-21.
(3) Beginning on November 6, 2019 and ending on May 31, 2020 or
when the Alexander Street bridge reopens, whichever is sooner, no
person shall park a vehicle for longer than 48 hours in the
Princeton Station parking yard. This subsection 19-25(b)(3) shall
automatically terminate and cease to be in effect as of June 1, 2020.
(a) Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following words or
phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this
section:
HIGH SCHOOL EAST YARD — The parking yard located between the
high school building and Walnut Lane.
HIGH SCHOOL SOUTH YARD — The parking yard located between the
high school building and Houghton Road.
HIGH SCHOOL WEST YARD — The driveway complex giving access to
the main entrance to the high school and having terminals at Houghton
Road and Moore Street.
(b) Use as thoroughfare prohibited.
(1) No operator of a vehicle shall enter any of the high school parking
yards and parking places for the purpose of using such yard or
place as a thoroughfare.
(c) Parking within designated parking stalls.
(1) No person shall park a vehicle in any of the high school parking
yards and parking places, except within parking stalls designated
on the pavement.
(d) Stopping or standing prohibited in certain locations.
(1) No person shall stop or stand a vehicle in any of the following
locations in the high school parking yards and parking places.
Name of Yard Location
High School
East
Driveway running along east side of yard
between the northerly exit drive and a point 190
feet south thereof. Southerly exit driveway.
High School
South
Along curb on north side of yard opposite the
entrance and exit driveways
High School
West
Northeast side of entrance driveway between
Houghton Road and Moore Street
Southwest side of entrance driveway from
Houghton Road to a point 30 feet northerly
§ 19-25 PRINCETON CODE § 19-26
BAO:562
Name of Yard Location
Southwest side of entrance driveway from a
point 126 feet north of Houghton Road,
northerly 36 feet
Southwest side of entrance driveway from
Houghton Road from a point 315 15 feet north of
Houghton, northerly 11 feet
Southwest side of entrance driveway from
Moore Street to a point 36 feet southerly
North side of oval driveway for a distance 30
feet on either side of the center of the tower
entrance to the high school
North side of exit driveway between Moore
Street and a point 270 feet east thereof
Along curb of island in oval driveway
(e) Entrances and exits.
(1) The following locations are designated as entrances to or exits from
the high school parking yards and parking places, or as both
entrances and exits:
Name of
Yard Location Designation
High School
East
Northerly driveway at Walnut
Entrance and exit Lane
Entrance and exit
Southerly driveway at Walnut
Lane
Exit
High School
South
Driveway at Houghton Road Entrance and exit
High School
West
Driveway at Houghton Road Entrance
Driveway at Moore Street Exit
(2) No operator of a vehicle shall enter any of such yards at other than
a designated entrance or leave any of such yards at other than a
designated exit.
(f) Stop intersections.
(1) Pursuant to the provisions of Revised Statutes, Section 39:4-140,
the following intersections of exit driveways of the high school
parking yards and parking places with streets of the borough are
hereby designated as stop intersections:
§ 19-26 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-26
BAO:563
§ 19-27. Borough Hall Parking Yards. [Ord. No. 2009-03, § I]
Name of Yard Intersection
Stop sign shall be
installed
High School South Driveway and
Houghton Road
On driveway
(g) One-way streets.
(1) The following streets or parts of streets in the high school parking
yards are hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction
indicated:
Name of Yard
Name of
Street Direction Limits
High School
East
North-south
driveway
Southbound Entire length
High School
West
Houghton
Road-Moore
Street
driveway
Bound for
Moore Street
Entire length
High School
West
Oval driveway Counter clockwise
Between
intersections
with Houghton
Road-Moore
Street
Driveway
(h) Loading zones.
(1) The following locations in the high school parking yards are hereby
designated as loading zones:
a. High School East Yard. The curb, 55 feet in width, in front of
the entrance to the high school cafeteria.
(a) Borough Hall East Yard:
(1) No person shall park a vehicle in the Borough Hall East Yard unless
the vehicle is a police vehicle, a vehicle owned or operated by a
member of the Princeton Borough police department or a vehicle
authorized by the chief of police to park in the yard.
(b) Borough Hall West Yard:
(1) No person shall park any vehicle in the Borough Hall West Yard
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through
Friday, unless the owner or operator of said vehicle is a visitor to
Princeton Borough Hall or the Suzanne Patterson Center, an
employee of the borough or authorized to park in the yard by the
§ 19-26 PRINCETON CODE § 19-27
BAO:564
§ 19-28. General Permit Parking Yards. [Ord. No. 2014-1 § 5]
§ 19-29. Parking Yard Entrances and Exits. [Ord. No. 2009-03, § I]
borough clerk. All vehicles permitted to park in the Borough Hall
West Yard shall be properly identified by a system to be
implemented by the borough clerk.
(a) Marking and restrictions of parking spaces.
(1) The borough engineer shall mark the parking spaces and shall post
signs giving notice that parking is restricted to vehicles and times
authorized by permit within each parking yard.
(b) Rules and regulations.
(1) The borough clerk is authorized to prescribe such rules and
regulations that shall be necessary or desirable to carry out the
provisions of this section.
(c) Speed limit.
(1) The speed limit in all municipal parking yards shall be 15 miles per
hour.
(d) Parking between 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m.
(1) No person shall park any vehicle in any of the municipal parking
yards between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., except as
authorized in this section.
a. Any vehicle parked in the designated areas between the hours
of 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m., so authorized by permit issued and
displayed in accordance with the provisions of section
19-31(b), in the following municipal parking yards:
Harrison Street North Yard
Maclean Street Yard
Park Place East Yard
Park Place West Yard
Princeton Station Lot
Princeton Station Retail Lot
Trinity Yard
Tulane Street West Yard
University Place Yard
(a) Access driveways for municipal parking yards shall be used by vehicles
only for entrance to a yard, where designated as entrances, and only for
exit from a yard, where designated as exits, in accordance with the
following schedule:
§ 19-27 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-29
BAO:565
§ 19-30. Handicapped Parking. [Ord. No. 2009-03, § I; Ord. No.
2010-12 § V.; Ord. No. 2017-20 § 3]
§ 19-31. Parking Permits. [Ord. No. 2009-03, § I; Ord. No. 2009-08,
§ I; Ord. No. 2009-12, § I; Ord. No. 2014-1 § 7]
Yard Driveway at Designation
Park Place West Park Place, west side Entrance
Park Place, east side Exit
Vandeventer Avenue Entrance
Tulane Street West Witherspoon Street Entrance
South Tulane Street Exit
(a) No person shall park a vehicle in the designated handicapped parking
space as described herein, unless said person has been issued a special
vehicle identification card pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-205 by the Motor
Vehicle Commission and unless the handicapped person is either the
driver or passenger in that vehicle.
(b) Any person parking the vehicle in the handicapped restricted parking
space without a special vehicle identification card shall be liable for a
fine of $250 for the first offense and for subsequent offenses, a fine of at
least $250 and up to 90 days community service on such terms and in
such form as the court may deem appropriate or any combination
thereof.
(c) Spaces designated.
(1) Palmer Square South, north side, 89 feet west of Palmer Square
East.
(2) Parking yards.
Park Place West Yard, 2 spaces as designated by the borough
engineer
Maclean Street Yard, 2 spaces as designated by the borough
engineer
Princeton Station Lot, 5 spaces
[Ord. No. 2014-1 § 6; Ord. No. 2017-20 § 3]
Princeton Station Retail Lot, 4 spaces
[Ord. No. 2014-1 § 6; Ord. No. 2017-20 § 3]
(3) Spring Street Municipal Parking Garage, nine spaces total
throughout the garage as duly designated.
(4) Witherspoon Alley, south side, one space as designated by the
borough engineer.
§ 19-29 PRINCETON CODE § 19-31
BAO:566
(a) Overnight parking on certain streets.
(1) Eligibility.
a. Bona fide residents of Princeton Borough who meet the
following criteria are eligible to apply for an overnight parking
permit to park on borough streets:
1. They reside in dwelling units that are located in the R1,
R2, R3 and R4 districts. A dwelling unit for the purpose of
this section shall be defined as a building, or entirely selfcontained
portion thereof, containing complete
housekeeping facilities for only one family, including any
domestic servants employed on the premises, and having
no cooking, food preparation or sanitary facilities in
common with other dwelling units and no common and
closed space, other than vestibules, entrances, porches,
laundry, heating and air conditioning rooms and
equipment. This definition shall not include a boarding
house, convalescent home, dormitory, fraternity, sorority
house, hotel or similar home and other similar building or
secondary residence. In addition, multi-family dwelling
structures that contain 10 or more units are specifically
excluded from this definition.
2. On-site parking on the premises of the applicant is
physically impossible due either to physical restrictions of
the property and/or restrictions imposed under borough
ordinance.
3. The dwelling unit of the applicant is in compliance with all
applicable local, county and state laws or ordinances and
is not the subject of zoning approvals that require the
owner to provide parking.
4. A resident of the dwelling unit which is located on state or
county roads, private streets or streets of another
municipality is not eligible for an overnight parking
permit.
b. Exception.
1. Bona fide residents of the Princeton Borough Housing
Authority's Hageman Homes Project shall be exempted
from the eligibility requirements as set forth above for
issuance of an overnight parking permit. Upon application
to the borough clerk, and the payment of the appropriate
fee of $30 per quarter, the clerk shall be authorized to
issue to the verified resident an overnight parking permit.
(2) Application for parking.
§ 19-31 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-31
BAO:567
a. A bona fide resident of Princeton Borough who meets the
above-described criteria may make application to the borough
clerk in writing on forms supplied by the borough clerk for a
permit to allow overnight parking between the hours of 6:00
p.m. and 9:00 a.m. Prior to the issuance of a permit by the
borough clerk, the zoning officer shall verify that the premises
in question meet the requirements set forth in this section.
Upon the zoning officer's verification to the clerk, the clerk
shall provide identification to the applicant. This form of
identification shall be affixed to the driver's side, side rear
window of the vehicle. The permits shall be issued quarterly,
beginning April 1, 1991. Application for an overnight parking
permit shall be accompanied by payment of a fee of $30. The
clerk is authorized to reissue a duplicate form of identification
on reasonable proof by the applicant that same has not been
lost or destroyed under intentional act of the applicant. Such
permit shall not be transferable.
b. Only one overnight parking permit shall be issued for each
dwelling unit. Holders of overnight parking permits will be
entitled to park overnight only on the borough street on which
they reside, and may park in any legal parking spot on the
particular street. An exception to this requirement may be
granted by mayor and council to permit a physically disabled
resident to park on an adjacent street when such a resident
lives on a street that does not permit any overnight parking.
(3) This section does not replace or modify requirements otherwise
established under Princeton Borough Ordinances for on-site
parking. The availability of overnight parking permits may not be
used to satisfy any parking requirements set forth elsewhere in the
Princeton Borough Ordinances.
(4) Declaration of snow emergency.
a. Whenever snow has fallen and the snow is such that it covers
the street or highway, an emergency shall exist and no vehicle
shall be permitted to park overnight on borough streets
regardless of whether the person holds a permit for overnight
parking. This parking prohibition will remain in effect after the
snow has ceased and until the snow has been plowed
sufficiently and to the extent that parking will not interfere
with the normal flow of traffic or impede the passage of fire
apparatus. During this period of parking prohibition, holders of
overnight parking permits, issued pursuant to this chapter,
may park overnight in municipal parking yards.
(b) For municipal parking yards and garages.
(1) General.
§ 19-31 PRINCETON CODE § 19-31
BAO:568
a. No person shall park a vehicle in a general permit parking yard
or garage unless authorized to do so by a valid and subsisting
permit issued and displayed in accordance with the provisions
of this section.
(2) Authorization.
a. The permit required by this section shall authorize the parking
of the vehicle to which it pertains in the general permit parking
yard for which it is issued, and in accordance with the
restrictions as provided for in this section.
(3) Issuance of permit; term; fee; transferability; issuance limited.
a. The permit required by this section shall be issued by the
borough clerk, as to a particular general permit parking yard
or garage, and a particular vehicle and for either daytime
parking, evening parking, or unlimited parking, but not both,
upon application of the owner of the vehicle or his agent. It
shall be valid for the vehicle and yard or garage for which it is
issued.
b. The permit shall be effective for a calendar month or part
thereof remaining at the time of issuance. The application shall
be accompanied by payment of a fee to the borough of $30 for a
daytime parking yard permit. For any vehicle owned by a
resident who lives within 400 yards of a borough parking yard,
an unlimited parking permit application may be filed and shall
be accompanied by payment to the borough of a fee of $25.
Application for a monthly parking permit for the Spring Street
Municipal Parking Garage shall be accompanied by payment of
a monthly fee to the borough of $180. Students living on
campus shall not be eligible for issuance of parking permits.
c. The permit shall not be transferable; and not more than one
permit, regardless of kind, shall be issued for the same vehicle
or the same owner for periods that are concurrent in whole or
in part.
The borough clerk shall have the right to limit the number
of monthly permits issued for the Spring Street Municipal
Parking Garage.
(4) Temporary parking.
a. Rules and regulations. The borough clerk is authorized to
prescribe such rules and regulations as are necessary or
desirable to issue temporary parking permits as follows:
("Period" is hereby defined as beginning on midnight of the
first day and running through midnight of the second day.)
b. Fees.
§ 19-31 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-31
BAO:569
1. For one-day parking upon the payment of $4 for such
period;
2. For two consecutive days upon the payment of $7 for such
period;
3. For three consecutive days upon the payment of $10.50 for
such period.
(5) Daytime permits.
a. Such permit shall be issued by the borough clerk, as to a
particular non-metered parking yard and a particular vehicle,
and for either daytime parking or unlimited parking but not
both, upon application of the owner of the vehicle or his agent.
It shall be valid only for the vehicle and yard for which issued.
b. The permit shall be effective for a calendar month or the part
thereof remaining at time of issuance. For a borough resident,
the application shall be accompanied by payment of a fee to the
borough of $25 for an unlimited parking permit. For an
individual and/or business user, the application shall be
accompanied by a payment of a fee to the borough of $30 for a
daytime permit. For an individual who is employed by a
business establishment located in the borough and who works
an evening and/or overnight shift at this business
establishment, the application shall be accompanied by proof
of such employment and payment of a fee to the borough of
$30 for an evening permit. Permits shall not be transferable.
c. The permit shall not be transferable, and not more than one
permit, regardless of kind, shall be issued for the same vehicle
for periods that are concurrent in whole or in part.
(6) Overnight permits.
a. Parking between 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. without payment of
fees.
1. Any vehicle may be parked in the designated areas
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m., Monday
through Friday and between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
10:00 a.m. on Saturday, without payment of parking meter
fees, if so authorized by permit issued and displayed in
accordance with the provisions hereof in the following
metered parking yards:
Harrison Street North Yard;
Trinity Yard;
Park Place East Yard;
Park Place West Yard;
§ 19-31 PRINCETON CODE § 19-31
BAO:570
§ 19-32. Parking Fees. [Ord. No. 2009-03, § I; Ord. No. 2009-08, § II;
Ord. No. 2009-12, § II; Ord. No. 2017-21 § 1; Ord. No. 2018-23 § 7;
Ord. No. 2019-7 § 3; Ord. No. 2019-23 § 3; Ord. No. 2019-29§ 4; Ord.
No. 2019-36 § 2]
Princeton Station Lot;
University Place Yard;
Tulane Street West Yard.
b. Resident permits. Such permit shall be issued by the borough
clerk for any vehicle owned by a resident of the borough upon
application of such owner or his agent accompanied by a fee of
$25 per month. It shall be effective, as to the vehicle and
parking yard for which it is issued and such permit shall not be
transferable.
c. Business permits. A permit shall be issued by the borough for
any vehicle owned by an individual, who is employed by a
business establishment located in the borough and who works
an evening or overnight shift at this establishment, upon
presentation of proof of such employment and application
accompanied by a payment of the fee of $30 per month. Such
permit shall not be transferable.
d. Guest permits. The borough clerk may also issue guest parking
permits upon application by a resident of the borough
accompanied by payment of $10 for each permit. Each guest
permit shall be valid for one week. A resident shall be limited
to six guest permits per calendar year.
(7) Rules and regulations.
a. The borough clerk is authorized to prescribe such rules and
regulations as shall be necessary or desirable to carry out the
provisions of this section, including, without limitation, the
forms of application and permit, the display of permits upon
authorized vehicles, the limitation of the number of permits
with regard to the capacity of the yards and the temporary
suspension of parking privileges by reason of emergency.
(a) Metered areas.
(1) The rates for parking in metered areas shall be as follows:
Area Rate
15 Minute Meters $0.55 for 15 minutes
30 Minute Meters $1 for 30 minutes
Three Hour Meters $1.75 per hour
All Day Meters $1 per hour
§ 19-31 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-32
BAO:571
Area Rate
Princeton Station $5 per 24 hours. A maximum of
seven days (168 hours) can be
purchased at a time
Omnibus Parking Zone $20 per hour
(2) Beginning on November 6, 2019 and ending on May 31, 2020 or
when the Alexander Street bridge reopens, whichever is sooner, a
maximum of 48 hours can be purchased at a time in the Princeton
Station metered parking yard. This subsection 19-32(a)(2) shall
automatically terminate and cease to be in effect as of June 1, 2020.
(b) Spring Street Municipal Parking Garage.
(1) The following rates shall apply to the Spring Street Municipal
Parking Garage, seven days per week, unless otherwise indicated
below:
9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m.
9:00 p.m. to 9:00
a.m.
0-30 min $0.00 $0.25
30-1 hour $1.25
1-2 hours $2.50 $0.50
2-3 hours $3.75 $0.75
3-4 hours $5.00 $1.00
4-5 hours $6.50 $1.25
5-6 hours $8.00 $1.50
6-7 hours $10.00 $1.75
7-8 hours $12.00 $2.00
8-9 hours $14.00 $2.25
9-10 hours $16.00 $2.50
10-11 hours $18.00 $2.75
11-12 hours $20.00 $3.00
(2) The following rates shall apply to the Spring Street Municipal
Parking Garage on New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence
Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas day unless
otherwise indicated below:
a. Every hour or any part thereof shall be $0.25.
(3) In addition to the above parking fees, the following fees shall also
apply to use of parking spaces in the Spring Street Municipal
Parking Garage that are identified as "charging station spaces," as
§ 19-32 PRINCETON CODE § 19-32
BAO:572
§ 19-33. Prohibited Parking Of Vehicles Under Emergency
Circumstances. [Ord. No. 2009-03, § I]
that term is defined in section 19-37A of this chapter, seven days
per week:
8:00 a.m. - 12:00
a.m.
12:00 a.m. - 8:00
a.m.
0-1 hour $1.50 $1
1-2 hours $3 $1
2-3 hours $5.50 $1
3-4 hours $8 $1
4-5 hours $1
5-6 hours $1
6-7 hours $1
7-8 hours $1
Between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m., an electric vehicle
may park in a charging station space for no more than four hours.
Between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m., an electric vehicle
is not limited in the amount of time it may park in a charging
station space.
(4) Any person who has lost or is otherwise unable to produce his or
her parking ticket upon request as said person leaves the parking
facility shall pay the accumulated fee based upon the abovereferenced
schedule from 9:00 a.m. of the day on which the person
entered the parking facility to the day and time said person departs
the parking lot.
(a) In general.
(1) Parking prohibited upon declaration of emergency; signs.
a. Upon the declaration of an emergency there shall be no
parking upon streets or sections of streets where temporary
"EMERGENCY NO PARKING" signs are displayed. The chief of
police, or in his absence the ranking police officer, is
authorized to declare an emergency and to direct the posting
of said "EMERGENCY NO PARKING" signs when weather
conditions, accidents, fires, construction or public celebrations
or gatherings dictate or require the avoidance of hazards or
other conditions which interfere with the free flow of traffic.
b. Notification that the "EMERGENCY NO PARKING" signs are
being or will be posted shall be given to the operator or owner
§ 19-32 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-33
BAO:573
of any vehicle which has been parked prior to the posting of
the signs.
c. Removal of vehicles; cost of removal and storage.
1. Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of
this ordinance shall be deemed a nuisance and a menace
to the safe and proper regulation of traffic and any police
officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle. The
owner shall pay the reasonable costs of the removal and
storage which may result from such removal, before
regaining possession of the vehicle.
d. Effectiveness contingent upon erection of signs.
1. The effectiveness of this section is contingent on signs
being erected as required by law.
(b) Snow emergencies.
(1) Declaration of snow emergency.
a. Whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it
covers the street or highway, an emergency shall exist and no
vehicle shall be parked on any borough streets between 11:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
b. The above parking prohibitions shall remain in effect after the
snow has ceased until the streets have been plowed sufficiently
and to the extent that parking will not interfere with the
normal flow of traffic or impede the passage of fire apparatus.
c. During a snow emergency, as defined in this ordinance,
owners, tenants and/or their agents shall be prohibited from
plowing snow onto borough streets, if such activity interferes
with normal flow of traffic and snow plowing of the streets or
results in depositing snow on either a driveway of another, or
on a sidewalk. Violators of this provision shall be subject to the
penalties set forth in section 1-6 of the Code of the Borough of
Princeton, New Jersey. Repeat offenders shall be subject to the
penalties set forth for repeat offenders in section 1-6.
(2) Removal of vehicles; cost of removal and storage.
a. Any vehicle parked or standing in violation of section 19-33
shall be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and
proper regulation of traffic, and any police officer may provide
for the removal of such vehicle. The owner shall pay the
reasonable cost of the removal and storage which may result
from such removal before regaining possession of the vehicle.
(3) Effectiveness contingent upon erection of signs.
§ 19-33 PRINCETON CODE § 19-33
BAO:574
§ 19-34. Enforcement of laws against stopping, standing or parking
in certain circumstances.
§ 19-35. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2009-03, § I]
§ 19-36. Prohibition on idling of diesel powered motor vehicles.
[Ord. No. 2009-03, § I]
a. The effectiveness of this section is contingent upon signs being
erected as required by law.
(a) Penalties.
(1) Any person who is convicted of a violation of a state law or
regulation prohibiting the stopping, standing, or parking of a
vehicle during specified hours on the side of a street or part of a
street along which parking, whether or not metered, would
otherwise be permitted, shall be subject to a penalty of not more
than $50 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days or both.
Such violations are exempt from the provisions of section 1-6.
(b) Tow away of vehicles.
(1) Any vehicle parked in violation of a state law or regulation
prohibiting the stopping, standing, or parking of a vehicle during
specified hours on the side of a street or part of a street along
which parking, whether or not metered, would otherwise be
permitted, shall be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe
and proper regulation of traffic. The police department shall
arrange for the prompt removal of any such vehicle. The owner
shall pay the reasonable cost of such removal, together with any
resulting storage charges, before regaining possession of such
vehicle. Suitable notice of the pertinent provisions of the state law
or regulation and of the tow away provisions of this subsection shall
be posted on or adjacent to each parking meter in the area affected
by such state law or regulation.
(2) Any such removal and the payment of any costs or storage charges
shall not be construed to prevent the prosecution of proceedings to
impose penalties for violations of such state law or regulation or
any other law, regulations, or ordinance.
(a) The provisions of Chapter 19 of the Code of the Borough of Princeton,
New Jersey, 1974, regarding motor vehicles and traffic shall be
enforced by the Princeton Borough Police Department and/or the
Princeton Borough Parking Enforcement Officer.
(a) Pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:27-14.3, no person may cause, suffer, allow or
permit the engine of a diesel powered motor vehicle to idle for more
than three consecutive minutes on local thoroughfares within the
§ 19-33 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-36
BAO:575
Borough of Princeton, if the vehicle is not in motion, with the following
exceptions:
(1) A diesel bus while it is discharging or picking up passengers;
(2) A motor vehicle stopped in a line of traffic;
(3) A motor vehicle whose primary power source is utilized in whole or
in part for necessary and definitively prescribed mechanical
operation other than propulsion, passenger compartment, heating
or passenger compartment air-conditioning;
(4) A motor vehicle being, or waiting to be examined by a state or
federal motor vehicle inspector;
(5) An emergency motor vehicle in an emergency situation;
(6) A motor vehicle while it is being repaired;
(7) A motor vehicle while it is being engaged in the process of
connection or detachment of a trailer or of an exchange of trailer;
or
(8) A motor vehicle manufactured with a sleeper berth while it is being
used in a nonresidentially zoned area by the vehicle's operator for
sleeping or resting, unless the vehicle is equipped with a functions
auxiliary power system designed in whole or in part to maintain
cabin, or sleeper berth comfort or to mitigate cold weather startup
difficulties;
(9) A motor vehicle at the vehicle operator place of business where the
motor vehicle is permanently assigned may idle for 30 consecutive
minutes;
(10) A motor vehicle may idle for 15 consecutive minutes when the
vehicle engine has been stopped for three or more hours.
(b) Furthermore, no person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit any
emission control apparatus or element of design installed on any dieselpowered
motor vehicle or diesel engine, to be disconnected, detached,
deactivated or in any other way rendered inoperable or less effective in
respect to limiting or controlling emissions than it was designed to be
by the original equipment or vehicle manufacturer, except for the
purposes of diagnostics, maintenance, repair or replacement and only
for the duration of such operations.
(1) No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit the engine of a
gasoline-fueled motor vehicle to idle for more than three
consecutive minutes if the vehicle is not in motion.
(c) The provisions of subsection (a) above shall not apply to:
(1) Autobuses while discharging or picking up passengers;
§ 19-36 PRINCETON CODE § 19-36
BAO:576
§ 19-37. Princeton High School/Westminster Choir College
Neighborhood Permit Parking District. [Ord. No. 2009-3 § 1; Ord.
No. 2014-42 § 1; Ord. No. 2017-12 § 1]
(2) Motor vehicles stopped in a line of traffic;
(3) Motor vehicles whose primary and/or secondary power source is
utilized in whole or in part for necessary and definitively prescribed
mechanical operation other than propulsion, passenger
compartment heating or air conditioning;
(4) Motor vehicles being or waiting to be examined by state or federal
motor vehicle inspectors;
(5) Emergency motor vehicles in an emergency situation;
(6) Motor vehicles while being repaired;
(7) Motor vehicles while engaged in the process of connection,
detachment or exchange of trailers; or
(8) Motor vehicles manufactured with a sleeper berth while being
used, in a nonresidentially zoned area, by the vehicle operator for
sleeping or resting.
(d) Any person who operated a motor vehicle or owns a motor vehicle
which he permits to be operated on the public highways in violation of
this ordinance shall be liable for a minimum penalty of a fine of not less
than $100 and not more than $1,000. In addition, any person violating
this ordinance may be subject to imprisonment not exceeding 90 days
or may be required to perform community service for a period not
exceeding 90 days, all in accordance with Princeton Borough Ordinance
section 1-6. Any person who is convicted of violating this ordinance
within one year of the date of a previous violation of the same provision
and who was fined for that previous violation shall be sentenced by the
court to an additional fine as a repeat offender. The additional fine
imposed by the court upon a person for a repeated offense shall not be
less than the minimum or exceed the maximum penalty set forth herein,
but shall be calculated separately from the fine imposed for violation of
this ordinance.
(a) Defined. The mayor and council of Princeton have determined that
there is an acute problem providing for on-street parking in the
neighborhood adjacent to the Princeton High School/Westminster Choir
College primarily attributable to the parking of students in this area.
The mayor and council have therefore determined that the greater
public interest will be served by insuring convenient and reasonable
access to homes, businesses, the High School and the Westminster
Choir College in this neighborhood and that the following limitations on
parking will promote such an interest. Although this ordinance will
allow some limited permitted parking for students, the mayor and
council strongly believe that all students should avail themselves of
§ 19-36 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-37
BAO:577
public transportation, bicycling, car pooling and other modes of
transportation whenever possible.
(b) Designation of residential permit parking areas.
From September 1 to June 30 of each year, excepting Saturdays,
Sundays and legal holidays, parking on the streets or parts of streets
below shall be prohibited, except to vehicles which display decals
issued pursuant to this ordinance:
Name of
Street Hours Sides Location
Moore Street 7:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m.
West From a point 114 feet
north of the north curb
line of Wiggins Street to
a point 55 feet south of
the extended south curb
line of Houghton Road;
From a point 55 feet
north of the extended
north curb line of
Houghton Road to a
point 68 feet south of the
south curb line of
Franklin Avenue; From a
point 72 feet north of the
north curb line of
Franklin Avenue to
Guyot Avenue
Jefferson Road 7:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m.
East From Wiggins Street to
Guyot Avenue
Franklin
Avenue
7:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m.
South From Moore Street to
Jefferson Road
Hawthorne
Avenue
7:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m.
South From Walnut Lane to
Jefferson Road
Harris Road 7:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m.
East From Henry Avenue to
Franklin Avenue
Henry Avenue 7:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m.
South From Moore Street to
Harris Road
Linden Lane 7:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m.
East From Henry Avenue to
Franklin Avenue
(c) Residential parking permits/decals. All owners of fee record having fee
title to any property with a dwelling unit thereon within the residential
permit-parking district established in section 19-37(b) and their tenants
shall be entitled to obtain up to two residential parking decals from the
§ 19-37 PRINCETON CODE § 19-37
BAO:578
municipal clerk. Upon request, said decal(s) will be issued in
accordance with the following provisions:
(1) The clerk shall obtain from the Princeton tax department a certified
list of the owners of record of real property with dwelling units
thereon located in the district established in section 19-37(b)
hereinabove. Upon verification of ownership or tenancy, the clerk
shall issue a decal(s) to said owner or tenant.
(2) The decals issued pursuant to this section shall be valid as of
September 1, 2004, or if issued subsequent to September 1, 2004
upon issuance thereof. Decals are not transferable and must be
vehicle specific. Decals shall be forfeited and returned to the clerk
or removed and destroyed upon the transfer of ownership interests
or termination of tenancy in the property for which a decal(s) has
been issued.
(3) Upon the issuance of a decal(s) by the clerk, said owner or tenant
shall promptly affix the decal to the motor vehicle that will park in
the district on the inside of the vehicle's rear windshield, lower left
corner, so that it can be easily observed by the Princeton police
department when enforcing and regulating the provisions of this
section. Motorcycles shall affix the decal to the rear, left bumper.
(d) Residential guest placards.
(1) Any holder of a parking decal(s) established by section 19-37(c)
above may be issued up to two placards by the clerk to be used for
visitors. Placards shall be hung on the vehicle's rear view mirror
and display the address of the holder of the decal. The placards will
entitle the user to the same rights as a parking decal holder.
Placards are not transferable. Upon the transfer of ownership
interests or termination of tenancy in the property for which a
placard(s) has been issued, the placard(s) shall be forfeited and
returned to the clerk.
(2) Any holder of a parking decal(s) established in section 19-37(c)
above may be entitled to exemption from the parking restrictions
set forth in section 19-37(b) above for a special event that will be
taking place at the holder's residence. To obtain an exemption, the
permittee shall make a written request for exemption to the clerk
prior to the special event. The written request shall set forth the
permittee's address, quantity of expected vehicles and date(s) of
the special event. No guest placard shall be required. A request for
exemption shall not be unreasonably withheld.
(3) Vehicles displaying a residential guest placard may park on the
streets or parts of streets designated for residential parking section
19-37(b).
(e) Designation of permitted parking areas for high school students. From
September 1 to June 30 of each year, excepting Saturdays, Sundays and
§ 19-37 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-37
BAO:579
legal holidays, parking on the streets or parts of streets below shall be
prohibited, except to vehicles which display decals issued pursuant to
this ordinance:
Name of Street Hours Sides Location
Franklin Avenue
[Ord. No.
2012-12]
7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.
South From the east
curb line of
Walnut Lane to
a point 400 feet
east
Walnut Lane
[Ord. No.
2012-12]
7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.
East Between
Houghton Road
and Franklin
Avenue
Guyot Avenue 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.
South Between Moore
Street and
Walnut Lane
(f) Student parking permits/decals.
(1) The clerk, in consultation with the Princeton police, shall
determine the quantity of vehicles that may be legally and safely
parked along the streets or parts of streets identified in section
19-37(e) above. Upon calculation of the quantity of available
parking spaces along those streets or parts of streets, the clerk, in
consultation with the police department, shall issue that quantity of
student parking decals to the Princeton High School administration
at a cost of $10 for each student decal/permit to cover the printing
and administrative costs to the municipality in implementing this
program.
(2) The Princeton High School administration will be authorized to
issue the parking decals that it has obtained from the clerk to
students to allow parking in the designated areas as set forth in
section 19-37(e) and shall provide the clerk with the students'
names and their license plate numbers, as the decals are issued.
(3) The Princeton High School administration shall adopt fair and
reasonable procedures for the issuance of parking decals in
compliance with this ordinance.
(4) The decals issued pursuant to this section shall be valid for one
school year commencing September 1 each year. Permits are not
transferable and shall be vehicle specific.
(5) Upon the issuance of a decal by the Princeton High School
administration to a student, the student shall promptly affix the
decal to the motor vehicle that will park in the district on the inside
of the vehicle's rear windshield, lower left corner, so that it can be
easily observed by the police department when enforcing and
§ 19-37 PRINCETON CODE § 19-37
BAO:580
§ 19-37A. Public Parking Spaces for Charging of Electric Vehicles.
[Ord. No. 2017-21 § 2; Ord. No. 2019-23 § 4]
regulating the provisions of this section. Motorcycles shall affix the
decal in the rear, left bumper. A decal may only be used on the
vehicle for which the decal was assigned.
(g) Special high school staff/guest parking. Staff and guest parking for the
Princeton High School may be permitted under certain circumstances
at the charge of $10 per placard each year. The Princeton High School
administration may request special placards to permit parking for staff
and guests on the streets or parts of streets listed below, identifying the
needed number of placards, up to seven, and requested duration of the
placards. A request for such placards shall not be unreasonably
withheld.
Houghton Road, south side, between Moore Street and Walnut Lane
(h) Exemptions. The following vehicles shall be exempt from this section:
(1) Service and emergency vehicles. Emergency, delivery, commercial,
public service, telephone and public utility vehicles may park
within the permit parking areas established in this ordinance
during the time they are rendering service or undertaking repairs
to the residences within those permit parking areas.
(i) Penalties. For each violation of this section, the violator shall be subject
to a fine of $50 and such other penalties as provided in section 1-6 of
this Code, entitled "General penalty." Repeat offenders shall be subject
to additional fines and other penalties as provided in section 1-6 of this
Code.
(a) As used herein, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
CHARGING STATION - Shall mean a location that is fitted with charging
station equipment.
CHARGING STATION EQUIPMENT - Shall mean the conductors,
including ungrounded and grounded, and the electric vehicle
connectors, attachment plugs, and all other fittings, devices, power
outlets, charging status or apparatus installed specifically for the
purpose of delivering electrical energy from the charging station to the
electric vehicle.
CHARGING STATION SPACE - Shall mean a dedicated, marked parking
space that is fitted with charging station equipment and exclusively
used for the charging of electric vehicles.
ELECTRIC SCOOTER AND/OR ELECTRIC MOTORCYCLE - Shall mean
a two-wheel or three-wheel electric vehicle that operates exclusively on
electrical energy stored in the vehicle's batteries.
§ 19-37 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-37A
BAO:581
ELECTRIC VEHICLE - Shall mean a vehicle that operates, either
partially or exclusively on electrical energy from a charging station or
other electrical energy source that is stored in the vehicle's battery
for propulsion purposes. Electric vehicle includes: a battery electric
vehicle; a plug-in hybrid electrical vehicle; a neighborhood electric
vehicle; and electric scooters or electric motorcycles.
NEIGHBORHOOD ELECTRIC VEHICLE - Shall mean an electric vehicle
that is a low- speed vehicle, built to have a top speed of 25 miles per
hour and have a maximum loaded weight of 3,000 lb.
NON-ELECTRIC VEHICLE - Shall mean a vehicle that does not meet
the definition of "electric vehicle" as provided herein.
PLUG-IN HYBRID ELECTRIC VEHICLE OR PHEV - Shall mean an
electric vehicle that: contains an internal combustion engine and also
allows power to be delivered to drive wheels by an electric motor;
charges its battery primarily by connecting to a charging station or
other electrical source not on board the vehicle; may additionally be
able to sustain a battery charge using an on-board internal-combustiondriven
generator; and has the ability to be propelled through the use of
electricity.
(b) The municipality has designated two parking spaces within the Spring
Street Municipal Parking Garage for use as charging stations. Fees for
use of the charging station spaces shall be as set forth in section
19-32(b)(4) - (5) above, and shall be in addition to the fees assessed for
parking in said Garage as set forth in section 19-32(b)(1)-(3). Use of
said charging station spaces shall be limited and restricted as follows:
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing a
vehicle in a stall or space in the Spring Street Municipal Parking
Garage that is designated as a charging station space unless the
vehicle is an electric vehicle as defined in this section and is
connected for electric charging purposes; and
(2) Non-electric vehicles are prohibited from parking in charging
station spaces; and
(3) Between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m. Electric vehicles are
authorized to park in spaces designated as charging station spaces
only during the time when the vehicles are connected for electric
charging purposes or up to four hours, whichever is less. When the
vehicle is no longer charging, the owner or operator of said vehicle
shall be required to remove the vehicle from the charging station
space. If the owner or operator of said vehicle allows his or her
vehicle to remain in a charging station space while the vehicle is no
longer charging, then said owner or operator shall be in violation of
this section.
(4) Between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. Electric vehicles are
not limited in the amount of time they may park in a charging
§ 19-37A PRINCETON CODE § 19-37A
BAO:582
§ 19-37B. Griggs Corner Parking Yard. [Ord. No. 2017-20 § 1]
station space when parking between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and
8:00 a.m.
(c) Violations and penalties. For each violation of this section, the violator
shall be subject to such fines and other penalties as provided in section
1-6 of this Code, entitled "General penalty; continuing violations; repeat
violations; other penalties." Repeat offenders shall be subject to
additional fines and other penalties as provided in section 1-6 of this
Code.
(a) Findings and purpose. The operator of the Griggs Corner Parking Yard
in Princeton has filed a written consent with the council that the
provisions of subtitle 1, chapter 39 of the Revised Statutes of New
Jersey, be made applicable to the Griggs Corner Parking Yard within
said municipality. The council hereby finds that extending Title 39
jurisdiction as requested is appropriate in order to promote the public
health, safety and welfare and said Title 39 jurisdiction is hereby
extended to the said parking yard pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1 et seq.
(b) Parking Yard defined. As used in this section, reference to the "Griggs
Corner Parking Yard" or "parking yard" shall refer to Lot 54 and Lot 55
in Block 20.04 on the Princeton Municipal Tax Map.
(c) Parking meters; signage; payment methods.
(1) Parking meters shall be installed adjacent to the individuallymarked
parking space that they are intended to regulate and shall
be so placed as to show by signal that such space is or is not legally
occupied.
(2) Each parking meter shall, by proper legend, indicate the legal
parking time, required parking fee and accepted method of
payment to be inserted in such meter. Each meter shall, when
operated in the proper manner, indicate on its face the duration of
the period of legal parking time and, on the expiration of such
period, shall indicate illegal or overtime parking. The parking yard
meters shall not be required to be programmed with a minimum
ten-minute grace period prior to displaying an over-time signal,
provided that signage warning the public of same is installed in the
parking yard or on the individual meters.
(3) The operator of every vehicle parked within the parking yard shall,
upon entering the respective parking space, immediately deposit or
cause to be deposited in the meter regulating the use of such space
the required fee in accordance with the schedules set forth by
signage in the parking yard. Such vehicle may remain parked in
such space for only as long as the parking meter does not display
an illegal or over-time signal or for a period of time not to exceed
what is authorized by the signage, whichever is less. Such over-
§ 19-37A BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-37B
BAO:583
parked vehicle shall be issued additional summonses for each
additional authorized time period which is overextended.
(4) Signage shall be installed in the parking yard for purposes of
advising the public of the time limitations, applicable parking fees
and accepted payment methods (i.e., coins, credit card, etc.). If
smart cards are not an accepted payment method, same shall also
be prominently posted.
(5) No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited any slug, device or
substitute for a proper coin of the United States in any parking
meter.
(6) No person shall deface, injure, tamper with, open, willfully break,
destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter.
(7) No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited in a meter any
payment for the purpose of extending the parking time beyond the
total lawful parking time limit in accordance with the schedules set
forth at said parking yard. Such over-parked vehicle shall be issued
additional summonses for each additional authorized time period
which is overextended. This provision is directed at preventing
what is commonly termed "meter feeding" and is enacted to
provide for the convenience of legal "turn-over parking" within the
municipality.
(d) Parking within parking spaces. No person shall park a vehicle in the
parking yard at any time except within a parking space marked on the
pavement.
(e) Limitation on parking. From time to time the entire parking lot,
portions thereof or individual parking spaces may be closed for public
use by its operator. Any such closure shall be clearly identified by the
operator through conspicuously posted signage at the entrance to the
lot and/or on the impacted meters, as necessary. No member of the
public shall be permitted to park in the parking yard or in its spaces
when the yard or spaces are clearly marked as closed.
(f) Handicapped parking spaces.
(1) Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.46, the one parking space designated
as a handicapped parking space within the parking yard is hereby
designated as restricted parking spaces for use by persons who
have been issued special vehicle identification cards for
handicapped parking pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-205 by the Motor
Vehicle Commission. No other person shall be permitted to park in
said space.
(2) Any person parking a motor vehicle in a restricted parking space
without a special vehicle identification card shall be liable to a fine
of $250 for the first offense and, for subsequent offenses, a fine of
at least $250 and up to 90 days community service on such terms
§ 19-37B PRINCETON CODE § 19-37B
BAO:584
and in such form as the court shall deem appropriate, or any
combination thereof.
(g) Tow-away. Any vehicle parked or standing in violation of the parking
regulations established in this section may be removed by towing the
vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
(h) Traffic to stay on driveway; keeping to right. All vehicular traffic in the
parking yard shall stay within driveways or within aisles or ways giving
access to parking spaces, except when using parking space. The driver
of a vehicle shall drive it on the right half of the driveway as closely as
possible to the right-hand edge of the driveway unless it is
impracticable to travel on that side of the driveway, and except when
overtaking and passing another vehicle.
(i) Enforcement and penalty.
(1) The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the Princeton
Police Department and/or the Princeton Parking Enforcement
Officers.
(2) The penalty provisions of section 19-7 of the "Code of the Borough
of Princeton, New Jersey, 1974" shall apply to any violations of the
provisions of this section.
(3) In the event of a claim of a meter malfunction (e.g., meter not
accepting payment, time running down too quickly), and upon the
request of the Princeton Prosecutor or Princeton Police
Department, the operator of the Griggs Corner Parking Yard shall
forthwith provide a diagnostic report or other evidence satisfactory
to the Princeton Prosecutor (including, if necessary, court
testimony), demonstrating that said meter is functioning correctly.
(j) Termination.
(1) By Princeton. Consistent with N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1, the Princeton
Mayor and Council retain the discretion at any time to rescind by
ordinance the provisions of this section 19-37B on notice to the
operator of the Griggs Corner Parking Yard, and said rescission
shall become effective on January 1 of the year following the
passage of such rescinding ordinance.
(2) By the operator. Consistent with N.J.S.A. 39:5A-2, in the event the
operator of the Griggs Corner Parking Yard files a written
rescission with the Princeton Clerk, then the provisions of this
section 19-37B shall cease to be applicable effective January 1 of
the year following the filing of said written rescission.
§ 19-37B BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-37B
BAO:585

ARTICLE XII
Valet Parking
§ 19-38. Valet Zones Designated. [Ord. No. 2016-15 § 3]
(a) Designated. The following areas upon the municipally controlled streets
of Princeton are hereby designated as valet parking service zones:
Witherspoon Street, east side, extending from a point 67 feet north of
Spring Street to a point 132 feet northerly.
Spring Street, south side, extending from a point 25 feet east of
Witherspoon Street to a point 75 feet easterly.
John Street Alley, east side, extending from a point 145 feet north of
Route NJ 27 (Nassau Street) to a point 270 feet northerly.
(b) No person shall park any vehicle within a valet zone designated in
subsection 19-38(a) above at any time except that a valet parking
service operator licensed by the municipality pursuant to Article III of
Chapter 31 of this Code, entitled "Valet Parking," may utilize the valet
zone for purposes of ramping of vehicles in connection with its service
between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 12:00 a.m. any day of the week.
§ 19-38 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-38
BAO:587

ARTICLE XIII
Omnibus Parking
§ 19-39. Omnibus Parking Zone. [Ord. No. 2019-29]
(a) As used in this section, "omnibus" shall mean any motor vehicle used for
the transportation of passengers for hire, including but not limited to
tour and charter bus operations, and which are at least 22 feet in
length. Excepted from the definition of "omnibus" are: commuter vans,
taxi cabs, vehicles used for ridesharing arrangements, school buses and
limousines. Also excepted from the definition of "omnibus" are the
following types of vehicles, as said terms are defined in N.J.S.A.
16:51-1.3: medical livery, adult day care transport, adult community
transport, car rental transport, collegiate transport, hotel
complimentary transport, farm labor transport, day labor transport,
time share transport and recreational transport.
(b) Parking Zone Designated. The following area upon the municipally
controlled streets of Princeton is hereby designated as the omnibus
parking zone:
ALEXANDER STREET — West Side, Between the Southern Most
Driveway to the Princeton Station Lot and a Point 410 Feet Northerly,
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., seven days a week.
(c) Parking Prohibited. No person shall park any omnibus on any other
municipally controlled street of Princeton at any time.
(d) Any person who is convicted of a violation of this section shall be
subject to a minimum fine of $100 and maximum fine of $2,000 for each
violation; the specific amount shall be as determined in the discretion of
the municipal court, along with such other penalties set forth in section
1-6 as appropriate.
(e) Omnibus parking shall be subject to all other applicable provisions of
this chapter not inconsistent with this section.
§ 19-39 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-39
BAO:589
Chapter B20
(RESERVED)
Editor's Note: See Chapter 12, Municipal Court in the Princeton
Township Code.
Chapter B21
LOUD, CONTINUOUS OR EXCESSIVE NOISE
§ 21-1. Loud, Continuous or Excessive Noise. [Ord. No. 2014-35]
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made
or continued any loud, continuous or excessive noise or any noise which
endangers the health, safety or welfare of the community, or which annoys,
disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety
of others within Princeton.
§ 21-2. Noises Expressly Prohibited or Restricted - Acts
Enumerated. [Ord. No. 2014-35; Ord. No. 2019-37]
The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing,
excessive or continuous noises, and a danger to the health, safety and
welfare of the community, in violation of section 21-1, but the enumeration
shall not be deemed to be exclusive:
(a) Horns, whistles, bells and signaling devices. The sounding of any horn,
whistle, bell or any type of signaling device on any automobile,
motorcycle, streetcar, bus or other vehicle in the municipality, except as
a danger warning; the creation by means of any such horn, whistle, bell
or signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; the
sounding of any such horn, whistle, bell or signaling device for an
unnecessary and unreasonable period of time; the use of any horn,
whistle, bell or other signaling device operated by engine, exhaust or by
compressed air or gas or by vacuum; and the use of any horn, whistle,
bell or signaling device when traffic is for any reason not moving
normally.
(b) Radios, televisions, musical instruments and other machines, players or
devices of any type or technology, using any type of media, used for the
creation of any music or sound. The use or operation of any of the
foregoing devices, with or without amplification, in such a manner as to
disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants, or
at any time with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing
for the person or persons who are in the room, vehicle, chamber or
premises in or at which such machine or device is operated and who are
voluntary listeners thereto. The following shall be prima facie evidence
of a violation of this section:
§ 19-39 PRINCETON CODE § 21-2
BAO:590
(1) The operation of any such set, instrument, machine, device or
player between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a
manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the
building, structure or vehicle in which or land on which it is
located; or19
(2) The operation of any such set, instrument, machine, device or
player between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a
manner as to be plainly audible within any residence neighboring
the building, structure or vehicle in which or land on which it is
located.
As used in this section 21-2, "plainly audible" shall refer to any
sound that can be detected by a person using his or her unaided
hearing faculties.
(c) Commercial loudspeakers, amplifiers, etc. The using, operating or
permitting to be played, used or operated of any radio receiving set,
musical instrument, loudspeaker, sound amplifier, or any other
machine, player or device of any type or technology for the producing
or reproducing of sound which is audible upon the public streets for the
purpose of commercial advertising or for any other purpose, except as
authorized by Princeton municipal or other governmental authorities in
connection with law enforcement or public emergencies or as permitted
by this Code, such as in the case of a parade permitted by Chapter 24;
provided, that such devices may be employed in connection with
nonprofit, charitable, educational, cultural, religious or recreational
activities, in accordance with permits first obtained therefor from the
administrator pursuant to section 21-3, if the administrator finds that
the public health and safety will not be endangered thereby.
(cc) Music amplification at privately sponsored events. The using, operating
or permitting to be played, used or operated of any radio receiving set,
musical instrument, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine,
player or device of any type or technology for the producing or
reproducing of sound at a privately sponsored event, including but not
limited to an event taking place at the Mountain Lakes Preserve or any
private school, prior to 12:00 noon or after 10:00 p.m. is hereby
declared to be in violation of section 21-1, except as authorized by
Princeton municipal or other governmental authorities in connection
with law enforcement or public emergencies or publicly sponsored
events; provided, however, that such devices may be used in connection
with nonprofit, charitable, educational, cultural, religious or
recreational activities in accordance with permits first obtained
therefor from the administrator pursuant to section 21-3, if the
administrator finds that the public health and safety will not be
endangered thereby.
19.Editor's Note: This Chapter 21 to be adopted in the Princeton Code. This Chapter, adopted
by Ordinance No. 2014-35 supersedes former Chapter 21, Sections 21-1-21-8.
§ 21-2 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-2
BAO:591
Music amplification at a privately sponsored event between the hours
of 12:00 noon and 10:00 p.m. shall be permitted without the necessity
of the above-referenced permit, provided that the measured sound
pressure or decibel levels comply with applicable State law and
regulation.
The individual, corporation, group or entity owning or controlling the
location at which the event will be held shall be responsible for calling
the provisions of this subsection and subsection (c) set forth above to
the attention of all individuals, corporations and other entities wishing
to use the improvements at the location of the event. There shall not
be continuous music amplification for a period of time in excess of five
hours for any one event.
(d) People Noises. Yelling, shouting, whistling, singing or conducting
unnecessarily loud or annoying vocal utterances at any time or place, so
as unreasonably to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any
person in any hospital, residential medical facility, school, place of
worship, place of business or dwelling, hotel or other type of residence,
or of any person in the vicinity.
(e) Animals, Including But Not Limited to Birds and dogs. The keeping of
any animal, including but not limited to any bird or dog, which, by
causing frequent or long continued noise, shall disturb the comfort or
repose of any persons in the vicinity. For purposes of this subsection, a
dog barking continually for 10 minutes or intermittently for 30 minutes,
unless provoked, and plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the
building, structure or vehicle in which or land on which it is located,
shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section.
(f) Non-Vehicular Whistles, Horns and Other Signaling Devices. The
sounding of any whistle, horn and other signaling device, except to give
notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or
danger, by or upon request of a duly authorized Princeton official, or as
may be required by general law or ordinance, or directed by a duly
authorized state or federal official.
(g) Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam
engine, stationary jet or internal combustion engine or motor vehicle,
except through a properly functioning muffler or other device which
will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom.
(h) Overloaded, Improperly Operated Vehicles. The use of any automobile,
motorcycle, truck or vehicle so out of repair, or so loaded or operated in
such a manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding,
rattling or other loud or disturbing noise.
(i) Construction Work. The excavation, grading, paving, erection,
demolition, alteration or repair of any premises, street, building or
structure at any time on Sundays, or other than between the hours of
8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Saturdays, or between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
and 6:00 p.m. on all other days, except in case of urgent necessity in the
§ 21-2 PRINCETON CODE § 21-2
BAO:592
interest of public health and safety; and, if the nature of the emergency
requires the prior procurement of a permit, first obtained from the
municipal engineer as to public street work, or from the building official
as to other work, pursuant to section 21-3, then all work shall be
performed in accordance with the terms of the permit. Such permit
may be granted by the municipal engineer or building official for a
period not to exceed three days while the emergency continues.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Mayor and Council by resolution
may grant permission for such work to be done within the prohibited
hours for such period in excess of three days as it shall deem reasonably
prudent and necessary if it determines that the public health, safety
and welfare either will not be impaired or will be better safeguarded
by allowing such work within the prohibited hours, [if the engineer
or the building official, as the case may be, shall determine that the
public health and safety will not be impaired by such work within
the prohibited hours, and he shall further determine that loss or
inconvenience would result to any party in interest, he may grant
permission for such work to be done within the prohibited hours upon
application being made at the time the permit for the work is issued
or during the progress of the work.] The provisions of this subsection
shall not apply to interior or exterior repairs or to interior alterations,
the work for which is actually performed personally by a homeowner
or other occupant or tenant between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00
p.m., provided, that the work shall be done without undue noise or
disturbance of the peace and quiet of the nearby residences or of the
neighborhood.
(j) Loading or Unloading Vehicles; Opening Boxes. The creation of loud
and excessive noise in connection with the loading or unloading of any
vehicle or the opening or destruction of bales, boxes, crates or
containers.
(k) Refuse Collection. The collection, transportation or disposal of garbage,
trash, cans, bottles and other refuse by persons engaged in the business
of scavenging or garbage collection, whether private or municipal, at
any time on Sundays or other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
7:00 p.m. on all other days, except in case of urgent necessity in the
interest of public health and safety and, if the nature of the emergency
will admit of the prior procurement of a permit, then only in accordance
with a permit first obtained from the engineer pursuant to section 21-3.
Such permit may be granted for a period not to exceed three days or
less while the emergency continues, and it may be renewed for periods
of three days or less while the emergency continues. Notwithstanding
the foregoing, the mayor and council by resolution may grant
permission for such work to be done within the prohibited hours for
such period in excess of three days as it shall deem reasonably prudent
and necessary if it determines that the public health, safety and welfare
either will not be impaired or will be better safeguarded by allowing
such work within the prohibited hours.
§ 21-2 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-2
BAO:593
(l) Schools, courts, places of worship, hospitals and residential medical
facilities. The creation of any excessive noise on any street or property
adjacent to any school, institution of learning, place of worship or court,
while the same is in use, or adjacent to any hospital or residential
medical facility which unreasonably interferes with the workings of
such institution or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the
hospital or medical facility, provided that, with respect to such streets,
conspicuous signs are displayed indicating the proximity of the school,
court, place of worship, hospital or residential medical facility.
(m) Drums, Other Instruments. The use of any drum or other instrument or
device for the purpose of attracting attention to any performance, show,
sale or other event.
(n) Solicitors, Peddlers. The shouting or crying of solicitors, peddlers,
hawkers and vendors, which disturbs the peace and quiet of the
neighborhood.
(o) Railroads, Buses, Trucks. The causing, permitting, or continuing of any
excessive, unnecessary or avoidable noise in the operation of railroad
cars, locomotives, buses and trucks.
(p) Blowers, Fans or Engines. The operation of any noise-creating blower
(including but not limited to leaf blowers) or power fan, or any internal
combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise due to the
explosion of operating gases or fluids, unless the noise from such
blower, fan or combustion engine is adequately muffled and such
engine is equipped with a muffler device sufficient to deaden such
noises. In addition, the operation or use of any of such equipment
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., Mondays through
Saturdays, and 10:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m., on Sundays, shall not be
permitted; except that the use of any snowblower shall not be
prohibited during these times when used to clear sidewalks, walkways
or driveways following a snow storm, nor shall the use of any portable
generator be prohibited during these times when used during a power
outage caused by a storm or other natural disaster.
(q) Lawnmowers or Chain Saws. The operation or use of any power
lawnmower or chain saw between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00
a.m., Mondays through Saturdays, and 10:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m., on
Sundays; except that the use of any chain saw shall not be prohibited
during these times when used in response to an emergency, such as to
clear a walkway or street from fallen branches or trees following a
storm or other natural disaster.
(r) Idling, Starting, Etc., of Vehicles at Night. Any of the following
activities, when occurring in close proximity to residences between
11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.: The warming up or idling of buses, trucks or
tractors; and the unnecessary and repeated idling, acceleration and
deceleration, or starting and stopping of automobiles and motorcycles.
§ 21-2 PRINCETON CODE § 21-2
BAO:594
§ 21-3. Permits - Issuance; Form and Contents; Fee; Time;
Reporting. [Ord. No. 2014-35]
The officers charged with the responsibility of issuing permits for the
activities requiring permits in accordance with section 21-2 shall issue
permits for such activities if the officer finds that the activities will not
unduly or unnecessarily annoy, disturb, injure or endanger the comfort,
repose, health, peace or safety of others, that the activities will not violate
other provisions of this Code, or any ordinance or law or create a public
nuisance, and that the public health and safety will not be endangered
thereby.
Permits shall specify the dates and hours of the permitted activities, which
shall not be allowed between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., unless
the issuing officer determines that it is in the best interest of the community
that the activities take place, wholly or partially, during such hours.
The issuing officers are authorized to adopt and use such forms of
applications and permits as may be reasonably required in the performance
of their duties. Each application for a permit shall be accompanied by a
fee of $10, which shall be payable to Princeton, and shall be submitted to
the officer charged with the responsibility of issuing the permits at least 10
days prior to the planned activity. Where good cause is shown therefor, the
issuing officer shall have the authority to consider any application under
this section which is filed less than 10 days before the date such activities
are proposed to be conducted.
§ 21-4. Appeal From Denial. [Ord. No. 2014-35]
An applicant for a permit under section 21-3 shall have the right to appeal
to the mayor and council from the denial of the permit by the issuing officer.
The appeal shall be taken by filing a written notice of appeal, addressed
to the mayor and council at the office of the municipal clerk. The notice
shall be filed within three days after the issuing officer shall have notified
the applicant of the denial of the permit. The mayor and council shall act
upon the appeal as soon as practicable after receiving the notice thereof
and shall give the applicant an opportunity to be heard before taking action.
The mayor and council may affirm or reverse the issuing officer's denial of
the permit or may grant the permit with modifications or conditions.
§ 21-5. Certain Noises Exempt From Chapter. [Ord. No. 2014-35]
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to apply to bells or chimes
at places of worship; to the playing of bands or orchestras in a hall or
building in a manner that will not annoy the peace, comfort and quiet of the
neighboring inhabitants; to municipal, county, state or federal government
agencies in connection with any emergency; to normal working activities
(s) Outdoor Concerts. Outdoor concerts, except in accordance with
permits first obtained therefor from the administrator, pursuant to
section 21-3.
§ 21-2 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-5
BAO:595
of or activities sponsored by the governing body; to warning devices on
authorized emergency vehicles; or to horns or other warning devices on
other vehicles used only for traffic safety purposes.
§ 21-6. Enforcement of Chapter. [Ord. No. 2014-35]
In addition to public law enforcement officers and others who by law are
entitled to enforce or bring complaints under this chapter, the officers who
are designated under this chapter for the issuance of permits shall have the
power to enforce and bring complaints under this chapter.
§ 21-7. Violations; Penalties. [Ord. No. 2014-35]
For each violation of this chapter, the violator shall be subject to such fines
and other penalties as provided in section 1-6 of this Code, entitled "General
penalty; continuing violations; repeat violations; other penalties." Repeat
offenders shall be subject to additional fines and other penalties as provided
in section 1-6 of this Code.
Chapter B22
OFFENSES-MISCELLANEOUS
§ 22-1. Disorderly Persons. [R.O. 1964, § 23.1; 10-10-1967, § 1; Ord.
No. 77-20, § 1]
(a) Any person, being a part of any congregation in the Borough of
Princeton that contains any person who is:
(1) Obstructing or interfering with the free and lawful use of any public
or private property; or
(2) Uttering loud and offensive or profane or indecent language in any
public place or place to which the public is invited; or
(3) Addressing or making audible and offensive remarks to or
concerning any passing person in any public or private place; or
(4) Engaging in any riotous or disorderly proceedings or in any
disturbance of the peace; or who fails to obey the order of a police
officer to disperse and who thereafter continues a part of such
congregation, is a disorderly person.
(b) Any person who shall maliciously threaten, abuse, assault or maltreat
any person in the borough or who, being in a street or any public place
in the borough, shall use loud and offensive, abusive, profane, indecent,
or insulting language, or shall obstruct or interfere with any person
lawfully being in or upon such street or public place; and all persons
who shall engage in any riotous or disorderly proceedings, or in any
disturbance of the peace within the borough; and any person unlawfully
having concealed upon his person any offense or dangerous weapons
§ 21-5 PRINCETON CODE § 22-1
BAO:596
§ 22-2. Fire Alarm System — Malicious Damage or Interference
With; False Alarm of Fire or Other Emergency.
Any person who shall intentionally, willfully or maliciously destroy or injure
any wire, post, machine, bell, siren, box or other apparatus of any fire alarm
system, or intentionally, willfully or maliciously interfere with the same or
any part thereof, or hinder or impede any of the operations intended to
be accomplished thereby, or intentionally cause or assist in causing a false
alarm of fire or emergency to be given in any manner, shall be deemed and
adjudged a disorderly person.
[R.O. 1964, § 23.5.]
§ 22-3. Firearms — Discharge Prohibited. [R.O. 1964, § 33.1; Ord.
No. 77-25, § 1]
No person shall discharge any firearm within the boundaries of the borough
or across any part of the borough. The provisions of this section are subject
to sections 22-3.1 and 22-3.2.
§ 22-3.1. Same — Persons to Whom Section 22-3 is Not Applicable.
[Ord. No. 77-25, § 2]
Section 22-3 shall not apply to:
§ 22-3.2. Same — Permits. [Ord. No. 77-25, § 2; Ord. No. 97-14, § I]
and all vagrants, beggars common night walkers, common thieves or
pickpockets; shall be deemed and adjudged to be disorderly persons.
(c) Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
(a) Law enforcement officers of any governmental agency while in the
performance of their duties.
(b) Members of any legally recognized military organization while in the
performance of their duties.
(c) Persons engaged in target practice or an indoor range in accordance
with a permit issued pursuant to section 22-3.2.
(d) Privately employed security personnel who are authorized by law to
carry firearms, while in the performance of their duties.
(e) Persons lawfully using firearms in the protection of the person, or in the
protection of property from damage by vermin, birds or other animal
pests, and, in cases involving such protection of property, in accordance
with a permit issued pursuant to section 22-3.2.
(f) Persons engaged in the discharge of firearms loaded only with blanks or
charges without projectiles in accordance with a permit issued
pursuant to section 22-3.2.
§ 22-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-3.2
BAO:597
§ 22-4. Gaming. [R.O. 1964, § 23-3]
Any person who shall engage in gaming, for money or any other valuable
thing, at cards, dice or any other game of chance, whether as banker, player,
dealer or otherwise, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
§ 22-5. Loitering; Unauthorized Entry Upon Private Property. [R.O.
1964, § 23-2; Ord. No. 77-20, § 2]
Any person who shall lounge or loiter before any premises, annoying the
occupant or owner thereof; and any person who shall loiter in or upon
any street or public place, in or above any public building, in or about
any entrance to a private place of business, in or about the entrance to a
private dwelling or other private building or in or upon any public or private
grounds, so as to interfere with the free and unobstructed use thereof, or
any person who goes in or upon any private property not his own, without
the permission of the owner or other person having authority to grant such
permission, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
§ 22-6. Property — Malicious Damage. [R.O. 1964, § 23-4]
No person shall willfully or maliciously commit any damage, injury or spoil
to or upon any real or person property in the borough, either of a public or
private nature.
(a) A permit for the discharge of firearms shall be issued by the chief of
police if he shall determine that (i) the purpose is one that is allowed by
permit under section 22-3.1; (ii) any indoor range proposed to be used
meets recognized safety standards; (iii) the activity for which
permission is requested, with any precautions that may be specified in
the permit, can be conducted with due regard for the safety of persons
and property; and (iv) in the case of requests for permits for the
protection of property as set forth in section 22-3.1(e), such protection
cannot reasonably be achieved by means other than the use of firearms.
The chief of police shall notify the mayor and council at the time of
issuance of such permits.
(b) Applications for permits shall be accompanied by payment of a fee of
$10 to the borough and shall be in such form as the chief of police shall
prescribe for the purpose of eliciting information to assist him in
determining whether permits shall be issued.
(c) Permits shall specify the name and address of each person authorized
to discharge firearms, the date or period on or during which the permit
shall be valid, the purpose for which the permit is issued, the type and
caliber of firearms and ammunition that may be used, and any other
special precautions deemed reasonably required by the chief of police
for the safety of persons and property.
§ 22-3.2 PRINCETON CODE § 22-6.1
BAO:598
§ 22-6.1. Placement of Graffiti on Public and Private Property —
Purpose. [Ord. No. 89-41, § I]
The mayor and council of the Borough of Princeton find and declare that the
use of broad-tipped pens, paint spray cans, pencils, pens, crayons or other
marking devices to write graffiti, verbal or otherwise, on the walls or other
available spaces on public or private buildings, vehicles, areas or facilities,
causes a serious defacement of such buildings, vehicles and areas, public
and private; contributes to the deterioration of property values, as well as
offending the public's right, public and private not to have unsightly and
unlawful graffiti on, with defacement of, public and private property; and
constitutes a deleterious practice contrary to the public health and welfare.
The mayor and council further find and declare that such contempt for the
property rights of private citizens, as well as public facilities, contributes to
the erosion of law and order and contributes to the deterioration and quality
of life of the community and must be opposed and punished.
§ 22-6.2. Graffiti Prohibited. [Ord. No. 89-41, § I; Ord. No. 97-23,
§ I]
(a) Graffiti Prohibited — Generally. No person shall purposely or knowingly
vandalize, deface or otherwise damage the real or personal property of
another by drawing, painting, writing or the making of any inscription,
in any fashion, with ink, paint, chalk or other substance, what is
commonly known as "graffiti."
(b) Graffiti Defined. For the purposes of sections 22-6.1 through 22-6.5,
"graffiti" shall include any form of painting, writing or inscription,
regardless of the content of said painting, writing or inscription, or the
nature of the materials used in the commission of the act. "Graffiti"
shall include drawing, painting, writing or the making of any inscription
directly on public or private property or the placement of such painting,
writing or inscription on materials or substances which are then placed,
by glue or otherwise, on public or private property.
(c) Graffiti Prohibited — Exception Consent of Owner. No person shall
place graffiti on real or personal property of another, whether said
personal or real property is publicly or privately owned, unless the
owner of said property shall have, prior to the writing, printing,
inscribing or placing of graffiti, specifically consented to the same.
Notwithstanding such consent, within seven days' notice by the
Borough of Princeton, the owner of real property shall take appropriate
action to clean, repair, paint or otherwise restore the property to the
condition it was prior to being damaged by graffiti. In the event the
owner fails to remove the graffiti in response to the borough's
notification, the borough may remove such graffiti at its own cost, upon
notification to the owner, and shall be authorized to impose a lien
against the real property in question in the amount expended by the
borough for such removal.
§ 22-6.1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-6.3
BAO:599
§ 22-6.3. Graffiti — Parent or Guardian Responsible for Violation by
Infant Under 18 Years of Age. [Ord. No. 89-41, § I]
§ 22-6.4. Graffiti — Prosecution of Persons Under 18 Years of Age;
Action in Court. [Ord. No. 89-41, § I]
§ 22-6.5. Graffiti — Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 89-41, § I;
Ord. No. 91-14, § VIII]
(a) It shall be unlawful for any parent, legal guardian or other person
having custody and care of any infant under the age of 18 years, to
assist, aid, abet, allow, permit or encourage said infant to violate the
provisions of section 22-6.2, either by words, overt act, by failing to act,
by negligence or by lack of supervision and control over said infant.
(b) Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:53A-15, any parent, guardian or other person
having legal custody of an infant under 18 years of age who fails or
neglects to exercise reasonable supervision and control of the conduct
of such infant, shall be liable in a civil action for any willful, malicious or
unlawful injury or destruction by such infant of the real or personal
property of another.
(a) If, at the time of the offense charged under section 22-6.2, any persons
shall be under the age of 18 years, the Juvenile Domestic Relations
Court shall have exclusive jurisdiction of the trial of such infant or
infants, and such infant or infants shall be surrendered to the Juvenile
Domestic Relations Court, and the case, including all papers and
process thereto, shall be transferred to said Court as provided in
N.J.S.A. 2C:4-11.
(b) The parent, legal guardian or other person having care and custody of
said infant shall be summoned or arrested and brought before the judge
of the municipal court of the Borough of Princeton and may be subject
to the penalties provided herein.
(a) Penalties. Any person who shall violate any provisions of this article
shall be subject to the penalties as provided in section 1-6. Each day in
which such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Repeat offenders, as that term is defined in section 1-6, shall be subject
to the penalties set forth in section 1-6.
(b) Restoration of Property. As a condition of sentencing, the municipal
court shall have the authority to order that the offender be responsible
for cleaning, repairing, painting or otherwise restoring the damaged
property to the condition it was prior to being damaged. In the event
that the offender is unable to comply with the above, the municipal
court shall have the authority to order that said offender make the
necessary monetary restitution to restore the property to its original
undamaged condition.
§ 22-6.3 PRINCETON CODE § 22-6.5
BAO:600
§ 22-7. General Policy Concerning Public Meetings and Assemblies.
[R.O. 1964, § 23.6; Ord. No. 2005-22, § I]
The borough encourages peaceful public meetings and assemblies by
individuals and organizations who wish to express their views in a public
forum, which will not obstruct vehicular and pedestrian traffic. Toward that
end, the borough will accommodate such meetings and assemblies in its
parks, public plazas or sidewalks adjacent to public roadway.
§ 22-7.1. Permits for Large Public Meetings and Assemblies. [Ord.
No. 2005-22, § II]
Where a group or organization wishes to conduct a public meeting,
assembly or demonstration involving more than 25 individuals in any park,
public plaza or sidewalk, a permit must be obtained from the borough clerk.
The purpose of the permit is to coordinate the use of limited park and public
space, to enable the deployment of adequate borough police and support
staff in dealing with crowd management and traffic control and to facilitate
communications between borough police and support staff with individuals
responsible for the public event.
§ 22-7.2. Applications for Permits. [Ord. No. 2005-22, § II]
Permits for meetings, assemblies and demonstrations pursuant to section
22-7.1 will be issued after the presentation of a completed application to
the borough clerk at least five days before the public event. The application
shall set forth the name and address of the organization; the name, address
and telephone number of the event contact person; the number of
individuals expected to participate in the public event; the location, time
and date of the public event and any special requirements for security
or police protection. The application will contain a certification that the
applicant will not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic; will adhere to the
noise restrictions contained in Chapter 21 of the Borough Code; and will
assume financial responsibility for any damage to public or private property
as a result of the public event.
§ 22-7.3. Issuance of Permits. [Ord. No. 2005-22, § II]
There shall be no charge for the issuance of a permit to conduct a large
public meeting or assembly. The permit shall be issued as soon as
practicable and in no event more than three business days of the application
is received unless any of the following occurs:
(c) Exception — Offender Under the Age of 18. An exception to subsections
(a) and (b) applies in the case of an infant under the age of 18 years,
who shall, upon conviction, be subject to the penalties imposed on him/
her by the Judge of the Mercer County Juvenile and Domestic Relations
Court.
(a) The application, with the required certification, is not fully completed;
§ 22-6.5 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-7.3
BAO:601
§ 22-8. Smoking Prohibited During Public Meetings in Borough
Hall. [Ord. No. 76-16, § 1]
No person shall smoke or carry a lighted cigar, cigarette or pipe in any room
or area of Borough Hall while any public meeting is being held in such room
or area, provided that such room or area is posted with no-smoking signs in
accordance with section 22-9.
§ 22-9. No-Smoking Signs to be Posted. [Ord. No. 76-16, § 1]
The borough administrator shall post and maintain a sign or signs in each
such room or area advising that smoking is prohibited while public meetings
are being held therein.
§ 22-10. Operating Hours of Gasoline Service Stations Restricted.
[Ord. No. 86-6, § 1]
No gasoline service station in the borough shall engage in any business
operations whatsoever involving the sale of goods or services to the public
except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., provided, any
gasoline service station which on January 9, 1986 maintained regular hours
of operation not conforming to the requirements of this section shall, upon
certification of its actual hours of operation to the borough clerk, be
permitted to open as early as 6:00 a.m. and be permitted to close as late as
11:00 p.m. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this ordinance shall be subject to a fine of up to $200 for each offense.
§ 22-10.1. Gasoline Service Stations — Defined. [Ord. No. 86-6, § 1]
As used herein, a "gasoline service station" shall include any building,
structure, place or location designated for the inspection, testing,
examination and repair of motor vehicles and maintaining any gasoline
pump or oil pump for the purpose of selling gasoline or oil.
§ 22-11. Drug-Free School Zones. [Ord. No. 1988-36, §§ I — V; Ord.
No. 2008-11, § I]
(b) The application contains material misrepresentations;
(c) The applicant has on prior occasions damaged public property and has
not paid for such damage;
(d) The public event conflicts with previously scheduled or planned
activities at the same location, in which case, the borough will take all
reasonable steps to find an alternative location for the public event; and
(e) The public event is prohibited by state statute.
If a permit is denied, the borough clerk or designee shall specify the
reasons in writing.
§ 22-7.3 PRINCETON CODE § 22-11
BAO:602
(a) In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of L. 1988, c. 44 (C.
2C:35-7), a map entitled "drug free school zones and public places,"
dated March 1, 2008, by Christopher M. Budzinski, P.E., borough
engineer, is hereby approved and adopted as an official finding and
record of the location and areas within the borough or property which is
used for school purposes and which is owned by or leased to any
elementary or secondary school or school board, and of the areas on or
within 1,000 feet of such school property.
(b) The drug-free school zone map approved and adopted pursuant to
subsection (a) of this section shall continue to constitute an official
finding and record as to the location and boundaries of areas on or
within 1,000 feet of property owned by or leased to any elementary or
secondary school or school board which is used for school purposes
until such time, if any, that this section shall be amended to reflect any
additions or deletions with respect to the location and boundaries of
school property and drug-free school zones.
(c) The school board, or the chief administrative officer in the case of any
private or parochial school, is hereby directed and shall have the
continuing obligation to promptly notify the borough engineer and the
borough attorney of any changes or contemplated changes in the
location and boundaries of any property owned by or leased to any
elementary or secondary school or school board and which is used for
school purposes.
(d) The Clerk of the Borough of Princeton is hereby directed to receive and
to keep on file the original of the map approved and adopted pursuant
to subsection (a) of this section, and to provide at a reasonable cost a
true copy thereof to any person, agency or court which may from time
to time request such a copy, along with a certification that such copy is
a true copy of the map approved and adopted herein and kept on file. It
is hereby further directed that a true copy of such map and of this
section shall be provided without cost to the county clerk and to the
Office of the Mercer County Prosecutor.
(e) The following additional matters are hereby determined, declared,
recited and stated:
(1) It is understood that the map approved and adopted pursuant to
subsection (a) of this section was prepared and is intended to be
used as evidence in prosecutions arising under the criminal laws of
this state, and that pursuant to state law, such map shall constitute
prima facie evidence of the following:
a. The location of elementary and secondary schools within the
Borough of Princeton;
b. The boundaries of the real property which is owned by or
leased to such schools or a school board;
§ 22-11 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-11
BAO:603
§ 22-12. Drug-Free Zones Around Public Housing Facilities, Parks
or Public Buildings. [Ord. No. 98-11, § I; Ord. No. 2008-11, § II]
c. That such school property is and continues to be used for
school purposes; and
d. The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within
1,000 feet of such school property.
(2) Except as is otherwise expressly noted on the face of the approved
and adopted map, all of the property depicted on the map approved
and adopted herein as school property was owned by or leased to a
school or school board and was being used for school purposes as
of July 9, 1987, that being the effective date of L. 1987, c. 101 (C.
2C:35-7).
(3) Pursuant to the provisions of L. 1988, c. 44, a prosecutor is not
precluded from introducing or relying upon any other evidence or
testimony to establish a violation of the offense defined in that
statute, including use of a map or diagram other than the one
approved and adopted pursuant to subsection (a) of this section.
The failure of the map approved herein to depict the location and
boundaries of any property which is, in fact, used for school
purposes and which is owned by or leased to any elementary or
secondary school or school board, whether the absence of such
depiction is the result of inadvertent omission or the result of any
changes in the location and boundaries of such property which
have not yet been incorporated into a revised approved map, shall
not be deemed to be an official finding and record that such
property is not owned by or leased to a school or school board, or
that such property is not used for school purposes.
(4) All of the requirements set forth in L. 1988, c. 44 concerning the
preparation, approval and adoption of a drug-free school zone map
have been complied with.
(a) Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.1, a map entitled "drug free school zones
and public places," dated March 1, 2008, by Christopher M. Budzinski,
P.E., borough engineer, is hereby approved and adopted as an official
finding and record of the location and boundaries of the area or areas
on or within 500 feet of a public housing facility, a public park or a
public building.
(b) The Clerk of the Borough of Princeton is hereby directed to receive and
keep on file the original of the map approved and adopted pursuant to
subsection (a) of this section and to provide at a reasonable cost a true
copy thereof to any person, agency or court which may from time to
time request such a copy, along with a certification that such copy is a
true copy of the map approved and adopted herein and kept on file. It is
hereby further directed that a true copy of such map and this section
§ 22-11 PRINCETON CODE § 22-12
BAO:604
§ 22-13. Urinating in Public, Prohibited. [Ord. No. 99-11, § I]
No person shall urinate or place any bodily waste of humans on any public
street, sidewalk or other place in public view, or to which the public is
invited or has access, except in a lavatory toilet or similar facility.
§ 22-14. Prohibition of the Use of Government Buildings and
Equipment for Political Fund-Raising. [Ord. No. 2000-3, § I]
shall be provided, without cost, to the county clerk and to the Office of
the Mercer County Prosecutor.
(c) The following additional matters are hereby determined, declared,
recited and stated:
(1) It is understood that the map approved and adopted pursuant to
subsection (a) of this section was prepared and is intended to be
used as evidence in prosecutions arising under the criminal laws of
this state, and that pursuant to state law, such map shall constitute
prima facie evidence of the location and boundaries of those areas
in or within 500 feet of a public park, public building or public
housing facility pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.1.
(2) Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.1, nothing in this section shall be
construed to preclude the prosecution from introducing or relying
upon any other evidence or testimony to establish any element of
this offense.
(a) Purpose.
WHEREAS, our laws in New Jersey do not presently ban solicitation
or acceptance of political contributions by public office holders and
employees while in any room or building occupied in the discharge of
official duties; and
WHEREAS, solicitation and acceptance of political contributions in
rooms and buildings occupied in the discharge of official municipal
business undermines the efficiency of government by taking officials
and employees away from the people's business, and leads to the
appearance of improper influence of political contributions on
government functions; and
WHEREAS, prohibiting the solicitation and acceptance of political
contributions in rooms and buildings occupied in the discharge of
official duties will address these harms and leave open ample
alternative venues of political fund-raising; and
WHEREAS, our laws in New Jersey do not presently recognize the
misuse of public property for political fund-raising as a distinct offense:
THEREFORE, it is accordingly found and determined that the
municipality's interests in an independent and efficient government
§ 22-12 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-14
BAO:605
workforce and a government that is undermined by neither the fact
nor appearance of improper influence of political contributions on
government decisions require the prohibition of political fund-raising
in rooms or buildings occupied in the discharge of official duties or
through the use of public property.
(b) Definitions.
(1) CANDIDATE -
a. An individual seeking election to a public office of the federal,
state, county, or municipal government, or school district or
political party, and
b. Any individual who shall have been elected or failed of election
to any such office;
(2) POLITICAL CONTRIBUTION - Any loans and transfers of money or
other things of value to any candidate, elected official, or
representative of any political organization, or other commitment
or assumptions of liability to make any such transfer. Political
contributions shall be deemed to have been made upon the date
when such commitment is made or liability assumed.
(3) POLITICAL ORGANIZATION - Any two or more persons acting
jointly, or any corporation, partnership or other incorporated or
unincorporated association which is organized to, or does, aid or
promote the nomination, election or defeat of any candidate or
candidates for federal, state, county, municipal or school board
office or political party office. "Political organization" includes, but
is not limited to, organizations defined in N.J.S.A. 19:44A-3 as a
"political committee," "joint candidates committee," "continuing
political committee," "political party committee," "candidate
committee," or "legislative leadership committee."
(4) MUNICIPALITY - The government of the municipality, including any
officer, department, board, commission, or agency thereof.
(5) MUNICIPAL OFFICIAL, EMPLOYEE AND APPOINTEE - Any person
holding elective municipal office or holding an appointed position
in the municipal government, or in any agency, commission, board,
or office thereof, whether the position is full time or part time,
compensated or uncompensated; and any employee of municipal
government or of any municipal agency, commission, board, or
office thereof, whether the position is full time or part time.
(6) SOLICIT - To ask for, by oral or written communication, a
contribution as that term is defined herein.
(7) PUBLIC PROPERTY - All personal property owned, leased, or
controlled by the municipal government, including but not limited
§ 22-14 PRINCETON CODE § 22-14
BAO:606
§ 22-15. Hours of Operation for Restaurants and Eating and
Drinking Establishments, Retail Food Establishments, Retail Sales,
and Personal Services Businesses. [Ord. No. 2014-45; Ord. No.
2017-11]
to vehicles, phones, fax machines, computers, stationery including
municipal letterhead, postage, and other office equipment.
(c) General Regulations.
(1) Prohibition against soliciting or accepting political contribution in
rooms or buildings occupied in the discharge of public duties. No
municipal official, employee or appointee may solicit, commit to
pay, or receive payment of or a commitment to pay any political
contribution for any candidate, elected official or political
organization while in any room or building occupied in the
discharge of official municipal business. This section shall include
solicitation or acceptance of political contributions made over a
private cell phone or by use of a private computer, if the person
soliciting or accepting the political contribution, or using the cell
phone or computer for purposes of soliciting or accepting the
political contribution, is in any room or building occupied in the
discharge of official municipal business.
(2) Prohibition Against Use of Public Property for Political Fund-
Raising. No municipal official, employee, or appointee may solicit,
commit to pay, or receive payment of or a commitment to pay any
political contribution for any candidate, elected official or political
organization, while utilizing public property.
(d) Exception. This prohibition shall not be deemed to prevent fund-raising
of any sort by political organizations, or any groups for non-government
use, where such organizations or groups have reserved exclusive use of
meeting facility during non-business hours of the borough, provided no
official municipal business is conducted therein and all political
organizations are allowed an equal opportunity to reserve the meeting
facility.
(e) Violation. Violation of any provision of this section shall be punished by
a period of community service not exceeding 90 days or a fine not
exceeding $1,000.
(a) The purpose of this section regulating the operating hours of
restaurants and eating and drinking establishments, retail food
establishments, retail sales, and personal services businesses in
Princeton is to:
(1) Improve the quality of life for residents in the residential areas of
Princeton, particularly during the late night and early morning
hours;
§ 22-14 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-15
BAO:607
(2) Decrease the incidence of nuisance complaints and littering
associated with large crowds of individuals congregating in or in
close proximity to residential areas in Princeton during the late
night and early morning hours, which individually and collectively
have a negative impact on the quality of life for residents;
(3) Discourage activities that compromise the public safety of
residents and business patrons in certain areas of Princeton during
the late night and early morning hours; and
(4) Provide for the efficient, effective and economical provision of
scarce government resources in addressing each of the
aforementioned purposes.
(b) For the purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
HOTEL — A facility offering transient lodging accommodations to the
general public and which may include additional facilities and services,
such as restaurants, meeting rooms, personal services, and recreational
facilities.
OPERATING HOURS — The hours during which a business or service is
open to the public.
PERSONAL SERVICES — Establishments primarily engaged in
providing services involving the care of a person or his or her goods or
apparel, including, but not limited to, laundering, shoe repair, hair and
body care, tailoring, travel agents, spas, tanning salons, and nutrition
weight loss centers.
RESTAURANT AND EATING AND DRINKING ESTABLISHMENTS —
Any or all of the establishments listed below:
RESTAURANT, CARRYOUT — An establishment where food and
beverages are prepared and sold for consumption on or off premises
(customer tables or counters typically available). Such an establishment
may take phone orders for food and may deliver food to customers.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-THROUGH — An establishment where food and
beverages are prepared and sold for consumption on or off premises,
and which includes one or more drive-through customer service
windows.
RESTAURANT, SIT-DOWN — An establishment where food and
beverages, including alcoholic beverages, are prepared and sold and
consumed primarily on the premises, and where food sales constitute
more than 50% of the gross sales receipts for all food and beverages.
Such an establishment may include table or self-service, and food and
beverages may be consumed either indoors or in designated outdoor
seating areas.
RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment where food and
beverages are offered for retail sale for consumption off premises. Such
foods or beverages may be packaged in a ready-to-consume state or
§ 22-15 PRINCETON CODE § 22-15
BAO:608
may come packaged and sold in bulk quantities. Examples of retail food
establishments include without limitation grocery stores, ice cream
shops, retail mini-marts, bakeries, and delicatessens.
RETAIL SALES — Establishments engaged in selling goods or
merchandise to the general public for personal or household
consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale of such
goods, including, but not limited to, specialty shops and boutiques.
TAVERN OR BAR — An establishment where food and beverages,
including alcoholic beverages, are prepared and sold and consumed on
the premises and where food sales constitute 50% or less of the gross
sales receipts for all food and beverages.
(c) Restaurants and eating and drinking establishments, retail food
establishments, retail sales, and personal services businesses located
on a lot within or abutting a residential zone, including any such
establishments or businesses within a hotel, shall not be permitted to
operate in Princeton between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m.
(d) The time limitations set forth herein shall not apply to the following:
(1) Holders of plenary retail consumption or retail distribution licenses
pursuant to the Alcoholic Beverage Law (N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq.),
which holders are subject to the aforesaid State law and local Code
provisions.
(2) The sale of prescription or non-prescription (over the counter)
medications in pharmacies and in drugstores with pharmacies
where the pharmacy remains open beyond 2:00 a.m.
(3) Medical care, urgent care or veterinary care practices.
(4) Businesses located in the following educational zones: E-1, E-2,
E-3, E-5 and AET.
(5) Hotels, limited to those services necessary for check-in and checkout.
(e) Any establishment or business otherwise subject to the time limitations
set forth herein shall be permitted to remain open beyond 2:00 a.m. up
to six days per calendar year, which may be taken separately or
consecutively, subject to the following requirements:
(1) Any establishment or business wishing to remain open beyond 2:00
a.m. shall first apply to the Princeton Administrator and Chief of
Police for permission to do so, on a form to be developed by the
Administrator and Clerk.
(2) The application shall be submitted at least 10 business days prior
to the date on which the establishment or business wishes to
remain open beyond 2:00 a.m.
§ 22-15 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-15
BAO:609
Chapter B23
(RESERVED)
Chapter B24
PARADES
Editor's Note: Chapter 24 will be adopted for inclusion in the
Princeton Code.
(3) The application shall indicate how many other days within the same
calendar year the establishment or business has been open beyond
the 2:00 a.m. Each day that the establishment or business remains
open beyond 2:00 a.m. shall count toward the six-day total allowed
as of right within a calendar year.
(4) The application shall be accompanied by a reasonable fee to be
established by the Administrator and Clerk.
(5) The Chief of Police shall be authorized to impose such conditions as
may reasonably be necessary in his or her professional judgment to
ensure no undue risk to the public health, safety and welfare.
(6) The Administrator and Chief of Police shall approve or deny the
application within five business days of receipt thereof.
(f) Any person, firm, corporation, or other entity violating any of the
provisions of this section shall be subject to the fines and other
penalties set forth in section 1-6 of this Code, and each day in which
such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 22-15 PRINCETON CODE § 22-15
BAO:610
ARTICLE I
In General
§ 24-1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2014-9]
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
PARADE — Any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant or
procession of any kind, or any similar display, in or upon any street or
sidewalk in this municipality.
§ 24-2. Interference with Parades. [Ord. No. 2014-9]
No person shall:
(a) Unreasonably hamper, obstruct or impede or interfere with any parade
or parade assembly, or with any person, vehicle or animal participating
or used in a parade, nor shall any person join or participate in any
parade, unless he is authorized to do so by the organization conducting
the parade.
(b) Drive any vehicle between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade,
when such vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously
designated as a parade.
(c) Park or leave unattended any vehicle on any street on the route of a
parade, where parking has been prohibited by the chief of police and
where signs to such effect have been posted.
§ 24-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 24-2
BAO:611

ARTICLE II
Permits
§ 24-3. Required; Exceptions. [Ord. No. 2014-9]
No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade,
unless a parade permit shall have been obtained from the municipal clerk;
except that no permit shall be required for funeral processions, school
activities on school property under the immediate direction and supervision
of proper school authorities or activities of any governmental agency acting
within the scope of its functions.
§ 24-4. Application. [Ord. No. 2014-9]
A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application with
the municipal clerk on forms provided by such officer.
(a) Filing Period. An application for a parade permit shall be filed with the
municipal clerk no less than 10 days nor more than 30 days before the
date on which it is proposed to conduct the parade.
(b) Contents. The application for a parade permit shall set forth the
following information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to
conduct such parade.
(2) If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of or by an
organization, the names, addresses and telephone numbers of the
headquarters of the organization and of the authorized and
responsible head of such organization.
(3) The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be
the parade chairman and who will be responsible for its conduct.
(4) The date when the parade is to be conducted.
(5) The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination
point.
(6) The approximate number of persons who, and animals and vehicles
which, will constitute such parade; the type of animals and
description of vehicles.
(7) The hours when such parade will start and terminate.
(8) A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a
portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed.
(9) The location by streets of any assembly areas for such parade.
(10) The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any
such assembly area.
§ 24-3 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 24-4
BAO:613
§ 24-5. Issuance Standards. [Ord. No. 2014-9]
The municipal clerk shall issue a permit as provided for in this article when,
from a consideration of the application and from such other information as
may be otherwise obtained, he finds that:
(11) The interval of space to be maintained between units of such
parade.
(12) If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf of or for, any
person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall
file with the municipal clerk a communication in writing from the
person proposing to hold the parade, authorizing the applicant to
apply for the permit on his behalf.
(c) Late Applications. The municipal clerk, where good cause is shown
therefor, shall have the authority to consider any application under this
section which is filed less than 10 days before the date such parade is
proposed to be conducted.
(a) The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and
orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route.
(b) The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a
number of police officers of the municipality to properly police the line
of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal
police protection to the municipality.
(c) The conduct of such parade will not require the diversion of so great a
number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to
portions of the municipality other than that to be occupied by the
proposed line of march and areas contiguous thereto.
(d) The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at the assembly
point of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police
protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such
assembly area.
(e) The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of fire
fighting equipment en route to a fire.
(f) The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of
termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route.
(g) The parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any
product and is not designed to be held purely for private profit.
(h) There is not outstanding an approved permit for another parade for a
time and place that is so proximate to that applied for as to constitute a
conflict therewith.
§ 24-4 PRINCETON CODE § 24-6
BAO:614
§ 24-6. Denial Generally; Notice. [Ord. No. 2014-9]
The municipal clerk shall act upon the application for a parade permit
within three business days after the filing thereof and shall, within such
time, notify the applicant of his action and, in the event of a denial of the
permit, the reasons therefor. A permit may be denied in writing based upon
the issuance standards set forth in subsection 24-5. In case more than one
application shall be received for parades on the same date, the application
first received shall be granted if it complies with all the requirements of this
article.
§ 24-7. Appeal From Denial. [Ord. No. 2014-9]
Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade
permit to the council. The appeal shall be taken, within three days after
notice of denial. The council shall act upon the appeal as soon as practicable
after receiving notice of the appeal.
§ 24-8. Alternate Permit. [Ord. No. 2014-9]
The municipal clerk, in denying an application for a parade permit, shall
be empowered to authorize the conduct of the parade on a date, at a time
or over a route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant
desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within three days after notice
of the action of the municipal clerk, file a written notice of acceptance
with the municipal clerk. An alternate parade permit shall conform to the
requirements of and shall have the effect of a parade permit under this
article.
§ 24-9. Contents. [Ord. No. 2014-9]
Each parade permit shall state the following information:
§ 24-10. Duties of Permittee. [Ord. No. 2014-9]
A permittee under this article shall comply with all permit directions and
conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances. The parade
chairman or other person heading or leading such activity shall carry the
parade permit upon his person during the conduct of the parade.
(a) Starting time.
(b) Minimum speed.
(c) Maximum speed.
(d) Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the
parade.
(e) The route of the parade and the portions of the streets to be traversed
that may be occupied by the parade.
(f) The maximum length of the parade, in miles or fractions thereof.
§ 24-6 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 24-11
BAO:615
§ 24-11. Revocation. [Ord. No. 2014-9]
The municipal clerk shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit
issued under this article, if applicant fails to comply with the standards for
issuance of a permit as herein set forth in section 24-5.
§ 24-11 PRINCETON CODE § 24-11
BAO:616
Chapter B24A
(RESERVED)
See Princeton Township Code Ch. 16, Recreation and Parks
Chapter B25
(RESERVED)
Chapter B26
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 24-11 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 24-11
BAO:617

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 26-1. Establishment of Department. [Ord. No. 2015-25 § 2, Exh. A;
Ord. No. 2019-32]
There is hereby created in and for Princeton, a police department, known
as the "Princeton Police Department," which shall consist of the Chief of
Police, up to one Captain, up to four Lieutenants, up to seven Sergeants, up
to four Corporals and up to 36 permanent Patrol Officers. As used in this
chapter, all sworn officers, i.e., the Chief, Captain, Lieutenants, Sergeants,
Corporals and Patrol Officers, may be referred to as "members." In addition,
the Police Department may be supported by such civilian employees as may
be deemed necessary by the Mayor and Council. Such Department shall be
governed by applicable laws of the State, this chapter and other applicable
laws and ordinances of the municipality and rules and regulations adopted
pursuant hereto.
§ 26-2. The Line of Authority for the Police Department. [Ord. No.
2015-25 § 2, Exh. A; Ord. No. 2016-09]
This section establishes and sets forth the line of authority for the
administration and operation of the Princeton Police Department.
(a) The Administrator shall constitute the "appropriate authority" as
required by N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118 and shall thereby have the powers as
provided by State law including the authority and duty to:
(1) Adopt and promulgate rules and regulations for the government of
the Police force and for the discipline of its members; and
(2) Coordinate with the Chief of Police with regard to the day-to-day
operations of the Police Department; and
(3) Handle Police disciplinary matters as more fully set forth in section
26-5 below; and
(4) Receive and review, and forward to the Mayor and Council for
review, monthly reports concerning the Department prepared by
the Chief of Police.
Reference to the Administrator in this Article shall be in his or her
capacity as the "appropriate authority."
(b) The Chief of Police shall be the head of the Police force and responsible
to the Administrator for the efficient and routine day-to-day operations
of the Department, including the authority and duty to:
(1) Administer and enforce rules and regulations of the Department
and special emergency directives for the disposition and discipline
of the force and its Officers and personnel; and
§ 26-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 26-2
BAO:619
(2) Have, exercise and discharge the functions, powers and duties of
the Police force; and
(3) Prescribe the duties and assignments of all subordinates and other
personnel within the Department; and
(4) Delegate such of his or her authority as the Chief may deem
necessary for the efficient operation of the Police force to be
exercised under the Chief's direction and supervision; and
(5) Report at least monthly to the Administrator on the operations of
the Police force during the preceding month and make such other
reports as may be requested by the Administrator.
(c) The Mayor and Council shall have the duty and responsibility to:
(1) Review and conduct investigations of the operations of the Police
Department when necessary; and
(2) Review and establish from time-to-time the size and rank structure
within the Department; and
(3) Fix the compensation of members of the Department consistent
with the terms and conditions of any applicable Collective
Bargaining Agreements; and
(4) Approve the appointment of the Chief of Police, promotion of Police
personnel and the hiring of any new Police Officers; and
(5) Receive and review monthly reports with regard to the Police
Department prepared by the Chief of Police.
(d) The Mayor and Council hereby establish a Public Safety Committee
which shall consist of the Mayor or a member of Council selected by the
Mayor to serve as the Mayor's designee, plus the Administrator, both ex
officio, as well as two members of the Council appointed by the Mayor
with the consent of the Council. The Public Safety Committee shall be
advisory to the Mayor and Council and shall assist the Mayor and
Council with execution of its responsibilities hereunder and as may be
required by law. In accordance with the above, the Public Safety
Committee shall:
(1) Act as liaison between the Mayor and Council and Chief of Police
with regard to any matters related to the Police Department; and
(2) Meet with the Chief of Police with regard to matters related to the
daily and routine operation of the Police Department, and report
regularly to the Mayor and Council as to same; and
(3) When requested by the Mayor and Council, conduct such
investigations regarding the operations of the Police Department;
and
§ 26-2 PRINCETON CODE § 26-2
BAO:620
§ 26-3. Appointment; Promotion; Qualifications Generally. [Ord. No.
2015-25 § 2, Exh. A; Ord. No. 2019-32]
(4) Advise the Mayor and Council as to the authorized number of
officers in various ranks and promotion of same, and with regard to
the hiring of new Police Officers; and
(5) Advise the Mayor and Council on such other Police Department
matters as may be requested from time to time.
The terms of the appointed members shall expire on the first day
of January next following their appointments but they shall serve
after the expiration of their terms until their successors shall have
been appointed and qualified. Any vacancy in any of the appointed
offices shall be filled in a like manner, but for the unexpired term.
The Mayor shall designate one of the appointed members as the
Police Commissioner and in that capacity such member shall be the
Chair of the Public Safety Committee.
(a) All members of the Police Department shall be appointed by the Mayor,
with the advice and consent of the Council. The Mayor and the Council
may seek and consider, but need not follow, recommendations from the
Public Safety Committee as to appointments and promotions.
(b) No person shall be appointed a Patrol Officer unless that person shall
have demonstrated an aptitude for police employment for a period of
one year as a probationary patrol officer, during which time he or she
shall not be considered a permanent member of the Department and
instead referred to as a probationary member. For purposes of this
section, the probationary period for any Patrol Officer shall be for a
period of one year following the candidate's graduation from a police
academy or if the candidate has prior police experience, said
probationary period shall be for one year from the date of employment
or from the date of the successful completion of any police refresher
courses required to be taken as a condition of employment, whichever
shall occur last. Candidates shall be drawn from an eligibility list
established through recognized examination and testing procedures,
interviews and thorough background investigations.
(c) No person shall be appointed or promoted to a command or supervisory
position above patrol officer unless that person shall have
demonstrated an aptitude and the qualifications for such position. In
addition, no person shall be promoted to Chief unless that person has
served as Captain for at least one year; no person shall be promoted to
Captain unless that person has served as Lieutenant for at least one
year; no person shall be promoted to Lieutenant unless that person has
served as Sergeant for at least one year; no person shall be promoted to
Sergeant unless that person has served as Corporal or Patrol Officer for
at least five years; and no person shall be promoted to Corporal unless
that person has served as Patrol Officer for at least five years.
§ 26-2 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 26-3
BAO:621
§ 26-4. Powers and Duties; Compensation. [Ord. No. 2015-25 § 2,
Exh. A]
The members of the Police Department shall have the powers and duties
and shall be subject to the discipline prescribed by law, this Code and other
ordinances of Princeton and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant
hereto. They shall receive such compensation for their services as shall be
lawfully determined by the Mayor and Council from time to time, consistent
with the terms and conditions of any applicable Collective Bargaining
Agreements.
§ 26-5. Removal or Suspension; Reduction in Rank; Fines. [Ord. No.
2015-25 § 2, Exh. A]
(d) Candidates for and members of the Police Department shall comply
with all other qualifications prescribed by law, including but not limited
to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-122.
(e) Every member of the Police Department shall be a resident of the State
of New Jersey while serving in such position, as required by law. New
members shall be residents of the State of New Jersey at the time of
their appointment and thereafter, unless they served in the armed
services of the United States as provided by N.J.S.A. 40A:14-123.1.
(f) No person shall be appointed to the Police Department who is under 21
years of age or who is over 35 years of age, except as otherwise
provided by law.
(a) No permanent member of the Police Department shall be removed or
suspended from or reduced in rank in office, employment or position
therein, or fined, except by action of the Administrator on the grounds
of incapacity, misconduct or disobedience of rules and regulations
established for the government of the Department, and then only upon
a written complaint setting forth the charge or charges against such
member, signed by the person making the charge or charges. Such
complaint shall be filed in the office of the Chief of Police, and a copy
thereof shall be served upon such member, with notice of a designated
hearing thereon by the Administrator, which shall not be less than 10
nor more than 30 days from the date of service of the complaint.
(b) A complaint charging a violation of the internal rules and regulations
established for the conduct of the Department shall be filed no later
than the 45th day after the date on which the person filing the
complaint obtained sufficient information to file the matter upon which
the complaint is based. The forty-five-day time limit shall not apply if an
investigation of a law enforcement officer for a violation of the internal
rules or regulations of the law enforcement unit is included directly or
indirectly within a concurrent investigation of that officer for a violation
of the criminal laws of this State. The forty-five-day limit shall begin on
the day after the disposition of the criminal investigation. The forty-fiveday
requirement of this paragraph for the filing of a complaint against
§ 26-3 PRINCETON CODE § 26-5
BAO:622
an officer shall not apply to a filing of a complaint by a private
individual.
(c) Failure to comply with the foregoing provisions as to service of a
complaint and the time within which a complaint is to be filed shall
require a dismissal of the complaint.
(d) The member against whom a complaint is made shall be given every
reasonable opportunity to make a defense, if any member has or
chooses to make, at and during the hearing on the charges by a hearing
officer designated by the Administrator. The hearing officer shall
conduct the hearing, receive testimony and other evidence, compile a
list of exhibits and make findings and recommendations to the
Administrator. The hearing officer shall file a report containing his or
her findings and recommendations, with copies provided to the charged
member, who will be provided with an opportunity to file exceptions and
present oral argument to the Administrator. The Administrator shall
make the final determination with respect to the charge and the penalty
imposed. The Administrator, may, in his or her discretion, serve as the
hearing officer. Any member who has been tried and convicted upon
any charge or charges may appeal same to the Superior Court, as
provided by law.
(e) Any member of the Police Department may, nevertheless, by writing
signed by the member and filed with the Chief of Police, waive his or her
right to have a written complaint filed and served upon the member and
to have a hearing thereon by the Administrator and consent to the
summary imposition against the member of a specified penalty by the
Chief of Police, as provided by the rules and regulations and
particularly those governing internal affairs. A member's consent to any
summary imposition of penalties shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Administrator. Alternatively, the member may waive the
right to a hearing and may appeal the charges directly to any available
authority specified by law or regulation, or follow any other procedure
recognized by a contract, as permitted by law.
(f) Notwithstanding the above, and to the extent permitted by law, a
member of the Police Department may, pursuant to the Department
rules and regulations and particularly those governing internal affairs,
be suspended with or without out pay pending a hearing, as a result of
charges made against the member, but such hearing, except as
otherwise provided by law, shall be commenced within 30 days after the
service of the copy of the complaint upon the member, in default of
which the charges shall be dismissed and the member returned to duty.
§ 26-5 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 26-5
BAO:623

ARTICLE II
Mutual Aid Agreement for Emergency Police Services
§ 26-6. Preamble. [Ord. No. 2015-25 § 2, Exh. A]
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-156, 40A:14-156.1, 40A:14-156.2, and 40A:14-156.3
authorize municipalities to enter into mutual aid and assistance agreements
for police services in cases of emergencies.
The County of Mercer consists of 12 municipalities, 11 of which have
municipal police or fire departments operating for or within the Township
of East Windsor, the Township of Ewing, the Township of Hamilton, the
Borough of Hightstown, the Township of Hopewell, the Township of
Lawrence, the Borough of Pennington, the Municipality of Princeton
(comprised of the former Township of Princeton and the former Borough
of Princeton), the City of Trenton, the Township of Robbinsville (formerly
the Township of Washington), and the Township of West Windsor, which
regularly interact and provide assistance to each other in police related
emergencies.
Each of the aforementioned municipalities in the County of Mercer wish
to formalize and refine existing practice by entering into mutual aid
agreements.
§ 26-7. Mutual Aid Agreements Established. [Ord. No. 2015-25 § 2,
Exh. A]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-156, N.J.S.A. 40A:14-156.1 et seq., there are
hereby established mutual aid agreements among and between this
municipality and each of the aforementioned municipalities in the County
of Mercer, New Jersey, which shall become effective upon the adoption by
one or more of the aforementioned municipalities (hereinafter referred to
as "participating municipalities") of reciprocal ordinances to provide mutual
aid in police services in case of emergency. This agreement shall apply
whenever this municipality may have an emergency within its boundaries
requiring additional police assistance to protect life and property, and
whenever any of the aforementioned municipalities may experience a
similar emergency.
§ 26-8. Emergency Defined S.O.P. [Ord. No. 2015-25 § 2, Exh. A]
For purposes of this article, the term "emergency" shall be defined to
include situations in which the number of available Police Officers in a
participating municipality is insufficient to meet the public need in a
particular situation and situations where police aid involving special
expertise, training or equipment is required in order to protect public
safety, life, and property or to assist in suppressing a riot or disorder. No
formal declaration of emergency is required to implement the provisions of
the Mutual Aid Agreement.
§ 26-6 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 26-9
BAO:625
§ 26-9. Requests for Assistance. [Ord. No. 2015-25 § 2, Exh. A]
The Chief, Police Director, or acting head of the Police Department or
Mayor, or Chief Executive Officer of a participating municipality, is hereby
authorized to request assistance from the Chief or other head of the Police
Department of any other participating municipality to provide aid in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-156 et seq.
§ 26-10. Provision of Assistance. [Ord. No. 2015-25 § 2, Exh. A]
A participating municipality shall provide police assistance when a valid
request in accordance with the Agreement to supply personnel is made,
to the extent possible without endangering persons or property within the
confines of the providing municipality.
§ 26-11. Powers, Rights, Immunities. [Ord. No. 2015-25 § 2, Exh. A]
The members of the providing municipality's Police Department supplying
aid shall have the same powers, authorities, rights, and immunities as the
members of the police force of the requesting municipality when aid is being
rendered therein. Said members shall also have, while so acting, such rights
and immunities as they may otherwise enjoy in the performance of their
normal duties in the municipality rendering such assistance.
§ 26-12. County Critical Incident Management Plan. [Ord. No.
2015-25 § 2, Exh. A]
These mutual aid agreements established herein by and between the
aforementioned municipalities in the County of Mercer shall further
authorize mutual police aid and assistance under the County Critical
Incident Management Plan as established by the Mercer County Prosecutor
as the Chief Law Enforcement Official in the County. The plan provides
for a response by specially trained regional Emergency Response/Special
Weapons and Tactics Team in the event of certain hostage, barricade,
sniper, high risk armed apprehensions, terrorist, or similar situations
occurring within a municipality within the County of Mercer.
§ 26-13. Benefits, Injury, Death. [Ord. No. 2015-25 § 2, Exh. A]
Members of the police force of the providing municipality suffering injury, or
their legal representatives, if death results while rendering assistance in the
requesting municipality, shall be entitled to all such salary, pension rights,
Workers' Compensation, or other benefits, as they would have accrued if
such injury or death had occurred in the performance of duties in their own
municipality, with such benefits to be the responsibility of the providing
municipality.
§ 26-14. Reimbursement. [Ord. No. 2015-25 § 2, Exh. A]
A municipality receiving police assistance hereunder pursuant to the terms
of the County Critical Incident Management Plan shall not be required to
§ 26-9 PRINCETON CODE § 26-14
BAO:626
directly reimburse the regional team for services so provided. The member
municipalities shall, however, otherwise support the function of the
respective regional response teams by providing the necessary manpower,
equipment, and supplies on an ongoing annual basis pursuant to the terms
of the County Critical Incident Management Plan.
Where emergency police aid is otherwise provided under circumstances
outside of the County Critical Incident Management Plan, reimbursement
shall be pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-156, or such other terms and conditions
for reimbursement specifically agreed to between specific municipalities.
§ 26-15. Federal Emergency Management Agency ("FEMA")
Reimbursement. [Ord. No. 2015-25 § 2, Exh. A]
The municipality receiving emergency police aid (hereinafter referred to
as "Receiving Entity") may seek reimbursement from FEMA for the cost of
the services rendered by the municipality providing the emergency police
aid (hereinafter referred to as "Providing Entity"). Reimbursement paid by
FEMA shall not be contingent on the declaration of an emergency, major
disaster, or fire by the Federal government. Reimbursement provided by
FEMA is subject to the following conditions:
(a) The Receiving Entity must request reimbursement from FEMA in
accordance with the provisions set forth in the FEMA Recovery Policy
RP9523.6 dated November 10, 2012, as may be amended from time to
time.
(b) Reimbursement for "Emergency Work," as that phrase is referenced in
FEMA Recovery Policy RP9523.6, shall include, but is not limited to,
work necessary to meet immediate threats to life, public safety, and
situations described in Section 26-8, "Emergency Defined S.O.P.,"
herein.
(c) Only a Receiving Entity is eligible for FEMA reimbursement as
described herein. The Providing Entity may seek reimbursement from
the Receiving Entity.
(d) The Receiving Entity shall provide FEMA with an executive summary of
the emergency police aid services requested and received, and the
associated costs (e.g., labor, equipment, materials, etc.). Both the
Receiving Entity and the Providing Entity shall keep and maintain
detailed records of the services requested and received. Such records
shall be maintained for at least three years after the emergency police
aid has been rendered.
(e) A Receiving Entity shall submit a copy of the Mutual Aid Agreement to
FEMA with its reimbursement request.
(f) A Receiving Entity shall submit a written and signed certification to
FEMA with its reimbursement request, which shall include:
§ 26-14 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 26-15
BAO:627
§ 26-16. Effective Date. [Ord. No. 2015-25 § 2, Exh. A]
This article shall be effective upon the final passage and publication of
the ordinance authorizing same, according to law, and shall be effective
with respect to this municipality's activities with another participating
municipality, when such other participating municipality has adopted an
ordinance reciprocal to this one, and such ordinance has become effective
in that municipality.
(1) The type and extent of emergency police aid assistance requested
and received;
(2) The labor and equipment rates used to determine the cost of the
emergency police aid; and
(3) A statement that all of the emergency police aid rendered by the
Providing Entity was eligible under the Robert T. Stafford Disaster
Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. §§ 5121-5206) and
applicable FEMA regulations and policies.
§ 26-15 PRINCETON CODE § 26-16
BAO:628
ARTICLE III
Princeton University Police
§ 26-17. Princeton University Police. [Ord. No. 2015-25 § 2, Exh. A]
As authorized by the New Jersey Statutes, and specifically N.J.S.A. 18A:6-4.2
et seq., the Trustees of Princeton University have appointed persons to act
as police officers for Princeton University, a portion of which is located
within the municipality of Princeton. The scope of their power is defined by
N.J.S.A. 18A:6-4.5 and 18A:6-4.7.20
20.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2015-25, codified herein was adopted August 10, 2015.
§ 26-17 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 26-17
BAO:629
Chapter B26A
(RESERVED)
Editor's Note: Former Chapter 26A, Recombinant DNA Research,
previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No.
78-4 and 83-21 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 96-9.
Chapter B27
(RESERVED)
Chapter B27A
CORNER HOUSE BOARD
Editor's Note: Chapter 27A, Corner House Board, to be adopted in
the Princeton Code.
§ 27A-1. The creation of a Corner House Board. [Ord. No. 2014-13;
Ord. No. 2019-3]
There is hereby established a Corner House Board consisting of nine
members and up to two alternate members, as follows:
(a) Seven residents of Princeton, plus up to two alternate members, who
shall also be residents of Princeton;
(b) One member of the Corner House Foundation, ex officio;
(c) One member from the council.
The Foundation shall annually designate its member of the board. The
term of the member from the council shall be for one year. The mayor,
with the advice and consent of council, shall appoint the residentmembers.
On the initial appointment to the board, two residents shall
be appointed for a one-year term, two residents for a two-year term
and three residents for a three-year term. All members of the board
shall serve until their respective successors are appointed and have
qualified. All reappointments and appointments of alternate members
shall be for the term of three years. Members of the board shall
annually select one of its members to serve as the chairperson of the
board. The board shall meet regularly to discharge its duties. The
Corner House Foundation member shall serve in an ex officio capacity
and shall have no voting rights on the board.
Alternate members shall be designated at the time of appointment as
"alternate number 1" and "alternate number 2". Alternate members
may participate in discussions of the proceedings involving the board
but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular
member. Alternates shall be counted for purposes of establishing a
§ 26-17 PRINCETON CODE § 27A-1
BAO:630
§ 27A-2. Corner House Board; Powers and Duties. [Ord. No.
2014-13]
The Corner House Board shall provide recommendations to the council
concerning the operations and administration of Corner House, the
municipal treatment and prevention agency addressing substance abuse
and education programs associated with same. Additionally, the board shall:
§ 27A-3. Corner House Executive Director; Duties. [Ord. No.
2014-13]
quorum for the board. In the event that a choice must be made as to
which alternate member is to vote, alternate number 1 shall vote.
(a) Provide advice to the council concerning the planning, development,
administration and operation of programs and activities in the area of
drug abuse and drug abuse prevention and shall devise and recommend
methods for measuring and reporting upon the effectiveness of ongoing
programs with the Princeton community; and
(b) Help guide the philosophy, policies and procedures of Corner House as
it implements its programs for prevention, education and treatment
involving substance abuse; and
(c) Make recommendations to the council on requests for public funding
for Corner House; and
(d) Review recommendations submitted to the board by the Corner House
executive director regarding the Corner House operating budget; and
(e) Undertake such additional duties and responsibilities as requested by
the council concerning programs for substance abuse prevention,
education and treatment for the Princeton community.
(a) Corner House shall be overseen and administered by the Corner House
executive director. The executive director shall be a department head
and subject to all of the municipality's administrative procedures,
including but not limited to its personnel manual. The executive
director shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of
the council, and shall receive such compensation as shall be prescribed
by the council in the annual salary ordinance. The Corner House
executive director shall, under the supervision and control of the
administrator, do the following:
(1) Study, recommend, administer, implement and enforce personnel,
organizational and policy decisions for Corner House;
(2) Keep the board informed of all matters within the executive
director's jurisdiction by such reports as he/she deems advisable or
as may be requested by the board and administrator and by an
annual report of his or her work for the benefit of the public served
by Corner House;
§ 27A-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 27A-3
BAO:631
Chapter B28
STREETS, SIDEWALKS, BIKE LANES AND SHARED USE
PATHS
Chapter 28 of the Princeton Borough Code, Streets and Sidewalks,
previously codified herein was repealed in entirety by Ord. No. 2018-12.
Prior history includes: R.O. 1964 §§ 73, 13, Ord. Nos. 77-27, 84-38, 88-6,
89-21, 89-22, 91-14, 92-27, 93-14, 2005-02, 2008-09, 2008-31, 2009-07,
2009-23, 2017-17.
See now Princeton Township Code Chapter 19, Streets, Sidewalks, Bike
Lanes and Shared Use Paths.
Chapter B29
SIDEWALK CAFES
§ 29-1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2006-06, § I; Ord. No. 2007-11, § I;
Ord. No. 2019-14]
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words or phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
ADJACENT BUILDING — The building whose principal facade fronts on the
sidewalk where the sidewalk cafe is or is proposed to be located.
PRINCIPAL FACADE — The portion of the facade of a building, which fronts
on a public street.
REQUIRED PEDESTRIAN PASSAGEWAY — An area of sidewalk, parallel
to the principal facade, at least six feet wide between the sidewalk cafe
and the adjacent curb, which area shall be unobstructed by trees, light
poles, trash receptacles, parking meter posts, telephone booths and similar
structures.
RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment actually located
within the adjacent building for which a current retail establishment
inspection certificate has been issued by the board of health and shall
include, by way of example, a restaurant, hotel, coffee shop, tea room,
dining room, cafeteria, luncheonette, soda fountain, sandwich shop, and
delicatessen.
(3) Prepare annually the operating budget for Corner House;
(4) Serve as the Princeton Alcohol and Drug Alliance ("PADA")
coordinator or his or her designee; and
(5) Such additional duties as may be requested of the executive
director either by the Corner House Board or the administrator, or
both.
§ 27A-3 PRINCETON CODE § 29-1
BAO:632
SIDEWALK — The paved surface provided for the exclusive use of
pedestrians and situated between and extending from any building to the
curb of any street, whether private or public property (excluding any
unpaved area).
SIDEWALK CAFE OR CAFE — A retail food establishment (as defined
herein):
§ 29-2. Annual License Required. [Ord. No. 2006-06, § I; Ord. No.
2019-14]
No person, firm, or corporation shall pursue the business or occupation
of selling food or drink in a public place as defined in section 29-1, to be
consumed on the premises in the Municipality of Princeton, until the owner,
lessee, or proprietor shall have first obtained from the Municipal Clerk a
license to carry on or conduct the same and paid to the Municipal Clerk an
annual fee to be determined in the following manner:
Exterior sidewalk cafe seating:
1 to 8 $200
9 to 12 $300
Over 12 not to exceed 24 seats $600
§ 29-3. Initial Application. [Ord. No. 2006-06, § I; Ord. No. 2019-14]
Serving food that has been prepared on the premises to be consumed
by the public at tables located within that more or less rectangular
portion of the sidewalk which lies within the area bounded by the
public street, the principal facade of the adjacent building, and the
imaginary perpendicular lines running from the outer edge of such
principal facade to the public street;
(a)
Containing one row of readily removable tables and chairs not
exceeding six feet in width with temporary railings and/or planters; and
(b)
Unenclosed by fixed walls or ceilings, except for retractable awnings,
umbrellas or other nonpermanent enclosures that in no way present a
safety hazard to or impede pedestrian traffic.
(c)
(a) Each applicant for a sidewalk cafe license shall submit and file an
application with the Municipal Clerk, together with four copies of a cafe
plan (as defined below), and the nonrefundable $250 application review
fee. The application shall set forth:
(1) The name and address of the applicant;
(2) The name and address of the owner of the adjacent building (if
other than the applicant); and
(3) The name and address of the person who has prepared the cafe
plan; and shall be accompanied by the written authorization and
§ 29-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 29-3
BAO:633
§ 29-4. Insurance Required. [Ord. No. 2006-06, § I; Ord. No.
2019-14]
approval of the owner of the adjacent building (if other than the
applicant).
(b) The term cafe plan shall mean a plan setting forth the following
information:
(1) Identification of the adjacent building and all properties
immediately adjacent to such building;
(2) A scaled drawing of the proposed design and location of the
sidewalk cafe, all temporary structures, equipment and apparatus
to be used in connection with its operation, including tables, chairs,
planters, awnings, lighting and electrical outlets (if any), provisions
for the storage of such structures, equipment and apparatus,
proposed signage and the location of any fire hydrant, plug or
standpipe, utility pole, parking meter stanchion, telephone booth,
or other permanent fixture between the adjacent building and the
curb, including a clear indication of the presence of the required
pedestrian passageway. (The plan shall be drawn to scale, but need
not be prepared professionally.) The plan shall demonstrate that
pedestrian traffic along the sidewalk upon which the sidewalk cafe
is proposed to be located will in no way be impeded, and that the
provisions of Section 29-6 of this Chapter will be satisfied.
(3) A certificate of insurance as set forth in Section 29-4 of this
Chapter.
(4) A statement of the seating capacity of the proposed sidewalk cafe
and of the existing retail food establishment actually operated by
the applicant in the adjacent building.
The Municipal Clerk shall approve or disapprove the initial
application or request for modification of the cafe plan within 15
days following its submission after referral of the cafe plan to the
Chief of Police, the Fire Official, Health Officer and the Zoning
Officer for inspection and written recommendation.
In the case of the zoning officer, such recommendation shall include
an inspection of the condition of the sidewalk upon which the
sidewalk cafe is proposed to be located and the adjacent curbing.
(a) The following wording must appear on the insurance certificate:
"The certificate holder (Municipality of Princeton) is included as an
additional insured with respect to losses arising solely from the
operation of the Sidewalk Cafe."
§ 29-3 PRINCETON CODE § 29-4
BAO:634
§ 29-5. Terms of License; Renewals. [Ord. No. 2006-06, § I; Ord. No.
2019-14]
All sidewalk cafe licenses shall be issued for the twelve-month period
commencing April 1 and ending March 31 of the following year. Licenses
may be renewed annually by the filing of an application in accordance with
the provisions of Section 29-3. If the cafe plan is to be modified, a new cafe
plan with a nonrefundable $250 application review fee must accompany the
renewal application. The Municipality may temporarily suspend a sidewalk
cafe license if access to the sidewalk is needed in connection with public
work to be performed in the area.
(b) The following wording may appear on the insurance certificate or the
applicant may provide this statement as a separate signed notarized
agreement:
"The licensee shall indemnify and hold harmless the Municipality of
Princeton and its agents and employees from and against all claims,
damages, losses and expenses, including but not limited to attorney
fees, arising out of the operation of the Sidewalk Cafe, providing that
such claims, damages, losses or expenses (1) are attributable to bodily
injury, sickness, disease or death, or to injury to or destruction of
tangible property, including the loss of use resulting therefrom and (2)
are caused in full or in part by a party indemnified hereunder."
(c) Ten days' written notice of cancellation must be provided to the
Municipality.
(d) Insurance in force must be written by a company licensed to do
business in the State of New Jersey.
(e) Minimum coverage requirements are:
(1) General aggregate - $1,000,000;
(2) Products and completed operation aggregate - $1,000,000;
(3) Personal and advertising injury - $1,000,000;
(4) Each occurrence - $1,000,000;
(5) Fire damage (any one fire) - $50,000;
(6) Medical expense (any one person) - $5,000;
(7) Workmen's compensation - Statutory requirements;
(8) Employers liability - $100,000 (each Accident) $500,000 (Disease -
policy limit) $100,000 (Disease - each employee)
§ 29-4 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 29-6
BAO:635
§ 29-6. Rules, Regulations and Specifications. [Ord. No. 2006-06,
§ I; Ord. No. 2019-14]
A sidewalk cafe authorized and operating pursuant to this Chapter shall
comply with all of the following rules and regulations, and such others as
may be adopted by ordinance of the common council.
(a) The cafe shall be operated and maintained in accordance with the cafe
plan as finally approved, and by the same person who operated and
maintains the abutting retail food establishment.
(b) The placement of commercial grade wood or metal furniture,
apparatus, decoration or appurtenance used in connection with the
operation of the sidewalk cafe in relation to any fire hydrant, plug or
standpipe permanent fixture shall be approved by specific written
authorization of the fire official based upon his review of the cafe plan.
(c) No furniture, apparatus, decoration or appurtenance used in
connection with the operation of the sidewalk cafe shall be located in
such a way as to impede the safe and speedy ingress and egress to or
from any building or structure.
(d) No furniture, apparatus, decoration or appurtenance used in
connection with the operation of the sidewalk cafe shall be located in or
project or protrude into the required pedestrian passageway.
(e) The sidewalk cafe may be separated from the required pedestrian
passageway by a suitable temporary and portable barrier designed for
such or similar use and not exceeding four feet in height, which shall
have been shown on the approved as part of the cafe plan.
(f) Any table service provided at the sidewalk cafe shall be provided by
persons engaged or employed for that purpose and shall be furnished to
seated patrons only. Table service is not required, and retail food
establishments that do not provide table service may operate sidewalk
cafes in which patrons carry their food from inside the premises to
tables located in the sidewalk cafe.
(g) The sidewalk area utilized by the sidewalk cafe shall be kept clean and
free of litter and shall be washed as required. Trash receptacles shall be
provided as required and approved by the Municipality. If no table
service is provide, the trash receptacles shall include those needed for
recycling.
(h) The following types of signs and decorations are prohibited within the
sidewalk cafe and the portable barrier:
(1) Signs painted or lettered on banner type material;
(2) Tent type signs placed on sidewalks;
(3) Moving, fluttering and flapping pennants, flags, balloons and
similar decorations;
§ 29-6 PRINCETON CODE § 29-6
BAO:636
§ 29-7. Alcoholic Beverages - Prohibited. [Ord. No. 2006-06, § I;
Ord. No. 2019-14]
Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as prohibiting the holder of
a license issued under this Chapter, who does not also hold a plenary
retail consumption, plenary retail distribution or club license issued under
Chapter 3 of the "Code of the Township of Princeton, New Jersey, 1968,"
to permit its customers and patrons to consume wine or malt alcoholic
beverages in accordance with N.J.S.A. 2C:33-27.
§ 29-8. Notice of Violation; Failure to Comply. [Ord. No. 2006-06,
§ I; Ord. No. 2019-14]
Upon a determination by the Municipal Clerk that a licensee has violated
one or more of such provisions, the Municipal Clerk shall give written notice
to the licensee to correct such violation within 24 hours of the receipt of
such notice by the licensee. In the event that the licensee fails or refuses
to correct such violation within such period, a license revocation shall
take effect immediately. A revoked license holder shall be subject to daily
penalties if immediate compliance does not occur.
§ 29-9. Appeals. [Ord. No. 2006-06, § I; Ord. No. 2019-14]
Any person aggrieved by any action of the Municipal Clerk, in the denial
or revocation of a sidewalk cafe license, shall have the right to appeal to
the borough administrator. The appeal shall be taken by filing with the
Municipal Clerk, within 10 days after the notice of the action complained of
has been served personally upon the licensee or mailed, postage prepaid,
to the licensee at the address given by the licensee in making application
under section 29-3 herein, a written statement setting forth fully the
grounds for appeal. The Municipal Clerk shall set a time and place of
(4) Signs including logos applied painted or lettered upon umbrellas.
(i) Noise shall be kept at such a level as to comply in all respects with the
provisions of applicable ordinances of the Municipality.
(j) Sidewalk cafes shall be permitted to operate only within a zoning
district in which retail food establishments are permitted by right or
when otherwise authorized under the applicable Land Use Code, and
only from 7:00 a.m. until 10:00 p.m.
(k) Furniture, apparatus, decorations and appurtenances may be secured
in accordance with a sidewalk cafe plan which describes the method for
securing same that is specifically approved by the chief of police and
the fire chief with particular attention being material being used to
create a public hazard.
(l) No food may be prepared in the sidewalk cafe or outside the adjacent
building.
(m) The licensee shall comply with all other ordinances of the Municipality.
§ 29-6 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 29-9
BAO:637
hearing for the appeal, at which time the Municipal Administrator shall
conduct a hearing and affirm, modify or reverse the action appealed from.
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Municipal Administrator may
make an appeal to the common council. Such appeal shall be taken by
filing with the Municipal Clerk within 10 days after notice of the decision
has been made, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds of the
appeal, along with a fee of $25. The Municipal Clerk shall set a time and
place of hearing for the appeal, at which time the common council shall
conduct a hearing and affirm, modify or reverse the decision appealed from.
§ 29-10. Penalties. [Ord. No. 2006-06, § I; Ord. No. 2019-14]
Any person convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter
shall be subject to a fine of at least $200 and not exceeding $500 for each
and every offense in addition to court costs.
Chapter B30
(RESERVED)
Chapter B31
TAXICABS AND OTHER VEHICLES FOR HIRE
§ 29-9 PRINCETON CODE § 29-10
BAO:638
ARTICLE I
In General
§ 31-1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2015-26 § 2, Exh. A]
The purposes of this chapter are to (1) establish uniform standards for the
licensing and operation of taxicabs and limousines within the municipality
of Princeton; (2) protect the safety and welfare of the traveling public;
(3) preserve the safety and order in and about the streets in Princeton;
(4) ensure that the public receives service from qualified companies and
drivers; and (5) discourage deceptive business practices.
§ 31-2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2015-26 § 2, Exh. A]
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
DRIVER — Any person who drives or operates a taxicab or limousine within
this municipality.
LIMOUSINE — Any automobile, vehicle or motor car used in the business
of carrying passengers for hire to provide prearranged passenger transport
at a premium fare on a dedicated, nonscheduled, charter basis that is not
conducted on a regular route and with a seating capacity of not more
than 14 passengers (not including the driver), and as defined by N.J.S.A.
48:16-13, as may be amended.
LIVERY SERVICE — The business of carrying passengers for hire by
limousines.
STREET — Any street, avenue, park, parkway, highway, or other public
place.
TAXICAB — Except as otherwise provided by law, any automobile, vehicle
or motorcar engaged in the business of carrying passengers for hire, which
is held out, announced or advertised to operate or run or which is operated
or run over any streets or public highways of this state, and particularly
accepts and discharges such persons as may offer themselves for
transportation from points or places within or without the state; provided,
however, that nothing herein contained shall include autobuses or jitneys on
designated routes, public deliveries or such public conveyances as are by
law exclusively subject to state and/or federal regulation.
§ 31-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 31-2
BAO:639

ARTICLE II
Taxicabs And Limousines
DIVISION 1
General Regulations and Rates for Taxicabs; Penalties Generally
§ 31-3. Designation of Taxi Stands. [Ord. No. 2015-26 § 2, Exh. A]
The mayor and council shall designate by ordinance such places under
its jurisdiction in the municipality as public stands for taxicabs as they
may deem expedient and proper. The chief of police, in order to meet a
temporary condition or emergency, may temporarily establish other stands
or close existing stands for a period not exceeding seven days or until the
next meeting of the mayor and council, whichever is sooner. The mayor and
council may establish by resolution, other stands or existing stands for a
period not to exceed 30 days in order to meet a temporary condition or
emergency.
§ 31-4. Use of Taxi Stands. [Ord. No. 2015-26 § 2, Exh. A]
Every taxicab, while occupying space on a public stand, shall be
immediately available for hire. As a taxicab shall leave the line or move
forward, the taxicab behind it shall be moved forward, and the driver of
another taxicab seeking a space at the stand shall approach from the rear
of the stand and shall stop as near as possible to the last taxicab in line. The
taxicab that is first in line shall be entitled to the next paying passenger.
Nevertheless, this provision shall not prevent any prospective passenger
from selecting a taxicab other than the one which is the head of the line.
No owner or driver shall leave his or her vehicle unattended or in any
other manner to render such vehicle unready for immediate use while such
vehicle is occupying space within any public taxi stand.
Only a taxicab licensed by Princeton may occupy or deliver a passenger to
a taxi stand in the municipality, or otherwise conduct business from said
stands.
§ 31-5. Duty to Accept Passengers. [Ord. No. 2015-26 § 2, Exh. A]
Upon request, no owner or driver of a taxicab, unless previously engaged,
shall refuse or neglect to carry any law abiding person meeting the terms
and fare for the service to be rendered anywhere within Princeton. No
owner or driver shall refuse service to any person based on race, creed,
color, national origin, ancestry, age, sex, gender identity or expression,
affectional or sexual orientation, marital status, familial status, disability or
nationality, or any other basis in violation of state or federal law.
§ 31-3 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 31-6
BAO:641
§ 31-6. Duty to Inform Passengers of Rates Prior to Trip. [Ord. No.
2015-26 § 2, Exh. A]
The driver of a taxicab shall be required to inform the passenger of the
specific rate to be charged prior to transporting that passenger.
§ 31-7. Riders Other Than Paying Passengers Prohibited. [Ord. No.
2015-26 § 2, Exh. A]
No owner or driver of a taxicab shall permit or allow any person other than
a passenger being transported for hire in or about such taxicab when in
service as a taxicab.
§ 31-8. Deceptive Practices by Taxicab Owners or Drivers. [Ord. No.
2015-26 § 2, Exh. A]
No owner or driver of any taxicab shall induce any person to employ him or
her by knowingly misinforming or misleading any such person, either as to
the time or place of the arrival or departure of any train or as to the location
of any hotel, or public or private place, nor shall any such owner or driver
deceive any person, make false representations to him or her or convey any
passenger to any other place or over any other route than that indicated by
the passenger.
§ 31-9. Delay or Neglect in Responding to Call. [Ord. No. 2015-26
§ 2, Exh. A]
No owner or driver of a taxicab who has accepted an order to call at any
point in the municipality for the purpose of conveying any person to any
other point in the municipality or the surrounding community shall neglect
or unreasonably delay to execute the order.
For the purposes of this article, any order delivered to and accepted by a
person in charge at the garage, office or home of the owner or driver shall
be considered as having been delivered to and accepted by the owner or
driver.
§ 31-10. Display in Taxicab of Card Identifying Owner and Driver
and Specifying Rates; Charges in Excess of Maximum Rates
Prohibited; Display of Electric "Taxi" Sign and Other License
Information. [Ord. No. 2015-26 § 2, Exh. A]
Every taxicab licensed under this article shall carry affixed therein, a card
permanently affixed to the dashboard in the front of the vehicle and to the
rear portion of the front seat of the vehicle and which shall state in a fashion
readily visible and readable by any passenger the name of the owner of the
vehicle, the number of the owner's license and the schedule of charges for
transportation. No owner or driver shall be permitted to charge at a rate in
excess of such maximum rate set forth in this article.
§ 31-6 PRINCETON CODE § 31-10
BAO:642
Every taxicab driver shall also display in a fashion readily visible and
readable by passengers his or her taxicab license.
Every taxicab shall carry, in such position as to be visible from the outside,
an electric sign not less than five inches by nine inches, which shall be
illuminated at night and shall plainly show the word "TAXI" or the owner's
name. The owner shall also cause to be displayed on the outside of the
vehicle's body the owner's taxi license number issued to that vehicle in
legible letters and figures. The owner's taxi license number shall be three
inches in height and located in the center of the rear quarter panels on
the driver and passenger sides and the rear center line of the trunk of the
vehicle. Each taxi shall also display on each rear door of the taxi that the
municipality of Princeton has issued the taxi a taxi license in letters three
inches in height.
§ 31-11. Rate Schedule; Posting of Rates; Issuance of Receipts.
[Ord. No. 2015-26 § 2, Exh. A]
The rates of fare that may be charged by any licensed taxicab driver under
this article shall comply with this section and be in accordance with the taxi
fare zone map on file in the office of the Princeton clerk, said map being
entitled "Map of Taxi Fare Zones in Princeton, Mercer County, New Jersey,"
prepared by Robert V. Kiser, P.E., Princeton Engineer and dated June 2015,
and incorporated herein by reference. Said map shall identify the applicable
taxi fare rates by zone, and shall also include an alphabetized listing of all
the streets in the area. The taxi fare zone map shall specifically cover the
municipality of Princeton and Princeton University. A copy of the taxi fare
zone map shall be made available on Princeton's municipal web site.
In addition, subject to the approval of council, the clerk's office may make
available to the public an informational version of the taxi fare zone map
that may differ in form but shall be identical in content to the taxi fare zone
map on file in the clerk's office.
Every taxicab driver shall carry in his or her vehicle a copy of the
informational version of the taxi fare zone map if one has been made
available by the clerk's office; otherwise, every taxi driver shall carry a
copy of the official taxi fare zone map in his or her vehicle. Copies of
the informational version and official version may be obtained from the
municipal clerk's office for a fee based on the actual cost of reproducing
same.
(a) Rates when originating from designated taxi stand. The rate of fare for
one passenger from a designated taxi stand to any location within the
limits of Princeton shall be based upon which Taxi Fare Zone the
designation is located, as set forth in the taxi fare zone map. Fares from
a designated taxi stand to Zones A through H as described in the taxi
fare zone map shall be as follows:
Zone A $8
§ 31-10 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 31-11
BAO:643
Zone B $10
Zone C $12
Zone D $14
Zone E $15
Zone F $16
Zone G $17
Zone H $18
(b) Rates when originating within Princeton, but not from designated taxi
stand. The rate of fare for one passenger from any location within
Princeton to another location within the limits of Princeton shall be
determined as follows:
(1) In accordance with subsection (a) above, determine first the fare
from the origin to taxi stand and second the fare from the taxi stand
to the designation. Determine which of the two fares is higher and
which is lower.
(2) Add the two fares from subsection (b)(1) above as follows: the
higher of the two fares (full amount) plus lower of the two fares (1/2
of amount) equals the actual fare.
(3) To illustrate the manner in which rates not from a designated taxi
stand shall be determined, the fare from Constitution Hill West to
the Princeton Shopping Center (Harrison Street) shall be $17.
Constitution Hill West is in Zone C and the Princeton Shopping
Center is in Zone B. The fare from the origin to the taxi stand is
$12. The fare from the taxi stand to the destination is $10. The
higher of the two fares $12 plus 1/2 of the lower of the two fares $5
is $17. This amount represents the actual fare from Constitution
Hill West to the Princeton Shopping Center.
(c) Additional Passengers.
Additional charge for each additional passenger to the same destination
within the limits of the municipality, per additional passenger $3.
Rate of fare for two or more passengers traveling to separate
destinations shall be charged in accordance with subsections (a) and
(b) above and based on the farthest destination from origin, plus $6 per
passenger in excess of one.
(d) Multiple Stops.
Additional charge for each stop made before reaching a trip's
destination, when waiting time is less than 15 minutes, per stop $3
(e) Night Rates.
§ 31-11 PRINCETON CODE § 31-11
BAO:644
§ 31-12. Duty to Inform Passengers Requesting Transportation
Outside Municipality that Rates Set Forth Herein do not Apply.
[Ord. No. 2015-26 § 2, Exh. A]
No owner or driver of a taxicab shall accept a passenger for transportation
outside the municipality, unless he or she informs the passenger before
starting that the rates of fare as set forth herein do not apply to
transportation beyond the limits of the municipality.
§ 31-13. Attire Regulation. [Ord. No. 2015-26 § 2, Exh. A]
Each licensed taxicab driver shall be clean and neat in person and fully
dressed while on duty.
§ 31-14. Disorderly Conduct Prohibited. [Ord. No. 2015-26 § 2, Exh.
A]
No taxicab driver shall, while on any street or public place commit any
disorder or use loud, indecent or profane language or annoy or insult
travelers or citizens.
Additional charge for each fare between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m. $2.
(f) Waiting Time. Except as provided above in subsection (d) above, there
shall be no charge for waiting time less than 15 minutes. If waiting time
is 15 minutes or more, then the fee shall be charged at a rate of $10 per
quarter hour, starting from the time waiting commenced. The maximum
fee for waiting time shall be $40 per hour.
(g) Baggage and Oversized Baggage. Excessive baggage, heavy baggage or
trunk luggage shall be assessed a fee of $1 per piece, and said charges
must be agreed upon by both driver and passenger before the taxi trip
takes place.
Rates of fare, both inside and outside the municipality, shall be
displayed at all times on the back of the front seat in each taxicab in
a prominent fashion as to be seen by passengers. The rate schedule to
be displayed shall be furnished and attested by the clerk in accordance
with the foregoing provisions of this section 31-11.
Upon request, every driver of a taxicab is required to provide each
passenger with a receipt indicating the driver's name, fee and
description of the trip.
In the case of any dispute as to the proper fare, such fare shall be
determined pursuant to the dispute resolution procedures set forth in
section 31-17, as may be amended.
§ 31-11 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 31-15
BAO:645
§ 31-15. Smoke Free Environment. [Ord. No. 2015-26 § 2, Exh. A]
The smoking of tobacco shall not be permitted in licensed taxicabs. The
prohibition shall be conspicuously posted in each licensed taxicab.
§ 31-16. General Condition. [Ord. No. 2015-26 § 2, Exh. A]
Each vehicle used as a licensed taxicab shall at all times be safe for the
transportation of passengers, clean, free of debris and in good repair.
§ 31-17. Complaints; Informal Dispute Resolution. [Ord. No.
2015-26 § 2, Exh. A]
§ 31-18. Penalties. [Ord. No. 2015-26 § 2, Exh. A]
Except as provided in section 31-17 above, all violations of this article shall
be adjudicated by the municipal court. Any person violating any provision
of this article shall be subject to the penalties set forth in section 1-6 of
the Code. Repeat offenders, as that term is defined in section 1-6, shall
be subject to the penalties set forth in section 1-6. Any person who shall
operate a taxicab in any street specifically in violation the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 48:16-1 et seq. shall also be guilty of a misdemeanor.
Such penalties shall be in addition to any suspension or termination of a
license as set forth in section 31-33 below.
(a) Any "license standard" violations of the provisions of this article should
be reported to the clerk during normal business hours of the
municipality, or during other hours, to the police department. "License
standard" violations shall consist of overcharging on taxi fares, the
failure to maintain taxicabs in a safe, sanitary and clean manner or the
failure to otherwise provide taxi service to customers in a manner that
is consistent with the provisions of this article.
(b) Upon receipt of a license standard complaint, the clerk shall notify the
licensee of the complaint and afford him or her an opportunity to
respond. The clerk is authorized to mediate any dispute on an informal
basis, and secure payment from the licensee to the customer, without
further proceeding.
(c) If said complaint is not resolved informally as provided in subsection (b)
above, the aggrieved person may file a formal complaint returnable in
municipal court, and violations shall be subject to the penalties set forth
in section 31-18 below. Complaints for non-license standard violations
of this article shall be adjudicated in municipal court.
(d) Every taxicab driver shall conspicuously post in his or her vehicle a
copy of a notice, provided by the clerk's office, which advises
passengers of the applicable procedures for reporting violations of this
article.
§ 31-15 PRINCETON CODE § 31-18
BAO:646
DIVISION 2
Taxicab and Limousine Licenses
§ 31-19. Required. [Ord. No. 2015-26 § 2, Exh. A]
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any taxicab or limousine or
cause any taxicab or limousine to be operated within the municipality unless
both the vehicle and the driver thereof are licensed by the municipality as
herein required or otherwise required by law.
§ 31-20. Types. [Ord. No. 2015-26 § 2, Exh. A]
There are hereby established three types of licenses under this division as
follows:
§ 31-21. Transferability and Leasing Generally. [Ord. No. 2015-26
§ 2, Exh. A]
(a) Taxicab Owner's License, which shall entitle the vehicle therein listed
and described to be used as a taxicab and operated by a driver duly
licensed hereunder.
(b) Limousine Owner's License, which shall entitle the vehicle therein
listed and described to be used as a limousine and operated by a driver
duly qualified pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:16-22.3a. A limousine owner shall
only be required to obtain a license from Princeton if the owner has his
or her principal place of business in Princeton.
(c) Taxicab Driver's License, which shall entitle the person named therein
to operate within this municipality any taxicab duly licensed hereunder.
Such license may only be issued in the name of an individual and not in
the name of a business entity.
Limousine operators and drivers shall not be required to obtain a
limousine driver's license from Princeton; limousine operators and
drivers shall be qualified by the Chief Administrator of the New Jersey
Motor Vehicle Commission under N.J.S.A. 48:16-22.3a.
(a) Taxicab drivers' licenses shall not be transferable.
(b) Taxicab owner's licenses shall not be transferable without the consent
of the municipal clerk or the clerk's designee.
(c) Taxicab owner's licenses may not be leased.
(d) The claimants to a disputed license shall be obligated to reimburse the
municipality for any legal fees the municipality may incur in connection
with said dispute.
§ 31-19 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 31-22
BAO:647
§ 31-22. Application for Taxicab or Limousine Owner's License;
Contents; Insurance. [Ord. No. 2015-26 § 2, Exh. A]
Any person desiring to obtain a license for the operation of a taxicab or
limousine shall make a separate application in writing to the municipal
clerk for the granting of a license for each vehicle, referred to as either a
taxicab owner's license or limousine owner's license. Applications shall be
made upon forms as may be required by the clerk, and shall contain or be
accompanied by the following information:
(a) For a taxicab owner's license.
(1) Owner's name, permanent address and telephone number. Every
applicant for a license must be at least 18 years of age.
(2) If the application is made for a business entity, the name and
address of said business entity along with the names of its partners
or officers and directors, its registered office and agent and title of
the individual completing the application.
(3) Proof that the owner's compliance with the minimum insurance
requirements, in accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:16-3 and 48:16-4, as
may be amended.
a. The owner shall have filed with the clerk an insurance policy
which shall be issued by an admitted insurance company duly
licensed to transact business under the insurance laws of the
State of New Jersey or a company registered to do business in
the State of New Jersey, the policy providing for not less than
$35,000 of motor vehicle liability insurance coverage or the
amount of motor vehicle liability insurance coverage required
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:6B-1, whichever is greater, to satisfy all
claims for bodily injury, death or property damages of any
person resulting from, or on account of, an accident by reason
of the ownership, operation, maintenance or use of such
taxicab upon any public street. Additionally, such operation
shall be permitted only so long as the insurance policy remains
in force to the full and collectible amount of a minimum of
$35,000. Nothing herein shall prohibit an owner from
obtaining any additional amount of motor vehicle liability
insurance coverage from a company licensed outside the State
of New Jersey. Said insurance policy shall provide for the
payment of any final judgment recovered by any person on
account of the ownership, maintenance, or use of the taxicab
or any fault in respect thereto, and shall be for the benefit of
every person suffering loss, damage or injury as aforesaid.
b. If the owner seeks to operate more than one taxicab, he or she
may file with the clerk, in lieu of the policy required in
subsection 31-22(a)(3)a above, a bond or insurance policy of a
company duly licensed to transact business under the
insurance laws of this state, in the sum of $50,000, which shall
§ 31-22 PRINCETON CODE § 31-22
BAO:648
be a blanket insurance covering all taxicabs operated by such
owner which shall provide for the payment of any final
judgment recovered by any person on account of the
ownership, maintenance and use of any such taxicabs or any
fault in respect thereto, and shall be for the benefit of every
person suffering loss, damage or injury as aforesaid.
(4) Power of attorney. The owner shall execute and deliver to the clerk
a power of attorney wherein and whereby the owner shall appoint
the Princeton's chief financial officer his or her true and lawful
attorney for the purpose of acknowledging service of any process
out of a court of competent jurisdiction to be served against the
insured by virtue of the indemnity granted under the insurance
policy or bond filed.
(5) Make, model, vehicle identification number and license plate
number of the taxicab sought to be licensed.
(6) A certificate of ownership relating to the taxicab sought to be
licensed.
(7) A signed statement indicating that the applicant agrees to activate
his or her license within two licensing cycles of the same, and that
his or her failure to do so may result in revocation of the license as
set forth in subsection 31-25(d) below.
(8) The fee set forth in section 31-29 hereunder.
(b) For a limousine owner's license.
(1) Owner's name, permanent address and telephone number.
(2) If the application is made for a business entity, the name and
address of said business entity along with the names of its partners
or officers and directors, its registered office and agent and title of
the individual completing the application.
(3) Proof of the owner's compliance with the minimum insurance
requirements. Each owner shall file an insurance policy of a
company duly licensed to transact business under the insurance
laws of the State of New Jersey in a minimum sum of $1,500,000
against loss by reason of the liability imposed by law upon every
limousine or livery service owner for damages on account of bodily
injury or death suffered by any person as the result of an accident
occurring by reason of the ownership, maintenance or use of the
limousine or livery service upon any public street. Additionally,
such operation shall be permitted only so long as the insurance
policy shall remain in force to the full and collectible amount of a
minimum of $1,500,000. Said insurance policy shall provide for the
payment of any final judgment recovered by any person on account
of the ownership, maintenance and use of such limousine or livery
§ 31-22 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 31-22
BAO:649
§ 31-23. Inspection of Taxicabs Prerequisite to Issuance of License.
[Ord. No. 2015-26 § 2, Exh. A]
Each vehicle to be used as a taxicab shall be inspected prior to issuance of
a license therefor by the Princeton police department. The clerk may refuse
to issue a license if an inspection reveals that any vehicle so used is unsafe,
unclean or otherwise unsuitable for the transportation of passengers.
§ 31-24. Inspection of Limousines. [Ord. No. 2015-26 § 2, Exh. A]
A vehicle licensed as a limousine hereunder shall be equipped as required
by the Director of the Motor Vehicle Commission in the Department of
Transportation, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:16-22.1, and its condition shall be
subject to examination thereof under N.J.S.A. 48:16-22.2.
§ 31-25. Receipt of Application for Taxicab or Limousine Owner's
License; Decision to Grant or Deny License; Issuance of License.
[Ord. No. 2015-26 § 2, Exh. A]
service on any fault in respect thereto and shall be for the benefit
of every person suffering loss, damage or injury as aforesaid.
(4) Proof of filing of power of attorney with the Motor Vehicle
Commission. The owner of the limousine shall execute and deliver
to the Motor Vehicle Commission, concurrently with the filing of a
policy required above in subsection 31-22(b)(3), a power of
attorney, wherein and whereby the owner shall appoint the
Director of the Motor Vehicle Commission his or her true and lawful
attorney for the purpose of acknowledging service of any process
out of a court of competent jurisdiction to be served against the
insured by virtue of the indemnity granted under the insurance
policy filed.
(5) Make, model, vehicle identification number and license plate
number of the limousines sought to be licensed.
(6) A certificate of ownership relating to the limousines sought to be
licensed.
(7) The fee set forth in section 31-29 hereunder.
(a) For taxicab owner's license.
(1) Following the filing of a complete application and payment of the
license fee as set forth in section 31-29, the clerk shall forward the
application to the chief of police, who shall, as soon as practicable
but no later than within 30 days investigate the statements made in
the application and concerning the vehicle, and inspect the vehicle
in accordance with section 31-23 above. Where sufficient cause is
shown therefor, the chief of police shall have such additional time
as may be reasonably necessary to make the investigation and
inspection.
§ 31-22 PRINCETON CODE § 31-25
BAO:650
§ 31-26. Application for Taxicab Driver's License; Contents. [Ord.
No. 2015-26 § 2, Exh. A]
Any person desiring to obtain a taxicab driver's license shall make an
application in writing to the municipal clerk. Applications shall be made
(2) Upon filing of the required insurance policy or bond, the clerk shall
issue a certificate in duplicate showing that the owner has
complied with the insurance or bonding and power of attorney
requirements set forth above. The certificate shall recite the name
of the insurance company, the number and date of expiration of the
policy or bond, a description of the vehicle insured thereunder, and
the registration number of the same. The owner shall file the
duplicate certificate with the New Jersey Motor Vehicle
Commission before the clerk may issue a license. The original
certificate must be posted in a conspicuous place in the taxicab.
(3) If, as a result of the above-required investigation and inspection,
the veracity of the contents of the application and condition of the
vehicle are found to be satisfactory, the chief of police shall endorse
on such application his or her approval and return the application
to the clerk, who shall issue the license. If, as a result of such
investigation and inspection, the veracity of the contents of the
application and/or condition of the vehicle is found to be
unsatisfactory, the chief of police shall endorse on such application
his or her disapproval and the reasons therefor and return the
application to the clerk.
(b) For limousine owner's license.
(1) Following the filing of a complete application and payment of the
license fee as set forth in section 31-29, the clerk shall issue in
duplicate a license to operate showing that the applicant has
complied with the terms and provisions of this article.
(2) The license shall recite the name of the insurance company, the
number and date of expiration of the policy, a description of every
limousine insured thereunder and the registration number of same.
(3) The applicant shall file the duplicate license with the New Jersey
Motor Vehicle Commission before any such car is registered as a
limousine.
(c) A license, when issued, shall in no way be construed so as to permit an
owner or operator to drive a taxicab or a limousine without a taxicab or
livery driver's license, or in any manner otherwise required by law.
(d) A taxicab license which has not been activated within two licensing
cycles from the date of issuance may be revoked pursuant to section
31-33 hereunder. For the purposes of this section, a licensing cycle shall
be defined as the period from date of issuance until the 15th day of April
of the following year.
§ 31-25 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 31-26
BAO:651
upon forms to be furnished by the clerk, and shall contain or be
accompanied by the following information:
§ 31-27. Examination of Applicant for Taxicab Driver's License
Prerequisite to Issuance of License. [Ord. No. 2015-26 § 2, Exh. A]
Each applicant for a taxicab driver's license shall demonstrate adequate
knowledge of various street locations in the municipality of Princeton,
through an oral examination which shall be approved by the clerk, in
consultation with the chief of police. The oral examination shall be
administered by an appropriate municipal official to be designated by the
clerk.
The applicant may use a street map during the oral examination, for
identification of street locations.
§ 31-28. Receipt of Application for Taxicab Driver's License;
Decision to Grant or Deny License; Issuance of License. [Ord. No.
2015-26 § 2, Exh. A]
(a) Applicant's name, permanent address and telephone number Every
applicant for a license shall be at least 18 years of age.
(b) Name of the licensed taxicab owner for whom the applicant seeks to
operate or drive a taxicab.
(c) A copy of the applicant's driver's license. Applicant must possess a valid
driver's license issued by the States of New Jersey or New York, or
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(d) A signed statement that the applicant is able to read and write the
English language.
(e) Consent as may be necessary for the municipality to complete a
criminal history record background check on the applicant. The
applicant must attest that he has not been convicted of any of the
disqualifying crimes as set forth in N.J.S.A. 48:16-3b., as may be
amended. The cost for the criminal history record background check
shall be borne by the applicant.
(f) Consent as may be necessary for the municipality to obtain the
applicant's driver history abstract. The applicant must attest that, for a
period of three years prior to the date of application, there has been no
conviction for reckless driving, driving while intoxicated, leaving the
scene of an accident or speeding over 30 miles per hour above the
speed limit and that at the time of application, the applicant has no
more than eight New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission points on his or
her driving record, or the equivalent if licensed in New York or
Pennsylvania. The cost for the driver history abstract shall be borne by
the applicant.
(g) Three identification photographs taken by the police department.
§ 31-26 PRINCETON CODE § 31-28
BAO:652
§ 31-29. Term; Fees. [Ord. No. 2015-26 § 2, Exh. A]
(a) Following the filing of a complete application and payment of the
license fee as set forth in section 31-29, the clerk shall forward the
application to the chief of police, who shall, as soon as practicable but
no later than within 30 days, investigate the statements made in the
application and arrange for a criminal history record background check
and driver history abstract to be conducted. Where sufficient cause is
shown therefor, the chief of police shall have such additional time as
may be reasonably necessary to conduct the investigation, background
check and driver history. During the initial 30 days, the clerk shall
arrange for the applicant's oral examination to be administered.
(b) If the results of the investigation, background check, driver history and
oral examination are found to be satisfactory, the chief of police shall
endorse on such application his or her approval and return the
application to the clerk, who shall issue the license. If the results of the
investigation, background check, driver history or oral examination are
found to be unsatisfactory, the chief of police shall endorse on such
application his or her disapproval and the reasons therefor and return
the application to the clerk. An applicant who is denied a license shall
have the right of appeal to the chief of police and the council pursuant
to section 31-33 below.
(c) The following shall disqualify an applicant from receipt of a taxicab
driver's license:
(1) Criminal history record background check results which reveal that
the applicant has been convicted of any of the disqualifying crimes
as set forth in N.J.S.A. 48:16-3b., as may be amended; or
(2) Driver history abstract results which reveal that: the applicant has
been convicted of reckless driving, driving while intoxicated,
leaving the scene of an accident or speeding over 30 miles per hour
above the speed limit within three years of the date of the
application, in New Jersey or the equivalent in any other
jurisdiction; or at the time of application, the applicant has more
than eight New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission points on his or
her driving record, or the equivalent if licensed in New York or
Pennsylvania.
(d) Except as otherwise provided herein, each taxicab driver's license,
when duly issued, shall remain in full force and effect while the licensee
shall remain in the employ of the owner who may have sponsored the
application of such licensee, and upon the termination of such
employment, such license shall become null and void.
(a) Taxicab Licenses.
§ 31-28 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 31-29
BAO:653
§ 31-30. Drivers to have License in Possession. [Ord. No. 2015-26
§ 2, Exh. A]
Every driver or operator, when in charge of a motor vehicle licensed under
this division, shall have in his or her immediate possession a valid taxicab
or limousine driver's license.
§ 31-31. Maximum Number of Licensed Taxicabs and Limousines.
[Ord. No. 2015-26 § 2, Exh. A]
The number of taxicab licenses issued and outstanding at any one time shall
not exceed 28 active licenses. There shall be no limit on the number of
limousine licenses issued and outstanding at any one time.
§ 31-32. Right to Inspect Licensed Vehicles. [Ord. No. 2015-26 § 2,
Exh. A]
Except as may be prohibited by law, the police department shall have the
right at any time to inspect any licensed vehicle for compliance with this
article and applicable law.
§ 31-33. Suspension or Revocation of Taxicab Licenses; Appeal of
Denial of License. [Ord. No. 2015-26 § 2, Exh. A]
(1) Term. Except as otherwise specifically required, all taxicab licenses
hereunder shall be good and valid from the date of issue until the
15th day of April next after granting same.
(2) Fees. The fee to be paid for each taxicab owner's license shall be
the sum of $50. The fee to be paid for each taxicab driver's license,
when issued to the holder of a taxicab owner's license, shall be the
sum of $15. The fee to be paid for all other taxicab driver's licenses
shall be the sum of $25 for each license.
(b) Limousine Licenses.
(1) Term. Except as otherwise specifically required, all limousine
licenses hereunder shall be good and valid from the date of issue
and so long as the insurance policy required hereinabove shall
remain in force to the full and collectible amount of $1,500,000.
(2) Fees. The fee to be paid for each limousine owner's license shall be
the sum of $20 and the fee for additional limousines covered under
the same insurance policy shall be an additional $10 per additional
limousine.
(a) Grounds and Hearings.
(1) Any taxicab owner's or driver's license may be suspended for not
more than five days by the chief of police in the case of emergency.
§ 31-29 PRINCETON CODE § 31-33
BAO:654
(2) A taxicab owner's license may be suspended by the chief of police,
for such reasonable time as may be necessary, if an inspection by
the police department reveals that the taxicab is unsafe, unclean or
otherwise unsuitable for the transportation of passengers. The
taxicab owner shall be entitled to restoration of said license only
upon demonstration that the taxicab is no longer unsafe, unclean or
unsuitable for the transportation of passengers.
(3) A taxicab owner's or driver's license may be revoked by the chief of
police for a violation of any provision of this article or for other
good cause shown.
(4) Notice of suspension or revocation shall be personally
communicated to the licensee. If a hearing is requested by a
licensee, the licensee shall be provided with a notice of the hearing
before the chief of police or his designee. The notice shall be in
writing, setting forth the grounds for the suspension or revocation,
and the time and place of the hearing. The notice shall be served
personally upon the licensee or mailed postage prepaid to the
licensee's address as given by the licensee in making the
application, at least five days prior to the date set for the hearing,
and no more than five days after receipt by the chief of police or his
designee of the written request for a hearing.
(b) Appeals. Any person denied an application for a license, or any person
whose license has been suspended or revoked, shall have the right to
appeal to the mayor and council. The mayor and council shall not hear
any appeal unless the applicant has first made appeal to the chief of
police. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the clerk, within 14
days after notice of the action complained of has been mailed to such
person's last known address, a written statement setting forth fully the
grounds for a hearing on such appeal. The mayor and council shall set a
time and place for hearing the appeal and a notice of the hearing shall
be given to the applicant. The decision of the mayor and council on the
appeal shall be final and conclusive.
§ 31-33 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 31-33
BAO:655

ARTICLE III
Valet Parking
§ 31-34. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2016-15 Exh. A]
The mayor and council find and declare as follows:
§ 31-35. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2016-15 Exh. A]
For the purposes of this article the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
Ramping. Use of the valet parking service area to allow customers to enter
or exit a vehicle and turn it over to or retrieve it from valet parking operator
employees. Ramping shall only be permitted and operated in a public rightof-
way specifically authorized for same by the mayor and council under
Section 31-36 below.
Valet parking operator; operator. Any person, partnership, corporation or
any other type of entity engaged in the business of parking automobiles
for a fixed period of time for which it charges a fare or price agreed upon
in advance between the operator and the customer. Valet parking services
operated by an establishment such as a hotel or restaurant on private
property as a courtesy to its customers is excluded from this definition.
Valet parking service area. The public on-street right-of-way to be utilized
for the valet parking service.
Wage theft. Having been found guilty, liable or responsible in any judicial
or administrative proceeding of committing a violation of the Federal Fair
Labor Standards Act of 1938, 29 U.S.C.A. § 201 et seq., the New Jersey
Wage and Hour Law, N.J.S.A. 34:11-56a. et seq., the New Jersey State Wage
Payment Law, N.J.S.A. 34:11-4.1 et seq. or N.J.S.A. 2C:40A-2 (violation of
contract to pay employees).
(a) The various cultural, social and educational activities and restaurants
available in Princeton's downtown business district attract significant
numbers of vehicular traffic and create an increased demand for
parking convenient to the locations offering such activities especially
on weekend evenings.
(b) The municipality's designation of one or more valet parking service
areas at appropriate location(s) under its jurisdiction will increase
available parking options for visitors during these times of increased
demand for parking.
(c) The regulation of persons providing valet parking services through use
of a valet parking service area will promote the safe and efficient
operation of a valet parking service, and ensure safety for patrons and
accountability for the licensed persons.
§ 31-34 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 31-36
BAO:657
§ 31-36. Valet Parking Service Areas — Designation. [Ord. No.
2016-15 Exh. A]
The mayor and council may, in their discretion, designate by ordinance such
places under their jurisdiction in the municipality as areas which can be
used for the drop-off and pick-up of vehicles by valet parking operators, as
they may deem expedient and proper.
The chief of police, in order to meet a temporary condition or emergency,
may temporarily relocate an existing valet service parking area for a period
not exceeding seven days or until the next meeting of the mayor and
council, whichever is sooner. The mayor and council may relocate a valet
parking service area by resolution for such period of time as may be
necessary to meet the temporary condition or emergency.
§ 31-37. Duty to Accept Customers upon Request. [Ord. No. 2016-15
Exh. A]
Except as may be required or authorized by law or ordinance, no valet
parking operator licensed under this article shall refuse to accept a
customer and a customer shall be serviced on a first-come, first-serve
basis. No licensed operator shall refuse service to any customer based on
race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry, age, sex, gender identity or
expression, affectional or sexual orientation, marital status, familial status,
disability or nationality, or any other basis in violation of state or federal
law.
§ 31-38. License Required. [Ord. No. 2016-15 Exh. A]
It shall be unlawful for a valet parking operator to conduct its business
within a municipal right-of-way without first having obtained a license
therefor from the mayor and council as provided in this article.
§ 31-39. Transferability, Generally. [Ord. No. 2016-15 Exh. A]
A valet parking operator license shall not be transferable.
§ 31-40. Application for Valet Parking Operator License;
Qualifications. [Ord. No. 2016-15 Exh. A]
In the event the mayor and council have designated one or more places to
serve as valet parking service area(s), then the mayor and council may issue
no more than one license per valet parking service area for the operation
of a valet parking service, through the solicitation of competitive bids or
informal proposals, as may be required by and in accordance with the Local
Public Contracts Law. The issuance of any valet parking operator license
for use of a valet parking service area shall comply with the minimum
requirements set forth in this article, and shall also be in accordance with
any additional terms and conditions as may be set forth by the mayor and
council.
§ 31-36 PRINCETON CODE § 31-40
BAO:658
The applicant shall give such information as may be deemed by the mayor
and council as requisite to determine the fitness of the applicant to conduct
the business. Every applicant for a license must be at least 18 years of age
and shall provide the following information at a minimum:
(a) Name, address and telephone number of the business or person(s) on
whose behalf the valet parking operator license is sought (referred to in
this section as "applicant").
(b) A description of the location(s) of where the valet parking services will
take place, including proof that it has made arrangements to use
private property for the parking of customer vehicles, and that no
public parking lots or streets will be used in connection with the
parking of vehicles.
(c) A copy of the driver's license for each of the applicant's employees who
will be parking vehicles on behalf of the applicant. All such individuals
shall be licensed in the States of New Jersey or New York, or
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(d) A statement that none of the applicant's employees who will be parking
vehicles have been convicted of reckless driving, driving while
intoxicated, leaving the scene of an accident or speeding over 30 miles
per hour above the speed limit. No employee who will park vehicles
shall have more than eight New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission
points on his or her driving record, or the equivalent if licensed in New
York or Pennsylvania.
The applicant shall either provide proof that it has obtained driver
history abstracts required herein no more than one year prior to the
commencement of the service for the municipality, or provide consent
as may be necessary, for the Chief of Police to obtain driver history
abstracts, in accordance with New Jersey law. The cost for obtaining
driver history abstracts shall be borne by the applicant.
Licensed operators shall be responsible for complying with this
subsection (e) for new employees hired after a license is initially issued
but during the license term.
(e) Certificate(s) of insurance evidencing the applicant's compliance with
the following minimum insurance requirements:
(1) A valet parking operator shall be required to maintain, during the
term of its license, commercial general liability insurance which
shall name Princeton, and each of its employees, officers, agents,
servants, and consultants as additional insured.
(2) The commercial liability insurance shall include contractual
liability insurance and shall provide for a minimum combined single
limit of $1,000,000 for bodily injury and/or property damage per
accident and per occurrence. In addition, the commercial general
liability insurance shall include garage keeper's liability insurance
§ 31-40 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 31-40
BAO:659
§ 31-41. Review and Issuance of Licenses. [Ord. No. 2016-15 Exh. A]
Completed applications shall be forwarded to such municipal departments
as may be necessary to ensure compliance with this article and other
provisions of this Code, and to conduct such investigations of the
application, including but not limited to driver history abstracts as may be
required. Licenses shall be granted if in compliance with this article and
other applicable provisions of this Code. Licenses shall be issued or denied
by the clerk's office within 30 days of receipt of said completed application,
except that where sufficient cause is shown therefor, the municipality shall
have such additional time as may be reasonably necessary to conduct its
review and investigation.
Copies of licenses shall be kept at the valet parking service area at all times
in operation and shall be presented upon request.
§ 31-42. Term. [Ord. No. 2016-15 Exh. A]
Licenses issued under this article shall be good and valid for one year from
the date of issuance, unless a shorter term is mutually agreed upon between
the valet parking operator and municipality.
The term shall be renewable for such additional one-year terms as may
be authorized under the terms of the contract between the valet parking
operator and municipality.
§ 31-43. Suspension or Revocation. [Ord. No. 2016-15 Exh. A]
Any license issued pursuant to this article may be permanently revoked or
suspended at any time for any violation of law (including but not limited to
providing coverage for vehicles under the control of the operator
within a minimum of $500,000.
(3) The operator shall maintain worker's compensation and employer's
liability insurance in accordance with the requirements of the laws
of the State of New Jersey and all other applicable laws and
regulations.
(4) The operator shall maintain comprehensive automobile liability
insurance covering the operator for claims arising from all owned,
hired and non-owned vehicles with a combined single limit not less
than $1,000,000 for bodily injury and/or property damage each
accident.
(5) The operator's certificate(s) of insurance shall evidence the
coverage required above, and shall be updated as necessary to
ensure proof of compliance. The certificate(s) shall evidence that
the municipality shall be given at least 30 days' prior written notice
of any intention not to renew any of the insurance required herein
or of any intention to cancel or materially change such coverage, or
any reduction in such insurance coverage.
§ 31-40 PRINCETON CODE § 31-43
BAO:660
wage theft laws), any provision of this article or for other good cause shown,
by the mayor and council after notice and an opportunity for a hearing.
§ 31-44. General Regulations Applicable to Operation of Valet
Service. [Ord. No. 2016-15 Exh. A]
The following general requirements shall govern the operation of a valet
parking service under a license herein authorized:
(a) The operator's license shall be specifically limited to the valet parking
service area and immediately adjacent sidewalk shown on a site plan
approved by the municipality that shall be attached to and made part of
the license.
(b) Mobile stands, chairs, umbrellas, key boxes and any other objects
necessary for the operation of the valet parking service shall be
maintained on the immediately adjacent sidewalk with a clean and
attractive appearance and shall be in good repair at all times and
removed at the close of business each day. No such objects shall be
attached, chained or in any manner affixed to any tree, post, sign or any
other fixture, curb or sidewalk in the authorized area. The base of the
mobile stand shall not exceed two feet by two feet in size. Any other
objects that may be used shall be approved by the municipality and
shall be shown on the site plan identified in subsection 31-44(a) above.
(c) The sidewalk area covered by the license shall be maintained in a neat
and orderly appearance at all times and the area shall be cleared of all
debris as necessary during the day, and again at the close of business
each day.
(d) The smoking of tobacco shall not be permitted in the sidewalk area
covered by the license or valet parking service area during the
operation of the valet parking service for purposes of protecting
customers and individuals operating the valet parking service.
(e) The license covers only the pedestrian and public right-of-way
authorized thereby. Valet parking services and objects that may be
necessary for the operation located on private property shall be
governed by other applicable laws, regulations and ordinances.
(f) The licensed operator shall be permitted to use up to two signs located
on the sidewalk adjacent to the valet parking service area, each not
exceeding four square feet in area and to be affixed to the valet parking
service stand. Said sign(s) shall identify the business name, indicate
that "valet parking" is offered and set forth the pricing.
(g) The licensed operator shall provide claim tickets to customers
identifying the operator's name, correspondence address and a phone
number for questions/complaints.
(h) The licensed operator shall maintain a key control booth on the
sidewalk adjacent to the valet parking service area until all vehicles
§ 31-43 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 31-44
BAO:661
§ 31-45. Compliance with State Laws and Regulations and
Ordinances; Wage Theft. [Ord. No. 2016-15 Exh. A]
have been claimed, or shall have a twenty-four-hour phone number for
after-hours vehicle pick up information.
(i) The public on-street right-of-way (valet parking service area) shall only
be used for purposes of ramping of vehicles. No vehicles shall be stored
in this area. A vehicle will be considered stored if it remains in this area
for more than 10 minutes. This area shall not be blocked by any type of
sign, nor shall it be cordoned off by any type of signage, rope or barrier
of any kind.
(j) Employees of the licensed operator who operate motor vehicles shall
have in their possession a valid driver's license in good standing and
shall abide by this article, and all traffic safety laws, regulations and
ordinances.
(k) Employees of the licensed operator shall be in similar uniforms and
wear on their uniforms name tags identifying their names.
(l) Employees of the licensed operator shall perform their duties in a
courteous and professional manner.
(m) In the event of an emergency, the Chief of Police may direct the
immediate removal or relocation of all or parts of the valet parking
service operation as may be necessary to respond to the emergency,
including but not limited to the directing of traffic in and around the
valet parking service area.
(n) Under no circumstances shall Princeton or any of its employees,
officers, agents, servants, or consultants be deemed responsible or
liable in any way for any damage or loss of any kind resulting from
actions which Princeton or its employees, officers, agents, servants or
consultants may take in order to enforce this article, including but not
limited to the removal of the operator's objects from the pedestrian or
public right-of-way in the case of emergencies or temporary relocation
of a valet parking service area.
(a) Nothing in this article shall be construed to relieve a licensed operator
and its employees from compliance with any applicable federal and
state law or regulation and it shall be the responsibility of each licensed
operator and employee under this article to comply with all such federal
and state laws and regulations, including without limitation state motor
vehicle laws, federal and state wage and hour laws and state workers'
compensation laws.
(b) The licensed operator and its employees shall also comply with any
other applicable ordinances and provisions of this Code pertaining to
the health and economic welfare of employees, as may be adopted from
time to time.
§ 31-44 PRINCETON CODE § 31-46
BAO:662
§ 31-46. Penalties. [Ord. No. 2016-15 Exh. A]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article upon conviction
thereof shall be subject to the penalties set forth in Section 1-6 of the Code.
Repeat offenders, as that term is defined in Section 1-6, shall be subject to
the penalties set forth in Section 1-6.
§ 31-46 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 31-46
BAO:663
Chapter B32
TRAILERS AND CAMP CARS
For state law as to authority of borough to license and regulate trailers and
trailer camps, see R.S., § 40: 52-1. As to Uniform Standards Code for Mobile
Homes Act, see R.S., § 52:27D-25.1 et seq.
As to motor vehicles and traffic generally, see ch. 19 of this Code.
§ 32-1. "Trailer or Camp Car" Defined. [R.O. 1964, § 85.1]
For the purposes of this chapter, a "trailer or camp car" is defined to be any
vehicle used or intended to be used as a conveyance upon public streets or
highways and duly licensed as such, including self propelled and non-self
propelled vehicles, so designed and constructed or reconstructed or added
to by means of accessories in such manner as to permit the occupancy
thereof as temporary dwellings or sleeping places for one or more persons,
and having no foundation other than wheels, jacks or skirtings, so arranged
as to be integral with or portable by such trailer or camp car.
§ 32-2. Restrictions as to Parking on Streets or Premises. [R.O.
1964, § 85.2]
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any trailer or camp car on any
street in the borough or on any premises within the limits of the borough,
except in conformity with the traffic laws or ordinances of the borough, and
under no circumstances for a longer period than two hours; provided, that
such time limit shall not apply to a trailer or camp car undergoing repairs
in a recognized public garage or automobile repair shop, nor where such
trailer or camp car is placed in dead storage on private property.
§ 32-3. Prohibition Against Use as Dwelling or Sleeping Place. [R.O.
1964, § 85.3]
No trailer or camp car, whether properly parked on a public street or on
private property, undergoing repairs or in dead storage, shall be used by
any person as a dwelling or sleeping place.
Chapter B33
(RESERVED)
Former Chapter 33, Trees and Shrubs, previously codified herein
and containing portions of R.O. 4964 §§ 65.1 - 65.14 and Ordinance
Nos. 5-12-64, 97-9, 2006-03, 2008-08 and 2014-04 were repealed in
entirety by Ord. No. 2014-26. See Princeton Township Code Chapter
22 for Tree and shrubs regulations.
Chapter B34
WATER AND SEWERS
§ 31-46 PRINCETON CODE § 32-3
BAO:664
ARTICLE I
Regional Sewerage Authority
§ 34-1. Created; Name. [Ord. No. 2017-61 Exh. A]
A sewerage authority is hereby created and continued, pursuant to the
Sewerage Authorities Law, N.J.S.A. 40:14A-1 et seq., as a body politic and
corporate under the name and style of "The Stony Brook Regional Sewerage
Authority."
§ 34-2. Powers, Duties, Government, Administration and Financing
Generally. [Ord. No. 2017-61 Exh. A]
The regional sewerage authority hereby created shall have such functions,
powers and duties as are provided by N.J.S.A. 40:14A-1 et seq., as amended
and supplemented, and shall be governed, administered and financed
pursuant to such state law and any other provision of law applicable to such
authorities.
§ 34-3. Composition. [Ord. No. 2017-61 Exh. A]
The regional sewerage authority shall consist of five members, one to be
appointed by each of the governing bodies of the boroughs of Hopewell
and Pennington, of the townships of Hopewell and West Windsor, and
the municipality of Princeton, in accordance with the provisions of the
Sewerage Authorities Law, N.J.S.A. 40:14A-1 et seq., as amended and
supplemented.
§ 34-4. Joint Meeting for Preparation and Acquisition of Plans for
Regional Sewerage System. [Ord. No. 2017-61 Exh. A]
(a) Formation; Powers Generally. A joint contract is hereby authorized to
provide for the formation of a joint meeting pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:48B-1.1 et seq., by and between the boroughs of Hopewell and
Pennington, the townships of Hopewell and West Windsor, and the
municipality of Princeton, or at least three of such municipalities, for
the joint preparation and acquisition of plans and specifications for a
regional sewerage system. The joint meeting, subject to the term,
conditions and limitations of the joint contract, shall have and exercise
the powers conferred by state law.
(b) Name. The joint meeting shall be known as the Stony Brook Regional
Sewerage Group.
(c) Management Committee. The joint meeting shall be governed by a
management committee, consisting of one member to be appointed by
the members of the governing body of each municipality, who shall
serve in accordance with state law. In the exercise of the powers of the
joint meeting, the management committee shall be limited to such
functions, powers and duties as may be authorized by the joint contract
to be executed by the parties.
§ 34-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 34-4
BAO:665
(d) Powers and Duties Enumerated. The joint meeting shall have the
following powers and duties:
(1) To acquire and prepare plans and specifications for the design and
construction of a regional sewerage system which would be
adequate to meet the present and reasonably foreseeable needs of
the participating municipalities. The plans and specifications shall
include at least such treatment plant, trunk sewer and interceptors
as may be required and shall not include local collector systems.
(2) To provide for the financing of the cost of such plans and
specifications by application for a loan or grant to the state
department of health or any authorized federal agency, and in
furtherance thereof to exercise the powers delegated to it by state
law.
(3) To retain one or more engineers, or firm of engineers, to prepare
the required plans and specifications in accordance with the
requirements of the state department of health.
(e) Joint Contract. The provisions of this section, together with such
additional provisions as may be agreed upon for the management,
control and administration of the joint meeting, shall be incorporated in
a joint contract, which shall be executed by the mayor following
approval of the contract by resolution of the governing body, in
accordance with state law.
§ 34-4 PRINCETON CODE § 34-4
BAO:666
ARTICLE II
Sewers and Drains Generally
§ 34-5. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2017-61 Exh. A]
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
HOUSE CONNECTION — Any pipe, together with necessary connections,
conveying sewage from a single building of any kind or sort to the sewer
system.
MONITORED FLOW — The flow of liquid as measured by the Princeton
Sewer Operating Committee at such time and under such weather
conditions as it may elect, without limitation, but such flow shall not include
flow attributable to water usage within the affected building.
OPERATING COMMITTEE OF THE PRINCETON SEWERAGE SYSTEM,
OPERATING COMMITTEE AND/OR PSOC — The committee originally
authorized and set up by agreement in relation to the Princeton Sewerage
System entered into under the date of December 15, 1932, and as amended
between the mayor and council of the Borough of Princeton and the
Township of Princeton, and a like agreement entered into under the date of
December 15, 1932, and as amended between the mayor and council of the
borough and the trustees of Princeton University.
PRINCETON SEWERAGE SYSTEM — The system defined in two certain
agreements, one between the mayor and council of the Borough of
Princeton and the Township of Princeton, under date of December 15, 1932,
and as amended, and the other between the mayor and council of the
borough and the trustees of Princeton University, under date of December
15, 1932, and as amended.
SANITARY ENGINEER/MANAGER — The sanitary engineer of the operating
committee referred to in the agreement entered into between the mayor
and council of the Borough of Princeton and the Township of Princeton
under the date of December 15, 1932, and as amended, and the mayor and
council of the borough and the trustees of Princeton University, under the
date of December 15, 1932, and as amended, shall also serve as manager
of the sewer system and solid waste facilities. The sanitary engineer shall
be trained in environmental engineering, or a related field of engineering or
science.
SANITARY SEWER — The system of conduits installed or maintained by
the municipality of Princeton or operating committee in or near the public
streets, thoroughfares and easements for the purpose of disposing of fluid
waste other than storm water.
SEWER EXTENSION — Any addition to the sanitary sewer, either privately
or publicly owned, serving or which may serve two or more premises.
§ 34-5 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 34-6
BAO:667
§ 34-6. Required Sewer Connections. [Ord. No. 2017-61 Exh. A]
The owner of property along the line of any sanitary sewer now or hereafter
constructed in the municipality shall connect any house or other building
located on such property with such sewer.
Any person who shall fail to comply with any order for such connection
issued by the board of health within 30 days after notice by the health
officer or sanitary inspector to make such required connection shall be
liable to a fine of $25, and to an additional fine of $10 for each day of delay
after the expiration of such 30 days in which the provisions of such order or
notice are not complied with.
Such notice may be served upon any such owner personally or by leaving it
at his/her usual place of abode with a member of his family above the age of
18 years.
§ 34-7. Prohibition of Illicit Connection to Municipal Separate
Storm Sewer Systems. [Ord. No. 2017-61 Exh. A]
(a) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to prohibit illicit connections to
the municipal separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the
municipality, so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to
prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
(b) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following terms,
phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meanings stated
herein unless their use in the text of this section clearly demonstrates a
different meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used
in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number
include the singular number, and words used in the singular number
include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and
not merely directory. The definitions below are the same as or based on
corresponding definitions in the New Jersey Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A-1.2.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Waste and wastewater from humans or
household operations.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any physical or nonphysical connection that
discharges domestic sewage, non-contact cooling water, process
wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater) to the
municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the municipality,
unless that discharge is authorized under the NJPDES permit other
than the Tier A Municipal Stormwater General Permit (NJPDES Permit
Number NJ0141852). Nonphysical connections may include, but are not
limited to, leaks, flows, or overflows into the municipal separate storm
sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Nondomestic waste, including, but not limited
to, those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b), or (c) of the
Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317(a), (b), or (c)).
§ 34-6 PRINCETON CODE § 34-7
BAO:668
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A
conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches,
manmade channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by the
municipality of Princeton or other public body, and is designed and
used for collecting and conveying stormwater. MS4s do not include
combined sewer systems, which are sewer systems that are designed
to carry sanitary sewage at all times and to collect and transport
stormwater from streets and other sources.
NJPDES PERMIT — A permit issued by the New Jersey Department
of Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
NON-CONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used to reduce
temperature for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come
into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product (other
than heat) or finished product. Non-contact cooling water may however
contain algaecides, or biocides to control fouling of equipment such as
heat exchangers, and/or corrosion inhibitors.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Any water which, during manufacturing
or processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the
production or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished
product, byproduct, or waste produce. Process wastewater includes,
but is not limited to, leachate and cooling water other than non-contact
cooling water.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain
and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the
subsurface, is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or
drainage facilities, or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
(c) Prohibited conduct. No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged through an illicit connection to the municipal separate
storm sewer system operated by the municipality of Princeton any
domestic sewage, non-contact cooling water, process wastewater, or
other industrial waste (other than stormwater).
(d) Existing storm drain inlets which are in direct contact with repaving,
repairing, reconstruction or resurfacing or alterations of facilities on
private property must be retrofitted to prevent the discharge of solids
and floatables to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated
by the municipality.
(1) No person in control of private property (except a residential lot
with one single-family house) shall authorize the repaving,
repairing (excluding the repair of individual potholes) resurfacing
(including top coating or chip sealing with asphalt emulsion or a
thin base of hot bitumen), reconstructing or altering any surface
that is in direct contact with an existing storm drain inlet on that
property unless the storm drain inlet either:
§ 34-7 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 34-7
BAO:669
§ 34-8. Permits-Required for Connection with Public Sewer,
Construction or Repair of Pipe, etc. [Ord. No. 2017-61 Exh. A]
No connection with any public sewer, and no construction, alteration or
repair of any pipe, leader, conduit or facility between the sewer line and
the building, shall be made without previous permit authorizing the same.
A permit under which the work is not completed within two years after the
date of issuance thereof shall become null and void upon the expiration of
such two-year period, and a new permit shall be obtained before any further
work is done.
§ 34-9. Same — Application — Processing. [Ord. No. 2017-61 Exh.
A]
Every application for a permit under this article shall be signed by the
owner of the building or premises to be connected with the sewer or by
his authorized agent. It shall state the name and address of such owner or
agent and provide, the number of copies required by the PSOC of a plan
showing the type of construction and course of the proposed construction,
the exact point where it is proposed that the connection to the public sewer
shall be made, size and material of such pipe and such other features as
may be required pursuant to the regulations of the sanitary engineer.
Every application from a private person for a sewer extension, as required
by the preceding section, shall be accompanied by the required application
of the Department of Environmental Protection, Division of Water
Resources, which shall be countersigned by a proper representative of the
operating committee and returned before the same shall be approved by the
mayor and council.
Such application and supporting documents shall be filed with the sanitary
engineer and shall be subject to the approval of the sanitary engineer.
§ 34-10. Same — Review and Action Thereon; Review Fees. [Ord. No.
2017-61 Exh. A]
The sanitary engineer shall consider the applications, as nearly as possible,
in the order in which they are received. The engineer may approve the
application, suspend action on the application, or reject any application,
or may attach such conditions thereto as may reasonably be required to
a. Already meets the design standard below to control passage of
solid and floatable materials; or
b. Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in the municipal
stormwater permit prior to the completion of the project.
(e) Enforcement. This section shall be enforced by the municipal engineer,
superintendent of public works and/or police department.
(f) Penalties. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
subject to the general penalty set forth in section 1-6 of this Code.
§ 34-7 PRINCETON CODE § 34-10
BAO:670
assure that the proposed construction and connection to the public sewer
conforms with public interest and established standards for health and
safety. A permit may, at the discretion of the engineer, embrace special
provisions and conditions, as to the use of flush tanks, size of pipe, method
of construction, mode of use and similar details.
Upon his approval, a permit shall be issued by the sanitary engineer. Where
special provisions or conditions are attached thereto, the permit shall set
forth such conditions.
No permit for construction, alteration or repair of any sewer or drainage
line, pipe, leader or connection to a public sewer shall issue until and unless
applicant has paid a fee of $100.
§ 34-11. Duties and Powers of Manager/Sanitary Engineer. [Ord. No.
2017-61 Exh. A]
The sanitary engineer shall maintain supervision of the operation and
maintenance of all components of the sewer system and solid waste
facilities and perform all other duties pertaining to the office of the sanitary
engineer prescribed by the statute, this Code or other ordinance.
The sanitary engineer is hereby authorized to exercise such powers as may
be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and
provisions of this article including the following powers in addition to others
herein granted:
§ 34-12. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2017-61 Exh. A]
The sanitary engineer may prosecute any violation of this article by the
commencement of proceedings in the Princeton municipal court. Each such
violation shall be punishable in accordance with the penalties set forth in
section 1-6.
(1) To investigate sewage conditions in the municipality in order to ensure
public health and safety;
(2) To plan, oversee and manage all regulatory responsibilities relating to
sewage collection and solid waste disposal;
(3) To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations with
the consent of the owner, his designated agent or occupant;
(4) To fix the duties of agents and employees as he deems necessary to
carry out the purposes of this article;
(5) To supervise and participate in the planning and design of sewer
projects;
(6) To supervise the inspection of sewer-related construction projects;
(7) To delegate any of his functions and powers under this article to such
officers and agents as he may designate.
§ 34-10 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 34-13
BAO:671
§ 34-13. Same — Records and Suspensions. [Ord. No. 2017-61 Exh.
A]
It shall be the duty of the sanitary engineer to keep a record of permits
issued as provided in section 34-10. The engineer may suspend any permit
where, in his opinion, the construction, alteration or repair is not being
performed in accordance with the regulations of the operating committee
or with the conditions of any permit issued therefor.
§ 34-14. Disposal of Certain Substances or Liquids in Public Sewers
or Plumbing Connections Prohibited; Permits for Disposal of
Certain Substances. [Ord. No. 2017-61 Exh. A]
(a) No person shall throw or deposit, or cause to be thrown or deposited,
any substance in any public sewer or plumbing connection therewith or
otherwise dispose of any substance in such manner that it will tend to
interfere with the free passage of water or sewage within the public
sewer system. Without limiting the foregoing, no person shall discharge
or cause to be discharged into any public sewer or plumbing connection
any of the following described liquids or substances:
(1) Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, wood shavings, metal, glass,
rags, feathers, tar, plastic, fats, oils, greases or any other solid or
viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in
sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the
public sewer.
(2) Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas.
(3) Except by special permission of the sewer operating committee, the
byproducts or refuse from any mechanical garbage disposal or
grinder used in the operation of any restaurant, market,
supermarket, mortuary, hotel, hospital or any other mercantile or
business establishment, or multi-family dwelling of three or more
units.
(4) Any water or waste containing corrosive materials of such
character and quality as might tend to injure, impair, corrode or
damage the public sewer system or sewage treatment plant or any
other connection facility which is part of the same.
(b) No person shall provide for or permit the drainage of any cellar,
swimming pool, air-conditioning system or any storm water or surface
water, directly or indirectly, into any sanitary sewer.
(c) No water cooled air conditioner shall be connected with the public
storm water drain. In lieu of draining into the storm water drain, water
cooled air conditioners shall be provided with circulating water towers
or alternative means of water disposal other than use of the public
sewers.
§ 34-13 PRINCETON CODE § 34-14
BAO:672
§ 34-15. Grease Interceptors. [Ord. No. 2017-61 Exh. A]
(d) The sanitary engineer may, by regulation, further define substances
which may be prohibited from disposal in a public sewer by reason of
their tendency to interrupt or interfere with the flow of the sewer,
constitute a danger of fire, explosion, asphyxiation or other menace to
public safety, or corrode, damage or impair the public sewer, sewage
treatment process or other facility thereto. The sanitary engineer, upon
the request of any user of the public sewer, shall provide a
determination as to whether or not a particular substance may be
disposed in the public sewer; if the sanitary engineer shall determine
that such substance may be disposed of, provided certain conditions are
met by the user, a written permit to use the public sewer for such
disposal subject to the conditions imposed by the sanitary engineer,
shall be issued by the sanitary engineer, and failure to comply with such
conditions shall constitute a violation of this article.
(a) Grease Interceptors Required. Grease interceptors shall be provided by
the owner, landlord and/or tenant of all existing and new retail food
establishments, delicatessens, restaurants, take-out food
establishments, hotel kitchens, bars, factory cafeterias, clubs or other
eating establishments, to prevent excessive quantities of grease to be
discharged into the sanitary sewer system.
(1) Inspection and Review of Existing Establishments. The PSOC shall
inspect all existing establishments as described in this section and,
where necessary, require installation of grease interceptors as
provided for in this article. Any person or establishment who shall
fail to comply with any notice requiring such installation issued by
the sanitary engineer within 45 days after said notice, shall be
liable for a fine of not less than $100 and an additional fine of not
less than $25 for each day of delay after expiration of such 45 days
in which the provisions of such notice are not complied with.
(2) New Construction. All building plans for retail food establishments,
delicatessens, restaurants, take-out food establishments, hotel
kitchens, bars, factory cafeterias, clubs or other eating
establishments, must be reviewed for grease interceptor
requirements and approved by the sanitary engineer prior to the
issuance of a building permit.
(b) Sizing and Installation of Grease Interceptors. Grease interceptors shall
be installed in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Uniform
Construction Code Act. Notwithstanding the provisions of the Uniform
Construction Code Act, each compartment of a three compartment sink
in a food establishment shall be connected to a grease interceptor.
(c) Maintenance of Grease Interceptors. Interceptors shall be maintained
in efficient operating condition by periodic removal of accumulated
grease, scum, oil or other floating substances and solids deposited in
the interceptor. Cleaning intervals shall be frequent enough such that
§ 34-14 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 34-15
BAO:673
§ 34-16. Connection of Cesspool or Septic Tank to Public Sewer.
[Ord. No.2017-61 Exh. A]
No cesspool or septic tank shall be allowed to discharge into the public
sewer. Wherever a connection discharging into a cesspool or septic tank
shall have been extended to the sanitary sewer and properly connected
therewith, the connection to such cesspool or septic tank immediately after
the completion of such new connection shall be entirely cut off from the
cesspool or septic tank, and the cesspool or septic tank shall be emptied of
its contents and afterwards filled with fresh, clean earth. This work shall be
done subject to the approval of the sanitary engineer.
§ 34-17. Drainage Across Sidewalks or into Gutters or Streets. [Ord.
No.2017-61 Exh. A]
No sewage, refuse, storm water, surface water or other fluids shall be
directed or conducted, directly or indirectly, over, across or under any
sidewalk or into any gutter or public street, except as provided in this
section; but nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the
continued use heretofore of existing means of directing or conducting storm
or surface water over, across or under any sidewalk or into any gutter or
public street. Where, by reason of close proximity of a catch basin, the
proposed use of a gutter for storm water and surface water drainage will
not cause a significant loss of use of the gutter to other persons or for
other purposes, the municipal engineer, upon written application therefor,
may issue a permit for the drainage of storm water or surface water under
a sidewalk and into the gutter. Any such permit shall be revocable by the
municipal engineer upon 90 days' notice.
§ 34-18. Proximity of Water, Gas or Other Pipe. [Ord. No.2017-61
Exh. A]
No water, gas or other pipe shall be laid within one foot of a sewer line
or according to the applicable standards under state or federal statute or
regulation, whichever one is more stringent.
grease does not bypass the interceptor. Intervals shall be dependent
on the capacity of the interceptor and quantity of grease in the
wastewater, but shall be a minimum of once every month. A log of
the cleaning operations shall be posted in such a manner that it can
be inspected by the sanitary engineer, his representative or health
department personnel. The log shall include the date of cleaning,
description of the volume removed, identification of approved disposal
site and the signature of the person responsible for its cleaning. Upon
request of the inspector, the trap shall be opened by a representative
of the establishment to provide for a physical inspection. Any person or
establishment who shall fail to adequately clean grease interceptors at
necessary intervals, provide for an up-to-date cleaning log, or refuse to
open the grease trap for physical inspection shall be liable for a fine of
not less than $50 for each occurrence.
§ 34-15 PRINCETON CODE § 34-19
BAO:674
§ 34-19. Sewer Extensions. [Ord. No. 2017-61 Exh. A]
Every application from a private person for a sewer extension shall be
accompanied by an application as required by the state department of
health which shall be countersigned by a proper representative of the
operating committee and returned, before such application shall be
approved by the mayor and council. Engineering requirements for all sewer
extensions shall conform in every detail with the rules and regulations of
the state department of health as contained in its Rules and Regulations for
the Preparation and Submission of Designs for Sewer Systems and Sewage
Treatment Works.
In all sewer extensions, during the construction of the work, everything
shall be left open for inspection by the proper agent of the operating
committee, and no sewage will be permitted to discharge into the line and
no permanent connection shall be made to the sewer system until tests have
been made and the tightness of the sewer found to conform to the operating
committee specifications.
§ 34-20. House Connections. [Ord. No.2017-61 Exh. A]
In all house connections, each property shall be separately and
independently connected with the sanitary sewer, and for the purposes of
this article, each side of a so called double house shall be considered as a
separate property, and each side must have a separate house connection
located entirely within its boundaries, if topographically feasible; except,
that where the connection of such double house involves cutting the
pavement of a street paved with concrete or having a concrete base, a single
opening may be made from the sewer to the curb, at which point a suitable
manhole shall be built and separate connections made from this manhole to
each side of the double house.
The provisions of the preceding paragraph of this section shall not apply to
any double house with a single house connection, which was constructed
prior to the passage of this article, except as hereinafter provided. If the
health officer shall determine that such a double house with single house
connection, or either side of such double house, is in a condition detrimental
to human health because of such single connection, by reason of the
inadequacy of the connection or its interior appurtenances or by reason
of failure to maintain such single connection or appurtenances in proper
working order owing to divided responsibility, such officer shall notify the
owner of each side of such double house to cause his side to be separately
and independently connected to the sewer system as provided in the
preceding paragraph within 60 days after such notification. Any owner who
shall fail to make such connection within such time shall be deemed in
violation of this article.
In the case of apartments in a single building where, pursuant to a general
plan of development, all apartments are designed for and operated under a
single administrative ownership responsible for the maintenance of sewer
connections, one house connection may be made from each building to
§ 34-19 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 34-20
BAO:675
the sanitary sewer and so maintained while such building remains under a
single ownership. In the case of two or more such buildings, each shall be
connected to the sanitary sewer by separate house connections.
No house connection shall be covered until so ordered by the sanitary
engineer; ample notice must be given him in order that he may examine
the work before ordering the backfilling to be begun. Any part of the work
which may have been covered without previously obtaining the consent of
the sanitary engineer shall be uncovered for his examination, if so ordered
by him. The backfilling around a house connection shall be so executed as
not to injure the joints of the pipes, and the backfilling generally shall be so
compacted as to permit the restoration of the surface of the street as nearly
as possible to its former condition.
All house connections shall also comply with any applicable state and
federal laws and regulations, and to extent there is any inconsistency, the
applicable law or regulation shall govern.
§ 34-21. Mandatory Repair of Leaking House Connections or
Laterals. [Ord. No. 2017-61 Exh. A]
(a) Whenever it is determined by the operating committee that there exists
an excessive flow in the public sanitary sewer system that is not
attributable to water usage and it is determined that such excessive
flow in the public system is exacerbated by leakage in defective private
house connections or laterals, appropriate employees of the operating
committee shall inspect the house connections or laterals. If on the
basis of this inspection the operating committee representative
concludes that the excessive flow exists and is caused by a leaking or
defective lateral or connection, the property owner shall be responsible
for repairs or alteration as further set forth in this section.
(b) The operating committee or its representative shall submit to the
property owner in writing a detailed specification of repairs and/or
alterations which it deems necessary to reduce or eliminate excessive
flow. If the property owner accepts this specification of necessary
repairs, the owner shall (i) perform the repairs at his or her own
expense or (ii) authorize the operating committee to perform the
repairs at the owner's expense, subject to collection as further set forth
herein.
(c) Upon completion and approval of all repairs mandated and made by the
operating committee pursuant to subsection (b)(ii) above, the owner
shall receive from the committee, a certificate of compliance which
shall exempt the owner and the owner's successors in title from any
additional responsibility for repairs attributable to normal wear and
tear to the connection for a period of 10 years from the date of the
certificate, provided that subsequent construction, alteration, or other
direct intervention on the property does not, in the opinion of the
operating committee, generate excessive flow. The certificate will not
exempt the owner or the owner's successors from assuming the costs of
§ 34-20 PRINCETON CODE § 34-21
BAO:676
§ 34-22. Right of Entry on Premises by Municipal Agents and
Employees. [Ord. No. 2017-61 Exh. A]
The agents and employees of the municipality or operating committee shall
have the right to enter any building and premises connected to any public
sewer, whenever necessary to examine the same, to take samples of the
effluent therefrom for laboratory analysis, or to do any work therein or
thereon; provided, that such entry shall be at reasonable times and upon
reasonable notice, if notice is feasible, to the owner or occupant thereof. No
person shall refuse, deny or interfere with such entry.
the repair of connections damaged or blocked as the result of the
actions of such owners or third parties, such as utility companies.
(d) All repairs required by this section shall be completed no later than 90
days after receipt by the property owner of a written specification of
necessary repairs from the operating committee. The running of the
ninety-day period shall be suspended for the months of December,
January and February. All such repairs shall be subject to written
approval by the manager of the operating committee; and no repair
shall be covered until so ordered by the manager. Any part of the repair
work covered without the prior consent of the manager shall be
uncovered for his examination if so ordered by him.
(e) If the property owner refuses to assume the costs of repair or alteration
of his or her house connection or lateral, as set forth in the written
specification of necessary repairs, then the operating committee shall,
on notice to the property owner, undertake such improvements and
assess costs as set forth in subsection (f) below.
(f) The costs of any work performed by or under the direction of the
operating committee hereunder shall be certified by the operating
committee manager to the property owner and to the operating
committee. The property owner shall be advised in writing that the
certified costs shall be subject to confirmation in the nature of a local
improvement at a hearing of the operating committee at a specified
date and time. If the certified cost is confirmed by the committee to be
correct and reasonable, the amount so certified shall, until paid in full
by the property owner, become a lien upon the land and shall be added
to the taxes to be assessed and levied thereon; and each year thereafter,
until the entire amount is paid, one-tenth of such amount with legal
interest thereon shall be enforced and collected from the owner of the
land, by the same officers and in the same manner as taxes in the
municipality. The municipality shall have the same remedies for the
collection thereof with costs and penalties as it has by law for the
collection of taxes upon real estate.
§ 34-21 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 34-23
BAO:677
§ 34-23. Specification by Sanitary Engineer. [Ord. No. 2017-61 Exh.
A]
The sanitary engineer, or his designee, may, from time to time, with the
approval of the operating committee, promulgate such further technical
specification pertaining to connections into the public sewers, and
construction, alteration or repair of pipe lines, leaders, conduits or drains
appurtenant thereto, in conformity with the standards and provisions of
this article as may be necessary to the public health and safety and proper
operation of the sewer system. All such specifications shall be in writing,
and copies thereof shall be available for public inspection at the office of the
sanitary engineer during normal business hours.
The sanitary engineer may prosecute any violation of this Chapter by the
commencement of proceedings in the Princeton municipal court. Each such
violation shall be punishable in accordance with the general penalty
provisions set forth in section 1-6 of this Code.
§ 34-24. Findings. [Ord. No. 2017-61 Exh. A]
The sanitary sewer system in Princeton has been substantially upgraded
over the past years to eliminate ground water and storm water entering
said system. However, illegally connected sump pumps, roof drains and
area drains are a continuing source of ground water and storm water in
the system. These sources introduce a large quantity of extraneous flow
to the public sanitary sewer system, especially during periods of rainfall
and high ground water. It is in the best interest of the municipality to
encourage the elimination of these extraneous flows at the earliest possible
date. Therefore, the following program is being implemented to insure the
disconnection of sump pumps, roof drains and area drains from the public
sanitary system.
§ 34-25. Improper Sump Pump, Roof Drain, or Area Drain
Programs. [Ord. No. 2017-61 Exh. A]
The mayor and council of the Princeton hereby establishes the following
program to encourage the elimination of sump pumps, roof drains and area
drains that are connected to the public sanitary sewer system:
(a) Any person who permits or has permitted on his or her property any
connection of a sump pump, roof drain or area drain to the public
sanitary sewer system shall cause said connection at said person's sole
expense to be disconnected immediately and permanently.
(b) After said person has disconnected his or her sump pump, roof drain or
area drain from the public sanitary sewer system, said person shall be
permitted to continue to utilize on his or her property said pump or
drain system in accordance with the following requirements:
(1) The pump shall have a permanent piping installation to direct flow
away from the building structure and at a location which will
§ 34-23 PRINCETON CODE § 34-25
BAO:678
§ 34-26. Application and Fee for Certificate of Sump Pump
Compliance. [Ord. No. 2017-61 Exh. A]
Prior to the transfer of title of any real property containing a building in
which there is a sump pump, roof drain or area drain, the owner shall
obtain a certificate of sump pump compliance from the PSOC. The PSOC
manager or his or her designee shall be the office issuing said certificate.
This certificate may be obtained by having an inspection by the PSOC. The
fee for said inspection shall be $50, which shall be paid by the property
owner prior to said inspection. In lieu of said inspection, the PSOC manager
may accept an affidavit of compliance from the property owner that the
sump pump, roof drain and area drain are permanently disconnected from
the public sanitary sewer system. This affidavit of compliance shall be on
forms provided by the PSOC manager's office. The application fee for said
affidavit of compliance and the processing of said shall be $20, which fee
shall be paid prior to the issuance of the affidavit of compliance form.
§ 34-27. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2017-61 Exh. A]
Any property owner who has failed to disconnect any sump pump, roof
drain or area drain connection to the public sanitary sewer system following
the adoption of this article shall be deemed in violation of this article and
subject to prosecution under this article and the penalties provided for in
section 1-6 of this Code.
minimize infiltration to the building foundation and/or public
sanitary sewer system. The new pump or drain connection shall not
discharge water onto any adjacent property. In addition, the pump
or drain connection shall not discharge within 10 feet of a property
line unless approved by the municipal engineer.
(2) The pump or drain discharge pipe shall not discharge water, either
directly or indirectly, to a public right-of-way or across a public
sidewalk without permission from the municipal engineer. Said
engineer, when evaluating a request to redirect flow from a pump
or a drain shall require the submittal of the following information:
a. A written proposal noting thereon how the flow is intended to
be redirected to discharge to a storm sewer or the gutter line
of a street so that icing or street erosion conditions will not
occur.
b. A sketch submitted showing the connection of the pump or
drain line to a storm sewer; submission of any street opening
permit required, if work is to be done in the municipal right-ofway.
(3) No pump or drain connection shall be made to the sanitary sewer
system.
§ 34-25 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 34-27
BAO:679

ARTICLE III
Sewer Service Charge
§ 34-28. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2017-61 Exh. A]
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
SERVICE YEAR — The one-year period beginning January 1 and ending
December 31.
WINTER QUARTER — A period of at least three months ending in the
January, February or March next preceding the service year, provided that
a water meter reading is available for such period.
§ 34-29. Annual Sewer Service Charge Established. [Ord. No.
2017-61 Exh. A]
There is hereby established in and for the municipality an annual sewer
service charge for each service year hereafter for each house or other
building connected with the public sanitary sewer system in the
municipality.
§ 34-30. Rates. [Ord. No. 2017-61 Exh. A]
In the case of each owner receiving metered water from New Jersey
American Water or its successors, the annual sewer service charge shall be
computed at the following rates:
(a) $6.45 of metered water for the first 2,000 CCF (hundred cubic feet).
(b) $9 of metered water for usage between 2,001 and 5,000 CCF (hundred
cubic feet).
(c) $11 of metered water for usage in excess of 5,000 CCF (hundred cubic
feet).
The amount so allocated shall be the lesser of the amount of metered
water charged to each such owner during the calendar year preceding
the service year, or if a winter quarter meter reading is available, a sum
equal to four times the amount of metered water charged to such owner
during the winter quarter. If the winter quarter is zero, the amount
charged would be the amount of metered water charged to each such
owner during the calendar year preceding the service year.
In the event that it is contended by the engineer or by the owner or
occupant of any house or building that the calculation of the service
charge upon the basis of metered water does not fairly reflect the
amount of the sewage discharge into the sanitary sewage system, either
because it discharges into the system from sources other than metered
water or because of elimination from the system of metered water that
is disposed of elsewhere, the sewer service charge may be adjusted
for good cause shown, by filing first an administrative appeal to the
§ 34-28 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 34-30
BAO:681
§ 34-31. Payment by Installments. [Ord. No. 2017-61 Exh. A]
The annual sewer service charge shall be payable by the owner of each such
house or other building in four installments, each of which shall be for a
calendar quarter. The installments shall be due and payable on the first day
of the second month of each calendar quarter, i.e., the first installment shall
be due and payable on February 1, the second installment on May 1, the
third installment on August 1, and the fourth installment on November 1.
§ 34-32. Billing. [Ord. No. 2017-61 Exh. A]
The tax collector shall prepare and mail or otherwise deliver sewer service
charge bills to the persons charged not later than July 1 of each year
hereafter. Such bills shall contain the third and fourth installments for
the current service year and the first and second installments for the
succeeding service year. Inasmuch as the bills for the first and second
installments will be sent out before the true amount of such installments is
determined, the amount of each of those installments shall be one-quarter
of the total sewer service charge finally determined for the same house or
other building for the preceding calendar year, and the amount of the third
and fourth installments shall be the full sewer service charge determined
for the current service year less the amount charged as the first and second
installments. The amount thus determined for the last two installments shall
be divided equally between those installments. Bills may be shown on and
included and distributed with the municipality's regular tax bills.
§ 34-33. Collection and Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2017-61 Exh. A]
Sewer service charges shall draw the same interest from the time they
become due as taxes upon real estate in the municipality. They shall be a
lien upon the premises until paid, and the municipality shall have the same
remedies for the collection thereof with interest, costs and penalties as it
has by law for the collection of taxes upon real estate.
§ 34-34. Applicability to University Property Subject to Sewer
Rental under 1932 Lease. [Ord. No. 2017-61 Exh. A]
This article shall not apply to property in the municipality owned by
Princeton University and as to which the University is paying a sewer rental
under the terms and conditions of a lease between the municipality and the
University, originally dated December 15, 1932, so long as the University
shall continue to own such property and to make payment therefor under
such lease.
tax collector and then to the sewer operating committee upon written
application of the owner or occupant after hearing on notice to the tax
collector. However, no such application shall be considered unless it is
filed with the tax collector on or before September 30 of the service
year in question.
§ 34-30 PRINCETON CODE § 34-34
BAO:682
ARTICLE IV
Surcharge for High Strength Sewage
§ 34-35. Purpose of Article. [Ord. No. 2017-61 Exh. A]
The purpose of this article is to establish a surcharge with respect to high
strength sewage discharged into the sanitary sewer system, in accordance
with the requirements of federal and state laws and regulations and user
charge agreements between the municipality and the Stony Brook Regional
Sewerage Authority.
§ 34-36. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2017-61 Exh. A]
As used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) — The quantity of oxygen,
expressed in ppm by weight, utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic
matter under standard laboratory procedure for five days at 20° C.
HIGH STRENGTH SEWAGE — Liquid waste that is found by laboratory
analysis or by annual report from SBRSA to exhibit one or more of the
following properties:
OPERATING COMMITTEE OF THE PRINCETON SEWERAGE SYSTEM,
OPERATING COMMITTEE AND/OR PSOC — The committee authorized and
set up by agreement in relation to the Princeton Sewerage System entered
into under the date of December 15, 1932, as amended, between the mayor
and council of the Borough of Princeton and the Township of Princeton, and
a like agreement entered into under the date of December 15, 1932, as
amended, between the mayor and council of the borough of Princeton and
the trustees of Princeton University.
SBRSA — The Stony Brook Regional Sewerage Authority created pursuant
to article I of this chapter.
SERVICE YEAR — The one-year period beginning January 1 and ending
December 31.
SPECIAL WASTE DISCHARGERS — Industrial users which have been
identified as special waste dischargers by the Stony Brook Regional
Sewerage Authority, the regional sewerage authority of which the
municipality is a member.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS) — All solids that either float on the surface of
or are in suspension in water, wastewater, or other liquids and which are
removal by laboratory filtration.
(a) BOD in excess of 300 milligrams per liter.
(b) SS in excess of 300 milligrams per liter.
(c) Phosphorous in excess of 15 milligrams per liter.
(d) Nitrogen in excess of 40 milligrams per liter.
§ 34-35 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 34-37
BAO:683
§ 34-37. Annual Surcharge for High Strength Sewage Established.
[Ord. No. 2017-61 Exh. A]
There is hereby established an annual surcharge for each service year
hereafter with respect to high strength sewage found by the municipality
or operating committee to have been discharged into the public sanitary
sewage system of the municipality from any house or other building in the
municipality that is connected to said system. The surcharge shall be in
addition to the annual sewer service charge established pursuant to article
III of this chapter.
§ 34-38. Calculation of Surcharge. [Ord. No. 2017-61 Exh. A]
The annual surcharge for high strength sewage shall be calculated as
follows:
(a) The number of milligrams per liter of each component (BOD, SS,
phosphorous (P), and nitrogen (N)) of high strength sewage from any
such house or building shall be determined by laboratory analysis of a
sample or samples taken by the municipality or operating committee
during the calendar year preceding the service year. If more than one
sample is taken, the number of milligrams per liter shall be the average.
The laboratory analysis shall be in accordance with procedures set
forth in the then current edition of "Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater."
(b) If the number of milligrams per liter shall exceed 300 for BOD, 300 for
SS, 15 for phosphorous, or 40 for nitrogen, the excess in each case shall
be multiplied by 0.0000624 (the factor to convert milligrams per liter to
pounds per cubic foot), and the product shall be further multiplied by
the number of cubic feet of metered water allocated to the house or
building, or by the number of cubic feet of sewage otherwise allocated
thereto, as the case may be, during the calendar year preceding the
service year, in accordance with section 34-30. The result shall
constitute the number of pounds of each component of high strength
sewage attributable to the house or building (BODp, SSp, Pp, and Np,
respectively.)
(c) The number of pounds of each component of high strength sewage
attributable to the house or building shall be multiplied by the cost of
treatment and disposal of one pound of that component (BODc, SSc, Pc
and Nc, respectively), as that cost shall have been fixed by the then
latest annual determination of SBRSA, and the product shall constitute
the amount of cost chargeable to the house or building for that
component. However, the aggregate amount of cost chargeable to all
houses and buildings for any component shall not exceed the annual
charge that is made by SBRSA to the municipality for that component
and that is based upon actual sampling of metered sewage from the
municipality for that component during the twelve-month period ending
in the calendar year preceding the service year. Any such excess shall
reduce the costs otherwise chargeable to such houses and buildings in
§ 34-37 PRINCETON CODE § 34-38
BAO:684
§ 34-39. Adjustment of Surcharge. [Ord. No. 2017-61 Exh. A]
The operating committee, upon written application by the municipal
engineer or by the owner or occupant of any house or building, after
hearing upon notice to the other party, may adjust any annual surcharge for
high strength sewage in any particular case if it shall find that the foregoing
calculation of such surcharge does not fairly reflect the amount of quality of
high strength sewage discharged into the public sanitary sewer system of
the municipality.
§ 34-40. Payment, Billing, Collection and Enforcement of
Surcharge. [Ord. No. 2017-61 Exh. A]
The annual surcharge for high strength sewage shall be paid in
installments, billed, collected, and enforced in the same manner as is
provided for annual sewer service charge pursuant to sections 34-30, 34-31,
and 34-32.
§ 34-41. Surcharge for Special Waste Dischargers Established. [Ord.
No. 2017-61 Exh. A]
Special waste dischargers shall be assessed a special waste charge which
will be billed to the user on a monthly or quarterly basis as determined by
the municipality's chief financial officer. The special waste charge shall be
calculated at 105% of the special waste charge allocated to the user and
billed to the municipality by the Stony Brook Regional Sewerage Authority,
the regional sewerage authority of which the municipality is a member. The
special waste charge billed by the authority to the municipality is based
upon the authority's cost in its current year's budget to cover monitoring,
testing and allocated administrative costs to reflect the authority's exposure
to risk in accepting special waste. The additional percentage billed by the
municipality to the user over and above that for which the municipality
billed by the authority, represents the municipality's costs to cover
monitoring, maintenance, administrative costs and to reflect the
municipality's exposure to risk in accepting special waste. Bills to users
under this section shall supersede any charge which otherwise would be
billed to the user by the municipality under section 34-37 herein.
proportion to the cost that would otherwise be chargeable to each of
them.
(d) The amounts of cost chargeable to the house or building for the several
components of high strength sewage shall be added together, and the
sum shall constitute the annual surcharge for high strength sewage for
the service year.
(e) The foregoing calculation may be expressed by the following formula:
Surcharge = BODp (BODc) + SSp (SSc) + Pp (Pc) + Np (Nc)
§ 34-38 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 34-41
BAO:685

ARTICLE V
Sewer Connection Fee
§ 34-42. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2017-61 Exh. A; Ord. No. 2019-27]
BASE WASTEWATER FLOW — The total annual water consumption rate in
gallons divided by 365, for the Municipality of Princeton for the preceding
fiscal year as calculated by the Princeton Sewer Operating Committee
("PSOC") from water utility records.
For the purpose of this Article, the words and phrases contained herein, as
well as the meaning respectively ascribed to them in the preceding Article
of this Chapter.
§ 34-43. Purpose of Article. [Ord. No. 2017-61 Exh. A; Ord. No.
2019-27]
The purpose of this Article is to establish a sewer connection fee to facilitate
a fair contribution by developers and property owners adding new flows to
the sewerage system towards the capital cost of the publicly owned sanitary
sewer system which is operated under the auspices of PSOC.
§ 34-44. Calculation of Sewer Connection Fees. [Ord. No. 2017-61
Exh. A; Ord. No. 2019-27]
Any owners of real property within the Municipality of Princeton in addition
to payments of the review fee associated with a permit application for a
sewer connection, shall also be obligated to pay a sewer connection fee. The
sewer connection fee shall be calculated in the following manner:
The total capital cost of the Municipality of Princeton sewerage system is
comprised of the following components:
(a) Total accumulated debt service plus capital expenditures not funded by
a bond ordinance or debt, for construction and improvement of the
PSOC system, as of the end of the immediately preceding fiscal year.
(b) Total accumulated debt service plus capital expenditures not funded by
a bond ordinance, allocated to the Municipality of Princeton by the
SBRSA for construction and improvement of the SBRSA system, as of
the end of the immediately preceding fiscal year.
(c) A deduction for any gifts or subsidies received by the PSOC and SBRSA,
and not reimbursed or reimbursable to any federal, state, county, or
municipal government.
The Sewer Capacity Charge in dollars per gallon per day is calculated
by dividing the sum of the components described above by the Base
Wastewater Flow.
The amount of an owner's contribution is calculated by multiplying
the Sewer Capacity Charge by the owner's anticipated daily volume of
sewage in gallons per day, as determined below.
§ 34-42 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 34-44
BAO:687
§ 34-45. Review of Connection Fees. [Ord. No. 2017-61 Exh. A]
Sewer connection fees shall be recomputed at the end of each fiscal year. If
as a result of this calculation, the PSOC decides to change the fee, then a
public hearing before the governing body regarding same shall be held. The
current sewer connection fee is $38.50 per gallon.
The Sewer Connection Fee calculated pursuant to this Article shall be
applicable to all real properties within the Municipality of Princeton.
The calculation of anticipated volume of sewage flow shall be in
accordance with the Flow Allocations for Princeton Sewer Connection
Fee standards as summarized below:
All single and multiple family dwellings, apartments, townhouses and
condominiums
1 bedroom unit 75 gpd
2 bedroom unit 150 gpd
3 bedroom unit 225 gpd
Each additional bedroom 75 gpd
Nonresidential structure The greater of 0.125 gallons per
square foot or the standards
promulgated by NJDEP in N.J.A.C.
7:14A-23.3
All calculations of construction and capital improvement costs, and
anticipated volume of sewage flow, etc., shall be made by the PSOC
Manager, in conjunction with the Municipal Engineer and Finance
Officer, as necessary.
§ 34-44 PRINCETON CODE § 34-45
BAO:688
ARTICLE VI
Water Emergencies
§ 34-46. Purpose; Intent. [Ord. No. 2017-61 Exh. A]
Protracted periods of uncontrolled growth in neighboring municipalities,
combined with high temperatures and limited rainfall have caused
excessive demands upon the water system of the water company serving the
municipality of Princeton (hereinafter referred to as the "Water Company").
These demands have created emergency conditions causing imminent peril
to health and safety. These emergency conditions are at least partially
attributable to the excessive use of water during the spring, summer and
fall months through the sprinkling of lawns, filling of swimming pools,
car washing and other similar uses, not related to the use of water for
domestic and sanitary purposes and fire protection. Such non-essential use
of water has caused a serious reduction in adequate pressure in the water
distribution system serving residents of the municipality. In the interest
of health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the municipality, it is
necessary to take all reasonable precautions and measures promptly to
conserve water and maintain such water pressure as is necessary for
sanitary, domestic and fire-fighting purposes.
§ 34-47. Declarations of Water Emergencies. [Ord. No. 2017-61 Exh.
A]
In case of an emergency where the available supply of water becomes
dangerously low, the mayor, or in his or her absence, the acting mayor,
is hereby authorized to declare the existence of a water emergency. The
declaration of emergency shall state that an emergency exists requiring the
implementation of such measures for the conservation of water for domestic
and sanitary purposes and fire protection as are specified in section 34-48.
§ 34-48. Terms of Declaration. [Ord. No. 2017-61 Exh. A]
(a) The declaration of emergency shall specify whether the emergency is
one requiring full curtailment or partial curtailment of outdoor water
usage as defined herein.
(1) "Full curtailment of outdoor water usage" shall mean an absolute
prohibition of the use of water from the water company, including
but not limited to, the sprinkling of shrubs and lawns, filling of
swimming pools, car washing and other related uses until the
emergency shall be terminated by declaration.
(2) "Partial curtailment of nonessential water usage" shall mean the
prohibition of the use of water from the water company, including
but not limited to, the sprinkling of lawns, filling of swimming
pools, car washing and other related uses or any of the foregoing
on certain days of the week and/or during certain hours of the day.
The terms of the partial curtailment shall be set forth in the
declaration.
§ 34-46 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 34-48
BAO:689
§ 34-49. Notice of Declaration. [Ord. No. 2017-61 Exh. A]
Immediately following the passage of any emergency declaration
hereinbefore described, a copy of the declaration shall be published in
official newspapers circulated in the municipality and posted in the
municipal building.
§ 34-50. Effect of Declaration. [Ord. No. 2017-61 Exh. A]
The declaration of an emergency shall be conclusive of the fact of the
existence of such emergency and shall be binding upon all persons and
users upon the filing of the same in the office of the municipal clerk and the
publication thereof in all newspapers circulated in the municipality.
§ 34-51. Termination of Declaration. [Ord. No. 2017-61 Exh. A]
The declaration of a water emergency shall continue in full force and effect,
for a period of 30 days, unless terminated earlier by the mayor, or in his or
her absence, the acting mayor. Any declaration of water emergency may be
extended beyond 30 days through resolution by the mayor and council.
§ 34-52. Inspections. [Ord. No. 2017-61 Exh. A]
During the water emergency, all premises receiving water from the water
company system shall be subject to inspection between sunrise and sunset
by the water company personnel or any other person duly authorized and
appointed by the municipality or water company to perform inspections to
oversee compliance during the water emergency. It shall be a violation of
this article for any person to hinder, obstruct, delay, resist or prevent any
such inspection as is described herein. Nothing herein shall be deemed
to limit the power of the police department to conduct a search of any
premises at any time when they have probable cause to believe that a
violation of this section has been committed.
§ 34-53. Use During Emergency to be a Violation. [Ord. No. 2017-61
Exh. A]
It shall be a violation of this article for any person to use water from the
water company distribution system at any time during the water emergency
in a manner prohibited by any declaration issued pursuant to this article.
§ 34-54. Continued Usage Deemed Health Hazard. [Ord. No.
2017-61 Exh. A]
In the event that there is on any premises a continuing usage of water
from the water company distribution system by any person in a manner
prohibited by any declaration issued pursuant to this article, such
(b) In the case of any such emergency declaration as is described herein,
the terms of the curtailment may be modified by amendment from time
to time based on any change in emergent conditions.
§ 34-48 PRINCETON CODE § 34-54
BAO:690
continuing usage is hereby declared to be a health hazard. The owner,
occupant and/or operator of the premises whereon the violation is occurring
shall first receive an oral warning if any such owner, occupant and/or
operator or the agent or employee of any of same is actually on the
premises. If no such person is present a written notice shall be posted on
the premises. If, after the passage of one hour from the delivering or posting
of such notice, the health hazard has not been abated, any authorized
employee of the municipality, including appropriate personnel from the
Princeton Fire Department or the water company, is hereby authorized
to enter upon the premises to abate the health hazard. Thereafter, the
municipality or water company, as the case may be, shall assess the costs
of such abatement against the owner, operator and/or occupant of the
premises.
§ 34-55. Water Use Restrictions. [Ord. No. 2017-61 Exh. A]
(a) After receiving a warning as specified in section 34-54, any person
found guilty of violating section 34-53 shall be subject to the penalties
set forth in section 1-6; and
(b) A repeat offender, as that term is defined in section 1-6, shall be subject
to the penalties set forth in section 1-6.
§ 34-54 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 34-55
BAO:691
Chapter B35
RESERVED FOR FUTURE LEGISLATION
Chapter BDL
BOROUGH DISPOSITION LIST
§ BDL-1. Borough Disposition of Legislation
Ord. No. Adoption Description Supp. No.
2012-01 2-14-2012 Bond, Special
2012-02 2-14-2012 Acceptance of property from
Princeton University, Special
2012-03 3-6-2012 Salary, Special
2012-04 3-27-2012 Trees, Sections 33-11, 33-14,
33-21, 33-27, 33-32, 33-33, 33-35,
33-36
2012-05 Tabled
2012-06 4-10-2012 CAP, Special
2012-07 Tabled
2012-08 4-8-2012 Land Use - Amends Mixed
Residential-Retail-Office (MRRO)
Zone, Sections 17A-356, 17A-358
2012-09 5-22-2012 Bond, Special
2012-10 7-10-2012 Fire Department - Captains and
lieutenants, Section 14-24
2012-11 7-24-2012 Authorize submission to voters for
annual tax levy for open space,
farmland and historic properties,
Special
2012-12 12-26-2012 Amends Land Use - Service
Business Zone, Sections 17A-201,
17A-321, 17A-322, 17A-323,
17A-324, 17A-325, 17A-326,
17A-326.1, 17A-330, 17A-366
2012-13 8-14-2012 Salary, Special
2012-14 8-14-2012 Amends nonmetered on-street
parking, Section 19-23
2012-15 Tabled
2012-16 Tabled
2012-17 12-11-2012 Conveyance of easement, Special
§ 34-55 PRINCETON CODE § BDL-1
BAO:692
Ord. No. Adoption Description Supp. No.
2012-18 12-26-2012 Amends Removal and storage of
garbage, trash and recyclables,
Section 15-4.1
2012-19 12-26-2012 Amends boards, agencies and
commissions: Municipal Court of
Princeton, Section 2-66; Housing
Authority, Section 2-67;
Environmental Commission,
Section 2-68; Human Services
Commission, Section 2-69;
Princeton Public Library, Section
2-70; Board of Health, Section
2-71; Planning Board Section
2-72; Site Plan Review Advisory
Board, Section 2-73; Construction
Board of Appeals, Section 2-74;
Historic Preservation Review
Commission, Section 2-75; Zoning
Board of Adjustment, Section
2-76; Corner House Board,
Section 2-77; Cable Television
Committee, Section 2-78;
Recreation Board, Section 2-79;
Bicycle and Pedestrian Advisory
Committee, Section 2-80; Sewer
Operating Committee, Section
2-81; Affordable Housing Board,
Section 2-82; Shade Tree
Commission, Section 2-83;
Citizen's Finance Advisory
Committee, Section 2-84; Flood
and Storm Water Commission,
Section 2-85; General Board for
Making Assessments for Local
Improvements, Section 2-86;
Public Safety Committee, Section
2-87; Traffic and Transportation
Committee, Section 2-88; Animal
Control Advisory Committee,
Section 2-89; Rental Housing
Board, Section 2-90
2012-20 12-26-2012 Amends Construction Code fees,
10-12
§ BDL-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BDL-1
BAO:693
Ord. No. Adoption Description Supp. No.
2012-21 12-26-2012 Amends miscellaneous fees:
Alarm system registration fees,
Section 2-91; Amusement license
fee, Section 2-92; Animal/dog
license fees (per year), Section
2-93; Fire safety permit fees,
Section 2-94; Government and
police records fees, Section 2-95;
Housing inspection fees, Section
2-96; Occupation of right-of-way
fees, Section 2-97; Peddler,
solicitor, transient merchant
license, Section 2-98; Street and
sidewalk opening fees, Section
2-99; Taxicab and other vehicles
for hire, Section 2-100; Land use
application and escrow fees,
Section 2-101
2013-1 1-28-2013 Municipal food waste recycling
registration fee, Section 2-129,
Princeton Township Code
2013-2 1-28-2013 Police extra duty pay, Section
2-130, Princeton Township Code
2013-3 2-25-2013 Animal/dog license fee, Section
2-120, Princeton Township Code
2013-4 4-1-2013 Green Development Information/
Checklist; Preliminary major
subdivision checklist, 10B-158;
Major site plan checklist, Section
10B-230, Princeton Township
Code; Preliminary major
subdivision checklist, Section
17A-162; Major site plan
checklist, 17A-197 Princeton
Borough Code
2013-5 4-1-2013 Historic Preservation Plan
application fee, Section 10B-36,
Princeton Township Code; Section
17A-36, Princeton Borough Code
2013-6 4-22-2013 Parking regulations for
Community Pool Parking Yard and
Police Department Parking Yard,
Sections 11-23.8.1; 11-23.10,
11-23.11, Princeton Township
Code
§ BDL-1 PRINCETON CODE § BDL-1
BAO:694
Ord. No. Adoption Description Supp. No.
2013-7 4-22-2013 Fire Prevention Code - Repeal
Section 14-11 — 14-13 Princeton
Borough Code; repeal Section 8-1
— 8-5.1.7.2 Princeton Township
Code; add new Sections 14-11 —
14-13 to Princeton Borough Code
2013-8 4-22-2013 Vacate right-of-way, Special
2013-9 4-22-2013 Refund bond, Special
2013-10 4-22-2013 Bond, Special
2013-11 5-28-2013 CAP, Special
2013-12 5-28-2013 Refund bond, Special
2013-13 5-28-2013 Sewer easement, Special
2013-14 5-28-2013 Handicapped parking, Section
11-61.1, Princeton Township Code
2013-15 5-28-2013 Right-of-way dedication, Special
2013-16 6-24-2013 No parking zone, Section 11-12,
Princeton Township Code
2013-17 6-24-2013 Rental housing registration repeal
Sections 16-1 — 16-32, Princeton
Borough Code; repeal Sections
10-1 — 10-15, Princeton Township
Code; add new Sections 16-1 —
16-32 to Princeton Borough Code
2013-18 6-24-2013 Easement, Special
2013-19 7-8-2013 Sewer service charges, Section
18-22, Princeton Township Code;
Section 34-30, Princeton Borough
Code
2013-20 7-22-2013 Bond, Special
2013-21 7-22-2013 Bond, Special
2013-22 7-22-2013 Salaries, Special
2013-23 8-26-2013 Bond, Special
2013-24 8-26-2013 Bond, Special
2013-25 9-9-2013 Authorize lease of Monument
Hall, Special
§ BDL-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BDL-1
BAO:695
Ord. No. Adoption Description Supp. No.
2013-26 9-23-2013 Police Department — Line of
authority — repeal Sections 26-3,
26-4 Princeton Borough Code;
repeal Section 15-4 Princeton
Township Code; add new Section
26-3 to Princeton Borough Code
2013-27 10-14-2013 Animal Control Advisory
Committee, Section 2-116,
Princeton Township Code
2013-28 10-28-2013 No parking certain hours,
11-11.3; no parking zones,
Section 11-12, Princeton
Township Code
2013-29 11-12-2013 Appropriation, Special
2013-30 12-9-2013 Sidewalk, curb and gutter repairs,
Section 28-13, Princeton Borough
Code; Chapter 19, Editor's Note,
Princeton Township Code
2013-31 12-9-2013 Bond, Special
2014-1 2-18-2014 Amends Princeton Borough Code
traffic-No stopping or standing;
No parking anytime; Metered onstreet
parking zones; Metered
parking yards; General permit
parking yards; Handicapped
parking-parking yards; Overnight
parking permits, Sections 19-17,
19-22, 19-24, 19-25, 19-28, 19-30,
19-31
2014-2 2-18-2014 Amends Princeton Township Code
traffic: Handicapped parking
zones, Section 11-11.1
2014-3 3-10-2014 Amends Princeton Borough Code
traffic: No parking anytime,
Section 19-22
2014-4 4-28-2014 CAP, Special
2014-5 4-28-2014 Bond, Special
2014-6 4-28-2014 Acceptance of deed for easement,
Special
§ BDL-1 PRINCETON CODE § BDL-1
BAO:696
Ord. No. Adoption Description Supp. No.
2014-7 5-27-2014 Consolidates portions of Chapter I
of the Princeton Borough Code,
1974 by repealing Sections 1-1 —
1-7 and replacing in the Princeton
Borough Code new Sections 1-1 —
1-6 and 2-102 and repealing
Sections 1-1 — 1-6 in the
Princeton Township Code, 1968
2014-8 5-27-2014 Consolidates portions of Chapter
2 of the Princeton Borough Code,
1974 by repealing Sections 2-1 —
2-50 and the Princeton Township
Code, 1968 by repealing Sections
2-1 — 2-19.2; 2-43 — 2-53.2; 2-60
— 2-68; 2-74 — 2-80 and revising
the Princeton Borough Code as
follows: Article I Municipal
Governing Body; Article II
Municipal Departments and
Offices; Division 1 - Department of
Administration and Finance;
Division 2 - Municipal Attorney;
Division 3 - Municipal Prosecutor;
Municipal Public Defender;
Division 4 - Office of Municipal
Clerk; Division 5 - Division of
Finance; Division 6 - Dept. of
Engineering; Division 7 -Dept. of
Infrastructure and Operations
2014-9 5-27-2014 Parades - Repeal Chapter 24, add
new Chapter 24, Princeton
Borough Code
2014-10 5-27-2014 Pay-to-Play - repeal Sections Art.
XIX Sections 2-81 — 2-83 and Art.
XXI Sections 2-87 — 2-92 of the
Princeton Township Code 1976;
add Article XXI, Sections 2-87 —
2-93 to the Princeton Township
Code
§ BDL-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BDL-1
BAO:697
Ord. No. Adoption Description Supp. No.
2014-11 5-27-2014 Municipal Court - Repeal Section
2-66 and Chapter 20 of the Code
of the Borough of Princeton and
Section 2-93 and Chapter 12 and
Chapter 2 Article XVII (Sections
2-69 — 2-73) of the Princeton
Township Code and add new
Chapter 12, Municipal Court to
the Princeton Township Code
2014-12 5-27-2014 Peddling and soliciting - Repeal
Sections 25-1 — 25-38 and
Section 2-98 of the Code of the
Borough of Princeton; repeal
Sections 14-1 — 14-13.2 and
amend Section 2-125; fees of
Princeton Township Code; add
new Chapter 14 - Peddling,
Soliciting and Related Activities to
the Princeton Township Code
2014-13 5-27-2014 Corner House - Repeal Sections
27A-1 — 27A — 3 and 2-77 of the
Princeton Borough Code and
Sections 2-84 — 2-86 and 2-104 of
the Princeton Township Code; add
new Chapter 27A, Corner House
to the Princeton Borough Code
2014-14 5-27-2014 Hotel Usage Tax - Amend Chapter
15A of the Princeton Borough
Code
2014-15 5-27-2014 Jogging - Repeal and replace
Princeton Township Code Chapter
10A.1
2014-16 5-27-2014 Princeton Public Library - Repeal
Chapter 18 and Section 2-70 of
the Princeton Borough Code and
Section 2-33 and 2-97 of the
Princeton Township Code; add
Chapter 18 Libraries to the
Princeton Borough Code
§ BDL-1 PRINCETON CODE § BDL-1
BAO:698
Ord. No. Adoption Description Supp. No.
2014-17 5-27-2014 Environmental Commission -
Repeal Section 2-68 and Chapter
12 of the Princeton Borough Code
and Sections 2-95 and 2-31 —
2-32.6 of the Princeton Township
Code; add new Chapter 12 to the
Princeton Borough Code
2014-18 6-9-2014 Amend Princeton Borough Code
certificates of compliance
16-7(a)(1)
2014-19 6-23-2014 Amend Princeton Borough Code -
Traffic Sections 19-17,19-22 and
19-24
2014-20 6-23-2014 Acquisition of property, Special
2014-21 7-14-2014 Landscape regulations - Repeal
Chapter 10C, Princeton Township
Code
2014-22 7-14-2014 Amend Environmental
Commission - Section 12-6 of the
Princeton Borough Code
2014-23 7-14-2014 Accept sanitary sewer easement,
Special
2014-24 7-14-2014 Bond, Special
2014-25 7-14-2014 Bond, Special
2014-26 7-21-2014 Repeal Section 2-83 - Shade Tree
Commission and Chapter 33 Trees
and Shrubs, Princeton Borough
Code; repeal Sections 2-23 — 2-25
and 2-110-Shade Tree
Commission and Chapter 22 -
Trees and Shrubs - Princeton
Township Code; add new Chapter
22 - Trees and Shrubs - Princeton
Township Code
§ BDL-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BDL-1
BAO:699
Ord. No. Adoption Description Supp. No.
2014-27 7-28-2014 Repeal Yard Waste Collection -
Art. III - Chapter 15, Princeton
Borough Code; repeal Chapter 19
Art. 1A (except Schedules B&C)
Princeton Township Code; add
new Chapter 19 Art. 1A Leaf,
branch and log collection with
Schedules B and C now Schedules
A and B of the Princeton Township
Code
2014-28 7-28-2014 Bond, Special
2014-29 7-28-2014 Amend No parking zones - Section
11-12, Princeton Township Code
2014-30 8-25-2014 Salaries, Special
2014-31 8-25-2014 Parking prohibited, Section 11-61,
Princeton Township Code
2014-32 8-25-2014 Vacate sewer line, Special
2014-33 8-25-2014 No parking zones, Section 19-22,
Princeton Borough Code
2014-34 8-25-2014 Bond, Special
2014-35 8-25-2014 Noise - Repeal Chapter 21 of the
Princeton Borough Code and
Sections 13-101 — 13-10.4 of the
Princeton Township Code and
reenact Chapter 21 of the
Princeton Borough Code
2014-36 9-22-2014 Mid-block crosswalks, 19-5
Princeton Borough Code;
consolidates Section 11-5.1 of the
Princeton Township Code into the
Princeton Borough Code
2014-37 9-22-2014 Ban use of hydraulic fracturing
(fracking), 10B-254 of Princeton
Township Code; 17A-364 of the
Princeton Borough Code
2014-38 9-22-2014 Acquisition of property, Special
2014-39 10-13-2014 Amends Borough Code § 19-22, no
parking zones
2014-40 10-27-2014 Bond, Special
§ BDL-1 PRINCETON CODE § BDL-1
BAO:700
Ord. No. Adoption Description Supp. No.
2014-41 10-27-2014 Repeals 2-79, Recreation Board;
Ch. 17, Joint Recreation Board;
Ch. 24A, Parks and public plazasregulation
of conduct from
Borough Code; repeals 2-106,
Recreation Board; Ch. 16, Parks
and Recreation from Township
Code; add Ch. 16, Recreation and
Parks and Similar Public Places to
Township Code
2014-42 11-10-2014 Amends Borough Code § 19-22, no
parking zones; 19-23, nonmetered
on-street parking zones; metered
on-street parking zones, 19-24,
add 19-37 Princeton High School/
Westminster College
Neighborhood Permit Parking
District
2014-43 11-24-2014 Deletes Chapter 10B, Art. XI,
Subdivision XXI
(10B-272.61-10B-272.64)
Residential Senior Community-1
Overlay Zone (RSC-1) District;
renumber: subdivision XXII RSC-2
District, subdivision XXIII,
Environmental Education, Land
Preservation and Educational
Uses; Subdivision XXIV, G-1
Overlay Zone, amend Zoning Map
2014-44 12-8-2014 Delete 2-102, Historic
Preservation; amends 10B-2,
definitions; deletes
10B-41.1-10B-41.4;
10B-230(a)(11);
10B-240-1-10B-240.3, 10B-272.4,
10B-272.5 of the Township Code;
deletes 17A-27.1-17A-27.4,
17A-118.6-17A-118.8;
17A-162(a)(11); 17A-174.1,
17A-177.1-17A-178.1, 17A-193A;
amends 17A-201 add to Chapter
10B of Township Code Article IA,
definitions; amends 10B-36; adds
Article XIII, Historic Preservation
§ BDL-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BDL-1
BAO:701
Ord. No. Adoption Description Supp. No.
2014-45 12-15-2014 Amends Borough Ch. 22, adds
hours of operation for restaurants
and eating and drinking
establishments, retail food
establishments, retail sales and
personal services businesses
2015-1 2-10-2015 Amend 11-23.2, Stopping or
standing prohibited-Township
Code
2015-2 2-10-2015 Acceptance of deed of
conservation easement, Special
2015-3 3-9-2015 Amends 19-22 no parking zones-
Borough Code; 19-23, nonmetered
on-street parking-Borough Code
2015-4 3-23-2015 Appropriation, Special
2015-5 3-23-2015 Amends 2-130, police extra duty
pay-Township Code
2015-6 4-27-2015 COLA, Special
2015-7 4-27-2015 Capital, Special
2015-8 4-27-2015 Parking Utility
2015-9 4-27-2015 Sewer trust, Special
2015-10 4-27-2015 Bond, Special
2015-11 4-27-2015 Bond, Special
2015-12 4-27-2015 Repeals 17A-205.4(a)(b) of
Borough Code; amends
10B-340.3(a)(1), 10B-340.4(a)(1)-
of Township Code-affordable
housing development fees
2015-13 4-27-2015 Salary, Special
2015-14 4-27-2015 Purchase property-9 Hilltop
Ordinance, Special
2015-15 4-27-2015 Bond-Sidewalk Ordinance, Special
2015-16 5-11-2015 Mutual Aid Agreement, Special
2015-17 6-8-2015 Amends 19-14, Speed limits
2015-18 6-8-2015 Amends 19-22, no parking zone
2015-19 6-8-2015 Amends 34-30, Princeton Borough
Code and 18-22, Princeton
Township Code-sewer service
charge
§ BDL-1 PRINCETON CODE § BDL-1
BAO:702
Ord. No. Adoption Description Supp. No.
2015-20 6-22-2015 Merges Articles I-III, V, VI and VII
and Article V, Divisions 1-13 of
Princeton Borough and Township
Land Use Codes-delete Articles I,
II, III, V, VI, VII and Division 1-13
of Ch. 17A of Borough Code;
deletes sections 2-99, 2-100,
2-102, 2-128 and Ch. 10B-Articles
I, IA, II, III, V, VI, VII and Article
IV, Divisions 1-13 of the Township
Code-Add Articles I — VII to Ch.
10B, Princeton Township Code
which will apply to all lands in
Princeton.
2015-21 7-13-2015 Amends Borough Code,
Ch.19,Traffic, 19-5, Mid-block
crosswalks
2015-22 7-27-2015 Bond, Special
2015-23 8-10-2015 Repeals, 14-1, 14-1.1, 14-6, 14-7,
14-7.1, fire alarms from Borough
Code; Repeals Ch. 2A, Alarm
Systems from Township Code, add
Ch. 2A Alarm Systems
Regulations to Township Code
2015-24 8-10-2015 Repeals Ch. 4 of Borough Code
and Chapter 3 of Township Code,
repeals 13-5 of Township Code,
alcoholic beverage consumption
adds Ch. 3, Alcoholic Beverages
2015-25 8-10-2015 Repeals Ch. 26 of Borough Code
and Ch. 15 of Township Code,
Police Department add Ch. 15,
Police Department to Township
Code
2015-26 8-10-2015 Repeal Ch. 31 of Princeton
Borough and Ch. 21 of Princeton
Township Code, Taxicabs and
Other Vehicles for Hire, add Ch.
31 to Princeton Borough Code,
Taxicabs and other Vehicles for
Hire
2015-27 8-10-2015 Accept donation of property,
Special
2015-28 8-24-2015 Salary, Special
§ BDL-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BDL-1
BAO:703
Ord. No. Adoption Description Supp. No.
2015-29 8-24-2015 Amends Princeton Township Code
Ch. 11, Traffic; 11-23.1, parking
prohibited anytime
2015-30 8-24-2015 Amends Princeton Borough Code
Ch. 19, Traffic; 19-12, bus stops
2015-31 9-15-2015 Authorizes acceptance of
property, Special
2015-32 9-15-2015 Amends Princeton Township Code
Ch. 11, Traffic; 11-12 parking
prohibited anytime
2015-33 9-28-2015 Amends Princeton Township Code
Ch. 10B, Land Use; 10B-11,
Zoning Board of Adjustmentincrease
number of alternates
2015-34 10-12-2015 Easements, Special
2015-35 12-7-2015 Bond, Special
2015-36 12-7-2015 Amends Princeton Borough code
Ch. 17A, Land Use; 17A-368,
accessory signs-permitted in
business districts
2015-37 12-7-2015 Amends Princeton Township
Code, Ch. 2, Administration;
2-128, Land Use Application and
Escrow fees; 10B-32(a),
application fees; educational fees;
escrow deposits and inspection
fees
2015-38 12-7-2015 Amends Princeton Borough Code,
Ch. 17A, Land Use; deletes
17A-403, reconstruction
2015-39 12-7-2015 Amends Princeton Township Code
Ch. 10B, Land Use; 10B-247,
minimum lot dimensions and
Schedule of Regulations
2015-40 12-7-2015 Acceptance of right-of-way,
Special
§ BDL-1 PRINCETON CODE § BDL-1
BAO:704
Ord. No. Adoption Description Supp. No.
2015-41 12-7-2015 Amends Princeton Borough Code
Ch. 2, Administration; repeals
2-92, amusement license fees;
repeals Ch. 5, Amusements;
amends Princeton Township Code
Ch. 2, Administration; 2-119,
amusement license fees; amends
Ch. 4, Amusements; repeals
Articles I and II; amends Article
III and renumbers it as Article I,
Legalized Games of Chance
2015-42 12-7-2015 Amends Princeton Borough Code
Ch. 19, Traffic; 19-12, bus stops
2015-43 12-21-2015 Amends Princeton Borough Code
Ch. 34, Water and Sewers; Article
VI (Sections 34-42-34-45), sewer
connection fees
2015-44 12-21-2015 Amends Princeton Borough Code;
repeals Ch. 2, Administration,
2-93, animal dog license fees;
repeals Ch. 6, Animals and Fowl;
adopts new Princeton Borough
Code Ch. 6, Animal Control;
Princeton Township Code; amends
Ch. 2, Administration 2-120,
animal dog license fees; repeals
Ch. 6, Dogs; amends Ch. 13,
Offenses-Miscellaneous; repeals
13-2, 13-3, 13-4, feeding of deer
2015-45 12-21-2015 Amends Princeton Borough Code
Ch.2, Administration; repeals
2-78, Cable Television Committee;
repeals Ch.7, Auctioneers;
amends Princeton Township Code
Ch. 2, Administration; repeals
2-105, Cable Television
Committee; repeals Ch. 5AAA,
Joint Cable Television Committee
2015-46 12-21-2015 Amends Princeton Borough Code
Ch. 16, Housing Articles I, II and
III in entirety
2015-47 12-21-2015 Amends Princeton Borough Code
Ch. 14, Fire; Article II, Fire
Prevention Code
§ BDL-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BDL-1
BAO:705
Ord. No. Adoption Description Supp. No.
2015-48 12-21-2015 Amends Princeton Borough Code
Ch. 17A, Land Use; 17A-201,
definitions; amends Princeton
Township Code Ch. 10B, Land
Use; 10B-241, definitions
2018-1 2-12-2018 Amends Citizen Finance
Committee, Township - Section
2-111, Borough - Section 2-84
2018-2 2-12-2018 Street Vacation, Special
2018-3 3-12-2018 Amends Traffic, 4 Ton Weight
Limit, Township Section 11-6
2018-4 3-12-2018 Bond, Special
2018-5 3-12-2018 Property Transfer, Special
2018-6 3-26-2018 CAP Bank, Special
2018-7 4-9-2018 Bond, Special
2018-8 4-9-2018 Bond, Special
2018-9 4-9-2018 Bond, Special
2018-10 4-9-2018 Bond, Special
2018-11 5-21-2018 Amends Zoning Township -
amends 10B-2 Definitions,
replaces 10B-109.1 through
10B-109.4 Replaces Articles VIII
through XB, 10B-127 through
10B-240.13 Borough -repeals
17A-118.1 through 17A-118.5
(Article IV. Div 14), 17A-131
through 17A-199 (Articles VIII
through X)
2018-12 5-21-2018 Streets and Sidewalks, Township -
repeals Township 2-126 street
opening fees, replaces Township
Ch 19 with Streets, Sidewalks,
Bike Lanes and Shared User
Paths, retains Schs A and B;
Borough - repeals Ch 28 Streets
and Sidewalks, repeals 2-97, fees
for occupation of right-of-way,
amends 2-99, Street and Sidewalk
Opening and Occupation Fees
2018-13 7-9-2018 Acquisition of Property, Special
§ BDL-1 PRINCETON CODE § BDL-1
BAO:706
Ord. No. Adoption Description Supp. No.
2018-14 7-23-2018 Solar panels in residential
districts, Township - 10B-255
Permitted uses; Borough -
17A-228 Uses permitted as of
right
2018-15 8-13-2018 Bond, Special
2018-16 8-13-2018 Amends Speed Limits, Township
11-2
2018-17 8-27-2018 Wedding fees, Borough 2-91
2018-18 8-27-2018 Salaries, Special
2018-19 9-11-2018 Property conveyance, Special
2018-20 9-24-2018 Comcast Franchise Agreement,
adds Comcast letter, 5AA-14(e),
Exhibit A
2018-21 10-22-2018 Easement, Special
2018-22 10-22-2018 Easement, Special
2018-23 10-22-2018 Amends Traffic - loading zones,
parking, parking rates, Township -
11-19.2, 11-19.2.1 Borough-
19-10, 19-20, 19-21, 19-24, 19-25,
19-32
2018-24 11-19-2018 Amends Zoning Township -
10B-255.2 Neighborhood
Residential Zoning Standards,
10B-241 Definitions, 10B-246
Schedule of Regulations, 10B-251
Buildings height- setback ratio,
10B-255.1 Residential front
porches.
§ BDL-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BDL-1
BAO:707
Ord. No. Adoption Description Supp. No.
Borough - 17A-201 definitions,
Deletes coverage limitations
applicable to one-family and twofamily
dwellings-17A-232(a),
17A-240(a), 17A-265,17A-266,
Amends height limit - 17A-246,
Amends heights limit and
coverage at 17A-258, Amends
17A-373 (a)(1) Exceptions to lot
size requirements — Existing
small lots, Amends 17A-376 Side
and rear yards, Amends 17A-377
Projections into yards; fences or
walls; paved areas, Amends
17A-377.1 Residential design
regulation, Amends 17A-402
(Noncomplying building)
enlargement, Adds 17A-403
Neighborhood Residential Zoning
Standards.
2018-25 12-17-2018 Salaries, Special
2019-1 — Not adopted
2019-2 — Not adopted
2019-3 2-11-2019 Amends Public Transit Advisory
and Corner House Board,
alternate members, Borough -
2-90B,27A-1
2019-4 2-11-2019 Amends Civil Rights Commission,
Borough - 2-90C
2019-5 2-25-2019 Abolishes Complete Streets
Committee, amends Bicycle
Advisory membership, Borough -
2-80
2019-6 2-25-2019 Amends permitted FAR for
Laboratory research in OR-2 zone,
Township-10B-241
2019-7 2-25-2019 Amends Traffic - metered parking
and parking rates, Borough-19-20,
19-21, 19-32
2019-8 3-25-2019 Right-of-Way permits, Township -
adds Article X, Section 19-10
2019-9 4-8-2019 CAP Bank, Special
§ BDL-1 PRINCETON CODE § BDL-1
BAO:708
Ord. No. Adoption Description Supp. No.
2019-10 4-8-2019 Amends Affordable Housing,
Township - 10B-242 Zoning map,
10B-244 Zoning districts, 10B-246
Regulations included: Schedule,
10B-256.2 Affordable Housing 3
Residential Zone
2019-11 3-25-2019 Bond, Special
2019-12 3-25-2019 Street vacation, Special
2019-13 3-25-2019 Amends Uniform Fire Code,
Borough - replaces Ch 14, 14-1
through 14-25
2019-14 4-8-2019 Amends sidewalk cafes, Township
- 3-25 Alcoholic beverage
consumption and possession in
public places Borough - replaces
Ch 29 Sidewalk Cafes, 29-1
through 29-10
2019-15 — Not adopted
2019-16 4-22-2019 Property donation, Special
2019-17 5-6-2019 Bond, Special
2019-18 5-6-2019 Bond, Special
2019-19 5-6-2019 Appropriation, Special
2019-20 5-6-2019 Bond, Special
2019-21 5-6-2019 Bond, Special
2019-22 5-28-2019 Bond, Special
2019-23 5-28-2019 Amends Traffic - Loading zones,
Parking and Parking rates,
Borough- 19-10, 19-24, 19-32,
19-37A
2019-24 5-28-2019 Easement, Special
2019-25 6-10-2019 License Agreement, Special
2019-26 7-8-2019 Unisex Single Occupancy
Restrooms, Borough - 11-9
2019-27 6-10-2019 Amends sewer connection fees,
Borough - 34-42 through 34-45
2019-28 — Not adopted
§ BDL-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BDL-1
BAO:709
Ord. No. Adoption Description Supp. No.
2019-29 6-10-2019 Amends Traffic - Borough -
amends 19-24 metered on-street
parking, 19-32, parking fees, adds
Article XIII 19-39, Omnibus
Parking (tour buses)
2019-30 8-5-2019 Agreement DWM Holdings,
Special
2019-31 8-26-2019 Agreement, Special
2019-32 7-22-2019 Amends Police Department,
Borough -26-1 Establishment of
Police Department, 26-3
Appointment; Promotion;
Qualifications Generally
2019-33 8-26-2019 Establishes Government Energy
Aggregation Program, Special
2019-34 8-26-2019 Agreement, Special
2019-35 9-9-2019 Salaries, Special
2019-36 10-28-2019 Amends Traffic - parking at the
Princeton Station Metered
parking yard, Borough- 19-25,
19-32
2019-37 10-28-2019 Amends Noise, Borough- 21-2
2019-38 11-12-2019 Easement, Special
Township Code
Chapter TAO
TOWNSHIP ADOPTING ORDINANCE
Chapter T1
(RESERVED)
Former Chapter 1, General Provisions, previously codified herein, and
containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 90-21, 2002-4 and 2006-4 was
repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2014-7. See Ordinance No. 2014-7
and Chapter 1 of the Princeton Borough Code.
Chapter T2
ADMINISTRATION
§ BDL-1 PRINCETON CODE § BDL-1
BAO:710
ARTICLE I
(Reserved)
§ T2-1. through 2-2 (Reserved) [Ord. No. 2014-8]
§ T2-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T2-1
BAO:711

ARTICLE II
(Reserved)
§ T2-3. through 2-9 (Reserved) [Ord. No. 2014-8]
§ T2-3 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T2-3
BAO:713

ARTICLE III
(Reserved)
§ T2-10. through 2-17 (Reserved) [Ord. No. 2014-8]
§ T2-10 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T2-10
BAO:715

ARTICLE IV
(Reserved)
§ T2-18. through 2-19.2 (Reserved) [Ord. No. 2014-8]
§ T2-18 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T2-18
BAO:717

ARTICLE V
Board of Health
[Reserved by Ord. No. 2017-59]
§ T2-20. (Reserved)
§ T2-21. through 2-22 (Reserved) [Ord. No. 2012-22]
§ T2-20 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T2-21
BAO:719

ARTICLE VI
(Reserved)
§ T2-23. through 2-25 (Reserved) [Ord. No. 2014-26]
§ T2-23 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T2-23
BAO:721

ARTICLE VII
(Reserved)
§ T2-26. through 2-30 (Reserved) [Ord. No. 2012-22]
§ T2-26 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T2-26
BAO:723

ARTICLE VIII
(Reserved)
§ T2-31. through 2-32.6 (Reserved) [Ord. No. 2014-17]
§ T2-31 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T2-31
BAO:725

ARTICLE IX
(Reserved)
§ T2-33. (Reserved) [Ord. No. 2014-16]
§ T2-33 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T2-33
BAO:727

ARTICLE X
(Reserved)
§ T2-34. through 2-42 (Reserved) [Ord. No. 856]
§ T2-34 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T2-34
BAO:729

ARTICLE XI
(Reserved)
§ T2-43. through 2-48 (Reserved) [Ord. No. 2014-8]
§ T2-43 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T2-43
BAO:731

ARTICLE XII
(Reserved)
§ T2-48.1. through 2-52 (Reserved) [Ord. No. 2014-8]
§ T2-48.1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T2-48.1
BAO:733

ARTICLE XIII
(Reserved)
§ T2-53. through 2-53.2 (Reserved) [Ord. No. 2014-8]
§ T2-53 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T2-53
BAO:735

ARTICLE XIV
Miscellaneous Administrative Fees
§ T2-54. Government record fees.21 [Ord. No. 2002-26, § 1; Ord. No.
2010-20, § 1; Ord. No. 2010-39, § 1.]
(a) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to set forth the township's fee
schedule for obtaining copies of government records.
(b) Definitions. As used in this section:
GOVERNMENT RECORD(S) OR RECORD(S) — Shall mean any
information subject to public inspection which is maintained by the
township in written, audio, video, electronic or other form and as
defined by the Open Public Records Act, N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq.
SPECIAL SERVICE CHARGE — Shall mean a charge, in addition to the
actual cost of duplicating the government record(s), which shall reflect
the expense associated with extensive use of township information,
technology or resources, or the extensive clerical or supervisory
assistance by township personnel necessary to accommodate requests
to examine and/or provide copies of the record(s), and as defined by the
Open Public Records Act, N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5c and 47:1A-5d.
(c) Fee schedule. See Section 2-122 for fees established by Ord. No.
2012-22.
(d) Postage. See Section 2-122 for fees established by Ord. No. 2012-22.
(e) Special service charges.
(1) A special service charge may be applied by the custodian of records
or his/her designee in the following circumstances:
a. When the nature, format, manner of collation or volume of a
government record embodied in the form of printed matter to
be inspected, examined or copied is such that the record
cannot be reproduced by ordinary size or involves an
extraordinary expenditure of time and effort to accommodate
the request; or
b. When a request is for a government record in a medium not
routinely used by the township; or
c. When a request is for a government record not routinely
developed or maintained by the township; or
d. When a request for a government record requires a substantial
amount of manipulation or programming of information
technology by the township and the cost of such manipulation
21.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance Nos. 84-16, 90-34,
93-26, 94-24, 95-11, 96-11, 97-9 and 98-30.
§ T2-54 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T2-54
BAO:737
§ T2-54.1. (Reserved) [Ord. No. 2012-23]
§ T2-54.2. (Reserved) [Ord. No. 2002-26]
or programming is not otherwise included in the fee or fees
listed in subsection 2-54(c).
(2) The special service charge rate for supervisory, programming and/
or clerical services shall be charged per hour and as follows:
a. The hourly rate shall be the hourly wage of the employee
conducting the supervisory, programming and/or clerical
services as set by the township committee by resolution from
year to year and/or P.B.A. Agreement(s) from time to time.
b. The hourly wages of salaried personnel shall be calculated by
dividing the employee's annual salary as set by the township
committee by resolution and/or P.B.A. Agreement(s) by 26
(weeks) and then dividing that biweekly pay by the number of
hours worked in a biweekly period.
§ T2-54 PRINCETON CODE § T2-54.2
BAO:738
ARTICLE XV
Princeton Township Redevelopment Agency
§ T2-55. Created. [Ord. No. 88-15]
A redevelopment agency hereinafter known and referred to as the
"Princeton Township Redevelopment Agency" is hereby created by authority
of N.J.S.A. 40:55C-6.
§ T2-56. Appointment. [Ord. No. 88-15]
The township committee hereby appoints the township committee as
commissioners of the Princeton Township Redevelopment Agency.
§ T2-57. Terms of office. [Ord. No. 88-15]
The commissioners' terms of office are as follows: One commissioner for
a term of one year, one commissioner for a term of two years, one
commissioner for a term of three years, one commissioner for a term of
four years, and one commissioner for a term of five years and until their
respective successors are appointed and have qualified.
§ T2-58. Additional commissioner to be appointed. [Ord. No. 88-15.]
The mayor shall hereby appoint an additional commissioner of the Princeton
Township Redevelopment Agency for a term of five years.
§ T2-59. Notification. [Ord. No. 88-15.]
The municipal clerk is hereby directed to notify the commissioner of
community affairs that the township committee has created the Princeton
Township Redevelopment Agency and requests the commissioner of
community affairs to appoint the remaining commissioner for the Princeton
Township Redevelopment Agency as required by N.J.S.A. 40:55C-6.
§ T2-55 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T2-59
BAO:739

ARTICLE XVI
(Reserved)
§ T2-60. through 2-68 (Reserved) [Ord. No. 2014-8]
§ T2-60 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T2-60
BAO:741

ARTICLE XVII
(Reserved)
§ T2-69. through 2-73 (Reserved) [Ord. No. 2014-11]
§ T2-69 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T2-69
BAO:743

ARTICLE XVIII
(Reserved)
§ T2-74. through 2-80 (Reserved) [Ord. No. 2014-8]
§ T2-74 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T2-74
BAO:745

ARTICLE XIX
(Reserved)
§ T2-81. through 2-83 (Reserved) [Ord. No. 2014-10]
§ T2-81 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T2-81
BAO:747

ARTICLE XX
(Reserved)
§ T2-84. through 2-86 (Reserved) [Ord. No. 2014-13]
§ T2-84 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T2-84
BAO:749

ARTICLE XXI
Pay-to-Play Regulations; Campaign Contributions
§ T2-87. Prohibition on awarding public contracts to certain
business entities. [Ord. No. 2014-10]
(a) Any other provision of law to the contrary notwithstanding, Princeton
or any of its purchasing agents or agencies or those of its independent
authorities, as the case may be, shall not enter into an agreement or
otherwise contract to procure professional, banking, insurance
coverage services or any other consulting services, including those
awarded pursuant to a "fair and open" bid process, from any business
entity, if that entity has solicited or made any contribution of money, or
pledge of a contribution, including in-kind contributions, and/or loans,
to a municipal campaign committee or fund of any candidate, or holder
of, a public office within Princeton having ultimate responsibility for the
award of the contract, or campaign committee financially supporting
such candidate or officeholder, or to any Princeton or Mercer County
party committee, or to any political action committee (PAC) that
regularly engages in the support of municipal elections and/or
municipal parties in excess of the thresholds specified in subsection (d)
within one calendar year immediately preceding the date of the
contract or agreement.
(b) No business entity which enters into negotiations for, or agrees to, any
contract or agreement with Princeton or any department or agency
thereof or of its independent authorities for the rendition of
professional, banking or insurance coverage services or any other
consulting services, including those awarded pursuant to a "fair and
open" bid process, shall violate this section by making or soliciting any
contribution of money, or pledge of a contribution, including in-kind
contributions, or loans, to a municipal campaign committee or fund of
any candidate for, or holder of, a public office within Princeton having
ultimate responsibility for the award of the contract, or campaign
committee financially supporting such candidate or officeholder, or to
any political action committee (PAC) that engages in the support of
municipal elections and/or municipal parties, or to any Princeton or
Mercer County party committee, between the time of first
communications between that business entity and Princeton regarding
a specific contract or agreement and the later of the termination of
negotiations or the completion of the contract or agreement.
(c) For purposes of this article, a "business entity" seeking a public
contract means an individual including the individual's spouse, if any,
and any child living at home; person; firm; corporation; professional
corporation; partnership; organization; or association. The definition of
a business entity includes all principals who own 10% or more of the
equity in the corporation or business trust, partners, and officers in the
aggregate employed by the entity as well as any subsidiaries directly
controlled by the business entity.
§ T2-87 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T2-87
BAO:751
§ T2-88. Contributions made prior to the effective date. [Ord. No.
2014-10]
No contribution of money or any other thing of value, including in-kind
contributions, made by a business entity to any municipal candidate for
mayor or council or office holder, or any Princeton or Mercer County party
committee or PAC referenced in this article shall be deemed a violation of
this article, nor shall an agreement for property, goods, or services, of any
kind whatsoever, be disqualified thereby, if that contribution was made by
the business entity prior to the effective date of this article.
§ T2-89. Contribution and disclosure statement by business entity.
[Ord. No. 2014-10]
(d) An individual meeting the definition of "business entity" under this
section may annually contribute during the twelve-month period prior
to local government contract negotiations a maximum of $300 each for
a municipal campaign committee or fund of any candidate, or holder of,
the Princeton public office having the ultimate responsibility for the
award of a contract or agreement, and a maximum of $300 to any
Princeton or Mercer County party committee. However, any group of
individuals meeting the definition of "business entity" under this
section, including such principals, partners, and officers of the entity in
the aggregate, may not annually contribute for any purpose in excess of
$2,500 to a municipal campaign committee or fund of all Princeton
candidates, Princeton and/or Mercer County political parties and PACs
referenced in this article combined, during the twelve-month period
prior to local government contract negotiations.
(e) The limitations set forth in subsection (d) above shall not apply in the
event the subject contract is offered to the lowest responsible bidder
after public advertising for bids and quotes, pursuant to the competitive
bidding requirements of the Local Public Contracts Law and Rules,
N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.
(a) Prior to awarding any contract or agreement to procure services,
including banking or insurance coverage services, with any business
entity, Princeton or any of its purchasing agents or agencies, as the case
may be, shall receive a sworn statement from the business entity made
under penalty of perjury that the business entity has not made a
contribution in excess of the limits contained in section 2-87(d), or in
violation of the time period and recipients specified in section 2-87(a)
and (b).
(b) The business entity shall have a continuing duty to report any violations
of this article that may occur during the negotiation or duration of a
contract or agreement with Princeton. The certification required under
this section shall be made prior to entry into the contract or agreement
with Princeton and shall be in addition to any other certifications that
may be required by any other provision of law.
§ T2-87 PRINCETON CODE § T2-89
BAO:752
§ T2-90. Return of excess contributions. [Ord. No. 2014-10]
A business entity or Princeton candidate or officeholder or municipal or
county party committee or PAC referenced in this article may cure a
contribution which violates section 2-87(b) or is in excess of the limits
contained in section 2-87(d), if, within 30 days after the general election
following any such contribution, or upon written notice of violation from
Princeton, whichever occurs sooner, the business entity notifies the mayor
and council in writing and seeks and receives reimbursement of a
contribution from the municipal committee or fund of a Princeton candidate
or office holder, or any Princeton or Mercer County political party or PAC
referenced in this article.
§ T2-91. Penalty. [Ord. No. 2014-10]
(c) The business entity shall append a "Contribution Disclosure Statement"
to its sworn certification, which statement shall be a list specifying the
amount, date, and the recipient of any and all contributions reportable
under N.J.S.A. 19:44A-1 et seq., made by the entity and its principals to
or on behalf of any candidate, candidate committee, joint candidates
committee, continuing political committee, or political party committee
of, or within Mercer County for the time period reference in sections
2-87 and 2-88 above. The business entity shall have a continuing duty to
update said statement during the course of negotiations and/or contract
performance, as the case may be. No contract shall issue if the entity
has failed to submit a Contribution Disclosure Statement.
(a) All Princeton professional, banking, insurance and consulting services
contracts shall provide that it shall be a breach of the terms of the
contract for a business entity to: (i) make or solicit a contribution in
violation of this article; (ii) knowingly conceal or misrepresent a
contribution given or received; (iii) make or solicit contributions
through intermediaries for the purpose of concealing or
misrepresenting the source of the contribution, or the intended
beneficiary; (iv) make or solicit any contribution on the condition or
with the agreement that it will be contributed to a campaign committee
of any candidate or holder of the public office of Princeton; (v) engage
or employ a lobbyist or consultant with the intent or understanding that
such lobbyist or consultant would make or solicit any contribution,
which if made or solicited by the business entity itself, would subject
that entity to the restrictions of this article; (vi) fund contributions
made by third parties, including consultants, attorneys, family
members, and employees; (vii) engage in any exchange of contributions
to circumvent the intent of this article; or (viii) directly or indirectly,
through or by any other person or means, do any act which would
subject that entity to the restrictions of this article.
(b) Any business entity who violates (a) i-viii shall be disqualified from
eligibility for future Princeton contracts for a period of four calendar
years from the date of the violation.
§ T2-89 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T2-91
BAO:753
§ T2-92. Severability and effectiveness clause. [Ord. No. 2014-10]
§ T2-93. Prohibition of campaign contributions on municipal
property. [Ord. No. 2014-10]
For State law prohibiting the solicitation and making of campaign
contributions on municipal property, see N.J.S.A. 19:44A-19.1 (P.L. 2011, c.
204).
(c) It shall be a rebuttable presumption that failure to disclose a
contribution made in violation of this article is a knowing and
intentional act.
(a) If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this article is
for any reason held to be unconstitutional, invalid, or unenforceable by
a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the
remaining portions of this article.
(b) And any ordinance inconsistent with the terms of this article is hereby
repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
§ T2-91 PRINCETON CODE § T2-93
BAO:754
ARTICLE XXII
Agencies, Boards, Commissions and Committees
§ T2-94. Housing Authority. [Ord. No. 2012-22]
§ T2-95. (Reserved) [Ord. No. 2014-2017]
§ T2-96. Human Services Commission. [Ord. No. 2012-22]
§ T2-97. (Reserved) [Ord. No. 2014-16]
(a) There is hereby established a housing authority consisting of seven
members. Five members shall be appointed by the governing body, one
by the mayor, and one by the Commissioner of Community Affairs. The
members shall serve for terms of five years and until their respective
successors have been appointed and qualified; except that of the five
members first appointed by the governing body one shall be appointed
for a term of one year, one for a term of two years, one for a term of
three years, one for a term of four years and one for a term of five years.
Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as the original
appointments were made, but for the unexpired term.
(b) No more than one member of the housing authority may be an officer or
employee of the appointing municipality. A certificate of the
appointment or reappointment of any member shall be filed with the
clerk of the municipality and that certificate shall be conclusive
evidence of the due and proper appointment of that member. A member
of an authority shall receive no compensation for his services, but shall
be entitled to reimbursement for actual expenses necessarily incurred
in the discharge of the duties of membership, including travel expenses.
The powers of the authority shall be vested in the members thereof in
office from time to time. Four members shall constitute a quorum of the
authority for the purpose of conducting its business and exercising its
powers and all other purposes. Action may be taken by the authority
upon the affirmative vote of the majority, but not less than four of the
members present, unless in any case the bylaws of the authority shall
require a larger number. The authority shall select a chairperson and a
vice-chairperson from among its members, and shall employ an
executive director, who shall be its secretary.
(a) There is hereby established a human services commission consisting of
nine members and one non-voting liaison from the governing body. On
the initial appointment to the commission, three members shall be
appointed for a one-year term; three members shall be appointed for a
two-year term; and three members shall be appointed for a three-year
term. All reappointments shall be for a term of three years.
(b) Five members shall serve as a subcommittee of the commission and
serve as the local assistance board.
§ T2-94 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T2-98
BAO:755
§ T2-98. Board of Health. [Ord. No. 2012-22]
§ T2-99. (Reserved) [Reserved by Ord. No. 2015-20]
§ T2-100. (Reserved) [Reserved by Ord. No. 2015-20]
§ T2-101. (Reserved) [Reserved by Ord. No. 2016-13 § 3]
§ T2-102. (Reserved) [Reserved by Ord. No. 2014-44; Ord. No.
2015-20]
§ T2-103. Zoning Board of Adjustment. [Ord. No. 2012-22]
(a) There is hereby established a Board of Health consisting of seven
members, who shall be appointed by the mayor and council. On the
initial appointment to the board, two members shall be appointed for
one year, two members shall be appointed for two years, and three
members shall be appointed for three years. All reappointments shall
be for a term of three years. The mayor and council also will appoint
two alternates who shall hold office for a term of two years, except that
the terms of the alternate members first appointed shall be two years
for Alternate No. 1 and one year for Alternate No. 2. A vacancy
occurring otherwise than by the expiration of term shall be filled by the
appointing authority for the unexpired term only. The alternates will be
designated as "Alternate 1" and "Alternate 2", respectively, at the time
of appointment.
(b) An alternate member shall not be permitted to act on any matter in
which he has either directly or indirectly any personal or financial
interest. An alternate member may, after public hearing if requested, be
removed by the governing body for cause.
(c) An alternate member may participate in discussions of the proceedings
but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular
member. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular member
may vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a choice
must be made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1
shall vote first.
(a) Zoning board of adjustment established; composition; terms, vacancies;
disqualification of members; alternate members. The zoning board of
adjustment is hereby established pursuant to the Municipal Land Use
Law as the board of adjustment for the municipality.
(1) The board shall consist of seven regular members and two
alternate members.
(2) Regular members shall be appointed by the governing body for
terms of four years each, computed from January 1 of the year of
their appointment; except that full terms of regular members filled
for the first time under this chapter shall be so fixed (for four or less
§ T2-98 PRINCETON CODE § T2-103
BAO:756
§ T2-104. (Reserved) [Ord. No. 2014-13]
§ T2-105. (Reserved) [Reserved by Ord. No. 2015-45]
§ T2-106. (Reserved) [Reserved by Ord. No. 2014-41]
§ T2-107. (Reserved) [Reserved by Ord. No. 2016-14 § 4]
§ T2-108. Sewer Operating Committee. [Ord. No. 2012-22]
There is hereby established a sewer operating committee consisting of
three regular members, at least one of which with civil engineering or
municipal waste experience, and one voting liaison member from the
governing body. Of the three regular members, initially one shall be
appointed for one year, one for two years and one for three years.
Thereafter, each appointment shall be for a term of three years. The liaison
years) and so arranged that, to the greatest practicable extent,
the expiration of all terms of regular members will be distributed
evenly over the first four years after the initial appointment under
this chapter.
(3) Alternate members shall also be appointed by the governing body,
and their terms shall be two years each, computed from January 1
of the year of their appointment, except that of the appointments to
alternate membership first made under this section, one shall be
for a term of one year.
(4) A vacancy occurring in either type of membership otherwise than
by expiration of term shall be filled for the unexpired term only.
(5) No regular or alternate member may hold any elective office or
position under the municipality nor shall any member be permitted
to act on any matter in which he has, directly or indirectly, any
personal or financial interest.
(6) Alternate members shall be designated by the governing body at
the time of their appointment as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate
No. 2."
(7) Alternate members may participate in discussions of the
proceedings but may not vote except in the absence or
disqualification of a regular member. A vote shall not be delayed in
order that a regular member may vote instead of an alternate
member. In the event that a choice must be made as to which
alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote.
(b) Officers. The board of adjustment shall elect a chair and a vice-chair
from among its members and shall also select a secretary, who may but
need not be a member of the board.
§ T2-103 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T2-108
BAO:757
representative shall be appointed annually by the governing body and serve
a one-year term.
§ T2-109. Affordable housing board. [Ord. No. 2012-22]
§ T2-110. (Reserved) [Ord. No. 2014-26]
§ T2-111. Citizens' finance advisory committee. [Ord. No. 2012-22;
Ord. No. 2018-1]
(a) Formation; composition; terms, vacancies; compensation.
(1) There is hereby established an affordable housing board consisting
of seven regular and up to two alternate members. At least one
regular member shall be a member of the governing body and may
be the mayor.
(2) The term of the member of the governing body shall correspond to
his or her official tenure. The terms of the remaining regular and
alternate members shall be three years, computed from the first
day of January of the year of appointment, provided that the terms
of such members are staggered so that no more than two terms
expire each year. If a vacancy occurs among such members, it shall
be filled for the unexpired term only. Members shall serve after the
expiration of their terms until their successors have been appointed
and qualified.
Alternate members shall be designated at the time of appointment
as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2". Alternate members
may participate in discussions of the proceedings involving the
board but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification
of a regular member. Alternates shall be counted for purposes of
establishing a quorum for the board. In the event that a choice
must be made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate
No. 1 shall vote.
(3) All members shall serve without salary, but may be paid expenses
incurred in the performance of duties.
(b) Officers. The board shall elect a chairperson and a vice-chairperson
from among its members. Their terms of office shall be one year, and
they shall be eligible for reelection. The board shall also elect a
secretary, who may but need not be a member of the board, and it may
create and fill such other offices as it shall determine.
(a) There is hereby established a citizens' finance advisory committee
consisting of six members and a minimum of one non-voting liaison
from the governing body. Appropriate municipal staff as designated by
the administrator shall be assigned to attend meetings of the
committee.
§ T2-108 PRINCETON CODE § T2-111
BAO:758
§ T2-112. Flood and storm water commission. [Ord. No. 2012-22]
There is hereby established a flood and storm water commission consisting
of seven members, including one member of the environmental commission
and one member from the governing body. There shall also be a non-voting
liaison from the engineering department. The regular members shall be
appointed to three year terms except that the initial appointments shall be
staggered so that no more than three regular member terms expire each
year.
§ T2-113. (Reserved) [Ord. No. 2012-22; reserved by Ord. No.
2017-2]
§ T2-114. Public safety committee. [Ord. No. 2012-22]
There is hereby established a public safety committee consisting of four
members, including the mayor and administrator, both ex officio, and two
members of the governing body. The terms of the appointed members shall
expire on the first day of January next following their appointments, but
they shall serve after the expiration of their terms until their successors
shall have been appointed and qualified. Any vacancy in any of the
appointive offices shall be filled in like manner, but for the unexpired term
only. One of the appointed members shall be designated as the police
commissioner, and in that capacity such member shall be the chairperson
of the public safety committee. The public safety committee shall have the
powers and duties prescribed by law.
§ T2-115. (Reserved) [Reserved by Ord. No. 2016-14§ 4]
§ T2-116. Animal Control Advisory Committee. [Ord. No. 2012-22;
Ord. No. 2013-27; Ord. No. 2017-1]
There is hereby established an Animal Control Advisory Committee
consisting of no fewer than three and no more than five residents ("citizen
members"), at least one of whom has expertise in biology or animal control;
(b) The members should have, but are not required to have, experience in
one of the following disciplines: accounting, business administration,
finance, corporate financial planning, marketing research, marketing,
economics or computer science.
(c) Members shall serve for a term of three years computed from January 1
of the year of their appointment, except that terms filled for the first
time shall be so fixed (for three years or less) and arranged so that, to
the greatest practicable extent, no more than two members' terms shall
expire in the same year.
(d) A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of a term shall be
filled for the unexpired term only.
(e) The members shall serve without compensation.
§ T2-111 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T2-116
BAO:759
the Animal Control Officer; the Administrator or his or her designee; and a
non-voting liaison from the governing body. The citizen members shall be
appointed for three year terms except that the initial appointments shall be
for a one-year term, a two-year term and a three-year term.
§ T2-117. Rental housing board. [Ord. No. 2012-22]
(a) The rental housing board shall consist of seven regular members who
shall be residents of the municipality holding no other municipal office
or employment. Of the regular members first appointed, one shall have
a term of one year, two shall have a term of two years and four shall
have a term of three years. Thereafter, the term of a regular member
shall be three years. Two regular members shall be tenants, two regular
members shall be landlords who own dwelling units in the municipality
and three regular members shall be neither a tenant nor landlord. A
majority of the board shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of
business provided at least one landlord member and one tenant
member are present.
(b) All members shall serve after the expiration of their terms until their
successors shall be appointed and qualified. Vacancies occurring other
than by expiration of term shall be filled for the unexpired term only.
Members may be removed for cause upon written charges and after
hearing. Members shall serve without compensation but shall be
entitled to reimbursement, within budgetary limitations, for reasonable
and necessary expenses incurred by them in the performance of their
duties.
§ T2-116 PRINCETON CODE § T2-117
BAO:760
ARTICLE XXIII
Miscellaneous Fees
§ T2-118. Alarm system registration fees. [Ord. No. 2012-23; Ord.
No. 2015-23; Ord. No. 2017-14]
Burglar alarm $25
Fire alarm $25
Combination fire alarm/burglar
alarm
$50
Failure to register $50
False alarm (after 1):
2 false alarms $200
3 false alarms $300
4 false alarms $400
5 or more, plus response costs if
more than 10
$500
Intentional false alarm $200-$500
Failure to install as required by law $100
§ T2-119. Amusement license fees. [Ord. No. 2012-23; Ord. No.
2015-41 § 4]
Bingo/raffle/games of chance [Ord.
No. 2015-41 § 4]
N.J.S.A. 13:47-4.9
§ T2-120. Animal/dog license fees (per year). [Ord. No. 2012-23;
Ord. No. 2013-3; Ord. No. 2015-44 § 3]
Dog license
Neutered $20
Unneutered $23
Late fee $1 per month
Potentially dangerous dog license $700
Impoundment/redemption (dog and
cat)
Up to $24 per day plus cost (if any)
of emergency veterinary care or of
any additional care requested by the
owner
Kennel license
10 dogs or less $10
11 + dogs $25
§ T2-118 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T2-120
BAO:761
The fees established under paragraph (a) of this Section shall be charged
for dogs within Princeton as of the effective date of Ordinance No. 2013-3.
§ T2-121. Fire safety permit fees.
The permit fees shall be those set forth in the Uniform Fire Code, N.J.A.C.
5:71-2.3(b)(4) and N.J.A.C. 5:71-2.8(b):
§ T2-122. Government and police records fees. [Ord. No. 2012-23]
(a) Type 1: $100.
(b) Type II: $200.
(c) Type III: $350.
(d) Type IV: $600.
(e) Inspection Fees for non-life hazard uses:
Under 500 square feet $100
500-999 square feet $125
1,000-4,999 square feet $275
5,000-10,000 square feet $350
10,001-20,000 square feet $520
20,001-50,000 square feet $572
50,0001-100,000 square feet $624
Note: An additional $75 for each additional 50,000 square feet or
parts thereof above 100,000 square feet will be added to cover the
expense of performing the fire safety inspection.
One and two story parking decks will be charged a flat fee of $55 per
deck. Three or more multiple story parking decks will be charged a
flat fee $110 per deck.
(f) Inspection Fees for multifamily, rooming and boarding houses (non-life
hazard uses)
2 to 5 units $30 per unit
6-19 units $40 per unit
20 or more units $50 per unit
(g) Miscellaneous Fees under N.J.A.C. 5:71 et. seq.
Variance review fee $50
Fire code status fee $35
Failure to register non-life hazard $250
§ T2-120 PRINCETON CODE § T2-122
BAO:762
(a) Fee schedule. The fees for copies of government records shall be:
Black and white photocopies of
records in 8.5 inches by 11 inches
$0.05 per page
Black and white photocopies of
records in 8.5 inches by 14 inches
and 11 inches by 17 inches
$0.07 per page
Color photocopies Actual costs of duplication as
charged to the municipality
Maps:
24 inches by 36 inches tax and
other maps
$0.50 per page
36 inches by 36 inches tax and
other maps
$0.70 per page
36 inches by 44 inches street
maps
$0.85 per page
8.5 inches by 11 inches, 8.5
inches by 14 inches or 11 inches
by 17 inches maps
Fees per page in accordance with
subsection (a)(1)
Full set of tax maps (24 inches
by 36 inches)
$95
Full set of tax maps (11 inches
by 17 inches)
$23.75
Tax map overlays: Individual
print out of tax map overlay
Fees per page in accordance with
subsection (a)(4)
Including topographical
information
$7 per acre
Topographical maps (24 inches
by 36 inches sheets)
$7 per acre
Land Use Code Book $175 plus supplements
General Ordinances Code Book $250 plus supplements
Land Use Code Book Supplements Fees per page in accordance with
subsection (a)(1)
General Ordinances Code
Supplements
Fees per page in accordance with
subsection (a)(1)
Master Plan Actual costs of duplication as
charged to the municipality
Audiotapes $1.25 per tape
CDs/DVDs $1 per cd/dvd
Duplicate Tax Bill (carbon copy) $5
Duplicate Tax Sales Certificate $100
§ T2-122 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T2-122
BAO:763
§ T2-123. Housing Inspection Fees. [Ord. No. 212-23]
Police department records
Videotapes/Digital Records $8
Audiotapes $15
Certified copy of docket entry $5
MDT transcripts $8
Photographs Actual costs of duplication as
charged to the municipality
All other records Actual costs of duplication as
charged to the municipality
(b) Postage. Postage costs will be added to fees for copies of records
requested to be mailed and will be determined at the time of the
request.
(c) Miscellaneous charges for non-government records.
Police department:
Good conduct letters $10
Special events permit $25
Firearms identification card $5
Permit to purchase firearm $2
State firearms fee $25
Mental health search fee $15
Temporary parking permit $4
Fingerprinting for resident $10
DWI discovery $25
All other discovery $15
Returned check (NSF, Stop
Payment, etc.)
$25
(a) Certificate of Compliance:
Structures (1 or two dwelling
units)
$175 per unit
Multiple dwelling structures (3 or
more units)
$175 per unit
(b) Reinspections:
§ T2-122 PRINCETON CODE § T2-123
BAO:764
§ T2-124. Occupation of Right of Way Fees. [Ord. No. 2012-23]
Permit requiring road closure $200
Permit not requiring road closure $100
§ T2-125. Peddler, Solicitor, Transient Merchant License. [Ord. No.
2014-12]
Peddler, Solicitor, Transient
Merchant
$100
One-day peddler's license $25
§ T2-126. (Reserved) [Repealed by Ord. No. 2018-12. See Borough
Code, Section 2-99]
§ T2-127. Taxicabs and Other Vehicles for Hire. [Ord. No. 2012-23]
Taxicab license $50
Livery license $35
Taxicab or livery license issued to
holder of license
$15
All other licenses $25
Duplicate license $10
§ T2-128. Land Use application and escrow fees. [Ord. No. 2015-37
§ 1; Ord. No. 2016-26]
See section 10B-32 of the Code of the Township of Princeton, New Jersey,
1968.
§ T2-129. Registration fees. [Ord. No. 2013-1]
Annual registration fee to participate in the municipal food waste recycling
program $65.
This fee shall be applicable to all residents of Princeton participating in the
municipal food waste recycling program.
First reinspection $100 per unit
Second reinspection $150 per unit
Third and subsequent
reinspections
$250 per unit
§ T2-123 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T2-130
BAO:765
§ T2-130. Police extra duty pay. [Ord. No. 2013-2; Ord. No. 2015-5]
Rates to be charged for Police Officers performance of extra duty is the
highest Sergeant Rate plus 15% administrative fee per hour.
§ T2-131. through 2-139 (Reserved)
§ T2-130 PRINCETON CODE § T2-131
BAO:766
ARTICLE XXIV
Paperless Payroll
§ T2-140. Direct deposit for employee net pay required.
§ T2-140.1. Required. [Ord. No. 2016-05]
All employees of Princeton who receive compensation are required to have
direct deposit of their net pay as of January 1, 2016 in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 52:14-15f.2b et seq.
§ T2-140.2. Exemptions. [Ord. No. 2016-05]
Princeton employees may request, in writing, an exemption from the
provisions of Subsection 2-140.1 above. Such requests shall be directed
to the Municipal Administrator who, following his/her review of a request,
shall decide to either grant or deny the exemption request.
§ T2-140 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T2-140.2
BAO:767
Chapter T2A
ALARM SYSTEM REGULATIONS
Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history: Ordinance Nos.: 83-24, 85-5,
90-35, 91-3, 93-25, 2005-37, 2012-23.
§ T2A-1. Findings and declarations. [Ord. No. 2015-23 § 2]
The mayor and council hereby finds and declares as follows:
§ T2A-2. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2015-23 § 2]
This chapter is intended to:
§ T2A-3. Scope. [Ord. No. 2015-23 § 2]
Except as otherwise provided in this section and in section 2A-8 below,
the provisions of this chapter shall apply to any person who installs, has
installed, operates, maintains or owns any alarm system designed to
summon the Princeton police or fire department, or other municipal agency
to any location in response to any type of alarm signal.
The provisions of this chapter are not intended to govern alarm businesses
which install, service and maintain alarm systems and are licensed under
N.J.S.A. 45:5A-1 et seq.
(a) The owners and occupants of numerous residential and commercial
properties in the municipality of Princeton have installed and maintain
alarm systems on their properties for emergencies such as burglary and
fire.
(b) The occurrence of false alarm activations has a severe impact on the
resources of Princeton and its police and fire departments.
(c) It is in the public interest to impose reasonable requirements and
standards in connection with the registration of alarm systems in
Princeton.
(a) Register all alarm systems in the municipality with the Princeton police
department.
(b) Ensure that Princeton and its police and fire departments have
information necessary to assist the same while responding to alarm
system activations.
(c) Encourage the proper maintenance of alarm systems.
(d) Reduce the occurrence of false alarm system activations and impact
that the same has on Princeton and its police and fire departments.
§ T2-140.2 PRINCETON CODE § T2A-4
BAO:768
§ T2A-4. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2015-23 § 2]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meaning:
§ T2A-5. Registration of alarm systems. [Ord. No. 2015-23 § 2]
No person shall install, operate or maintain any alarm system unless the
alarm system has been registered with the Princeton police department.
Registration shall take place every two years by completing and filing the
registration form supplied by the police department along with the requisite
filing fee established by section 2-118 of the Code.
The registration form and fee shall be filed between January 1 and January
31 on the first year of each two-year term, and shall be effective until
December 31 of the second year of the two-year term, except, if a person
installs an alarm system any time after January 1 of the first year of the twoyear
term, said system shall be registered within 30 days of said installation.
The first two-year term shall commence on January 1, 2016; alarm users
shall have until January 31, 2016 to register for the first term.
An alarm system shall be deemed registered at such time as a fully executed
registration form and fee are filed with the police department. Among the
information to be provided on the registration form is the following:
(a) ALARM DEVICE- Shall refer to any type of alarm-activating equipment
which provides warning of fire, smoke, carbon monoxide, burglary,
intrusion or like peril.
(b) ALARM SYSTEM - Shall refer to interconnected alarm devices and
components, including systems interconnected with radio frequency
signals, which emits an audible, visual or electronic signal indicating an
alarm condition and providing a warning of fire, smoke, carbon
monoxide, flood, burglary, intrusion or like peril.
(c) ALARM USER - Shall refer to any person in control of any building,
structure or facility wherein an alarm device or system is maintained.
(d) FALSE ALARM - Shall refer to any signal from an alarm system eliciting
a response by Princeton police or firefighters or other municipal
officials when a situation requiring a response by police or firefighters
or other municipal officials does not in fact exist, including but not
limited to alarm system malfunctions or when the cause of an alarm
system activation cannot readily be determined (but excluding an alarm
signal caused by violent conditions of nature or other extraordinary
circumstances not reasonably subject to control by the alarm user).
(e) INDEPENDENT DEVICE - Shall refer to one or more smoke and/or
carbon monoxide detectors installed within a structure for the purpose
of alerting only the occupants thereof, where installed, of smoke, fire or
carbon monoxide, and which is not monitored by a person or company
for the purpose of notifying the Princeton police or fire departments.
§ T2A-4 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T2A-5
BAO:769
§ T2A-6. General provisions regarding installation, activation and
operation of alarm system. [Ord. No. 2015-23 § 2]
(a) The name, address, telephone number of the owner of the property
upon which the alarm system is installed;
(b) The name and telephone number of the installer of the system;
(c) The type of system;
(d) A list of names, addresses and telephone numbers of the person(s) to be
contacted in the event of an alarm or in an emergency situation
determined by the police department; and
(e) The names, addresses and telephone numbers of the person(s)
maintaining or monitoring the alarm system.
If following annual registration or renewal of said registration there
is any material change in the information previously submitted with
respect to any alarm system, it shall be the duty of the user of the alarm
system, within 10 days of such material change, to file a supplemental
or revised registration containing accurate, current information. The
sale of a property with an alarm system shall be deemed a material
change and the name, address and telephone number of the new owner
shall be filed with the police department.
(a) Each alarm system shall be installed utilizing discrete circuitry for
multipurpose alarm systems to insure appropriate emergency response.
(b) Any alarm system which requires for its operation electricity supplied
by a public utility may be equipped with a battery rendering it operable
in the event of a power outage if so desired by the property owner. Such
a battery back-up system shall only be required for any alarm system
which will trigger itself automatically in the event of a power outage.
(c) Every burglar and fire alarm system not fitted with an external key
switch shall be equipped with a time delay of at least 15 seconds which
may include an audible signal of the same length of time, said time
delay to be designed to prevent accidental activation of the system. The
15-second signal, if utilized, shall be audible only within the structure
and not externally.
(d) No alarm system may be connected directly to the Princeton police
department.
(e) No person shall install, cause to be installed, or permit to be installed,
any alarm device, by whatever name known, which automatically
selects a telephone line dedicated to the Princeton police department or
fire department for the purpose of playing a recorded message to report
any emergency.
(f) In the event an alarm system, other than a fire or holdup alarm system,
is tied into and/or serviced by a central station or answering service,
§ T2A-5 PRINCETON CODE § T2A-6
BAO:770
§ T2A-7. Confidentiality. [Ord. No. 2015-23 § 2]
All information submitted in compliance with this chapter shall be held in
the strictest confidence and shall be deemed a record exempt from public
disclosure pursuant to state statute. Any violation of confidentiality shall be
deemed a violation of this chapter.
§ T2A-8. Exceptions. [Ord. No. 2015-23 § 2]
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any alarm system installed
on property occupied by any municipal, county or state or federal
government agency or office, nor to an independent device as defined in
section 2A-4 above. The provisions of this chapter shall also not apply to any
alarm system installed on property occupied by any educational institution
which is not designed to summon the Princeton police or fire departments
or other municipal agency to any location in response to any type of alarm
signal.
§ T2A-9. Penalties; required corrective action for repeat false
alarms. [Ord. No. 2015-23 § 2]
upon activation of said alarm system, the central station or answering
service shall verify the validity of the alarm prior to notifying the
Princeton police department of same.
(g) No Princeton police or fire department personnel or other municipal
agency or official shall be responsible in any way for the resetting or
maintenance of any alarm system.
(h) No person owning, using or possessing an alarm system shall cause or
permit the giving of repeated false alarms, whether intentional,
accidental or otherwise.
(i) Any person owning, using or possessing an alarm system who may want
to know about a response to any alarm by the Princeton police
department shall contact the department. The police department will
not contact automatically any such person or answering service to
advise them concerning the result of the department's response to any
alarm.
(j) A homeowner possessing or using an alarm system shall be responsible
for notifying the police department of the sale of his or her property.
The homeowner shall notify the police department as to the name of the
new owner and whether or not the new owner is continuing with an
alarm device or system within the property.
(a) Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be subject
to the penalties as provided in section 1-6 of this Code, including
penalties for repeat offenders. Violations of this chapter shall include,
but not be limited to, the failure to register or annually renew said
§ T2A-6 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T2A-9
BAO:771
§ T2A-10. Penalty for intentional false alarm. [Ord. No. 2015-23 § 2]
Any person who intentionally causes the giving of a false alarm shall be in
violation of this chapter and subject to the penalties set forth in section 1-6
of this Code. Repeat offenders as that term is defined in section 1-6 shall be
subject to the penalties set forth in section 1-6.
Chapter T3
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
registration or installation of an alarm system not in compliance with
this chapter.
(b) Any owner or user of an alarm system which experiences more than one
false alarm within any one-year period shall be in violation of this
chapter. In addition, said owner or user may be required to modify or
improve said system with a retrofit which will incorporate into said
system a mandatory audible 15 second signal which shall be designed
to prevent accidental activation of the system.
Any owner or user of an alarm system which experiences more than
five false alarms within any one-year period shall, in addition to being
subject to penalties as provided in section 1-6 of this Code (including
the penalties for repeat offenders), implement a corrective action plan
to modify or improve said system in order to prevent accidental
activation of the system. The corrective action plan shall be submitted
for review and approval to the police department and the fire
department. After said departments approve the corrective actions
plan, the owner or user of the alarm system shall implement said plan
within 15 days of notification of approval.
Any owner or user of an alarm system which experiences more than
10 false alarms within any one-year period may, in addition to being
subject to the penalties as provided in section 1-6 of this Code
(including the penalties for repeat offenders), be required by the
Princeton police department to provide a KNOX box for the building or
buildings serviced by the alarm system. The cost of the KNOX box and
the installation of same shall be the responsibility of the owner or the
user of the alarm system. The fire marshal shall designate the location
of the KNOX box on the building or buildings.
(c) Any owner or user of an alarm system shall be notified in writing by the
Princeton police department once one false alarm has occurred with
said system.
§ T2A-9 PRINCETON CODE § T2A-10
BAO:772
ARTICLE I
Licensing Requirements and Regulations
§ T3-1. Compliance with chapter and state law. [Ord. No. 2015-24
§ 3]
It shall be unlawful to possess, sell, distribute or transport alcoholic
beverages within the municipality of Princeton otherwise than as provided
in this chapter, the provisions of Title 33 of the Revised Statutes of New
Jersey, N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq. (hereinafter referred to as Title 33), and
the regulations promulgated thereunder by the Director of the Division of
Alcoholic Beverage Control, as may be amended, and any other relevant
laws, regulations or provisions of this Code.
§ T3-2. Licenses required. [Ord. No. 2015-24 § 3]
No person shall sell or distribute alcoholic beverages in Princeton without
first obtaining a license as required under this chapter. No license of any
type shall be issued until the premises have been approved by the Health
Officer or designee on behalf of the Council and Board of Health.
§ T3-3. Council designated licensing authority. [Ord. No. 2015-24
§ 3]
The Council shall constitute the authority for the administration of the
issuance of licenses under this chapter.
§ T3-4. License types; maximum number of retail consumption and
distribution licenses. [Ord. No. 2015-24 § 3]
§ T3-5. Plenary retail consumption license for nonprofit musical or
theatrical corporations. [Ord. No. 2015-24 § 3]
Any nonprofit corporation that conducts musical or theatrical performances
or concerts on premises with a seating capacity of 1,000 or more persons
or more may, upon the approval of the Council and the Director of the
(a) The Council shall be authorized to issue the following types of licenses
in Princeton: plenary retail consumption, plenary retail distribution and
club licenses.
(b) Except as otherwise specifically permitted by law and consistent with
N.J.S.A. 33:1-12.14 (as may be amended), no new plenary retail
consumption license shall be issued in Princeton unless and until the
combined total number of such licenses existing in Princeton is fewer
than one for each 3,000 of its population and no new plenary
distribution license shall be issued in Princeton unless and until the
combined total number of such licenses existing in Princeton is fewer
than one for each 7,500 of its population. Population for purposes of this
section shall be based on the most recent estimates issued by the U.S.
Bureau of the Census. There shall be no such limit on club licenses.
§ T3-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T3-5
BAO:773
Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control, obtain a plenary retail consumption
license subject to the conditions and limitations provided in this section
and state law. Such license shall authorize the sale of alcoholic beverages
for consumption on the licensed premises only during performances and
the hour immediately preceding and the hour immediately following
performances, provided no alcoholic beverage shall be sold, served,
delivered or consumed except during hours of sale otherwise permitted in
this chapter. A license issued under this section shall not be counted in
determining the number of licenses under section 3-4 above.
§ T3-6. License fees; licensing period. [Ord. No. 2015-24 § 3]
All licenses shall be for a term of one year from July 1 each year, and fees
therefor shall be paid prior to commencement of said term. The license fees
as of July 1, 2006 are hereby continued and fixed as follows:
Plenary retail consumption license $2,500
Plenary retail distribution license $2,500
Club license $188
The license fees for plenary retail consumption and plenary retail
distribution licenses shall automatically increase each July 1 by 20% unless
the then current license fee has reached the maximum amount allowed by
N.J.S.A. 33:1-12.
§ T3-7. Suspension and revocation of licenses; penalties. [Ord. No.
2015-24 § 3]
Any license issued pursuant to this chapter may be suspended or revoked
for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or for violation of any of
the provisions of Title 33, in particular N.J.S.A. 33:1-31, or of the Alcoholic
Beverage Tax Act, N.J.S.A. 54:41-1 et seq., or of any of the rules and
regulations promulgated the Director of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage
Control, as may be amended.
A licensee shall also be subject to such other penalties as may be authorized
by law for violations of Title 33 or of any of the rules and regulations
promulgated pursuant thereto.
§ T3-8. Sale and delivery to persons under legal age or intoxicated
persons prohibited; consumption on licensed premises by persons
under legal age or intoxicated persons prohibited. [Ord. No.
2015-24 § 3]
No licensee under this chapter shall sell, serve, deliver or allow, permit or
suffer the service, delivery or consumption of any alcoholic beverage on the
licensed premises, directly or indirectly, to or by any person under the legal
age to purchase or consume alcoholic beverages or to or by any person who
is actually or apparently drunk or intoxicated.
§ T3-5 PRINCETON CODE § T3-9
BAO:774
§ T3-9. Certain persons not permitted on licensed premises. [Ord.
No. 2015-24 § 3]
No licensee under this chapter shall knowingly allow, permit or suffer in or
upon the licensed premises any person the licensee believes may create a
disturbance or a nuisance, or who may engage in any unlawful or improper
conduct prohibited in this chapter.
§ T3-10. Certain conduct prohibited on licensed premises. [Ord. No.
2015-24 § 3]
No licensee under this chapter shall allow, permit or suffer in or upon
the licensed premises any unlawful or improper conduct, including but not
limited to disturbances, lewdness, fighting and unnecessary or loud noises,
or allow, permit or suffer the licensed place of business to be conducted in
such manner as to become a nuisance.
§ T3-11. Lotteries and sale of lottery tickets prohibited on licensed
premises; exception. [Ord. No. 2015-24 § 3]
No licensee under this chapter shall allow, suffer or permit any lottery
to be conducted, or any ticket or participation right in any lottery to be
sold or offered for sale on or about the licensed premises except for the
New Jersey State Lottery, or tickets or participation rights therein, being
conducted pursuant to appropriate license under the State Lottery Law
(N.J.S.A. 5:9-11) or other activity authorized by state law.
§ T3-12. Gambling and illegal games prohibited on licensed
premises. [Ord. No. 2015-24 § 3]
No licensee under this chapter shall engage in or allow, permit or suffer
any pool-selling, bookmaking or any unlawful game or gambling of any kind,
or any device or apparatus designed for any such purpose, on or about the
licensed premises.
§ T3-13. Slot machines prohibited on licensed premises. [Ord. No.
2015-24 § 3]
No licensee under this chapter shall possess, allow, permit or suffer, on or
about the licensed premises, any slot machine or device in the nature of a
slot machine which may be used for the propose of playing for money or
other valuable thing.
§ T3-14. Compliance with state laws and rules relative to
transportation of alcoholic beverages. [Ord. No. 2015-24 § 3]
No licensee under this chapter shall receive, possess or sell any alcoholic
beverages transported into this state in violation of Title 33 or of the
rules governing the transportation of alcoholic beverages into the state
promulgated by the Director of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control,
as may be amended.
§ T3-9 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T3-15
BAO:775
§ T3-15. Opening or consumption of alcoholic beverages prohibited
on premises of retail distribution licensees. [Ord. No. 2015-24 § 3]
No retail distribution licensee shall permit any alcoholic beverages sold
by said licensee to be consumed on the licensed premises, nor shall the
licensee permit their containers to be opened on the licensed premises.
§ T3-16. Hours when sales permitted. [Ord. No. 2015-24 § 3]
§ T3-17. Cleanliness and lighting of licensed premises. [Ord. No.
2015-24 § 3]
Premises licensed under this chapter shall at all times be kept in a safe,
clean and sanitary condition. All rooms, passageways, entrances, exits and
stairways shall be well lighted and ingress and egress thereto and therein
shall be unobstructed. The Health Officer or designee shall, after the
issuance of any license, have the right and power, at any time, to inspect
the licensed premises for the purpose of seeing that they are in a sanitary
condition, and the failure to maintain the premises in a proper sanitary
(a) Plenary retail distribution licenses. No plenary retail distribution
licensee shall sell or deliver or allow, permit or suffer the sale or
delivery of any alcoholic beverage other than as specified below:
(1) On all days of the week from 9:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., any alcoholic
beverage may be sold.
(2) In addition, retail distribution licensees may sell wine and malt
alcoholic beverages only in original bottle or can containers during
the same hours and on the same days plenary retail consumption
licensees are permitted to make sales as set forth in paragraph (b)
of this section.
(b) Plenary retail consumption licensees. No plenary retail consumption
licensee shall sell, serve or deliver or allow, permit or suffer the sale,
service or delivery of any alcoholic beverage other than as specified
below:
(1) On all days of the week, alcoholic beverages may be sold midnight
to 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. to midnight.
(2) In addition to the hours permitted in subsection (b)1 above, on
January 1 (New Year's Day), alcoholic beverages may also be sold
2:00 a.m. to 4:00 a.m..
(c) Club licensees. Club licensees may make sales of alcoholic beverages
during the same hours plenary retail consumption licensees are
permitted to make sales as set forth in subsection (b) of this section
above and at no other time. Such sales may be made to club members or
bona fide guests of club members and no other persons and only for on
premises consumption.
§ T3-15 PRINCETON CODE § T3-17
BAO:776
condition shall be a proper ground for the suspension or revocation of the
license.
§ T3-18. Maintenance of public peace, decency and good order on
licensed premises. [Ord. No. 2015-24 § 3]
The public peace, decency and good order shall be maintained at all times
in and about any premises licensed under this chapter.
§ T3-19. Persons under legal age in places selling alcoholic
beverages. [Ord. No. 2015-24 § 3]
No person under the legal age to purchase or consume alcoholic beverages
shall knowingly purchase, attempt to purchase, have another purchase for
him or her, possess or consume any alcoholic beverages on any premises
licensed under this chapter.
§ T3-20. Purchases for or on behalf of minors. [Ord. No. 2015-24
§ 3]
No person shall purchase any alcoholic beverages from any licensed
premises for or on behalf of a person under the legal age to purchase or
consume alcoholic beverages, except that person's parent or guardian if the
parent or guardian is of the legal age to consume alcoholic beverages, as
may be authorized by law or regulation.
§ T3-21. Alcoholic beverages to be served in rooms open to public;
exception as to clubs. [Ord. No. 2015-24 § 3]
No licensee under this chapter shall serve to any person alcoholic
beverages in any room or place on the licensed premises which is not open
to the public generally; except, that in hotels guests may be served in their
rooms or in private dining rooms; provided further, that this regulation shall
not apply to bona fide clubs holding club licenses under Title 33 and the
regulations promulgated thereunder, as may be amended.
§ T3-22. View of rooms where alcoholic beverages sold to be
unobstructed; exceptions as to clubs and hotels. [Ord. No. 2015-24
§ 3]
All premises licensed under this chapter, except clubs holding club licenses,
and guest rooms and private dining rooms in hotels, shall be so arranged
that a full view of the interior may be had from the public thoroughfare
or from adjacent rooms to which the public is freely admitted. All such
premises shall be lighted sufficiently so that a full view of the interior
thereof may be had at all hours from the public thoroughfare or from
adjacent rooms to which the public is freely admitted.
§ T3-17 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T3-23
BAO:777
§ T3-23. Display of "Fetal Alcohol Syndrome (FAS)" warning signs.
[Ord. No. 2015-24 § 3]
In accordance with N.J.S.A. 33:1-12a., all licensees under this chapter,
except club licensees, who sell alcoholic beverages shall ensure that a
warning notice prepared by the Department of Health and Senior Services
is posted prominently in any service area as well as on a wall, towel
dispenser or other appropriate location in any public rest room for women
patrons on the licensed premises. The notice shall warn patrons that alcohol
consumption during pregnancy has been determined to be harmful to the
fetus and can cause birth defects, low birth weight and Fetal Alcohol
Syndrome, which is one of the leading causes of intellectual disabilities.
§ T3-24. License transfer fees. [Ord. No. 2015-24 § 3]
All applications for the transfer of plenary retail consumption and
distribution licenses shall be accompanied by the following fees, which
are established by Title 33 and the administrative rules promulgated
thereunder, as may be amended:
(a) A filing fee of $200; and
(b) For transfers of a license to other premises only, or applications for
transfer of license to another person only, a fee of 10% of the full annual
license fee for said license; and
(c) For transfers of a license to other premises and other persons, a fee of
20% of the full annual license fee for said license.
§ T3-23 PRINCETON CODE § T3-24
BAO:778
ARTICLE II
Regulations of General Application
§ T3-25. Alcoholic beverage consumption and possession in public
places. [Ord. No. 2015-24 § 3; Ord. No. 2019-14]
§ T3-26. Penalties. [Ord. No. 2015-24 § 3]
Any person violating this article shall be subject to the penalties set forth in
section 1-6 of this Code.
(a) Prohibitions. No person of legal age shall consume or possess in any
opened container any alcoholic beverage in or upon any public or quasipublic
place, including but not limited to any public street, alley,
sidewalk, mall, park, playground, public conveyance, parking facility or
in or around any public building. For the purposes of this section, a
quasi-public area shall be defined as that portion of private lands which
have been made open to the public for their use and enjoyment by the
owner of said lands in connection with zoning approvals, dedication of
said lands or similar means, and where the Council, upon n application
from the owner of said lands, determines that the provisions of this
section be made applicable thereto.
(b) Exceptions. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the following:
the possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages within or upon
premises duly licensed for the consumption of alcoholic beverages[,];
the consumption of wine or malt alcoholic beverages as may be
permitted under N.J.S.A. 2C:33-27 within that portion of a retail food
establishment which constitutes a sidewalk cafe licensed under
Chapter 29 of the "Code of the Borough of Princeton, New Jersey,
1974;" or the possession, distribution or consumption of alcoholic
beverages in any public park, recreation area, public building, or other
public area in connection with any organized function or social affair for
which previous permission has been granted by the Council or as
otherwise authorized by Title 33 or the administrative regulations
promulgated thereunder, as may be amended.
§ T3-25 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T3-26
BAO:779
Chapter T4
AMUSEMENTS
§ T3-26 PRINCETON CODE § T3-26
BAO:780
ARTICLE I
Legalized Games of Chance
[Adopted in entirety by Ord. No. 2015-41 § 3]
§ T4-1. Statutory authority for games of chance. [Ord. No. 2015-41
§ 3]
As provided for by N.J.S.A. 5:8-24 et seq., and N.J.S.A. 5:8-50 et seq.,
qualifying organizations may conduct games of chance known as bingo and
raffles within the municipality.
§ T4-2. License required. [Ord. No. 2015-41 § 3]
No qualifying organization shall conduct a bingo or raffle without first
having applied for and received a license pursuant to state law.
§ T4-3. Issuing authority. [Ord. No. 2015-41 § 3]
The issuing authority for the municipality responsible for approving bingo
and raffle licenses shall be the municipal clerk.
§ T4-4. Application; fees. [Ord. No. 2015-41 § 3]
The issuing authority shall approve or deny all applications for bingo or
raffle licenses with due expedition after the filing of the application.
Applications must be filed with the municipal clerk, together with the
required fees pursuant N.J.A.C. 13:47-4.9. The applicant shall demonstrate
in writing compliance with the provisions of all applicable laws and
regulations.
§ T4-5. Days of operation. [Ord. No. 2015-41 § 3]
A bingo or raffle license may be issued for any day of the year without
limitation as provided by N.J.S.A. 5:8-31 and N.J.S.A. 5:8-58.
§ T4-6. Violations and penalties. [Ord. No. 2015-41 § 3]
Any person violating the provisions hereof shall be subject to such
sanctions, including but not limited to penalties, as may be authorized
under N.J.S.A. 5:8-24 et seq. and 5:8-50 et seq. for violations of this chapter
and/or rules and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto.
§ T4-7. Suspension or revocation of license. [Ord. No. 2015-41 § 3]
The council, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 5:8-30 and N.J.S.A. 5:8-57, may suspend
and revoke any issued bingo or raffle license, after a hearing, for any
violation of this chapter or state law. The council may suspend the operation
of a bingo or raffle pending hearing, in which case a hearing must be
held within five days after such action. Notice of a hearing shall be served
personally upon an officer of the licensee or the member in charge of the
conduct of the bingo or raffle or sent by registered mail or certified mail to
§ T4-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T4-7
BAO:781
the licensee at the address shown on the license. All decisions and findings
by the council regarding the suspension or revocation of a bingo or raffle
license shall be in writing.
§ T4-7 PRINCETON CODE § T4-7
BAO:782
Chapter T4A
BICYCLE ROUTES AND TRAFFIC
§ T4-7 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T4-7
BAO:783

ARTICLE I
In General
§ T4A-1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 775, § 1]
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section, except in those
instances where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
BICYCLE — A two-wheeled device in, upon or by which a person or property
is or may be transported and that is propelled by human power.
BICYCLE PATH OR PATH — A way, other than a roadway or sidewalk, that
is designated as a bicycle route by section 4A-2 or pursuant to section 4A-3.
BICYCLE ROUTE — A roadway, sidewalk or bicycle path that is designated
as a route for bicycle travel by section 4A-2 or pursuant to section 4A-3.
ROADWAY — That portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily
used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In the event a
highway includes two or more separate roadways, the term "roadway" as
used herein shall refer to any such roadway separately, but not to all such
roadways separately and not to all such roadways collectively.
SIDEWALK — That portion of a street or highway intended for the use of
pedestrians, between the curb line or the lateral line of a shoulder or, if
none, the lateral line of the roadway and the adjacent right of way line.
STREET OR HIGHWAY — The entire width between the boundary lines of
a way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public for purposes of vehicular travel.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which a person or property is or
may be transported upon a highway, except devices moved by human power.
§ T4A-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T4A-1
BAO:785

ARTICLE II
Routes
§ T4A-2. Designated. [Ord. No. 775, § 1; Ord. No. 790; § 1; Ord. No.
927, § 1]
The following roadways, sidewalks and paths are hereby designated as
routes for bicycle travel, and as such they shall be known as bicycle routes:
(a) Roadways:
Community Park South Parking Yard. Between the east and west
entrances.
Edgerstoune Road. Between State Highway Route No. 206 and the path
to Rosedale Road.
Great Road. Between the southerly and northerly junctions with Great
Road East.
Guyot Avenue. Between Witherspoon Street and Carnahan Place and
between Jefferson Road and Moore Street.
Pardoe Road. Between Mountain Avenue and Westerly Road.
Race Street. Between Birch Avenue and west entrance to Community
Park South Parking Yard.
Stuart Road. Between Great Road and Great Road East.
Westerly Road. Between Elm Road and Pardoe Road.
(b) Sidewalks:
Bunn Drive, east side. Between North Harrison Street and the north
entrance to Princeton Community Village.
Elm Road, east side. Between Westerly Road and Mountain Avenue.
Franklin Avenue, north and east sides. Between Walnut Lane and the
borough line.
Franklin Avenue, north side. Between the borough line and Tee-Arr
Place.
Great Road, east side. Between Mountain Avenue and the junction with
Great Road East (including a projected lane between Mountain Lakes
Brook and a point south of the junction with Great Road East.)
Great Road East, east side. Between the southerly junction with Great
Road and Stuart Road.
Guyot Avenue, south side. Between Moore Street and the borough line.
§ T4A-2 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T4A-2
BAO:787
§ T4A-3. Secondary routes. [Ord. No. 775, § 1; Ord. No. 790, § 2;
Ord. No. 927, § 2]
The township committee from time to time by resolution may designate
any other sidewalk or path as a secondary bicycle route and may rescind
Johnson Park School, access road, east side. Between Rosedale Road
and the south entrance to the school.
Mountain Avenue, north side. Between Pardoe Road and the north side
of Community Park.
North Harrison Street, east side. Between Terhune Road and Bunn
Drive.
Rosedale Road, north side. Between opposite the path from
Edgerstoune Road to Rosedale Road and Johnson Park School access
road.
State Highway Route 206, east side. Between the borough line and
Mountain Avenue at the jug-handle.
Terhune Road (West) alignment, east side. Between the north entrance
to Johnson Park School and the former trolley right-of-way.
Walnut Lane, east side. Between the borough line and Guyot Avenue.
Washington Road, east side. Between the borough line and Faculty
Road.
Witherspoon Street, east side. Between a point opposite the entrance
to Community Park School and Guyot Avenue.
(c) Paths:
Existing path. From Alexander Street opposite Faculty Road to the
Lawrence Apartments.
Community Park, north side. Between Mountain Avenue and the
deadend at the sewer line; and between State Highway Route 206 and
the aforementioned path.
Existing Path. Between the northerly end of Edgerstoune Road and
Rosedale Road.
Existing path. Between a point on Faculty Road opposite Hibben-Magee
Apartments northerly to the borough line.
Guyot Avenue right-of-way. Between Carnahan Place and Jefferson
Road.
Former trolley right-of-way. Between the borough line and a point
northwesterly from the Johnson Park School; and between said last
mentioned point and the Johnson Park School access Road.
§ T4A-2 PRINCETON CODE § T4A-3
BAO:788
any such secondary designation; provided, however, that no such secondary
designation shall be made with respect to a sidewalk or path that is less
than four feet wide.
§ T4A-4. Signs. [Ord. No. 775, § 1; Ord. No. 927, § 3]
Subject to the approval of the state commissioner of transportation, where
required, signs shall be installed in connection with bicycle routes as
follows:
§ T4A-5. Curb cuts. [Ord. No. 775, § 1; Ord. No. 927, § 4]
At all intersections of a bicycle route with a street, highway, or driveway, the
route shall meet the pavement of such street, highway, or driveway at the
level of the pavement. The gradient between such pavement and the normal
level of the sidewalk or path shall be uniform and shall not exceed 6%.
(a) Route markers. All bicycle routes shall be marked by standard white on
green "Bike Route" marker signs as approved by the National Joint
Committee on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Where a private street,
way, or path is designated as a bicycle route, the words "Private street
(or way) Use at own risk" shall be placed below each pertinent route
marker sign.
(b) Other signs. The township committee may by resolution authorize the
installation along any bicycle route of such other signs as it may deem
appropriate.
(c) Bicycle crossing signs. Standard black or yellow "Bike Xing" warning
signs as approved by the National Joint Committee on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices shall be installed at appropriate locations.
(d) Stop signs. The work STOP shall be stenciled on the pavement of each
bicycle route immediately before it intersects with a street at which
motor vehicles travelling parallel to the route are required by state law
to stop.
§ T4A-3 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T4A-5
BAO:789

ARTICLE III
Traffic
§ T4A-6. Keeping to right; single file; passing. [Ord. No. 775, § 1]
Every person operating a bicycle upon a bicycle route other than a roadway
shall ride as near to the right side of the bicycle route as practicable,
exercising due care when passing a stationary object or person or one
proceeding in the same direction.
Persons riding bicycles upon a bicycle route other than a roadway shall ride
in single file.
§ T4A-7. Signalling when passing. [Ord. No. 775, § 1]
Every person operating a bicycle upon a bicycle route other than a roadway
shall give reasonable warning by an audible signal before passing a
stationary person or a person proceeding in the same direction.
§ T4A-8. Use of Bicycle Routes. [Ord. No. 86-11, § 1]
No vehicle except a bicycle shall be permitted to operate on bicycle paths
or bicycle routes that are designated as such by sections 4A-2 and 4A-3 of
this code.
§ T4A-9. Penalty. [Ord. No. 775, § 1]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by state statute, every person
convicted of a violation of any provision of this article shall be liable to a
penalty of not more than $25.
4A-10 Repealed by Ordinance No. 927.
§ T4A-6 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T4A-9
BAO:791
Chapter T5
BUILDINGS
As to fire protection, see ch. 8 of this Code. As to housing standards,
see ch. 10. As to sewers and sewage disposal, see chs. 18, 28. As to
plumbing, see ch. 26. As to swimming pools, see ch. 30.
§ T4A-9 PRINCETON CODE § T4A-9
BAO:792
ARTICLE I
In General
§ T5-1. (Reserved)
§ T5-2. Swimming pool — Defined. [Ord. No. 386, § 3]
As used in sections 5-3 and 5-4, "swimming pool" means any outdoor
pool, tank or plunge which is designed, used or maintained primarily for
swimming purposes.
§ T5-3. Same — Permit required for construction. [Ord. No. 386,
§ 2]
No swimming pool shall be constructed in the township except in
accordance with a permit for such construction previously secured from
the township building official upon written application. The application shall
be accompanied by a plan showing the size, shape and location of the
swimming pool and its enclosure, if any, and such other information as may
be necessary to enable the building official to determine whether enclosure
of the pool is required by and complies with section 5-4.
§ T5-4. Same — To be enclosed when within 500 feet of residence.
[Ord. No. 386, § 1]
No swimming pool shall be maintained in the township within 500 feet of
any residence, other than that to which it is appurtenant, unless such pool
and its surrounding area are enclosed by a fence, wall or other substantial
barrier not less than four feet high, with a self-closing, self-latching gate, of
such character as is reasonably sufficient to prevent access to the pool.
§ T5-4.1. Repealed by Ordinance No. 82-15.
§ T5-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T5-4.1
BAO:793

ARTICLE II
Building Official
[Repealed by Ordinance No. 855]
§ T5-5. to 5-14.1 Repealed by Ordinance No. 855.
§ T5-5 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T5-5
BAO:795

ARTICLE III
Building Code
[Repealed by Ordinance No. 855.]
§ T5-15. to 5-21 Repealed by Ordinance No. 855; except, that
section 5-17.1 was saved from repeal and is renumbered as section
5-4.1.
§ T5-15 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T5-15
BAO:797

ARTICLE IV
Fallout Shelters
[Repealed by Ordinance No. 855.]
§ T5-22. to 5-24 Repealed by Ordinance No. 855.
§ T5-22 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T5-22
BAO:799

ARTICLE V
Numbering of Building and Lots
§ T5-25. Assignment of street numbers to certain parcels of land
fronting on certain streets. [Ord. No. 237, § 1; Ord. No. 246, § 1.]
The several parcels of land fronting on certain streets in the township
shown on the map hereinafter mentioned are and shall be assigned the
street numbers indicated on a map entitled "Map Showing Street Numbers
and Tax Map Numbers of the Township of Princeton, Mercer County, New
Jersey, prepared by C.S. Sincerbeaux, Township Engineer, February 1953,
Amendment No. 1, prepared by C.S. Sincerbeaux, Township Engineer,
January 1954," on file in the office of the township clerk.
§ T5-26. Extension of street number assignments to land fronting
on new streets. [Ord. No. 237, § 2.]
The township engineer shall, from time to time, extend the assignment of
street numbers to land fronting on existing or new streets in the township.
Any such extension, when adopted by resolution of the township committee,
shall be indicated on and shall constitute a supplement to the map referred
to in section 5-25.
§ T5-27. Owner required to maintain assigned number on premises.
[Ord. No. 237, § 3]
The owner of each building erected or placed upon premises fronting on
any street in the township shall, at the owner's expense, place or cause to
be placed upon such building or premises, and thereafter shall maintain
thereon, the number certified by the township clerk. Such number shall be
constructed of substantial material and shall be so placed and maintained
as to identify the building from the street.
§ T5-28. Application for and placing of street number assignment
for future buildings. [Ord. No. 237, § 6.]
With respect to buildings hereafter erected or placed upon premises, a
street number assignment application shall be made at the time of or prior
to the application for a building permit. The assigned number shall be
placed not later than the date such building is completed or is occupied,
whichever shall first occur.
§ T5-25 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T5-28
BAO:801

ARTICLE VI
Builders and Contractors
§ T5-29. Registration of builders and contractors. [Ord. No. 88-17,
§ 1; Ord. No. 2002-20, § 6.]
(a) No person shall engage in the business of constructing, erecting,
altering, repairing, restoring, moving or demolishing the whole or any
part of any building or structure, or contracting to perform any of the
foregoing, without first registering with the township construction
official, on forms to be supplied to said official.
(b) All applicants for such registration shall furnish proof, to the
satisfaction of the township construction official, of at least four years
training or experience in building construction and each such
application shall be endorsed by at least two responsible personal
references, stating that the applicant is, in their opinion, sufficiently
qualified to register. Only one registration need be secured by a
corporation or partnership.
(c) The township committee may, upon recommendation of the township
construction official, after notice and a hearing, suspend or revoke any
registration for violation of law, or the New Jersey Uniform
Construction Code or related township ordinances, or for good cause,
which is shown to be prejudicial to the public health, safety or welfare.
When the construction official has reasonable cause or belief that an
emergency affecting the public health, safety or welfare so requires,
said official may temporarily suspend any registration for a period not
to exceed one week, until township committee can be convened to
consider said suspension.
(d) No registration shall be required of any owner of real property in the
township who shall personally perform activities otherwise requiring a
registration on a dwelling place or appurtenant structure intended for
occupancy or use by the property owner or his or her immediate family;
except that all such work must otherwise comply with other provisions
of the New Jersey Construction Code.
(e) Every registration shall be issued and renewed on an annual basis,
effective May 1 of each year, upon payment of an annual fee to the
township construction official in the amount of $75. At the time said fee
is paid, said applicant shall also file with the township construction
official a certificate of insurance indicating that said applicant has
general comprehensive and liability insurance in a minimum amount of
$250.
(f) Builders of new construction exempted from township registration.
Builders engaged in the construction of new homes and required to be
registered pursuant to the New Home Warranty and Builders'
Registration Act, N.J.S.A. 46:3B-1 et seq., shall not be required to
register with the township pursuant to this section. Such builders shall
§ T5-29 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T5-29
BAO:803
submit a copy of their current certificate of registration from the
Department of Community Affairs to the township construction official
prior to engaging in the construction of new homes in the township.
§ T5-29 PRINCETON CODE § T5-29
BAO:804
Chapter T5A.1
CONSTRUCTION CODE ENFORCEMENT
§ T5-29 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T5-29
BAO:805

ARTICLE I
Enforcing Agency, Construction Board of Appeals, Fees and
Miscellaneous Requirements
§ T5A.1-1. Enforcing agency — Established; composition;
construction; chief administrator. [Ord. No. 2016-13 Exh. A]
There is hereby established in and for Princeton, pursuant to the State
Uniform Construction Code Act (P.L. 1975, c. 217; N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et
seq.) (hereinafter referred to as the "Act"), a state uniform construction
code enforcing agency which shall be known as the "Princeton Construction
Code Enforcing Agency" (hereinafter referred to as the "enforcing agency").
The enforcing agency shall consist of the construction official, the building
subcode official, the electrical subcode official, the fire protection subcode
official, subcode officials for such additional subcodes as the Commissioner
of the Department of Community Affairs of the State shall hereafter adopt
as part of the Act with the exception of an elevator subcode official which
responsibility the municipality transfers to the Department of Community
Affairs, and such employees, assistants and staff as are required by such
officials. The construction official shall be the chief administrator of the
enforcing agency and, after consultation with the subcode officials, he or
she may adopt such rules of procedure for the internal governance of the
enforcing agency as are not inconsistent with the law, regulation or this
chapter.
§ T5A.1-2. Construction and subcode officials — Qualifications;
appointment; terms; vacancies; powers and duties; onsite
inspection agencies. [Ord. No. 2016-13 Exh. A]
(a) The construction official and subcode officials shall possess such
qualifications as are prescribed by the Act and regulations adopted by
the Commissioner of the Department of Community Affairs. More than
one such official position may be held by the same person, but in that
case the person shall possess the qualifications required for each such
position.
(b) Each such official shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and
consent of the council for a term of four years calculated from January 1
of the year of appointment, but terms of office shall be subject to tenure
rights as provided by law. Vacancies occurring other than by expiration
of term shall be filled for the unexpired term only.
(c) The construction and subcode officials shall have such powers and
duties as are prescribed by law, regulation or ordinance for the
enforcement of the Act.
(d) In lieu of any particular subcode official, an onsite inspection agency
may be retained by contract pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23-1.1 et seq.
§ T5A.1-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T5A.1-3
BAO:807
§ T5A.1-3. Enforcing agency — Part-time personnel; dispersal of
personnel; central office; reorganization. [Ord. No. 2016-13 Exh. A]
The construction official, the subcode officials and the employees, assistants
and staff supporting them need not work exclusively for the enforcing
agency nor need they be located in one office or building. However, for
purposes of enforcement of the Act and regulations pertaining thereto,
all such persons, wherever located, shall be subject to the procedures
and policies of the enforcing agency, and the subcode officials, employees,
assistants and staff shall be primarily responsible to the construction
official. Furthermore, regardless of whether the aforementioned personnel
are dispersed in different locations, the public shall have the right to do
business at one enforcing agency center, except in case of emergency
or unforeseen or unavoidable circumstances. Such central office shall be
designated by the construction official after consultation with the mayor
and council. Any reorganization necessary to provide for the coordination
of dispersed personnel, so as to enable the enforcing agency to take timely
action in the performance of its duties, is delegated to the mayor and
council.
§ T5A.1-4. Construction board of appeals — Established; powers and
duties; composition; fees. [Ord. No. 2016-13 Exh. A]
A construction board of appeals is hereby established to hear and decide
appeals from decisions of the enforcing agency and to exercise and perform
such other powers and duties as are or shall be prescribed by law,
regulation or ordinance. It shall be known as the "Princeton Construction
Board of Appeals" and shall consist of five regular members and at least five
alternate members in accordance with the below.
The board shall also include two special members, one of whom shall be
a licensed professional engineer with municipal construction experience,
and one of whom shall be a builder. The special members shall serve
as additional members of the board in any case involving an appeal of
municipal fees pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.2 et seq.
Each regular, alternate and special member shall be qualified by experience
or training to perform the duties of a member of the board.
The board may adopt such rules as to its procedures and for its internal
governance as are not inconsistent with law, regulation or this chapter.
Applications of appeal to said board shall be accompanied by a fee in
the sum of $500. The application shall not be considered complete unless
accompanied by this appeal fee. In the case of an appeal based on the
failure of the enforcing agency as established in section 5A.1-1 of this
chapter to act within any time frame specified, the fee shall be waived.
§ T5A.1-5. Qualifications of members. [Ord. No. 2016-13 Exh. A]
(a) At least one regular member of the board shall be a registered architect
or licensed professional engineer with building construction
§ T5A.1-3 PRINCETON CODE § T5A.1-5
BAO:808
§ T5A.1-6. Appointment and terms of members; alternate members;
chairperson; disqualification; compensation. [Ord. No. 2016-13 Exh.
A]
experience, or other person as qualified as a building subcode official.
At least one regular member shall be as qualified as a plumbing
subcode official. At least one regular member shall be as qualified as
an electrical subcode official. At least one regular member shall be
as qualified as a fire protection subcode official. At least one regular
member shall be certified as a fire official.
(b) The requirements of section 5A.1-5(a) above shall not be construed as
requiring that there be a separate regular member in each of the
qualification categories above. One regular member may satisfy these
requirements with regard to more than one such qualification category.
No more than two members shall be selected from the same business or
profession. Each member shall have had at least three years'
experience in construction, design or supervision as a licensed engineer
or registered architect, or in the alternative, five years' experience in
construction, design or supervision as an architect or engineer with a
bachelor's degree in architecture or engineering, respectively, from an
accredited institution of higher education, or in the further alternative,
10 years' experience in construction, design or supervision as a
journeyman in a trade or as a contractor.
(a) Members of the construction board of appeals shall be appointed by the
mayor with the advice and consent of the council for terms of four years
each, calculated from January 1 of the year of appointment; except, that
of the members first appointed, one shall be appointed for a term of one
year, one for a term of two years, one for a term of three years and two
for terms of four years. Members shall serve after the expiration of their
terms until their successors are appointed and qualified.
(b) Vacancies occurring other than by expiration of term shall be filled for
the unexpired term only.
(c) The mayor with the advice and consent of the council shall appoint at
least five alternate members of the board to serve during the absence
or disqualification of any member. Alternate members shall be
appointed to staggered terms, in the same manner as the initial
appointment of regular members. Alternate members shall be so
chosen so that there will be at least one alternate member in each
qualification category set forth in section 5A.1-5(a) above. In addition,
service by alternate members shall meet the provisions of N.J.A.C.
5:23A-1.3.
(d) The mayor with the advice and consent of council shall designate one of
the regular members to serve as chairperson and another member to
serve as vice-chairperson of the board. The vice-chairperson shall serve
as chairperson in the event of absence or disqualification of the
chairperson.
§ T5A.1-5 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T5A.1-6
BAO:809
§ T5A.1-7. Schedule of fees. [Ord. No. 2016-13 Exh. A]
The following fees shall be paid to and collected by the enforcing agency
prior to the issuance of any of the permits or certificates hereinafter
mentioned in this section in connection with the Act and such fees shall be
administered as hereinafter set forth:
(e) No member or alternate member of the board shall be a member of the
enforcing agency nor shall any member or alternate member pass on
any question in which he or she is engaged as contractor or material
dealer or in which he or she has been involved in the preparation of
plans or specifications or in which he or she has any personal or
professional interest.
(f) Members and alternate members of the board shall receive no
compensation for their services as such, but they shall be reimbursed
for all necessary expenses incurred by them in the performance of their
duties.
(a) Prototype review: An amount equal to 20% of the fee for a construction
permit for the project. The plan review fee shall be paid at the time of
submission of an application for a permit and it shall be credited toward
the fee due for a construction permit, when issued. Plan review fees are
not refundable.
(aa) Prototype review fee: An amount equal to 5% less than the plan review
fee.
(b) Construction permit: An amount equal to the sum of the following
subcode and elevator fees, but not less than $75 for Use Groups R-3,
R-4 and R-5. All other Use Groups shall not be less than $75. Minimum
fees for all construction permits including a change of contractor shall
be $50.
(1) BUILDING SUBCODE FEE:
a. For new construction with regard to all Use Groups except for
R-3, R-4 and R-5, the amount of $0.0800 per cubic foot of
building or structure volume.
b. For new construction with regard to R-3, R-4, and R-5 Use
Groups, the amount of $0.0250 per cubic foot of the building or
structure volume.
c. For renovations, alterations and repairs with regard to all Use
Groups except for R-3, R-4 and R-5, the amount of $17 per
$1,000 of estimated cost up to and including $75,000; $16 per
$1,000 of estimated cost over $75,000 and up to and including
$150,000; and $15 per $1,000 of estimated cost over $150,000.
For the purpose of determining estimated cost, the applicant
shall submit to the enforcing agency, if applicable, cost data
produced by the architect or engineer of record or by a
§ T5A.1-6 PRINCETON CODE § T5A.1-7
BAO:810
recognized estimating firm or by the contractor. A bona fide
contractor's bid, if available, shall be submitted. The enforcing
agency shall make the final decision regarding estimated cost.
d. For renovations, alterations and repairs with regard to Use
Groups R-3, R-4 and R-5, the amount of $15 per $1,000 of
estimated cost up to and including $75,000; $14 per $1,000 of
estimated cost over $75,000 and up to and including $150,000;
and $13.50 per $1,000 of estimated cost over $150,000. For
the purpose of determining estimated cost, the applicant shall
submit to the enforcing agency, if available, cost data produced
by the architect or engineer of record, by a recognized
estimating firm or by the contractor. A bona fide contractor's
bid, if available, shall be submitted. The enforcing agency shall
make the final decision regarding estimated cost.
e. For additions with regard to all Use Groups except for R-3, R-4
and R-5, the amount of $0.0850 per cubic foot of building or
structure volume for the added portion.
ee. For additions with regard to R-3, R-4 and R-5, the amount of
$0.080 per cubic foot of building or structure volume for the
added portion.
f. For combinations of renovations and additions, the sum of the
fees computed separately for renovations and for additions.
g. For the following structures for Use Group U or for structures
for which volume cannot be computed, the following flat fees
shall be charged:
Asbestos removal $70 + $14 (CO)
Fence(s) (6 feet or more in
height) Residential (R)
$75
Fence(s) (6 feet or more in
height) Commercial
$15 Per $1,000
Radon mitigation $75
Swimming Pool Aboveground $100
Swimming Pool Inground $200
Tanks Inground (removal/
modifications)
$150
Tanks Aboveground storage
(installation, removal,
modification)
$75
Temporary Construction
Trailer
$100
§ T5A.1-7 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T5A.1-7
BAO:811
Temporary Construction
Fence
$0
Tennis courts $100
Tent(s) A-5 $75
(2) FIRE PROTECTION SUBCODE FEES:
Fire Protection Subcode Fees
Description
Number
of
Devices Residential
Number
of
Devices Commercial
Number
of
Devices
Both
Residential
&
Commercial
Smoke
detectors
1-12
12-24
$40
$60
1-12
12-25
25>
$60
$75
$100
Ducttype
smoke
detectors
Each $25
Oil or
gas
fired
appliances
New $50
Replacem$e2n5t
Kitchen
hood
exhaust
system
$50 Type II
Type I
$75
$100
Pull
stations
manual
Each $10
Wood
stove/
fireplace
Each $50
Gas
fired
manufactured
fireplace
& flue
$45 Each $50
Signaling
devices
(strobes)
Each $5
§ T5A.1-7 PRINCETON CODE § T5A.1-7
BAO:812
Fire Protection Subcode Fees
Description
Number
of
Devices Residential
Number
of
Devices Commercial
Number
of
Devices
Both
Residential
&
Commercial
Residential
sprinklers
(per)
dwelling
unit
$50
Stand
pipe
riser
Each
Riser
$230
Fire
pump
$200
Fire
pump
testing
$100
Sprinkler
system
(wet/
dry)
(heads)
(standard
type)
1-20
20-50
50-100
100>
$65
$100
$200
$2 per
head
Early
fire
suppression
response
(type
heads)
1-20
20-50
50-100
100 >
$40
$75
$100
$1.50
per head
Fire
protection
(2)
minimum
fee and
change
of
contractor
$50
§ T5A.1-7 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T5A.1-7
BAO:813
Fire Protection Subcode Fees
Description
Number
of
Devices Residential
Number
of
Devices Commercial
Number
of
Devices
Both
Residential
&
Commercial
Special
fire
suppression
system
(Dry
Chemical
Water,
CO2
and
Halon)
local
system
only
including
major
suppression
$85 per
installation
Above
ground
storage
tanks
(per
tank)
$46
Incinerators $365
Administrative
fee
15% of
total fee
paid
Fire
mains -
per
diameter
inch
$100
Dry
pipe
valves
$25
each
Preaction
valves
$25
each
§ T5A.1-7 PRINCETON CODE § T5A.1-7
BAO:814
Fire Protection Subcode Fees
Description
Number
of
Devices Residential
Number
of
Devices Commercial
Number
of
Devices
Both
Residential
&
Commercial
Hydro
testing
of fire
supply
lines 2
hour
test as
per
nfpa @
$40 per
hr.
$80
Electronic
fire/
smoke
control
door
releases
$10
(3) PLUMBING SUBCODE FEE:
a. The Plumbing subcode fee shall be that charged by the
municipality's plumbing subcode official in accordance with
the requirements of the Act. Said fees are as follows:
1. Minimum fee including change of contractor $50.
2. Fixtures and devices:
Shall include but not be limited to: Fixtures, appliances
or devices connected to the plumbing system including:
water closets, lavatories, bidets, urinals, hose bibs,
showers, whirlpool tubs, bath tubs, floor drains, sinks,
dishwashers, drinking fountains, washing machines,
plumbing stacks, roof drains, area drains, sump pumps,
pot fillers, ice machines, steam units, condensate drains
and back-flow preventers not equipped with test ports and
humidifiers. $15 each
3. Special devices:
Grease traps, oil separators, refrigeration units, utility
service connections, back-flow preventers equipped with
test ports (double check valve assemblies, reduced
pressure zones and pressure vacuum breaker back-flow
preventers), steam boilers, hot water boilers, pool heaters,
§ T5A.1-7 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T5A.1-7
BAO:815
active solar systems, sewer pumps and interceptors,
provided however, there shall not be inspection fee
charges for gas service entrances. $95.
a. Residential lawn sprinklers $70 each.
4. Cross-connections:
Backflow preventers and Cross-connections subject to
testing quarterly or annually.
Use Groups R-2, R-3, R-4 and R-5
1 to 50 $35 each
50 or more $15 each
All other Use Groups
1 to 50 $40 each
50 or more $15 each
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-126(d), the plumbing
subcode official may waive the charge for testing cross
connections for all low-income and middle-income units
which are a part of Princeton's Affordable Housing
program as defined elsewhere in this Code, including but
not limited to section 10B-333 of the "Code of the
Township of Princeton, New Jersey, 1968," as may be
amended.
5. Water Heaters:
Installation or replacement of gas or electric water heaters
in R-2, R-3, R-4, and R-5 use groups: $40.
Installation or replacement of water heaters for all use
groups other than R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5: $75.
5a. Pool safety accessories: $45.
6. Mechanical inspections of the following appliances in Use
Groups R-2, R-3, R-4 and R-5 shall include but not be
limited to: furnaces, condensers, air handlers, mini-split
units, boilers, gas fireplaces, outdoor grills, fire pits,
generators, gas lamps, dryers, stoves, cooktops, fuel oil
piping, and log lighters.
First appliance: $58.
Each additional appliance: $15.
7. Mechanical inspections related to installation of fuel oil
piping on fuel tanks.
§ T5A.1-7 PRINCETON CODE § T5A.1-7
BAO:816
Use Groups R-3, R-4 and R-5: $45.
All other Use Groups: $70.
8. Mechanical inspections related to natural gas piping and
LP gas piping systems.
Each appliance connection: $15.
9. Additional mechanical inspection fees for all Use Groups
except R-3, R-4 and R-5:
$10 per $1000 of the total cost of piping labor, material
and equipment.
10. Geothermal Wells:
Fee for each well: $20.
11. Propane Tanks:
Under 125 gallons: $30 per tank
Over 125 gallons: $50 per tank.
12. Dental Office Piping:
Excluding waste, vent, water and mechanical piping: $300
flat fee.
(4) ELECTRICAL SUBCODE FEE:
a. The electrical subcode fee shall be that charged by the
municipality's electrical subcode official in accordance with
the requirement of the Act. Said fees are as follows:
1. Minimum fee: $50
2. Electrical fixtures and devices:
Lighting outlets, wall switches, fluorescent fixtures, fire
protection devices, convenience receptacles or similar
devices and motors less than HP or 1-KW (1-25 devices),
and for each telecommunications, data or other type of
structure wiring devices for all Use Groups: $40
2a. For each 25 additional fixtures, wall switches, convenience
receptacles or similar devices, and motors of less than
1-HP or 1-KW: $8.
3. Service sub panels.
Each service panel, service entrance or sub panel less than
or equal to 200 amps.
Use Groups R-3, R-4 and R-5: $50.
§ T5A.1-7 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T5A.1-7
BAO:817
All other Use Groups: $60.
Each service panel, service entrance or sub panel greater
than 200 amps and less than or equal to 600 amps.
Use Groups R-3, R-4 and R-5: $95.
All other Use Groups: $110.
Each service panel, service entrance or sub panel greater
than 600 amps and less than or equal to 1,000 amps.
Use Groups R-3, R-4 and R-5: $230.
All other Use Groups: $250.
Each service panel, service entrance or sub panel 1,000
amps or greater.
Use Groups R-3, R-4 and R-5: $460.
All other Use Groups: $550.
4. Motors:
Each motor greater than 1-HP and less than 10-HP.
Use Groups R-3, R-4 and R-5: $10.
All other Use Groups: $15.
Each motor 10-HP or less than 50-HP:
Use Groups R-3, R-4 and R-5: $50.
All other Use Groups: $60.
Each motor 50-HP and less than 75 HP:
Use Groups R-3, R-4 and R-5: $95.
All other Use Groups: $110.
Each motor 75-HP and less than 100-HP:
Use Groups R-3, R-4 and R-5: $230.
All other Use Groups: $250.
Each motor 100-HP or greater.
Use Groups R-3, R-4 and R-5: $460.
All other Use Groups: $550.
5. Transformers.
§ T5A.1-7 PRINCETON CODE § T5A.1-7
BAO:818
Each electrical device, transformer and generator greater
than 1-KW and less than 10-KW.
Use Groups R-3, R-4 and R-5: $10.
All other Use Groups: $15.
Each electrical device, transformer and generator 10-KW
or greater and less than 45-KW.
Use Groups R-3, R-4 and R-5: $50.
All other Use Groups: $60.
Each electrical device, transformer and generator 45-KW
or greater and less than 75-KW.
Use Groups R-3, R-4 and R-5: $95.
All other Use Groups: $110.
Each electrical device, transformer and generator 75-KW
or greater and less than 112.5 KW.
Use Groups R-3, R-4 and R-5: $230.
All other Use Groups: $250.
Each electrical device, transformer and generator
112.5-KW or greater.
Use Groups R-3, R-4 and R-5: $460.
All other Use Groups: $550.
6. Annual inspection of public and commercial swimming
pools: $50.
7. Each permanently installed private swimming pool, spa,
hot tub or fountain (including any required bonding and
associated equipment): $50.
8. For each bonding inspection and installation of associated
equipment, except panel boards and under water lighting
fixtures: $50.
9. For each light-standard greater than eight feet in height
including luminaries: $10.
10. For each communications closet or communication rack
system: $10.
11. For each replacement or wiring involving one branch
circuit (or part thereof).: $10.
12. For each utility management device: $10.
§ T5A.1-7 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T5A.1-8
BAO:819
§ T5A.1-8. State training fees. [Ord. No. 2016-13 Exh. A]
§ T5A.1-9. Enforcement; violations; penalties. [Ord. No. 2016-13
Exh. A]
Procedures for enforcement of the Act and its regulations are as set forth in
such Act and regulations, as amended from time to time. Further, penalties
for violations of the Act, its regulations and this chapter shall also be as set
forth in such act and regulations, as such penalties may be amended from
time to time.
§ T5A.1-10. Temporary certificates of occupancy. [Ord. No. 2016-13
Exh. A]
Whenever the construction official issues pursuant to the Act (P.L. 1975,
c. 217; N.J.S.A. 52:27B-119 et seq.) a temporary certificate of occupancy
to a holder of a construction permit, said construction official shall ensure
that said applicant has met the requirements set forth in the regulations
for the Act (N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.23). If the holder of a construction permit must
complete on-site improvements relating to the construction of a driveway,
driveway apron, landscaping, or in any way pertain to improvements
relating to drainage, then said construction official, prior to the issuance
of said temporary certificate of occupancy, shall require the applicant for
said temporary certificate of occupancy to enter into an agreement with
Princeton, in a form to be approved by the municipal attorney, whereby
said applicant shall agree to complete all of the aforementioned work as
required by the construction permit. Further, the applicant shall post with
the construction official sufficient security to insure the completion of all of
the remaining work required pursuant to the construction permit in order
to receive a temporary certificate of occupancy. If a holder of a construction
permit must complete other remaining work than that specifically set forth
hereinabove, said construction official may require that said additional
(a) In order to provide for training, certification and technical support
programs, and as required by the Act and by regulation, the enforcing
agency shall collect, in addition to the fees specified above, a surcharge
fee as set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.19.
(b) Such surcharge fee shall be remitted to the Bureau of Housing
Inspection, Department of Community Affairs, on a quarterly basis for
the fiscal quarter ending September 30, December 31, March 31 and
June 30, not later than one month next succeeding the end of the
quarter for which it is due. In the fiscal year in which the regulations of
such Department first become effective, the surcharge fee shall be
collected and remitted for the third and fourth quarters only.
(c) The enforcing agency shall report to the Bureau of Housing Inspection
annually at the end of each fiscal year, and not later than July 31, the
total amount of the surcharge fees collected in the fiscal year. In the
fiscal year in which such regulations first become effective, such report
shall be for the third and fourth quarters only.
§ T5A.1-8 PRINCETON CODE § T5A.1-10
BAO:820
remaining work be included in the aforementioned agreement with
Princeton and further may require the posting of sufficient security to
insure the completion of said remaining work before the temporary
certificate of occupancy is issued.
§ T5A.1-10 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T5A.1-10
BAO:821

ARTICLE II
Construction Records Clearance
§ T5A.1-11. Certificate of construction records clearance required.
[Ord. No. 2016-13 Exh. A]
No building or structure shall be occupied in whole or in part prior to
the issuance of a certificate of construction records clearance ("CRC"). A
CRC shall be required prior to the sale of any residential or commercial
structure.
§ T5A.1-12. Exceptions to the requirement for certificate of
construction records clearance. [Ord. No. 2016-13 Exh. A]
The following conveyances shall be exempt from the requirements of
section 5A.1-11 above:
§ T5A.1-13. Responsibility to obtain CRC. [Ord. No. 2016-13 Exh. A]
(a) Transfer of title to correct a previously recorded deed.
(b) Title eligible to be recorded as an ancient deed.
(c) Transfer of title between husband and wife, whether or not relating to
divorce, or between former spouses if the transfer is incident to an
order or judgment from any court of competent jurisdiction.
(d) Transfer of title relating to new construction for which a certificate of
occupancy is required.
(e) Transfer of title by or to an executor, administrator or court order,
which affects a distribution of a descendant's estate in accordance with
the provisions of the descendant's will or, the interstate laws of the
state.
(f) Transfer of title due to refinancing home equity loans, second
mortgages.
(g) Transfer of title by or to a received, trustee in bankruptcy or
liquidation, or assignee for the benefit of creditors.
(h) Residential rentals.
(a) No owner shall permit the sale of a residential or commercial premises
or rentals of commercial premises covered under this article unless the
requisite CRC has been issued. No purchaser or commercial tenant
shall occupy any premises covered under this article until the requisite
CRC has been issued. Owners, commercial tenants and occupants shall
be jointly and separately responsible for failure to obtain the requisite
CRC required hereunder. The owner and/or authorized agent shall
submit a written application and payment of fees at least 10 business
days prior to the change of ownership and/or occupancy on the form
provided by the municipality.
§ T5A.1-11 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T5A.1-13
BAO:823
§ T5A.1-14. Fees. [Ord. No. 2016-13 Exh. A]
The application fee must be paid for in advance for a CRC in accordance
with the following schedule if applied for within:
1-5 business days $125
6-10 business days $70
11-20 business days $35
§ T5A.1-15. Violations and penalties. [Ord. No. 2016-13 Exh. A]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this article
shall, upon conviction, be punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000,
imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90 days and/or a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days.
§ T5A.1-16. Miscellaneous revisions. [Ord. No. 2016-13 Exh. A]
(b) Pre-occupancy records inspection. Prior to the issuance of any such
certificate for any transaction, the enforcing agency shall conduct a
records inspection to ensure that there are not open construction
permits on subject premises. Should there be open permits on subject
premises all final inspections and prior approvals shall be obtained and
appropriate Uniform Construction Code Certificates shall be issued
prior to issuance of the CRC.
(a) The issuance of a CRC shall not preclude the imposition of penalties
upon the subsequent discovery of Construction Code violations.
(b) CRC certificates are valid for six months from the date of issue unless a
change in occupancy has occurred and must be renewed for each
occupancy change.
§ T5A.1-13 PRINCETON CODE § T5A.1-16
BAO:824
Chapter T5A
(RESERVED)
Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. App. A:9-40.5 which establishes statewide
laws governing municipality's authority to declare and enforce
orders during a local state of emergency.
(CIVIL DISTURBANCES — EMERGENCY REGULATIONS)
Chapter T5AA
CABLE TELEVISION AND COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM
FRANCHISE
§ T5AA-1. Purpose of the chapter. [Ord. No. 2016-35 § 1]
The Municipality hereby grants to Comcast renewal of its non-exclusive
Municipal Consent to place in, upon, across, above, over and under
highways, streets, alleys, sidewalks, easements, public ways and public
places in the Municipality, poles, wires, cables, underground conduits,
manholes and other television conductors, fixtures, apparatus, and
equipment as may be necessary for the construction, operation and
maintenance in the Municipality of a cable television and communications
system.
§ T5AA-2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2016-35 § 2]
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. Such meaning or
definition of terms in supplemental to those definitions of the Federal
Communications Commission ("FCC") rules and regulations, 47 C.F.R.
Subsection 76.1 et seq., and the Cable Communications Policy Act, 47 U.S.C.
Section 521 et seq., as amended, and the Cable Television Act, N.J.S.A.
§ 48:5A-1 et seq., and shall in no way be construed to broaden, alter or
conflict with the Federal and State definitions:
(a) MUNICIPALITY - Shall mean the Municipality of Princeton, County of
Mercer, State of New Jersey.
(b) COMPANY OR COMCAST - Shall mean the grantee of rights under this
chapter and is known as Comcast of Central New Jersey II.
(c) ACT OR CABLE TELEVISION ACT - Shall mean Chapter 186 of the
General Laws of New Jersey, and subsequent amendments thereto,
N.J.S.A. § 48:5A-1, et seq.
(d) FCC - Shall mean the Federal Communications Commission.
(e) BOARD OR BPU - Shall mean the Board of Public Utilities, State of New
Jersey.
§ T5A.1-16 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T5AA-2
BAO:825
§ T5AA-3. Statement of findings. [Ord. No. 2016-35 § 3]
Public hearings conducted by the Municipality, concerning the renewal of
Municipal Consent herein granted to the Company were held after proper
public notice pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act and the
regulations of the Board adopted pursuant thereto. Said hearings, having
been fully open to the public, and the Municipality, having received at said
public hearings all comments regarding the qualifications of the Company
to receive this renewal of Municipal Consent, the Municipality hereby finds
that the Company possesses the necessary legal, technical, character,
financial and other qualifications and that the Company's operating and
construction arrangements are adequate and feasible.
§ T5AA-4. Duration of franchise. [Ord. No. 2016-35 § 4]
The non-exclusive Municipal Consent granted herein shall expire 15 years
from the date of expiration of the previous Certificate of Approval issued
by the Board with a ten-year automatic renewal as provided by N.J.S.A.
§ 48:5A-19 and 25, and N.J.A.C. § 14:18-13.6.
In the event that the Municipality shall find that the Company has not
substantially complied with the material terms and conditions of this
chapter, the Municipality shall have the right to petition the OCTV, pursuant
to N.J.S.A. § 48:5A-47, for appropriate action, including modification AND/
OR termination of the Certificate of Approval; provided, however, that the
Municipality shall first have given the Company written notice of all alleged
instances of non-compliance and an opportunity to cure same within 90 days
of that notification.
§ T5AA-5. Franchise fee. [Ord. No. 2016-35 § 5]
Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act, the Company shall, during
each year of operation under the consent granted herein, pay to the
Municipality 2% of the gross revenues from all recurring charges in the
(f) OFFICE OR OCTV - Shall mean the Office of Cable Television of the
Board.
(g) BASIC CABLE SERVICE - Shall mean any service tier, which includes
the retransmission of local television broadcast signals as defined by
the FCC.
(h) APPLICATION - Shall mean the Company's Application for Renewal of
Municipal Consent.
(i) PRIMARY SERVICE AREA OR PSA - Shall mean and consist of the area
of the Municipality currently served with existing plant as set forth in
the map annexed to the Company's Application for Municipal
Consent.22
22.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes Ordinance Nos. 1016, 83-13, 93-28,
2003-12 and 2003-21.
§ T5AA-2 PRINCETON CODE § T5AA-5
BAO:826
nature of subscription fees paid by subscribers for cable television
reception service in the Municipality or any higher amount permitted by
the Act or otherwise allowable by law, whichever is greater. The current
franchise fee amount for the Municipality is 3.5% of the gross revenues
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-30(d).
§ T5AA-6. Franchise territory. [Ord. No. 2016-35 § 6]
The consent granted under this chapter for the renewal of the franchise
shall apply to the entirety of the Municipality and any property
subsequently annexed hereto.
§ T5AA-7. Extension of service. [Ord. No. 2016-35 § 7]
The Company shall be required to proffer service to any residence along
any public right-of-way in the Primary Service Area, as set forth in the
Company's Application. Any extension of plant beyond the Primary Service
Area shall be governed by the Company's Line Extension Policy, as set
forth in the Company's Application, with a HPM ("homes-per-mile") of 25
dwellings per linear mile from the nearest active trunk or feeder line.
§ T5AA-8. Construction Requirements. [Ord. No. 2016-35 § 8]
(a) Restoration: In the event that the Company or its agents shall disturb
any pavement, street surfaces, sidewalks, driveways, or other surface
in the natural topography, the Company shall, at its sole expense,
restore and replace such places or things so disturbed in as good a
condition as existed prior to the commencement of said work.
(b) Relocation: If at any time during the period of this consent, the
Municipality shall alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other
way or place the Company, upon reasonable notice by the Municipality,
shall remove, re-lay or relocate its equipment, at the expense of the
Company prior to approval of the board.
(c) Removal or trimming of trees: During the exercise of its rights and
privileges under this franchise, the Company shall have the authority to
trim trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks or other
public places of the Municipality so as to prevent the branches of such
trees from coming in contact with the wires and cable of the Company.
Such trimming shall be only to the extent necessary to maintain proper
clearance of the Company's wires and cables.
(d) Temporary removal of cables: The Company shall, upon request of the
Municipality, at the Company's expense, temporarily raise, lower or
remove its lines in order to facilitate the moving of buildings or
machinery or in other like circumstances, subject to the prior approval
of the Board.
(e) Installation of Equipment: The Company shall install equipment in the
same location and manner as existing public utilities whenever
§ T5AA-5 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T5AA-8
BAO:827
§ T5AA-9. Customer service. [Ord. No. 2016-35 § 9]
In providing services to its customers, the Company shall comply with
N.J.A.C. § 14:18-1, et seq. and all applicable State and Federal statutes
and regulations. The Company shall strive to meet or exceed all voluntary
company and industry standards in the delivery of customer service and
shall be prepared to report on it to the Municipality upon written request of
the Municipality Administrator or Clerk.
§ T5AA-10. Municipal Complaint Officer. [Ord. No. 2016-35 § 10]
The Office of Cable Television is hereby designated as the Complaint Officer
for the Municipality pursuant to N.J.S.A. § 48:5A-26(b). All complaints shall
be received and processed in accordance with N.J.A.C. § 14:17-6.5. The
Municipality shall have the right to request copies of records and reports
pertaining to complaints by Municipality customers from the OCTV.
§ T5AA-11. Local office. [Ord. No. 2016-35 § 11]
During the term of this franchise, and any renewal thereof, the Company
shall maintain a business office or agent in accordance with N.J.A.C.
§ 14:18-5.1 for the purpose of receiving, investigating and resolving all local
complaints regarding the quality of service, equipment malfunctions, and
similar matters. Such a business office shall have a publicly listed toll-free
telephone number and be open during standard business hours.
§ T5AA-12. Performance bond. [Ord. No. 2016-35 § 12]
During the life of the franchise the Company shall give to the Municipality
a bond in the amount of $25,000. Such bond shall be to insure the faithful
possible, in order to minimize the impact of same on surrounding
property.
(a) The Company shall continue to comply fully with all applicable State
and Federal statutes and regulations regarding credit for outages, the
reporting of same to regulatory agencies and notification of same to
customers.
(b) The Company shall continue to fully comply with all applicable State
and Federal statutes and regulations regarding the availability of
devices for the hearing impaired and the notification of same to
customers.
(c) The Company shall use every reasonable effort to meet or exceed
voluntary standards for telephone accessibility developed by the
National Cable Television Association ("NCTA").
(d) Nothing herein shall impair the right of any subscriber or the
Municipality to express any comment with respect to telephone
accessibility to the Complaint Officer, or impair the right of the
Complaint Officer to take any action that is permitted under law.
§ T5AA-8 PRINCETON CODE § T5AA-12
BAO:828
performance of all undertakings of the Company as represented in its
Application for Municipal Consent incorporated herein.
§ T5AA-13. Subscriber rates. [Ord. No. 2016-35 § 13]
The rates of the Company shall be subject to regulation as permitted by
Federal and State law.
§ T5AA-14. Commitments by the Company. [Ord. No. 2016-35 § 14;
Ord. No. 2018-20]
(a) The Company shall provide Expanded Basic or a similar tier of cable
television service to one outlet at no cost to each qualified existing and
future school in the Municipality, public and private, elementary,
intermediate and secondary, provided the school building is within 200
feet of active cable distribution plant or through customer owned
conduit. Each additional outlet installed, if any, shall be paid for on a
materials plus labor basis by the school requesting service.
(b) The Company shall provide Expanded Basic or a similar tier of cable
television service at no cost to one outlet to each qualified existing and
future municipal building, police, fire, emergency management facility
and public library in the Municipality, provided the facility is located
within 200 feet of active cable distribution plant or through customer
owned conduit. Each additional outlet installed, if any, shall be paid for
on a materials plus labor basis by the Municipality.
(c) Within six months of the issuance of a Renewal Certificate of Approval
by the BPU, the Company shall provide to the Municipality a one-time
Technology Grant in the amount of $75,000 to meet the technology and/
or cable related needs of the community.
(d) The Communications Act of 1934, as amended [47 U.S.C. § 543 (b)],
allows the Company to itemize and/or identify: (1.) the amount on the
subscriber bill assessed as a franchise fee and the identity of the
governmental authority to which the fee is paid; (2.) the amount on the
bill assessed to satisfy any requirements imposed on the Company by
the cable franchise to support public, education, and/or governmental
access channels, the use of such channels or required to meet the
technology and/or cable related needs of the community; and (3.) any
grants or other fees on the bill or any tax, assessment, or charge of any
kind imposed by any governmental authority on the transaction
between the operator and the subscriber. The Company reserves its
external cost, pass-through rights to the full extent permitted by law.
(e) The Company shall provide additional services as outlined in a separate
letter of agreement attached hereto as Exhibit A.23
23.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is included as an attachment to this Chapter.
§ T5AA-12 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T5AA-14
BAO:829
§ T5AA-15. Public, educational and governmental access. [Ord. No.
2016-35 § 15; Ord. No. 2018-20]
(f) The Company shall meet with the Council or their designee annually
upon written request of the Municipality.
(a) The Company will continue to provide one channel for public access and
one channel for governmental access. It will be on the most basic tier of
service offered by the Company in accordance with the Cable Act,
Section 611 [47 U.S.C. § 531], and as further set forth herein.
(b) The Company does not relinquish its ownership of or ultimate right of
control over a channel by designating it for PEG access use. A PEG
access user - whether an educational or government user - acquires no
property or other interest by virtue of the use of a channel so
designated, and may not rely on the continued use of a particular
channel number, no matter how long the same channel may have been
designated for such use.
(c) The Company shall not exercise editorial control over the use of any
educational or governmental channel capacity, except Company may
refuse to transmit any educational or governmental access program or
portion of any public or governmental access program that contains
obscenity, indecency, or nudity.
(d) Public access. "Public access" shall mean non-commercial use by the
public.
(e) Educational access. "Educational access" shall mean non-commercial
use by educational institutions such as public or private schools, but not
"home schools," community colleges and/or universities.
(f) Government access. "Government access" shall mean non-commercial
use by the governing bodies of the Municipality for the purpose of
showing the public local government at work.
(g) Fallow time. Because blank or underutilized PG channels are not in the
public interest, in the event the Municipality or other PG access users
elect not to fully program the PG access channel, the Company may
program unused time on those channels subject to reclamation by the
Municipality upon no less than 60 days' written notice.
(h) The Communications Act of 1934, as amended [47 U.S.C. § 543 (b)],
allows the Company to itemize and/or identify: (1.) the amount on the
subscriber bill assessed as a franchise fee and the identity of the
governmental authority to which the fee is paid; (2.) the amount on the
bill assessed to satisfy any requirements imposed on the Company by
the cable franchise to support public, education, and/or governmental
access channels, the use of such channels or required to meet the
technology and/or cable related needs of the community; and (3.) any
grants or other fees on the bill or any tax, assessment, or charge of any
kind imposed by any governmental authority on the transaction
§ T5AA-14 PRINCETON CODE § T5AA-15
BAO:830
§ T5AA-16. Emergency uses. [Ord. No. 2016-35 § 16]
§ T5AA-17. Liability insurance. [Ord. No. 2016-35 § 17]
The Company shall at all times maintain a commercial general liability
insurance policy with a single limit amount of $1,000,000 covering liability
for any death, personal injury, property damages or other liability arising
out of its construction and operation of the cable television system, and an
excess liability (or "umbrella") policy in the amount of $5,000,000.
§ T5AA-18. Incorporation of the Application. [Ord. No. 2016-35
§ 18]
All of the statements and commitments contained in the Application or
annexed thereto and incorporated therein, and any amendment thereto,
except as modified herein, are binding upon the Company as terms and
conditions of this consent. The Application and other relevant writings
submitted by the Company shall be annexed hereto and made a part hereof
by reference provided same do not conflict with application State or Federal
law.
§ T5AA-19. Competitive equity. [Ord. No. 2016-35 § 19]
Should the Municipality grant Municipal Consent for a franchise to
construct, operate and maintain a cable television system to any other
person, corporation or entity on terms materially less burdensome or more
favorable than the terms contained herein, the Company may substitute
such language that is more favorable or less burdensome for the
comparable provision of this chapter subject to the provisions of N.J.A.C.
§ 14:17-6.7.
between the operator and the subscriber. The Company reserves its
external cost, pass-through rights to the full extent permitted by law.
(i) The Company shall provide additional services as outlined in a separate
letter of agreement attached hereto as Exhibit A.24
(j) The Company shall meet with the Council or their designee annually
upon written request of the Municipality.
(a) The Company will comply with the Emergency Alert System ("EAS")
rules in accordance with applicable State and Federal statutes and
regulations.
(b) The Company shall in no way be held liable for any injury suffered by
the Municipality or any other person, during an emergency, if for any
reason the Municipality is unable to make full use of the cable television
system as contemplated herein.
24.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is included as attachment to this chapter.
§ T5AA-15 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T5AA-20
BAO:831
§ T5AA-20. Separability. [Ord. No. 2016-35 § 20]
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court or
Federal or State agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be
deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and its validity or
unconstitutionality shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of
the chapter.
§ T5AA-21. Third party beneficiaries. [Ord. No. 2016-35 § 21]
Nothing in this franchise or in any prior agreement is or was intended to
confer third-party beneficiary status on any member of the public to enforce
the terms of such agreements or franchise.
§ T5AA-22. Effective date. [Ord. No. 2016-35 § 22]
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon issuance of a Renewal
Certificate of Approval from the BPU.
Chapter T5AAA
(RESERVED)
Chapter T5B
DISCRIMINATION
Editor's Note: See also Borough Code § 2-90c, Civil Rights Commission.
§ T5B-1. Purpose of chapter. [Ord. No. 686, § 1; Ord. No. 705, § 1;
Ord. No. 82-2, § 1; Ord. No. 94-5, § 1]
The governing body of the township finds and declares that practices of
discrimination with respect to real property because of age, race, creed,
color, national origin, ancestry, marital status, sex, affectional or sexual
orientation, familial status, liability for service with the Armed Forces of
the United States, nationality or handicap are matters of concern to the
government of the township and that such discrimination threatens not only
the rights and proper privileges of persons but menaces the institutions and
foundations of a free democratic society. It is the policy of the township that
all persons shall have the opportunity to obtain all the accommodations,
advantages, facilities and privileges of real property in the township without
such discrimination, subject only to conditions and limitations applicable
alike to all persons. In furtherance of that policy, this chapter shall be
deemed an exercise of the police power of the township for the protection
of the public health, safety and morals and for the promotion of the general
welfare.
§ T5AA-20 PRINCETON CODE § T5B-2
BAO:832
§ T5B-2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 686, § 2; Ord. No. 705, § 1; Ord. No.
94-5, § 1]
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
COMMISSION — The joint commission on civil rights created by the
borough and the township.
FAMILIAL STATUS — Being the natural parent of a child, the adoptive
parent of a child, the foster parent of a child, having a "parent and child
relationship" with a child as defined by state law, or having sole or joint
legal or physical custody, care, guardianship, or visitation with a child, or
any person who is pregnant or is in the process of securing legal custody of
any individual who has not attained the age of 18 years.
HANDICAP — Physical disability, infirmity, malformation or disfigurement
which is caused by bodily injury, birth defect or illness, including epilepsy,
and which shall include, but not be limited to, any degree of paralysis,
amputation, lack of physical coordination, blindness or visual impediment,
deafness or hearing impediment, muteness or speech impediment, or a
physical reliance on a service or guide dog, wheelchair, or other remedial
appliance or device, or any mental, psychological or developmental
disability resulting from any anatomical, psychological, physiological or
neurological conditions which prevents the normal exercise of any bodily
or mental functions or is demonstrable, medically or psychologically, by
accepted clinical or laboratory diagnostic techniques.
HOUSING — Shall not fail to meet the requirements for housing for older
persons by reason of: Persons residing in such housing as of March 12, 1989
not meeting the age requirements under this definition, provided that new
occupants of such housing meet the age requirements under this definition;
or unoccupied units, provided that such units are reserved for occupancy by
persons who meet the age requirements under this definition.
HOUSING FOR OLDER PERSONS — Housing which is:
PERSON — One or more individuals, partnerships, associations,
organizations, cooperatives, corporations, legal representatives, trustees,
trustees in bankruptcy, receivers, fiduciaries and other legal entities.
REAL PROPERTY — Real estate, lands, tenements and hereditaments,
corporeal and incorporeal, and leaseholds.
UNLAWFUL DISCRIMINATION — Only those unlawful practices and acts
specified in section 5B-3 of this chapter.
Provided under any state or federal program that the Attorney General
determines is specifically designed and operated to assist elderly
persons (as defined in the state or federal program); or
(a)
(b) Intended for and solely occupied by persons 62 years of age or older; or
Intended and operated for occupancy by at least one person 55 years of
age or older per unit.
(c)
§ T5B-2 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T5B-3
BAO:833
§ T5B-3. Unlawful acts. [Ord. No. 686, § 3; Ord. No. 705, § 1; Ord.
No. 82-2, § 2; Ord. No. 94-5, § 1.]
It shall be an unlawful discrimination:
(a) For the owner, lessee, sublessee, assignee or managing agent of, or
other person having the right of ownership or possession of or the right
to sell, rent, lease, assign or sublease any real property or part or
portion thereof, or any agent or employee of any of these, real estate
broker or salesman, attorney, auctioneer or court-appointed fiduciary or
agent, or any agent or employee of any of these:
(1) To refuse to sell, rent, assign, lease or sublease or otherwise to
deny to or withhold from any person or group of persons any real
property or part or portion thereof because of the age, race, creed,
color, national origin, ancestry, marital status, sex, affectional or
sexual orientation, familial status, liability for service in the Armed
Forces of the United States, nationality or handicap of such person
or group of persons; or
(2) To refuse to sell, rent, assign, lease or sublease, or offer for sale,
rental, lease, assignment or sublease any real property or part or
portion thereof to any person or group of persons or to refuse to
negotiate for the sale, rental, assignment, lease or sublease of any
real property or part or portion thereof to any person or group of
persons because of the age, race, creed, color or national origin,
ancestry, marital status, sex, affectional or sexual orientation,
familial status, liability for service in the Armed Forces of the
United States, nationality or handicap of such person or group of
persons, or to represent that any real property or portion thereof is
not available for inspection, sale, rental, assignment, lease or
sublease when in fact it is so available, or otherwise to deny or
withhold any real property or any part or portion of facilities
thereof to or from any person or group of persons because of the
age, race, creed, color or national origin, ancestry, marital status,
sex, affectional or sexual orientation, familial status, liability for
service in the Armed Forces of the United States, nationality or
handicap of such person or group of persons; or
(3) To discriminate against any person or group of persons because of
the age, race, creed, color or national origin, ancestry, marital
status, sex, affectional or sexual orientation, familial status, liability
for service in the Armed Forces of the United States, nationality or
handicap of such person or group of persons in the terms,
conditions or privileges of the sale, rental or lease of any real
property or part or portion or in the furnishing of facilities or
services in connection therewith; or
(4) To print, circulate, issue, display, post or mail, or cause to be
printed, published, circulated, issued, displayed, posted or mailed,
any statement, advertisement, publication or sign, or to use any
§ T5B-3 PRINCETON CODE § T5B-3
BAO:834
form of application for the purchase, rental, lease, assignment or
sublease of any real property or part or portion thereof or to make
any record or inquiry in connection with the prospective purchase,
rental, lease, assignment or sublease of any real property or part
or portion thereof which expresses, directly or indirectly, any
limitation, specification or discrimination as to age, race, creed,
color, national origin, ancestry, marital status, sex, affectional or
sexual orientation, familial status, liability for service in the Armed
Forces of the United States, nationality or handicap or any intent
to make any such limitation, specification or discrimination; or
(5) For the purpose of inducing a transaction for the sale or rental of
real property from which transaction such person or any of its
members may benefit financially, to represent that a change has
occurred or will or may occur in the composition with respect to
age, race, creed, color or national origin, ancestry, marital status,
sex, affectional or sexual orientation, familial status, liability for
service in the Armed Forces of the United States, nationality or
handicap of the owners or occupants in the block, neighborhood or
area in which the real property is located, and to represent, directly
or indirectly, that this change will or may result in undesirable
consequences in the block, neighborhood or area in which the real
property is located, including, but not limited to, the lowering of
property values, an increase in criminal or antisocial behavior, or a
decline in the quality of schools or other facilities.
(b) For any person, bank, banking organization, mortgage company,
insurance company or other financial institution, lender or credit
institution to whom application is made for financial assistance for the
purchase, acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair or
maintenance of any real property or part or portion thereof or any
agent or employee thereof:
(1) To discriminate against any person or group of persons because of
the age, race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry, marital status,
sex, affectional or sexual orientation, familial status, liability for
service in the Armed Forces of the United States, nationality or
handicap of such person or group of persons or of the prospective
occupants or tenants of such real property or part or portion
thereof, in the granting, withholding, extending, modifying or
renewing, or in the fixing of the rates, terms, conditions or
provisions of any such financial assistance or in the extension of
services in connection therewith; or
(2) To use any form of application for such financial assistance or to
make any record or inquiry in connection with applications for such
financial assistance which expresses, directly or indirectly, any
limitation, specification or discrimination as to age, race, creed,
color, national origin, ancestry, marital status, sex, affectional or
sexual orientation, familial status, liability for service in the Armed
Forces of the United States, nationality or handicap or any intent to
§ T5B-3 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T5B-3
BAO:835
§ T5B-4. Application of chapter. [Ord. No. 686, § 4; Ord. No. 705,
§ 1; Ord. No. 94-5, § 1.]
make any such limitation, specification or discrimination, unless
otherwise required by law or regulation to retain or use such
information.
(c) For any person to take reprisals against any person because that person
has opposed any practices or acts forbidden under this chapter or
because that person has filed a complaint, testified or assisted in any
proceeding under this chapter, or to coerce, intimidate, threaten or
interfere with any person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account
of that person having aided or encouraged any other person in the
exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted or protected by this chapter.
(d) For any person to aid, abet, incite, compel or coerce the doing of any of
the acts forbidden under this chapter, or to attempt or conspire to do
so.
(e) (1) It shall be an unlawful discrimination for the township or other
local, civil or political subdivision of the State of New Jersey, or an
officer, employee, or agent thereof, to exercise the power to
regulate land use or housing in a manner that discriminates on the
basis of age, race, creed, color or national origin, ancestry, marital
status, sex, affectional or sexual orientation, familial status, liability
for service in the Armed Forces of the United States, nationality or
handicap.
(2) Any person claiming to be aggrieved by an unlawful discrimination
under this subsection shall enforce this subsection by private right
of action in Superior Court. This shall not apply to discrimination in
housing owned or managed by the township or other local, civil or
political subdivision of the State of New Jersey.
(a) The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the rental: (1) of a
single apartment or flat in a two-family dwelling, the other occupancy of
which is occupied by the owner as a residence or the household of the
owner's family at the time of such rental; or (2) of a room or rooms to
another person or persons by the owner or occupant as a residence or
the household of the owner or occupant's family at the time of such
rental.
(b) Nothing herein contained shall be construed to bar any religious or
denominational institution or organization, or any organization
operated for charitable or educational purposes, which is operated,
supervised or controlled by or in connection with a religious
organization, in the sale, lease or rental of real property, from limiting
admission to or giving preference to persons of the same religion or
denomination or from making such selection as is calculated by such
organization to promote the religious principles for which it is
established or maintained.
§ T5B-3 PRINCETON CODE § T5B-4
BAO:836
§ T5B-5. Filing of complaints with civil rights commission. [Ord.
No. 686, § 5; Ord. No. 705, § 1; Ord. No. 94-5, § 1; Ord. No. 2006-28,
§ 1.]
§ T5B-6. Actions in municipal court. [Ord. No. 686, § 6; Ord. No.
705, § 1; Ord. No. 94-5, § 1.]
Any person may file a complaint for any violation of this chapter in the
municipal court in accordance with the practice therein; and this may
(c) Nothing herein contained shall be construed to bar any person from
refusing to sell, rent, lease, assign or sublease any room, apartment or
flat in a dwelling or residential facility that is planned exclusively for
and occupied exclusively by individuals of one sex to any individual of
the opposite sex on the basis of sex, nor shall anything herein be
construed to bar any person from advertising or recording a
qualification as to sex for any room, apartment or flat in such a dwelling
or residential facility.
(d) Nothing herein contained regarding discrimination on the basis of
familial status shall apply with respect to housing for older persons.
(a) Any person claiming to be aggrieved by an unlawful discrimination, as
specified in this chapter, may file a complaint with the commission
setting forth the name and address of the person alleged to have
committed the unlawful discrimination complained of, the particulars of
such unlawful discrimination and such other information as may be
required by the commission. This procedure may be followed
notwithstanding that a complaint for the same unlawful discrimination
shall be pending in the municipal court hereunder.
(b) The commission shall thereupon cause prompt investigation to be made
in connection therewith, and if it shall determine after such
investigation that probable cause exists for crediting the allegations of
the complaint, it shall immediately endeavor to eliminate the unlawful
discrimination complained of by conference, conciliation and
persuasion.
(c) No determination of the commission shall be used in any action in the
municipal court of the township for violation of this chapter.
(d) No complaint shall be filed with the commission later than 30 days after
the date of the unlawful discrimination complained of therein, and the
commission shall complete its investigation and determination and its
procedures, if any, for elimination of the unlawful discrimination
complained of, within 60 days after the filing of the complaint.
(e) A township employee must exhaust his or her administrative remedies
as set forth in the township personnel manual before filing a complaint
with commission if the complaint relates to the employee's employment
with the township.
§ T5B-4 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T5B-6
BAO:837
be done notwithstanding that a complaint for the same violation shall be
pending before the commission hereunder. However, no person shall be
prosecuted, tried or punished in the municipal court for any violation of this
chapter unless the complaint shall be filed in such court within 90 days after
the time of the violation complained of therein.
Chapter T6
(RESERVED)
Chapter T6A
EMPLOYEES — DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION
§ T6A-1. Intent and purpose. [Ord. No. 934, § 1.]
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to provide for the defense of
actions against and the indemnification of public employees as permitted by
N.J.S.A. 59:10-1, et seq.
§ T6A-2. Definitions. [Ord. 934, § 1]
As used in this chapter:
EMPLOYEE — Any officer, employee or servant, whether or not
compensated or part-time, who is authorized to perform any act or service;
provided, however, that the term does not include an independent
contractor.
PUBLIC EMPLOYEE — Any employee or former employee of the township.
§ T6A-3. Defense of actions. [Ord. No. 934, § 1]
The township shall provide for the defense of any action brought against
a public employee on account of any act or commission in the scope of
his employment, and this obligation shall extend to any cross-actions,
counterclaims or cross-complaint against such employee.
§ T6A-4. Exceptions. [Ord. No. 934, § 1.]
The provisions of section 6A-3 shall not be applicable when the township
committee determines that:
(a) The act or omission was not within the scope of employment; or
(b) The act or failure to act was because of actual fraud, willful misconduct
or actual malice; or
(c) The defense of the action or proceeding would create a conflict of
interest between the township and the public employee; or
§ T5B-6 PRINCETON CODE § T6A-4
BAO:838
§ T6A-5. Methods of providing defense. [Ord. No. 934, § 1.]
The township may provide any defense required of it under this chapter
through an attorney from its own staff or by employing other counsel.
§ T6A-6. Township control over litigation. [Ord. No. 934, § 1.]
Whenever the township provides any defense required of it under this
chapter, the township, through counsel, may assume exclusive control over
the representation of the public employee, and such employee shall
cooperate fully with the defense.
§ T6A-7. Indemnification. [Ord. No. 934, § 1; Ord. No. 88-27, § 1.]
In any case where the township is required to provide a defense under this
chapter, the township shall pay or shall reimburse the public employee for:
Chapter T6B
(d) The defense of the action or proceeding is provided for by an insurance
policy or policies, whether obtained by the township or by any other
person; or
(e) The public employee failed to deliver to the township administrator,
within 10 calendar days after the time he is served with any summons,
complaint, process, notice, demand or pleading, the original or a copy
of the same; or
(f) The public employee has failed to cooperate fully with the defense.
(a) Any bona fide settlement agreements entered into by the employee; and
(b) Any judgments entered against the employee; and
(c) Any exemplary or punitive damages resulting from the employee's civil
violation of state or federal law if, in the opinion of the township
committee, the acts committed by the employee upon which damages
are based did not constitute actual fraud, actual malice, willful
misconduct or an intentional wrong; and
(d) If the township has failed to provide such required defense, all costs of
defending the action, including reasonable counsel fees and expenses,
together with costs of any appeal.
In addition, in any case where the township would be required to
provide a defense under this chapter except for the fact that such
defense is provided for by insurance, the township shall provide
indemnification as aforesaid, but only to the extent not covered by
insurance.
Nothing in this chapter shall authorize the township to pay for punitive
or exemplary damages or damages resulting from the commission of a
crime.
§ T6A-4 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T6A-7
BAO:839
ENVIRONMENTAL DESIGN REVIEW OF SITE
DEVELOPMENTS
Chapter T7
FINANCE AND TAXATION
For Local Fiscal Affairs Laws of the state, see R.S., tit. 54. As to
general board for making assessments of benefits from local
improvements, see §§ 2-26 to 2-30. As to licenses for sale of alcoholic
beverages, see §§ 3-2 to 3-6. As to licenses for operators of bagatelle
and amusement games, see §§ 4-1 to 4-4. As to licenses for billiard
halls and bowling alleys, see §§ 4-6 to 4-11. As to dog license fees, see
§ 6-1. As to permits for canvassers and solicitors, see §§ 14-1 to 14-4.
As to licenses for hucksters and peddlers, see §§ 14-7 to 14-12. As
to license to establish a dump, see §§ 17-1, 17-2. As to sewer rental
or service charge, see §§ 18-21 to 18-26. As to taxicab licenses, see
§§ 21-1, 21-2. As to license to engage to business of emptying or
cleaning septic tanks, cesspools, etc., see § 28-14. As to license for
collection and disposal of solid waste, see § 29-2.
§ T6A-7 PRINCETON CODE § T6A-7
BAO:840
ARTICLE I
In General
§ T7-1. Payroll account authorized; method of payment of
compensation.25 [Ord. No. 264, § 1]
§ T7-2. Exemption of personal property from taxation.26 [Ord. No.
415, §§ 1, 2]
No tangible household personal property and personal effects located
within the township shall be assessed or taxed.
This section shall apply to taxes on tangible household personal property
and personal effects due and payable in the year 1962 and thereafter so
long as this section shall be in effect, and shall not affect the obligation,
lien or duty to pay any taxes, interest or penalties which have accrued or
(a) At the first meeting of the township committee in January of each year,
there shall be approved an account to be designated the township
payroll account. From time to time the township treasurer, upon receipt
of a warrant for the amount due the township payroll account, shall
deposit the warrant to the credit of the township payroll account and
charge the appropriate budgetary accounts therewith.
(b) The township treasurer shall thereafter draw checks on the township
payroll account to the employees entitled to payment therefrom.
(c) The township treasurer shall present monthly to the township
committee for approval warrants drawn to the order of the township
payroll account in advance for all employees whose salaries are on an
annual or hourly basis when such salaries are due and payable prior to
the next regular meeting of the township committee.
(d) At each regular meeting of the township committee, the township
treasurer shall submit for the approval or ratification, as the case may
be, the necessary payrolls for the amount due the several officers and
employees for compensation. The payroll shall be considered by the
township committee in due course and approved if found to be correct.
(e) In case of error or adjustment in the payroll, it shall be the duty of the
township treasurer to see that such error or adjustment is properly
corrected and appropriate record made thereof.
(f) Such officers as may be designated by the township committee are
authorized to sign warrants drawn in favor of the payroll account upon
due notice that the appropriate payrolls have been approved by the
proper committee and by the proper certifying authorities.
25.Editor's Note: For state law governing when a township may pay out money, see R.S.,
40A:5-16.
26.For state law authorizing the municipality to exempt personal property from taxation see
R.S. 54:4-9.2
§ T7-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T7-2
BAO:841
may accrue by virtue of any assessment made or which may be made with
respect to taxes levied for any year prior to the year 1962, nor shall this
section affect the legal authority to assess and collect taxes which may be
or have been due and payable prior to January 1, 1962, together with such
interest and penalties as would have accrued thereon under any provisions
of law amended or repealed hereby; nor shall this section invalidate any
assessments or affect any proceedings for the enforcement thereof pending
upon the effective date of this section or upon January 1, 1962, or during
the period between such dates.
§ T7-2 PRINCETON CODE § T7-2
BAO:842
ARTICLE II
Approval and Payment of Claims27
§ T7-3. Procedure in presentation of claims to township. [Ord. No.
503, § 1; Ord. No. 92-10, § 1]
Any person claiming payment from the township shall present a detailed bill
of demand to the township chief financial officer, duly certified or supported
by an affidavit of the claimant, as provided by section 40A:5-16 of the
Revised Statutes of New Jersey.
§ T7-4. Certification by department heads or employees. [Ord. No.
503, § 2; Ord. No. 92-10, § 1.]
It shall be the duty of the township chief financial officer to see that the
signature of the officer or employee, who has been duly designated by the
township committee to certify that the materials have been received by or
the services rendered to the township, appears on every claim, as provided
by section 40A:5-16 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey.
§ T7-5. Approval of claims by department head and chief financial
officer; approved claims filed with township clerk for submission of
bill list to township committee. [Ord. No. 503, § 3; Ord. No. 92-10,
§ 1.]
After presentation to the township clerk, claims shall be presented to the
department head and chief financial officer responsible for the placing
of the order who, if satisfied that the claims are proper, shall approve
the claims. After such approval is given, the department head and chief
financial officer shall file the claims with the township clerk, who shall
then present the claims on a bill list to the township committee for formal
approval at a regular meeting.
§ T7-6. Approval or rejection of claims by township committee;
referral back to township clerk of rejected claims. [Ord. No. 503,
§ 4; Ord. No. 92-10, § 1.]
Claims as set forth on the bill list shall be considered by the township
committee which shall approve the same; except, that the township
committee may reject any claim presented to it, stating the reason for such
rejection. Any disapproved claim shall be referred back to the township
clerk with such instructions as the township committee may give at the time
of disapproval.
§ T7-7. Recording disposition of claims after township committee
action. [Ord. No. 503, § 5, Ord. No. 92-10 § 1.]
It shall be the duty of the township clerk to record all claims as set forth on
the bill list in the official minutes, indicating that the township committee
27.For state law as to when a township may pay out money, see R.S., § 40A:5-16
§ T7-3 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T7-7
BAO:843
has by formal action approved the same, with appropriate record as to any
claims disapproved or rejected.
§ T7-8. Indication of approval by designated chief financial officer.
[Ord. No. 503, § 6; Ord. No. 92-10, § 1.]
It shall be the duty of the chief financial officer to indicate on the claims
that they have been approved for payment, with the date of approval thereof
noted on the claim.
§ T7-9. Signing and recording checks in payment of claims;
distribution of checks to claimants. [Ord. No. 503, § 7; Ord. No. 724,
§ 1; Ord. No. 892, § 1; Ord. No. 92-10, § 1.]
After the chief financial officer has certified that the claims have been
approved, he shall forthwith prepare the necessary checks for the payment
of the claims. The checks shall be signed by the mayor, the township chief
financial officer, and the township clerk. After preparing the checks for the
payment of claims, the chief financial officer shall record them in proper
books of account and thereafter mail or otherwise distribute the checks to
the claimants.
§ T7-7 PRINCETON CODE § T7-9
BAO:844
ARTICLE III
Tax Sale Certificate Redemptions
§ T7-10. Tax sale certificate redemptions. [Ord. No. 2010-15, § 1.]
The tax collector shall provide to any party entitled to redeem a tax sale
certificate pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-54 two calculations of the amount
required for redemption within a calendar year at no cost. The tax collector
shall charge a fee of $50 for each subsequent calculation requested within
a calendar year. A request for a redemption calculation shall be made in
writing to the tax collector.
The tax collector shall charge to a lien holder a fee of $50 for the calculation
of the amount due to redeem a tax lien. Any requests for a redemption
calculation shall specify the date to be used for the calculation, which shall
be the date of the notice. Neither the tax collector or the township shall be
liable for an incorrect calculation. The fee paid to the township by the lien
holder shall not become a part of the lien and shall not be passed on to any
party entitled to redeem the lien.
§ T7-10 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T7-10
BAO:845
Chapter T7A
FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS PAYMENT
§ T7A-1. Payment prohibited until taxes, assessments, etc., are
paid. [Ord. No. 992, § 2.]
No insurance company authorized to issue fire insurance policies in the
State of New Jersey shall pay any claim in excess of $2,500, for fire damages
to real property located within the township, unless or until all taxes,
assessments and other municipal liens or charges due and payable
appearing on the official certificate of search shall have been paid either by
the owner of such real property or by the insurance company as provided in
section 3 of P.L. 1978, c. 184; or the municipality submits to the insurance
company a copy of a resolution adopted pursuant to section 4 of P.L. 1978
c.184.
§ T7A-2. Alteration of certificate of search. [Ord. No. 992, § 2.]
The official certificate of search may, from time to time, be altered, by
the bonded official responsible for preparing such certificates, in order to
cancel any error or omissions or to add any municipal liens or related
charges due and payable subsequent to the preparation of the official
certificate.
§ T7A-3. Appeal amount of lien or charge. [Ord. No. 992, § 3.]
In the event an appeal is taken on the amount of any lien or charge, other
than an appeal on the assessed valuation of real property pursuant to R.S.
54:3-21, the insurance company shall withhold 75% of the full amount of
lien or charge being contested pending termination of all proceedings, at
which time such moneys and all interest accruing thereon at a rate paid
on interest bearing accounts in banking institutions or savings and loan
associations in the State of New Jersey, shall be disbursed in accordance
with a final order or judgment of the court.
§ T7A-4. Priority of claims payment. [Ord. No. 992, § 4.]
Any claim on behalf of the township made in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter and P.L. 1978, c. 184 shall be paramount to any other claims
on the proceeds of the fire insurance policy, except the claim of a holder of
a mortgage on the fire damaged property, where the fire insurance policy
at the time of the loss listed the mortgagee as a named insured, in which
event the claim of the mortgagee to the proceeds shall be paramount to
the municipal lien only to the extent of the amount due and payable to the
mortgagee under the mortgage contract.
§ T7-10 PRINCETON CODE § T7A-5
BAO:846
§ T7A-5. Future property policies subject to chapter provisions.
[Ord. No. 992, § 5.]
All fire insurance policies covering property within the township, issued or
renewed after the adoption of this chapter and the filing of a copy of this
chapter with the State Commissioner of Insurance shall be subject to the
provisions of this chapter.
Chapter T8
PRINCETON FIRE DEPARTMENT
§ T7A-5 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T7A-5
BAO:847

ARTICLE I
Organization
§ T8-1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2017-63]
As used in this chapter:
ASSOCIATE MEMBER — Means a member of the Princeton fire department
who is not a member of any of the three fire companies described in section
8-2 of this article.
AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE — Means those vehicles that are
defined and authorized as such under the laws of the State of New Jersey.
CHIEF OF POLICE — Means the chief of the police department of the
Municipality of Princeton, or designee.
DEPARTMENT — Means the Princeton fire department.
DIRECTOR OF EMERGENCY AND SAFETY SERVICES (ALSO REFERRED
TO HEREIN AS (DIRECTOR) — Means the Princeton department head
responsible for all fire prevention and safety matters in the municipality.
MEMBER OR REGULAR MEMBER — Means a member of the Princeton fire
department who is a member of one of the three fire companies described
in section 8-2 of this article.
PERSON — Means any individual, corporation, association, partnership,
other legal entity, government, or governmental subdivision or agency.
PRINCETON — Means the Municipality of Princeton, County of Mercer,
State of New Jersey.
PRINCETON FIRE DEPARTMENT (ALSO REFERRED TO HEREIN AS
DEPARTMENT OR PFD) — Means the fire department of the Municipality of
Princeton.
SOGS OR SOG — Means the Standard Operating Guidelines of the
department.
§ T8-2. Division into companies. [Ord. No. 2017-63]
(a) The Princeton fire department shall consist of three companies, known
as "Princeton Hook and Ladder Company," "Mercer Engine Co. No. 3"
and "Princeton Engine Co. No. 1," which shall be responsible for
providing fire protection to Princeton, subject to the general control
and management of Princeton. This chapter and the Princeton fire
department standard operating guidelines (SOGs) shall take
precedence over the individual company constitutions, bylaws and any
other rules or guidelines the individual companies may have in place.
(b) Each company of the department shall be entitled to receive a stipend
to be funded through the department budget, upon the approval of a
purchase order by the Princeton administrator.
§ T8-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T8-3
BAO:849
§ T8-3. Management of fire department. [Ord. No. 2017-63]
The general control and management of the department shall be the
responsibility of the Princeton mayor and council and the director of
emergency and safety services. The director may delegate this
responsibility to the chief, deputy chief and assistant chief, who may also
be referred to as DCs (department chiefs) in this chapter and other PFD
documents. The chief shall meet regularly with the director, fire officials,
and elected line officers of the department in accordance with the SOGs of
the department.
§ T8-3 PRINCETON CODE § T8-3
BAO:850
ARTICLE II
Membership Requirements; Membership Approvals
§ T8-4. Qualifications. [Ord. No. 2017-63]
No person shall become a member or associate member of the Princeton
fire department, unless said person shall meet the following qualifications:
§ T8-5. Oath. [Ord. No. 2017-63]
Before an applicant is accepted for regular or associate membership into
the department and enters upon the duties connected with said department,
said applicant shall take an oath to perform the duties of a member of
the Princeton fire department, to obey the officers of the Princeton fire
department and to comply in all respects with provisions of this chapter,
the Princeton Code and rules and regulations concerning the conduct of the
Princeton fire department. Each member shall sign an affidavit provided by
the Princeton clerk confirming receipt of a full copy of the fire department's
then current Standard Operating Guidelines.
§ T8-6. Training requirements. [Ord. No. 2017-63]
(a) Maintain a principal residence within a fifteen-mile radius of 363
Witherspoon Street. An individual who is available to respond to fires
during their regular work hours by virtue of employment within said
fifteen-mile radius shall be exempt from meeting this residency
requirement. Individuals who were members of the department as of
June 10, 1982, shall be recognized as members of said department as
defined herein and need not comply at any time with any residency
requirements provided for herein. For good cause shown, the mayor
and council may waive the residency requirement.
(b) Be at least 18 years of age.
(c) Be in good health, to be evidenced by a certificate to that effect by a
licensed physician of the State of New Jersey who has been chosen by
Princeton.
(d) Be eligible for and accepted for coverage under that certain group
accident insurance policy issued to the department through Princeton
and any renewal or replacement thereof.
(a) Upon entering the Princeton fire department each new regular and
associate member shall, within an eighteen-month period, complete
and pass a Firefighter I course or equivalent as well as any other New
Jersey State mandated courses. The director of emergency and safety
services with the concurrence of the chief may grant an extension of
this period only where completion of the course within this time period
is not possible due to changes in the schedule of course offering or
some other extenuating circumstance.
§ T8-4 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T8-6
BAO:851
§ T8-7. Approval of members of companies. [Ord. No. 2017-63]
§ T8-8. Status change. [Ord. No. 2017-63]
Any person who shall have served as a member of the department and
who has met the quota requirements of the New Jersey State Fireman's
(b) All members must pass the Firefighter I or a New Jersey State approved
program and any other mandated courses and training to remain a
firefighting member of the department; any member who does not
complete this training within the specified time shall become one of the
non-firefighting types of member listed in section 8-7(e).
(a) The various companies of the Princeton fire department shall process
their own members and associate members, but no person shall become
a member or associate member of the Princeton fire department until
approved by the Princeton mayor and council.
(b) Associate members approved by the mayor and council shall not be
members of a company of the Princeton fire department but shall be
subject to all provisions of this chapter. Associate members may at any
time apply to become a member of a company. If accepted into a
company, associate member status will no longer apply.
(c) Should an associate member wish to join the New Jersey State
Fireman's Association (NJSFA), the member will be required to join one
of the three fire companies and will lose associate status. Due to time
limits by the NJSFA on accepting medical doctors' physicals (12 months
from date of physical), associate members will be responsible for the
cost of a new physical if required by the NJSFA.
(d) Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, associate members shall
be entitled to the same benefits as regular members of the Princeton
fire department.
(e) Each company may at its own discretion have various types of
memberships. These memberships are not subject to the approval of
the mayor and council. Such memberships include but are not limited
to:
(1) Honorary members;
(2) Life members;
(3) Auxiliary members;
(4) Social or administrative members.
Only members who are active interior, exterior and junior
firefighters, apparatus drivers, fire police and command staff may
be present in any role at an incident requiring fire department
action as defined in SOGs.
§ T8-6 PRINCETON CODE § T8-8
BAO:852
Association may, upon application, be retired from active service upon the
vote of the company of which that person is a member.
§ T8-8 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T8-8
BAO:853

ARTICLE III
Line Officers
§ T8-9. Election of captains of fire department; term; duties;
vacancies. [Ord. No. 2017-63]
§ T8-10. Election of lieutenants; term; duties; vacancies. [Ord. No.
2017-63]
(a) In September of an election year each company shall nominate
members for the maximum of two positions of captain of the fire
department members who meet all training requirements outlined for
that position in the SOGs. The nominees will be interviewed by the
chiefs and the director of emergency and safety services, designated as
the captains' interview committee. The names of the nominees selected
by the captains' interview committee will be put on a department ballot
and the department members will vote for the captain positions in
October of the election year. The two candidates receiving the top two
vote counts will be elected to the position of captain. The term of office
of a captain is two years.
(b) In the event of a vacancy in the office of a captain for a reason other
than expiration of a term, the captains' interview committee may
appoint a member meeting all qualifications to fill the vacancy until the
next election cycle; the committee retains the option to leave the
position vacant until the next election cycle.
(c) The captains shall be responsible for the proper care of the fire
apparatus and all like property pertaining thereto and belonging to
Princeton. The captains shall report any equipment defect or necessary
repairs in a timely manner to the fire chief or director of emergency and
safety services. The captains shall preserve order and discipline in the
department at all times; and when on duty at fires, they shall obey all
orders of the officer in command. In the absence of a captain, the next
in command of the department, shall direct all or any portion of
company drills or training sessions at least once in each month. In
addition, the captains shall perform all duties as outlined within the fire
department SOGs.
(a) In November of an election year, each company shall nominate for the
position of lieutenant for that company members who meet all training
requirements outlined for that position in Standard Operating
Guidelines. The nominees will be interviewed by the chiefs and
captains, designated as the lieutenants' interview committee. The
names of the nominees selected by the committee as eligible for
election shall be sent to their respective companies. Each company
shall then vote for one of the candidates from that company. The
candidates receiving the highest number of votes in each company will
be elected to the position of lieutenant for that company. The election
§ T8-9 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T8-10
BAO:855
§ T8-11. Further duties of captains and lieutenants. [Ord. No.
2017-63]
Line officers, when on duty at fires, or on any occasion where the
department is engaged, shall obey the directions of the fire chief, whose
judgment and authority shall be deemed paramount and conclusive. They
shall, under said direction, take proper measures to arrange the apparatus
and to manage the personnel of the department in the most advantageous
manner for the effective extinguishing of fires.
for lieutenant will be held in December of the election year. The term of
office for a lieutenant is two years.
(b) In the event of a vacancy in the office of a lieutenant for a reason other
than expiration of a term, the lieutenants' interview committee may
appoint a member meeting all qualifications to fill the vacancy until the
next election cycle; the committee retains the option to leave the
position vacant until the next election cycle.
(c) If a company does not have any eligible member to nominate for the
position of lieutenant, the company shall nominate one or more
candidates from the remaining pool of members, subject to interview
and approval by the lieutenants' interview committee and subsequent
vote by the members for the remaining position at a special company
meeting. The person receiving the highest vote count will hold the
position of lieutenant.
(d) The lieutenants shall perform all duties as outlined within the fire
department SOGs.
§ T8-10 PRINCETON CODE § T8-11
BAO:856
ARTICLE IV
Discipline of Officers and Members
§ T8-12. Failure to follow orders. [Ord. No. 2017-63]
Any officer or member of the department, while on duty, who shall refuse
or negligently fail to obey or execute any order from the officer(s) in charge
of any fire, emergency or nonemergency activity in which the Princeton fire
department has been called, shall, for such offense, be subject to discipline
from a warning to a suspension or termination from the department in such
manner and upon such hearing as may be prescribed by the SOGs of the
Princeton fire department. A terminated or suspended officer or member
shall be entitled to an appeal hearing in accordance with the procedures set
forth in section 8-14.
§ T8-13. Other offenses or causes. [Ord. No. 2017-63]
For other offenses or causes, an officer or member of the department may
be subject to discipline from a warning to a suspension or termination
from the department in such manner and upon such hearing as may be
prescribed by the SOGs of the Princeton fire department. A terminated
or suspended officer or member shall be entitled to an appeal hearing in
accordance with the procedures set forth in section 8-14.
§ T8-14. Appeals. [Ord. No. 2017-63]
An officer or member who is terminated or suspended may appeal the
termination or suspension by requesting a hearing before an appeals
committee. The appeals committee shall consist of the director, the
company presidents and the chiefs. If a company president is not available,
that company's vice president shall serve on the committee. If a chief is
not available, a captain shall serve in lieu of that chief. Any appeal should
be made in writing and submitted to the director or to the municipal clerk
no more than 14 business days after the effective date of the suspension
or termination. The hearing shall be informal and shall take place no more
than 30 days after the filing of the appeal. All members of the appeals
committee shall participate in the appeal hearing. The appeals committee
may affirm, reverse or modify the decision appealed from; that decision
shall be final.
§ T8-12 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T8-14
BAO:857

ARTICLE V
Appointment of Fire Chiefs; Duties
§ T8-15. Positions; terms. [Ord. No. 2017-63]
§ T8-16. Princeton fire department chief appointment committee as
appointing authority; committee members. [Ord. No. 2017-63]
(a) Upon a vacancy occurring by reason of the expiration of a term, a fire
department chief, deputy fire chief or assistant fire chief shall be
appointed as set forth in this article. They shall hold their offices for a
maximum of three consecutive two-year terms. The only exception
would be in the event that no qualified members are available to fill the
position.
(b) All members shall be notified by the director of emergency and safety
services no less than 30 days prior to the commencement of the election
and appointment procedures set forth in this article.
(a) The Princeton fire department chief, deputy chief and assistant chief
shall be appointed by the Princeton fire department chief appointment
committee (hereinafter "chief appointment committee" or "committee")
which shall consist of the director, the Princeton administrator and
three past company chiefs of the Princeton fire department (one from
each company), as elected by each company.
(b) Each company shall hold an annual election in October to elect one past
company chief to serve on the Princeton fire department chief
appointment committee. Any current member who is a past company
chief who is interested in serving on the committee shall notify the
company president of that interest prior to the October company
meeting. If their qualifications for the committee are verified in
accordance with current company rules and procedures their names
shall be placed on the company ballot for the committee membership
election in October. No later than three days after each company
election, the names of the members elected to serve on the chief
appointment committee shall be provided to the director.
(c) In the event no current member who is a past chief is available or
willing to serve on the chief appointment committee, the president of a
company may appoint another member to serve on the chief
appointment committee. Any such appointee shall be qualified in
accordance with current department rules and procedures. The name
of such appointee shall be provided to the director along with the
names of elected members in accordance with subsection (b) of this
section.
(d) Company elections shall be conducted in accordance with current
company rules and procedures.
§ T8-15 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T8-17
BAO:859
§ T8-17. Eligibility for chief positions; applications; committee
procedures; appointment. [Ord. No. 2017-63]
(a) Any eligible member who is not a member of the chief appointment
committee may apply for a chief position. To be eligible for the position
of fire chief, deputy fire chief or assistant fire chief, each candidate
must provide proof of compliance with all training requirements
mandated by the fire department's rules and regulations. No candidate
may be a chief officer of another emergency services organization. All
candidates shall clearly specify the position sought and shall provide
copies of their training certificates to the director, or if designated by
the director, to the Princeton clerk, starting the first Monday in October
and no later than 5:00 p.m. on the first Monday in November.
(b) The director will certify those candidates meeting the requirements in
subsection (a) above and will provide a list of all qualified candidates to
the chief appointment committee. The qualified candidates will be
interviewed by the committee, and will be notified promptly by the
director of the time, place and procedures of the interview process. If
there is no qualified candidate for one or more of the chief positions, the
committee will proceed with the qualified candidate(s).
(c) Each candidate will be interviewed by the committee to assess each
candidate's firefighting experience, knowledge, and leadership
qualities; and to assess each candidate's views on what direction the
department should follow and what improvements and/or changes
should be made. The following are selection guidelines for the
committee to follow while evaluating the candidates:
(1) Technical skills as they relate to planning, organizing and
implementing fire suppression, training and technical rescue.
(2) Supervisory skills, ability to motivate the volunteer personnel.
Establish and maintain an effective working relationship with
members, administration, mutual aid departments and the
community.
(3) Ability to maintain departmental discipline and conduct and the
general behavior of the assigned personnel.
(4) Ability to develop and implement department standard guidelines
and operating procedures.
(5) Ability to work with the director and the Princeton administration
to develop budget plans as well as goals and long range planning
regarding the direction of the department.
(6) Ability to operate as the incident commander at an emergency
scene, including but not limited to fires, special details and rescue
operations.
§ T8-17 PRINCETON CODE § T8-17
BAO:860
§ T8-18. Confidentiality. [Ord. No. 2017-63]
§ T8-19. Compensation. [Ord. No. 2017-63]
The fire chief, deputy chief and assistant chief shall receive a stipend as
provided in the annual fire department budget.
§ T8-20. Fire chief authority; chain of command. [Ord. No. 2017-63]
(7) Ability to communicate both orally and in writing, understand
computer operations and the various computer programs used by
Princeton.
(d) After the interviews are completed, the committee by majority vote and
secret ballot will appoint a new chief, deputy chief, and assistant chief,
as applicable. The appointment procedures shall be completed by
December 15 and shall be announced and posted immediately after the
votes are counted. The decision of the chief appointment committee
shall be final. The director, on behalf of the committee, shall promptly
provide to the Princeton clerk a list of the appointments, so that the
names of the appointees may appear on the agenda for swearing in at
the reorganization meeting of the Princeton council the following year.
(a) All meetings and deliberations of the chief appointment committee shall
be confidential and closed.
(b) The time frames and deadlines required in this article shall be strictly
enforced.
(a) Fire chief authority at fire emergencies. The fire chief shall be the
ranking officer in the fire department. The fire chief shall, in all cases
where fire threatens life or damage or destruction of property within
Princeton, take prompt and efficient measures and use the means of the
department to extinguish the fire, and shall at such times and occasions
have the sole and absolute control and command over all the fire
apparatus and all members of the department at such fire.
(b) Fire chief general operational authority. The fire chief shall consult and
cooperate with the Princeton administrator and director of emergency
and safety services and shall be responsible to the director of
emergency and safety services and through the director to the
administrator and mayor and council of Princeton, for the conduct,
efficiency and management of the department and for the enforcement
of the rules and regulations governing the same, and for the carrying
out of lawful orders and instructions of the director, mayor and council
of Princeton and of the administrator.
(c) Chain of command. All orders and instructions to members of the fire
department shall be made by or through the fire chief or by or through
the officer in command in case of inability to communicate with the fire
chief. In the absence of the fire chief at any emergency or non-
§ T8-17 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T8-20
BAO:861
§ T8-21. Inspections; annual report. [Ord. No. 2017-63]
§ T8-22. Officers' radio designations. [Ord. No. 2017-63]
Officers' radio designations shall be established within and in accordance
with the Princeton fire department's SOGs.
emergency activity in which the fire department is operating, the chain
of command shall move to the next ranking officer, i.e., deputy chief,
then assistant chief, then to the ranks of captain and lieutenant, then
to drivers and firefighters. The SOGs contain further detail on chain of
command and incident command procedures.
(a) The chief in conjunction with the director of emergency and safety
services shall conduct inspections as appropriate and shall provide an
annual report on the general status of the department, fires attended,
manpower, apparatus, other equipment, and buildings and submit it to
the administrator.
(b) Public inspections. The fire chief will set the date and time for public
inspections of the department by the mayor and council. The chief shall
make all necessary rules and regulations governing public inspections.
§ T8-20 PRINCETON CODE § T8-22
BAO:862
ARTICLE VI
Fire Chief Appointments to Fill Vacancies for Reasons Other than
Expiration of a Term
§ T8-23. Fire chief vacancy. [Ord. No. 2017-63]
In case of a vacancy or announced departure of a person in the fire chief's
position, other than by reason of the expiration of a term, the deputy chief
shall assume the position of acting chief until such time as a new fire chief
is appointed and confirmed. If the duration of the vacancy will be more
than six months, the director, as promptly as practicable, shall announce
the date of the commencement of an application period to fill the vacancy
and complete the unexpired term. Interested and qualified members of the
department may apply for the position in accordance with the procedures
set forth in section 8-17 above, except that the referenced dates and time
frames may be adjusted by the director as appropriate for the filling of this
vacancy. The most recent chief appointment committee shall interview the
candidates and shall appoint a candidate to fill the vacancy, as set forth in
section 8-17. If the duration of the vacancy will be fewer than six months,
the acting chief shall remain in office until such time as a new fire chief is
appointed in the next election and appointment cycle.
§ T8-24. Deputy fire chief vacancy. [Ord. No. 2017-63]
In case of a vacancy or announced departure of the deputy fire chief's
position, other than by reason of the expiration of a term, the assistant chief
shall assume the position of acting deputy chief until such time as a new
deputy chief is appointed and confirmed. If the duration of the vacancy will
be more than six months, the director, as promptly as practicable, shall
announce the date of the commencement of an application period to fill the
vacancy. Interested and qualified members of the department may apply
for the position in accordance with the procedures set forth in section 8-17
above, except that the referenced dates and time frames may be adjusted
by the Director as appropriate for the filling of this vacancy. The most
recent chief appointment committee shall interview the candidates and
shall appoint a candidate to fill the vacancy, as set forth in section 8-17. If
the duration of the vacancy will be fewer than six months, the acting deputy
chief shall remain in office until such time as a new fire chief is appointed
in the next election and appointment cycle.
§ T8-25. Assistant fire chief vacancy. [Ord. No. 2017-63]
In case of a vacancy or announced departure of the assistant chief, the
position will remain vacant until the director announces the date of the
commencement of an application period to fill the vacancy. Interested and
qualified members of the department may apply for the position in
accordance with the procedures set forth in section 8-17 above, except
that the referenced dates and time frames may be adjusted by the director
as appropriate for the filling of this vacancy. The most recent chief
§ T8-23 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T8-25
BAO:863
appointment committee shall interview the candidates and shall appoint a
candidate to fill the vacancy, as set forth in section 8-17.
§ T8-25 PRINCETON CODE § T8-25
BAO:864
ARTICLE VII
Junior Firefighters
§ T8-26. Applications; membership. [Ord. No. 2017-63]
§ T8-27. Rules and regulations; discipline. [Ord. No. 2017-63]
(a) All applicants for junior firefighter membership shall be subject to the
same residency rules as regular members and be 16 or 17 years of age.
All applications for membership shall be in writing on a form provided
by the department. Applicants will be physically and mentally fit to
perform the duties of a junior firefighter, evidenced by completing a
physical provided by a physician selected by Princeton. All applicants
must include a letter of written permission from the applicant's parents
or legal guardians and high school principal or guidance counselor.
Junior firefighters will be limited to 15 per company. Fine and dues
structure of regular members do not apply to junior firefighters.
(b) Applicants for junior firefighter shall be approved by the recruiting
committee and by the fire company in which they wish to serve, after
which they shall be sworn in at a meeting of the council.
(c) The term of a junior firefighter shall expire when such junior firefighter
is appointed to membership by the mayor and council pursuant to
section 8-7 or when the junior firefighter reaches the age of 18 and 1/2
years of age, whichever occurs first.
(a) All junior firefighters shall be subject to all fire department rules,
regulations and procedures, this chapter and applicable Princeton
ordinances, all as may be amended from time to time. In addition, the
following rules and regulations apply.
(b) Violation of any of the requirements described or listed in this section
may result in discipline as set forth in subsection (c) or (d) of this
section as applicable.
(1) All junior firefighters must maintain a passing academic average to
continue membership. If it is determined that a member is not
keeping a passing average, said member will not be allowed to
participate until the average is brought up to a passing level.
(2) Junior firefighters must wear full protective clothing, helmet, hat,
gloves and boots when taking part in a working drill.
(3) Junior firefighters shall vacate the firehouse by 10:00 p.m. on
nights preceding a scheduled school day, and by 11:00 p.m. on all
other nights. On special occasions, a company may grant
permission for the juniors to remain later.
(4) Junior firefighters shall at all times be in the direct charge of the
line officers and advisors of the particular fire company and shall
obey their orders.
§ T8-26 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T8-27
BAO:865
§ T8-28. Miscellaneous. [Ord. No. 2017-63]
(5) At no time shall any junior firefighter obtain or consume any
alcoholic beverage on Princeton fire department property. No
junior member shall at any time consume any drug or controlled
dangerous substance on Princeton fire department property.
(6) Junior firefighters shall not display any light, such as an emergency
blue light, on their vehicles.
(7) Junior firefighters shall be permitted to ride under the following
criteria:
a. They must already be at the fire station;
b. They must wear full protective clothing;
c. They must ride inside the cab or enclosed seating area; and
d. They must remain with the apparatus unless ordered to do
otherwise by an officer or the driver.
(8) Junior firefighters may be allowed to assist the driver with hooking
and unhooking hose lines, getting equipment, relaying messages
and other duties as assigned by the driver or any fire department
officer. Junior firefighters may also train on equipment as
authorized by an officer at training drills.
(9) Junior firefighters may not hold or direct a charged hose line during
a priority incident, nor may they hold or operate any power
equipment. In addition, junior firefighters may not participate in
the mitigation of hazardous materials incident or in any area of
immediate danger. Junior firefighters may not don an SCBA at the
scene of an incident.
(10) Junior firefighters may not leave school for any Princeton fire
department activity at call, nor may they wear a Princeton fire
department pager while at school.
(c) Failure to abide by the requirements for junior membership as
established by this chapter shall subject a junior member to summary
dismissal by the chief. Any junior member aggrieved by such an action
may request an appeal hearing by the fire chief, deputy chief and
assistant fire chief who by majority vote may affirm or reject the
summary dismissal and whose decision shall be final.
(d) Junior firefighters not following the rules and regulations of the fire
company in which they serve may be disciplined, up to and including
summary dismissal by vote of the fire company members, with no right
of appeal.
(a) Junior firefighters may elect two officers, a president and a secretary.
The juniors may conduct their own meetings provided at least one
§ T8-27 PRINCETON CODE § T8-28
BAO:866
advisor is present. Any suggestions or requests from a meeting of the
juniors will be presented to the department by the advisors or in a letter
from the juniors' secretary. Requests for information on fires shall be
referred to the chief; requests for information on company matters shall
be referred to the president.
(b) Junior firefighters shall be reasonably expected to participate in all of
the department's activities.
(c) Two or more advisors shall be appointed by the chief of the department.
It shall be the duty of the advisors to oversee the juniors and enforce
the rules and regulations governing them. At least one of the advisors
will be a line officer.
§ T8-28 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T8-28
BAO:867

ARTICLE VIII
Drivers
§ T8-29. Head driver. [Ord. No. 2017-63]
§ T8-30. Drivers. [Ord. No. 2017-63]
(a) Term; removal. A head driver shall be appointed by the chief and the
director of emergency and safety services for a period not exceeding
one year and may be removed by the chief or the director at their
discretion, with or without cause.
(b) Duties. It shall be the duty of the head driver to keep all apparatus in
proper working condition to the satisfaction of the fire chief and the
director of emergency and safety services. The head driver shall
provide to the director and the chief a written monthly vehicle report
and report in a prompt manner all needed repairs and maintenance of
such apparatus.
(c) Expenses. A head driver shall receive a stipend to cover departmental
costs as provided for in the fire department budget.
(a) The department line officers shall be responsible for the training and
qualifications of drivers who shall be authorized, upon a call for service
or upon an order from the fire chief, deputy chief, assistant chief or line
officers to drive said piece of apparatus. All drivers will first pass the
training requirements in the department SOGs prior to being
appointed.
(b) Term; removal. Drivers shall be appointed for such time as the officers
may see fit and may be removed by them at their direction, with cause.
Drivers may also be suspended and/or removed by the director of
emergency and safety services per the department SOGs.
§ T8-29 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T8-30
BAO:869

ARTICLE IX
Fire Department Apparatus, Vehicles and Property
§ T8-31. Taking apparatus out of Princeton limits. [Ord. No.
2017-63]
§ T8-32. Emergency vehicle operation. [Ord. No. 2017-63]
The driver of any emergency vehicle, as defined in this chapter, shall not
activate any emergency lighting or audible warning devices or disobey any
existing traffic regulation, except when said vehicle is responding to an
emergency call or when responding to, but not upon returning from the
incident. The driver of an emergency vehicle responding to an emergency
may:
(a) No fire apparatus of any kind belonging to Princeton shall be taken
beyond the municipal limits without the express authority of the chief
or in the chief's absence, the deputy chief or assistant chief unless in
response to a request for aid from another municipality. In case any fire
apparatus is sent beyond the limits of Princeton the director of
emergency and safety services shall be notified and enough apparatus
must be left within Princeton to protect adequately the property of the
municipality through the use of Princeton fire department apparatus or
the use of mutual aid box plans.
(b) In case any fire apparatus is sent outside of the limits of Princeton, the
apparatus shall be in direct command of the ranking officer on board
the apparatus, who shall immediately report to the incident commander
on scene. In all cases, however, the chief or next in command shall be
and remain in direct control of the apparatus belonging to Princeton.
(c) No vehicle specifically assigned for the use of the chief or next available
in command shall be taken out of Princeton unless for official fire
department business. Official business is defined as:
(1) Fire, mutual aid request, accident, rescue call, flood, civil defense
or other emergency situation;
(2) Governmental or required meetings;
(3) Inspections and investigations;
(4) Drills, local and mutual aid; and
(5) Parades.
(d) Command, utility and station vehicles may be taken home, to work or
throughout the municipality and surrounding areas by the designated
officers. If the officer designated for that vehicle is not available, the
vehicle can be assigned to the next available in command or to the fire
station.
§ T8-31 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T8-32
BAO:871
(a) Park or stand irrespective of the provisions of existing traffic
regulations;
(b) Proceed past a red or stop signal or other sign, but only after stopping
and receiving the right-of-way;
(c) Exceed the speed limit so long as it does not endanger life or property;
and
(d) Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in
specified directions.
The exemptions in this section granted to an emergency vehicle shall
apply only when the driver of any such vehicle while in motion sounds
an audible signal by bell, siren, or horn.
§ T8-32 PRINCETON CODE § T8-32
BAO:872
ARTICLE X
Fire Police
§ T8-33. Establishment; composition; qualifications; appointment.
[Ord. No. 2017-63]
§ T8-34. Officers. [Ord. No. 2017-63]
The chief shall appoint a captain of the fire police. The captain shall hold
the position for the term of one year and until a successor is appointed.
§ T8-35. Duties generally; command and supervision. [Ord. No.
2017-63]
(a) As authorized by N.J.S.A. 15:8-4, each company of the department may
provide for the appointment of certain of its members to perform
certain police duties at fires and fire drills, for a term of office not
exceeding five years from the date of the appointment. The appointed
members shall, before entering upon their duties, qualify by:
(1) Successfully completing a basic fire police training course
formulated or approved by the New Jersey Division of Fire Safety.
(2) Taking and subscribing an oath that they will justly, impartially and
faithfully discharge their duties according to the best of their
ability and understanding. The oath shall be administered by the
municipal clerk and subscribed to in duplicate. The original copy of
the oath shall be filed with the municipal clerk and a copy thereof
filed with the secretary of the fire company making the
appointment and with the director of emergency and safety
services.
(b) After appointment, a qualified member shall be eligible as a fire police
officer and shall have full power and authority to act as a fire police
officer in Mercer County or other county in which the fire police officer
may be called upon to act.
(a) The fire police shall be under the direct command of the captain of the
fire police, subject to the supervision and control of the fire chief,
deputy chief, assistant chief or other superior officer.
(b) It shall be the duty of a member of the fire police to perform police
duties under the supervision of the fire department officer in charge of
the fire or fire drill, until the arrival of a duly authorized police officer,
who shall assume responsibility for the supervision of the performance
of traffic duties, preservation of evidence and all other law enforcement
duties.
(c) The duties of said fire police subject to the supervision aforesaid shall
be to:
(1) Protect property and contents.
§ T8-33 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T8-35
BAO:873
§ T8-36. Violations; penalties. [Ord. No. 2017-63]
If any person shall unreasonably refuse to obey the orders of the fire police,
a fire police officer may arrest the person and keep the person under
arrest until the fire is extinguished or the drill completed. If the offender
is found guilty by a municipal court or superior court, the offender shall be
sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $200 and costs.
(2) Establish and maintain fire lines.
(3) Perform such traffic duties as necessary, from the fire station to and
at the vicinity of the fire, fire drill or other emergency call, until the
arrival of a duly authorized police officer, or in place of police
officers at the request of the police department or direction of the
fire officer in charge; or at any public event where fire police
services may be requested to protect the public, subject to the
approval of and supervision by the Princeton chief of police or the
chief law enforcement officer of the municipality in which the
public event takes place.
(d) Nothing in this section shall give the fire police the right to supersede a
duly authorized police officer.
(e) Nothing in this section shall diminish the powers of the chief or other
superior officer of any volunteer fire company in the exercise of their
duties pursuant N.J.S.A. 40A:8-54.1.
§ T8-35 PRINCETON CODE § T8-36
BAO:874
ARTICLE XI
Interference with Fire Department Activities
§ T8-37. Authority at fires and other emergencies. [Ord. No.
2017-63]
The director of emergency and safety services, chief officer, line officer or
duly authorized representatives as may be in charge at the scene of a fire,
and/or other emergency is empowered to direct such operations as may be
necessary to extinguish or control any suspected or reported fires, gas leaks
or other hazardous conditions or situations or of taking any other action
necessary in the reasonable performance of their duty. The fire chief or any
other duly authorized person as may be in charge at the scene of a fire,
and/or other emergency may prohibit any person, vehicle or object from
approaching the scene and may remove or cause to be removed from the
scene any person, vehicle or object which may impede or interfere with the
operations of the fire department. The fire chief may remove or cause to
be removed any person, vehicle or object from hazardous areas. All persons
ordered to leave a hazardous area shall do so immediately and shall not reenter
the area until authorized to do so by the fire chief.
§ T8-38. Interference with fire department orders. [Ord. No.
2017-63]
It shall be unlawful to interfere with, attempt to interfere with, conspire to
interfere with, obstruct or restrict the mobility of, or block the path of travel
of any fire department emergency vehicle in any way or to interfere with,
attempt to interfere, conspire to interfere with, obstruct or hamper any fire
department operation.
§ T8-39. Compliance with orders. [Ord. No. 2017-63]
A person shall not willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of the fire chief or designee or to interfere with the compliance
attempts of another person.
§ T8-40. Vehicles crossing fire hose. [Ord. No. 2017-63]
A vehicle shall not be driven or propelled over any unprotected fire hose
of the fire department when laid down on any street, alley-way, private
drive or any other vehicular roadway without the consent of the fire chief in
command of said operation.
§ T8-41. Operation of vehicles on approach of authorized
emergency vehicles. [Ord. No. 2017-63]
Upon the approach of any authorized emergency vehicle giving audible and
visual signal, the operator of every other vehicle shall immediately drive the
same to a position as near as possible and parallel to the right-hand edge or
curb of the street or roadway, clear of any intersection, and shall stop and
remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle or vehicles
§ T8-37 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T8-41
BAO:875
shall have passed, unless otherwise directed by the fire chief or a police
officer.
§ T8-42. Vehicles following fire apparatus. [Ord. No. 2017-63]
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle, other than one on
official fire department business, to follow closer than 300 feet from any
fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm, or to drive any vehicle
within the block or immediate area where fire apparatus has stopped in
answer to a fire alarm.
§ T8-43. Unlawful boarding or tampering with fire department
emergency equipment. [Ord. No. 2017-63]
A person shall not, without proper authorization from the fire department
chief or other authorized officer, cling to, attach themselves to, climb upon
or into, board, or swing upon any Princeton fire department emergency
vehicle, whether the same is in motion or at rest, or sound the siren, horn,
bell or other sound-producing device thereon, or manipulate or tamper
with any levers, valves, switches, starting devices, brakes, pumps, or any
equipment or protective clothing on, or a part of any fire department
emergency vehicle.
§ T8-44. Damage to fire department property or injury to fire
department personnel prohibited. [Ord. No. 2017-63]
It shall be unlawful for any person to damage or deface, or attempt or
conspire to damage or deface any Princeton fire department emergency
vehicle at any time, or to injure, or attempt to injure or conspire to injure
Princeton fire department personnel while performing departmental duties.
§ T8-45. Violations; penalties. [Ord. No. 2017-63]
Any person who violates any section of this article for which no other
penalty is provided herein shall be subject to the penalties set forth in
section 1-6 of the Princeton Code.
§ T8-41 PRINCETON CODE § T8-45
BAO:876
Chapter T9
FLOODWAYS AND FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
Chapter T9A
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Chapter T10
HOUSING STANDARDS
As to buildings generally, see chapter 5 of this Code.
§ T8-45 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T8-45
BAO:877

ARTICLE I
Repealed
§ T10-1. through 10-15 Repealed.
§ T10-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10-1
BAO:879

ARTICLE II
Buildings Unfit for Human Habitation or Occupancy or Use28
§ T10-16. Legislative findings; purpose of article. [Ord. No. 95-18,
§ 1.]
It is hereby found that there exists in the municipality buildings that are
unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use due to dilapidation, defects
increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities, lack of
ventilation, light or sanitation facilities, or due to other conditions rendering
such buildings, or parts thereof, unsafe and unsanitary, or dangerous or
detrimental to the health or safety or otherwise inimical to the welfare
of the residents of the municipality. It is hereby declared that this article
is in exercise of the police powers of the municipality to repair, close or
demolish, or cause or require the repairing, closing or demolition of, such
buildings, or parts thereof, in the manner herein provided.
§ T10-17. Definitions. [Ord. No. 95-18, § 1.]
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section.
DWELLING — Shall mean a building or structure, or part thereof containing
one or two dwelling units or lodging units.
OWNER — Shall mean the holder of the title in fee simple.
PARTIES IN INTEREST — Shall mean all individuals, association and
corporations who have interests of record in a building, and any who are in
actual possession thereof.
PUBLIC AUTHORITY — Shall mean any township body or agency, or
township, county or state officer who is in charge of any department which
is involved in building or fire safety.
PUBLIC OFFICER — Shall mean the construction official of the Township
of Princeton and such assistants as the construction official shall designate
in writing are hereby designated as the officer to exercise the powers
prescribed by this ordinance.
§ T10-18. Public officer - Powers generally. [Ord. No. 95-18, § 1.]
The public officer is hereby authorized to exercise such powers as may
be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and
provisions of this article, including the following powers in addition to
others herein granted:
(a) To investigate the building conditions in the municipality in order to
determine which buildings therein are unfit for human habitation,
occupancy or use.
28.Editor's Note: Prior ordinances codified herein include portions of Ordinance No. 930.
§ T10-16 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10-18
BAO:881
§ T10-19. Standards for finding of unfitness. [Ord. No. 95-18, § 1.]
The public officer may determine that a building is unfit for human
habitation, occupancy or use if the public officer finds that conditions exist
in such building which are dangerous or injurious to the health or safety
of the occupants of such building, the occupants of neighboring buildings
or other residents of the township. Such conditions may include defects
therein increasing the hazards of fire, accident or other calamity; lack
of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities; dilapidation; disrepair,
structural defects; and uncleanliness.
§ T10-20. Hearings — Determination of condition of building —
Generally. [Ord. No. 95-18, § 1.]
Whenever a petition is filed with the public officer by a public authority
or by at least five residents of the township, charging that any building is
unfit for human habitation, occupancy or use, or whenever it appears to
the public officer that any building is unfit for human habitation, occupancy
or use, the public officer shall, if a preliminary investigation discloses a
basis for such charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner of and
parties in interest in such building a complaint stating the charges in that
respect and containing a notice that a hearing will be held before the public
officer, or a designated person, at a place therein fixed, not less than 10
days nor more than 30 days after serving of such complaint. The owner and
parties in interest shall be given the right to file an answer to the complaint
and to appear, in person or otherwise, and give testimony at the place and
time fixed in the notice. The rules of evidence prevailing in the courts shall
not be controlling in hearings before the public officer.
§ T10-21. Same - Determination and order by public officer. [Ord.
No. 95-18, § 1.]
If, after such notice and hearing, the public officer determines that the
building under consideration is unfit for human habitation, occupancy or
use, the public officer shall issue findings of fact in support of such
(b) To administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence.
(c) To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations with
the consent of the owner, his/her designated agent or occupant thereof,
or failing that, pursuant to a properly issued search warrant in such
manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in
possession.
(d) To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees as
the public officer deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this
article.
(e) To delegate any of his/her functions and powers under this article as
deemed necessary.
§ T10-18 PRINCETON CODE § T10-21
BAO:882
determination including written statements from the appropriate building
subcode inspector, the electrical subcode inspector, the plumbing subcode
inspector and/or the fire subcode inspector and shall issue and cause to be
served upon the owner thereof and parties in interest an order.
§ T10-22. Authority of public officer to order repair, etc. of building
upon noncompliance with order; posting of closed building. [Ord.
No. 95-18, § 1.]
If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or improve or,
at the option of the owner, to vacate and close the building, the public
officer may cause such building to be repaired, altered or improved, or to be
vacated, closed and boarded up, and may order utilities disconnected in the
latter case. The public officer may cause to be posted on the main entrance
of any building so closed a placard with the following words: "This building
is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use; the use or occupation of
this building is prohibited and unlawful."
§ T10-23. Removal or demolition of building by public officer, etc.
[Ord. No. 95-18, § 1.]
If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the
building, the public officer may cause such building to be removed or
demolished or may contract for the removal or demolition thereof, after
advertisement for and receipt of bids therefor.
§ T10-24. Remedy for persons aggrieved by orders of public officer,
etc. [Ord. No. 95-18, § 1.]
Any person aggrieved by an order issued by the public officer under this
article, may, within 60 days after the posting and service of such order,
bring an action for injunctive relief to restrain the public officer from
carrying out the provisions of the order and for any other appropriate
relief. The court may proceed in the action in accordance with the statutes
and rules in such case made and provided. The remedy herein provided
shall be exclusive, and no person affected by an order of the public officer
shall be entitled to recover any damages for action taken pursuant thereto,
or because of noncompliance by any person with any order of the public
officer.
(a) Requiring the repair, alteration or improvement of the building to be
made by the owner, within a reasonable time, which time shall be set
forth in the order or, at the option of the owner, the vacation and closing
of the building within the time set forth in the order; and
(b) If the building is in such a condition as to make it dangerous to the
health and safety of persons on or near the premises, and the owner
fails to repair, alter or improve the building within the times specified
on the order, requiring the owner to board up all openings or remove or
demolish the building within a reasonable time as specified in such
order of removal.
§ T10-21 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10-25
BAO:883
§ T10-25. Cost of legal proceedings, repairs, etc., to be lien against
premises; credit for proceeds of sale of salvaged materials on
demolition of buildings; power of municipality to declare and cause
abatement of nuisances unaffected; right of court review on lien.
[Ord. No. 95-18, § 1.]
The amount of the cost of the filing of legal papers, expert witnesses'
fees, search fees and advertising charges, incurred in the course of any
proceeding taken under this article determined in favor of the municipality,
and such cost of such repairs, alterations or improvements, or vacating and
closing, or removal or demolition, if any, or the balance thereof remaining
after deduction of the sum, if any, realized from the sale of materials derived
from such building or from any contract for removal or demolition thereof,
shall be a municipal lien against the real property upon which such cost
was incurred. If the building is removed or demolished, the public officer
shall sell the materials of such building. There shall be credited against
the cost of the removal or demolition thereof the proceeds of any sale of
such materials or any sum derived from any contract for the removal or
demolition of the building. If there are not such credits or if the sum total
of such costs exceeds the total of such credits, a detailed statement of the
costs and the amounts so due shall be filed with the municipal tax assessor
or other custodian of the records of tax liens, and a copy thereof shall be
forthwith forwarded to the owner by registered mail. If the total of the
credits exceeds such cost, the balance remaining shall be deposited in the
superior court by the public officer, shall be secured in such manner as may
be directed by such court and shall be disbursed according to the order or
judgment of the court to the persons found to be entitled thereto by final
order of judgment of such court.
§ T10-26. Service and publication of complaints and orders. [Ord.
No. 95-18, § 1.]
Complaints or orders issued by the public officer pursuant to this article
shall be served upon a person either personally or by registered mail, but
if the whereabouts of such person is unknown and the same cannot be
ascertained by the public officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence,
and the public officer shall make an affidavit to that effect, serving such
complaint or order upon such person may be made by publishing the
same one each week for two successive weeks in a newspaper printed and
published in the municipality or, in the absence of such newspaper, in one
printed and published in the county and circulating in the municipality. A
copy of such complaint or order shall be posted in a conspicuous place on
the premises affected by the complaint or order. A copy of such complaint
or order shall be duly recorded or lodged for record with the county clerk.
Service of any complaint, order or notice in the manner prescribed in the
article upon an agent designated as provided in the section shall have
the same force and effect as if such service were made upon the owner
designating such agent.
§ T10-25 PRINCETON CODE § T10-27
BAO:884
§ T10-27. Effect of article upon other powers of municipality,
officers and departments. [Ord. No. 95-18, § 1.]
Nothing in this article shall be construed to abrogate or impair the power
of the municipality or any officer or department thereof to enforce any
provisions of its ordinances or regulations or to prevent or punish violations
thereof, and the powers conferred by this article shall be in addition and
supplemental to the power conferred upon the municipality by any law or
ordinance.
§ T10-27 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10-27
BAO:885

ARTICLE III
Rental Housing Registration29
§ T10-28. Legislative findings. [Ord. No. 95-18, § 1.]
It is hereby found and declared that it is desirable for the administration
of laws, ordinances and regulations relating to housing that there be
established and maintained a registry of rental dwellings in the
municipality, in that such registry will identify accommodations that are
subject to the provisions of such laws, ordinances and regulations, and in
that it will also aid in the master planning and zoning of the municipality by
providing an inventory of rental accommodations, which are needed for the
achievement of a balanced residential community.
§ T10-29. Registration of rental dwellings required. [Ord. No.
95-18, § 1; Ord. No. 98-31, § 1.]
Every building or part thereof that is rented or held for rent for human
habitation or use as a dwelling as of January first, shall be registered by
the owner with the municipal clerk or a municipal officer designated by the
governing body on or before January 31st of that year. Every building or
part thereof that is not rented or held for human habitation or use as a
dwelling as of January first, but which thereafter becomes so rented or held
for rent within that year, shall be registered by the owner with the municipal
clerk or a municipal officer designated by the governing body within 30 days
after becoming so rented or held for rent.
Registration pursuant to N.J.S.A. 46:8-28 or certificates of registration
issued by the State Commissioner of the Department of Community Affairs
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1, et seq., within the time limits and as to
premises specified by this section shall, upon the filing by the owner with
the municipal clerk or a municipal officer designated by the governing
body of forms thereof, within such time limits, be deemed to satisfy the
requirements of this section as to registration.
§ T10-30. Change of status and reregistration. [Ord. No. 95-18, § 1;
Ord. No. 98-31, § 2.]
If premises that have been registered pursuant to this article thereafter
cease to be so rented and also cease to be held for rent, the owner shall
file notice of such change of status with the municipal clerk or a municipal
officer designated by the governing body within 30 days thereafter. If
premises for which notice of such change of status has been filed shall again
be so rented or held for rent, the same shall, within 30 days thereafter,
again be registered by the owner with the municipal clerk or a municipal
officer designated by the governing body, and shall be subject to periodic
re-registration in accordance with section 10-29.
29.Editor's Note: Prior ordinances codified herein include portions of Ordinance Nos. 930,
86-19, 89-25.
§ T10-28 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10-31
BAO:887
§ T10-31. Forms. [Ord. No. 95-18, § 1; Ord. No. 98-31, § 3.]
Registration and notice of change of status shall be made upon forms
furnished by the municipal clerk or a municipal officer designated by the
governing body. Such forms shall include the address of the premises, the
name and address of the owner, the name and address of the agent in
charge of the premises, if other than the owner or if the owner does not live
or operate a business in the municipality or within Mercer County in the
State of New Jersey, the name and address of the tenant(s), the number of
rental units and number of occupants in each and a description of premises
and of the service furnished in connection therewith, and the rents and
other amounts charged monthly for occupancy of each unit in the premises.
It shall be a violation of this article for a person to knowingly provide false
information on any form submitted to the Township of Princeton pursuant
to this article.
§ T10-32. Fines and penalties. [Ord. No. 95-18, § 1.]
All persons who fail to register their property in accordance with this article
shall be subject to the penalties and fines of section 1-6 of chapter 1 and be
subject to a minimum mandatory fine of $100 for each and every violation
of this article. Each day any violation of this article shall continue shall
constitute a separate offense; penalties assessed for said continuing and
separate offenses shall be made in the discretion of the municipal court
judge.
§ T10-33. Inventory of rental dwellings. [Ord. No. 95-18, § 1.]
The public officer may survey all property owners for compliance with the
requirements contained herein at not less than six year intervals for the
purposes of updating the municipal records.
§ T10-33A. Notice concerning flooding of rental dwellings. [Ord. No.
2009-24, § 1.]
Every landlord shall provide written notification to each of the landlord's
tenants upon the event that a rental dwelling that is the subject of a lease
has been determined to:
(a) Be located in a flood zone or flood area pursuant to N.J.S.A. 46:8-50; or
(b) The rental that is the subject of the lease has sustained flood damage
requiring repairs for which construction permits have been issued by
the township's construction official; or
(c) Either the landlord or prior tenants have filed for and received flood
damage payments through the National Flood Insurance Program
("NFIP"); or
(d) The landlord has elected to have the rental dwelling participate in a
Mitigation Grant Program through the New Jersey Office of Emergency
Management ("NJOEM") for Federal Emergency Management
§ T10-31 PRINCETON CODE § T10-33A
BAO:888
Administration ("FEMA") grant funding for the sale of the rental
dwelling property due to repetitive and severe flooding.
Each new tenant shall receive written notification prior to the signing
of the lease for the rental property. For the purposes of this section,
"landlord" shall mean any person who rents or leases, for a term of
at least one month, commercial space or residential dwelling units
other than dwelling units in a premise containing not more than two
such units, or in an owner-occupied premise for not more than three
dwelling units, or in hotels, motels, or guest houses servicing transient
or seasonal guests.
§ T10-33A BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10-33A
BAO:889

ARTICLE IV
Smoke Detectors Required
§ T10-34. Definitions. [Ord. No. 86-13, § 1; Ord. No. 95-18, § 2; Ord.
No. 2008-5, § 1.]
For the purposes of this article, the following terms are defined:
(a) SMOKE DETECTORS whenever used in this section - Shall mean a fire
alarm device capable of sensing visible or invisible particles of
combustion, providing suitable alarm audible in all sleeping areas. Any
such smoke detector installed shall bear a seal, tested and listed by an
approved rating organization as Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. (U.L.)
or Factory Mutual Laboratories (F.M.) or other nationally recognized
testing laboratory. Said device shall also be equipped with a sound
audible signal denoting failure of equipment and a testing device. Said
device shall have sufficient battery power to sound an alarm signal for
at least four continuous minutes.
(a-1)CARBON MONOXIDE ALARM whenever used in this section - Shall
mean a device that is capable of detecting harmful amounts of carbon
monoxide and sounding an alarm audible in all sleeping areas. Any such
carbon monoxide alarm installed shall bear a seal, tested and listed by
an approved rating organization as Underwriters Laboratories, Inc.
(U.L.) or Factory Mutual Laboratories (F.M.) or other nationally
recognized testing laboratory. Said device shall also be equipped with a
sound audible signal denoting failure of equipment and a testing device.
Said device shall have sufficient battery power to sound an alarm signal
for at least four continuous minutes.
(b) BATTERY OPERATED SMOKE DETECTOR - Shall mean a single station
device, which is battery powered, that will indicate the presence of
smoke and sound an alarm.
(b-1) BATTERY OPERATED CARBON MONOXIDE ALARM - Shall mean a
single station device, which is battery powered, that will indicate the
presence of carbon monoxide and sound an alarm.
(c) DUAL OPERATED SMOKE DETECTOR - Shall mean a device which
shall be connected to an emergency electrical system that complies
with the electrical subcode to assure continued service in case of
emergency or primary power loss. Alternatively, said dual operated
smoke detector may consist of a single station battery powered smoke
detector installed within two feet of an existing hardwired smoke
detector or two single station battery powered smoke detectors
installed within two feet of each other.
(c-1)DUAL OPERATED CARBON MONOXIDE ALARM -Shall mean a device
which shall be connected to an emergency electrical system that
complies with the electrical subcode to assure continued service in case
of emergency or primary power loss. Alternatively, said dual operated
§ T10-34 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10-34
BAO:891
§ T10-35. Smoke detectors and carbon monoxide alarm required for
existing dwellings. [Ord. No. 86-13, § 1; Ord. No. 95-18, § 2; Ord.
No. 2008-5, § 1.]
All existing one and two-family dwelling units in the township shall be
equipped with, at minimum, battery powered smoke detectors and carbon
monoxide alarm as further provided for herein below. All such battery
powered smoke detectors and carbon monoxide alarm shall be purchased
and installed by the owner of the dwelling. If the dwelling is a rental unit,
it shall be the responsibility of the tenant to maintain the battery in good
working order.
§ T10-36. Smoke detector and carbon monoxide alarm certification
and inspection fees. [Ord. No. 91-30, § 3; Ord. No. 95-18, § 2; Ord.
No. 2006-5, § 1; Ord. No. 2008-5, § 1.]
The fire official shall charge the following fees for smoke detector
certifications and inspections:
carbon monoxide alarm may consist of a single station battery powered,
or hardwired, carbon monoxide alarm that incorporates a smoke
detector within the same warning device.
(d) DWELLING - Shall mean any building or structure used for residential
or sleeping purposes to be inspected upon resale.
(e) DWELLING UNIT - Shall mean any room or group of rooms arranged
for the use of one or more persons as a single residential unit or
sleeping facility.
(f) MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING - Shall mean a building or portion thereof
containing more than two dwelling units and not classified as a one or
two family dwelling.
(a) The fire official shall, through the bureau of fire prevention, inspect all
one and two single family dwellings and multi-family dwellings for
compliance with the Uniform Fire Safety Act smoke detector and
carbon monoxide alarm requirements. The application fee for said
certification shall be $60 if received 10 or more business days prior to
the change of occupancy, $95 if received four to nine business days
prior to the change of occupancy, and $150 if received three or fewer
business days prior to the change of occupancy.
(a-1) Affordable housing units as sold through the Princeton Township
Affordable Housing Program shall be charged the following rates for
the required smoke detector and carbon monoxide alarm certification:
$35 if received 10 or more business days prior to the change of
occupancy, $70 if received four to nine business days prior to the
change of occupancy, and $125 if received three or fewer business days
prior to the change of occupancy.
§ T10-34 PRINCETON CODE § T10-36
BAO:892
§ T10-37. Smoke detectors and carbon monoxide alarm required for
new dwellings and existing multi-family dwellings. [Ord. No. 86-13,
§ 1; Ord. No. 95-18, § 2; Ord. No. 2008-5, § 1.]
No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any dwelling by the township
construction official unless said official certifies that such dwelling is
equipped with dual powered smoke detectors and carbon monoxide alarm
as defined herein above. Additionally, for existing multi-family dwelling
units no person shall rent to another or suffer or permit occupancy by
another of any rental dwelling unless said rental units are equipped with
dual powered smoke detectors and carbon monoxide alarm as defined
hereinabove. In any rented dwelling unit, the owner shall be responsible
for maintaining and replacing the batteries as needed in the dual powered
emergency electrical system when the dual operated smoke detector or
carbon monoxide alarm consists in part of a single station battery powered
smoke detector or carbon monoxide alarm. All such battery powered smoke
detectors and carbon monoxide alarm within the dwelling unit shall be
purchased, installed and maintained in good working order by the tenant
of the dwelling. All other battery powered smoke detectors and carbon
monoxide alarm such as in common areas shall be the responsibility of the
owner notwithstanding the responsibility of the owner to maintain the unit
in all other respects.
§ T10-38. Minimum specifications. [Ord. No. 86-13, § 1; Ord. No.
95-18, § 2; Ord. No. 2008-5, § 1.]
In compliance with the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code (latest
edition of the International Building Code, New Jersey Edition as amended
and supplemented), and the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code, and the
National Fire Protection Association Fire Codes applicable standards, and
regulations for the maintenance of hotels and multiple dwellings concerning
smoke detectors and carbon monoxide alarms. (Divisions of Housing,
Bureau of Housing Inspections).
§ T10-39. Location of smoke detectors and carbon monoxide alarm.
[Ord. No. 86-13, § 1; Ord. No. 95-18, § 2; Ord. No. 2008-1, § 1.]
A minimum of two approved smoke detectors shall be installed in a single
and two family dwelling having a basement; a minimum of one approved
smoke detector shall be installed in single family dwellings having no
basement. Smoke detectors shall be located on a ceiling or wall according
to the manufacturer's instruction generally not closer than four inches from
where the ceiling and wall meet and no further than 12 inches from the
ceiling when locating a wall type detector. In dwelling units with split
levels, a smoke detector alarm installed on the lower level shall suffice
(b) If the fire official or his designee is required to perform a reinspection
to assure compliance of the Uniform Fire Safety Act requirements for
smoke detectors and carbon monoxide alarm, a reinspection fee of $50
shall be charged for each reinspection.
§ T10-36 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10-39
BAO:893
for the adjacent upper level provided the lower level is less than one full
story below the upper level. If there is an intervening door between the
adjacent levels, a smoke detector shall be installed on both levels. Smoke
detectors shall not be placed within three feet of any air supply register.
Smoke detectors when required inside a bedroom or outside of a group of
bedrooms, in the immediate vicinity of the sleeping area, shall be located
so that when activated it will sound an alarm sufficiently audible to warn
any sleeping occupant(s) when outside a bedroom or group of bedrooms,
said smoke detectors shall be within 10 feet of sleeping room(s). In dwelling
units with split levels, a smoke detector installed on the upper level shall
suffice for the adjacent lower level provided the lower level is less than one
full story below the upper level. If there is an intervening door between the
adjacent levels, a smoke detector must be installed on both levels.
A minimum of one carbon monoxide alarm shall be installed in the
immediate vicinity of each sleeping area as stated by manufacturer
recommendations. Said carbon monoxide alarm shall be within 10 feet of
each sleeping room. In dwelling units with split levels, a carbon monoxide
alarm installed on the lower level shall suffice for the adjacent upper level
provided the lower level is less than one full story below the upper level. If
there is an intervening door between the adjacent levels, a carbon monoxide
alarm must be installed on both levels.
§ T10-40. Enforcement and implementation. [Ord. No. 86-13, § 1;
Ord. No. 95-18, § 2; Ord. No. 2008-1, § 1]
The codification of this section within this article shall not be considered
to vest exclusive jurisdiction to the fire prevention bureau in the terms of
its enforcement, and violations of this section may be enforced by other
township officials.
These powers of the fire official shall be in addition and supplemental to all
other powers of the municipality and its officers and departments to enforce
the ordinance of the municipality. Enforcement also may be initiated by any
citizen by the filing of a complaint in municipal court on forms provided by
the clerk of the court. In such circumstances, the clerk of the court shall
issue a summons and provide for service of summons and complaint as
authorized by law.
§ T10-41. Severability. [Ord. No. 86-13, § 1; Ord. No. 95-18, § 2; Ord.
No. 2008-1, § 1.]
Every section or provision of this article shall be deemed a separate
provision to the extent that if any portion shall be declared invalid, such
determination shall not affect the remaining parts of this article, which shall
remain in full force and effect to the extent severable.
§ T10-39 PRINCETON CODE § T10-42
BAO:894
§ T10-42. Penalty. [Ord. No. 86-13, § 1; Ord. No. 95-18, § 2; Ord. No.
2008-1, § 1.]
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article, or fails to
comply with any order issued by an authorized person acting pursuant to
lawful authority in the enforcement of this article, shall be subject to a fine
of not more than $500.
§ T10-42 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10-42
BAO:895
Chapter T10A.1
JOGGING
Editor's Note: Chapter 10A.1 will be part of the Princeton Code.
§ T10A.1-1. Findings and purpose. [Ord. No. 2014-15]
The council finds that due to the increased popularity of jogging it is
advisable for the purposes of public health, safety and welfare to regulate
jogging within Princeton.
§ T10A.1-2. Jogging regulations. [Ord. No. 2014-15]
It shall be unlawful for any person to jog on any public street, highway,
roadway, alley or shoulder in Princeton except in accordance with the
following regulations:
§ T10A.1-3. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2014-15]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
§ T10A.1-4. New Jersey State law. [Ord. No. 2014-15]
This chapter shall not be construed to permit jogging where prohibited by
any law of the State of New Jersey nor in violation of Article 6 of Chapter 4
of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of the State of New Jersey.
§ T10A.1-5. Severability. [Ord. No. 2014-15]
If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause or provision of this chapter
shall be adjudged invalid, such adjudication shall apply only to the section,
paragraph, subdivision, clause or provision so adjudged and the remainder
of this chapter shall be deemed valid and effective.
§ T10A.1-6. Violation and penalties. [Ord. No. 2014-15]
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall for the first
violation receive a warning. Any person who has received a warning and
(a) All joggers running during hours of darkness must wear reflective
material between the waist and shoulders on their front and back which
gives an indication of the jogger's presence through reflected light from
the head lamp beams of motor vehicles at a distance of at least 500 feet.
(a) Hours of darkness. Any time from one-half hour after sunset to one-half
hour before sunrise and at any other time when there is not sufficient
light or visibility to render clearly discernible persons on the highway at
a distance of 500 feet ahead.
(b) Jog or jogging. Running of any kind and at all speeds.
§ T10-42 PRINCETON CODE § T10A.1-6
BAO:896
who subsequently is convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter
after said warning shall be subject to a fine of $25. Any person being
convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter after said first
conviction shall be subject to a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $100
per conviction.
Chapter T10A
JOINT PURCHASING WITH MERCER COUNTY
Editor's Note: Prior ordinances codified herein include portions of
Ordinance Nos. 749 and 92-23.
§ T10A-1. Findings and purpose. [Ord. No. 93-6, § 1; Ord. No. 98-18,
§ 1.]
N.J.S.A. 40A:11-11(5) authorizes contracting units to enter into cooperative
pricing agreements. The township committee wishes to enter into such
an agreement with the County of Mercer, hereinafter referred to as the
"lead agency" since said county has offered voluntary participation in a
cooperative pricing system for the purchase of work, materials and supplies
in order to achieve economies through large volume purchasing.
§ T10A-2. Title. [Ord. No. 93-6, § 1; Ord. No. 98-18, § 1.]
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the cooperative pricing
ordinance of the Township of Princeton, County of Mercer, and State of New
Jersey.
§ T10A-3. Authority. [Ord. No. 93-6, § 1; Ord. No. 98-18, § 1.]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:11-11(5), the mayor and clerk of
the township are hereby authorized and directed to enter into a cooperative
pricing agreement with the lead agency. A copy of said agreement is on file
in the Office of the Princeton Township clerk and may be inspected during
regular office hours.
§ T10A-4. Lead agency. [Ord. No. 93-6, § 1; Ord. No. 98-18, § 1.]
The lead agency entering into contracts on behalf of the township shall be
responsible for complying with the provisions of the Local Public Contracts
Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1, et seq., and all other provisions of the Revised
Statutes of the State of New Jersey.
§ T10A-5. Repeal. [Ord. No. 93-6, § 1; Ord. No. 98-18, § 1.]
All ordinances or parts thereof inconsistent with this section shall be, and
the same are hereby, repealed.
§ T10A.1-6 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10A-6
BAO:897
§ T10A-6. Effective date. [Ord. No. 93-6, § 1; Ord. No. 98-18, § 1.]
This chapter shall take effect upon final passage and publication in
accordance with law.
Chapter T10B
LAND USE
Editor's Note: Pursuant to Ord. No. 2015-20, adopted June 22, 2015,
the Code of the Township of Princeton, New Jersey, 1968 is hereby
amended by adding the following NEW Articles I-VII, which shall
apply to all lands in Princeton, including all lands in the former
Borough and Township.
§ T10A-6 PRINCETON CODE § T10A-6
BAO:898
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ T10B-1. Purposes. [Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-1]
(a) It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to exercise the authority
delegated to municipalities by the Municipal Land Use Law and hereby,
in conformance with the purposes of such law:
(1) To guide the appropriate use or development of all lands in a
manner that will promote the public health, safety, morals and
general welfare;
(2) To secure safety from fire, flood, and other natural and human
made disasters;
(3) To provide adequate light, air and open space;
(4) To ensure that the development of the municipality does not
conflict with the development and general welfare of neighboring
municipalities, the county and the state as a whole;
(5) To promote the establishment of appropriate population densities
and concentrations that will contribute to the well-being of
persons, neighborhoods, communities and regions and the
preservation of the environment;
(6) To encourage the appropriate and efficient expenditure of public
funds by the coordination of public development with land use
policies;
(7) To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for a variety of
uses and open space, both public and private, according to their
respective environmental requirements;
(8) To encourage the location and design of transportation routes that
will promote the free flow of traffic while discouraging locations of
such facilities and routes that result in congestion or blight;
(9) To promote a desirable visual environment through creative
development techniques and good civic design and arrangements;
(10) To promote the conservation of open space and valuable natural
resources and to prevent urban sprawl and degradation of the
environment through improper use of land;
(11) To encourage planned unit developments that incorporate the best
features of design and relate the type, design and layout of various
types of development to particular sites;
(12) To encourage the development of housing of sizes and types that
will serve residents of various ages, incomes, and physical
capabilities;
§ T10B-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-1
BAO:899
§ T10B-2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2014-44; Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-2;
Ord. No. 2016-16 § 1; Ord. No. 2018-11 § 2]
ADEQUATE FIRE PROTECTION — Protection against fire as provided by
compliance with the fire flows or alternatives as set forth in Article IV,
Division 14 of this Chapter.
ADJACENT BUFFER STRIP — An area on both sides of a waterway
measured from the top of the channel banks and extending outward.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The municipal engineer unless another
person is appointed by the Princeton Council for action with respect to a
specific development application or other matter.
(13) To encourage coordination of the various public and private
procedures and activities shaping land development with a view to
lessening the cost of such development and to the more efficient
use of land; and
(14) To promote sustainability and the conservation of energy through
the use of planning practices designed to reduce energy
consumption and to provide for maximum utilization of renewable
energy sources.
(15) To protect the environment and promote sustainability, especially
wooded areas and the tree canopy, for the purposes of flood
control, soil erosion prevention, energy conservation, wildlife
preservation, and aesthetics.
(b) The Princeton Council further finds and declares that Princeton
contains numerous buildings, archeological sites, and areas of special
character and special historic and aesthetic value; that these buildings,
archeological sites, and areas of the municipality reflect elements of the
cultural, social, economic, and architectural history of the community;
and that preservation and enhancement of such elements are required
in the interest of the health, prosperity, and welfare of the municipality
as well as the surrounding region. The purpose of the historic district
regulations is to:
(1) Preserve and enhance structures, archeological sites, and locations
which reflect the heritage of the community;
(2) Maintain and develop harmonious settings for such structures,
archeological sites, and locations;
(3) Foster civic pride;
(4) Protect and enhance the community's attractions to visitors;
(5) Strengthen the economy of the community; and
(6) Promote the appreciation of landmarks for the education, pleasure,
and welfare of the people of Princeton.
§ T10B-1 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-2
BAO:900
AFFORDABLE HOUSING — Very low, low and moderate income housing as
defined by the Uniform Housing Affordability Controls, N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et
seq.
AGRICULTURAL OR HORTICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT — Construction
for the purposes of supporting common farm site activities, including but
not limited to: the production, harvesting, storage, grading, packaging,
processing, and the wholesale and retail marketing of crops, plants,
animals, and other related commodities and the use and application of
techniques and methods of soil preparation and management, fertilization,
weed, disease and pest control, disposal of farm waste, irrigation, drainage
and water management, and grazing.
AGRICULTURAL OR HORTICULTURAL USE — The use of the land for
common farm site activities including but not limited to production,
harvesting, storage, grading, packaging, processing and the wholesale and
retail marketing of crops, plants, animals and other related commodities
and the use and application of techniques and methods of soil preparation
and management, fertilization, weed, disease and pest control, disposal of
farm waste, irrigation, drainage, and water management, and grazing.
AGRICULTURAL PURPOSES — The art or science of cultivating the ground
or tillage, not including the erection, alteration, enlargement, occupancy or
use of any building intended, designed for or susceptible to occupancy for
residential purposes.
ALTER — To change the appearance of exterior elements of a structure,
including changing the materials used and removing paint and cleaning by
means of abrasives or chemicals or pressurized liquids. A change in the
exterior color of a structure shall be considered an alteration if the change
in color entails application of paint or other surface coloring to a surface
which has not been painted before or if pre-primed or prefinished material
is added to the exterior. In addition, the repainting shall be considered
an alteration in Historic Preservation Districts Type 1 if it is substantially
out of character with the historic preservation district within which the
structure is located. Such repainting, however, shall not be considered an
alteration in Historic Preservation Districts Type 2. Ordinary maintenance
and repainting in the same color shall not be considered an alteration
within this definition. The Type 1 and Type 2 Historic Preservation Districts
are shown on the "Overlay Zoning Map of Historic Preservation Districts
and Historic Preservation Buffer Districts, Princeton, Mercer County, New
Jersey" on file in the office of the Clerk of Princeton, prepared by the
Princeton Engineering Department, as revised through April 11, 2016, and
adopted hereby.30
APPLICANT — A developer submitting an application for development.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — The application or appeal form and
all accompanying documents required by this chapter for approval of a
subdivision plat, site plan, planned development, conditional use, zoning
variance or direction for the issuance of a special permit.
30.Editor's Note: See Section 10B-242 for adoption of the overlay map.)
§ T10B-2 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-2
BAO:901
APPLICATION FOR SPECIAL PERMIT — An application for development
that seeks the direction of the issuance of a special permit.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a construction adapted to
permanent, temporary or continuous occupancy and having a roof.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT — A governmental acquisition of real property or
a major construction project.
CATEGORY ONE (C1) WATERS — Waters of the state designated in N.J.A.C.
7:9B-1.15(c) through (h) for purposes of implementing the anti-degradation
policies set forth at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.5(d) for protection from measurable
changes in water quality characteristics because of their clarity, color,
scenic setting, other characteristics of aesthetic value, exceptional
ecological significance, exceptional recreational significance, exceptional
water supply significance, or exceptional fisheries resources(s).
CIRCULATION — Systems, structures and physical improvements for the
movement of people, goods, water, air, sewage or power by such means
as streets, highways, railways, waterways, towers, airways, pipes and
conduits, and the handling of people and goods by such means as terminals,
stations, warehouses and other storage buildings or transshipment points.
COMMITTEE — The site plan review advisory board (SPRAB) constituted
pursuant to Section 10B-10 of this Chapter or, with respect to the matters
and circumstances set forth in Section 10B-376(1)(a), the historic
preservation commission.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — An open space area within or related to a
site designated as a development, and designed and intended for the use
or enjoyment of residents and owners of the development. Common open
space may contain such complementary structures and improvements as
are necessary and appropriate for the use or enjoyment of residents and
owners of the development.
COMPACTION — The increase in soil bulk density caused by subjecting
soil to greater-than-normal loading. Compaction can also decrease soil
infiltration and permeability rates.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district only
upon a showing that such use in a specified location will comply with the
conditions and standards for the location or operation of such use that are
contained in the zoning regulations, and upon approval of such use by the
Planning Board.
CONSTRUCT — To make, remake, or make additions to the exterior of a
structure by combining materials.
CONSTRUCTION OFFICIAL — The officer appointed pursuant to law to
administer and enforce the State Uniform Construction Code.
CONSTRUCTION PERMIT — A permit for construction required by and
issued in accordance with the State Uniform Construction Code and
ordinances adopted pursuant thereto.
CONVENTIONAL — Development other than planned development.
§ T10B-2 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-2
BAO:902
CORE — A pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic uses serving
the surrounding area, generally including housing and access to public
transportation.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — The Mercer County Planning Board, as
designated by the County Board of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal
stormwater management plans and implementing ordinance(s).
DAYS — Calendar days.
DE MINIMIS — When applied to an action affecting a property in a historic
preservation district, an action of such minimal nature that: (a) the
purposes of historic preservation as defined in this chapter will not thereby
be materially affected; and (b) the action does not increase the degree of
noncompliance or create a new noncompliance with respect to any bulk
regulation set forth in this chapter.
DEMOLISH — To partially or completely take down a structure or a part
thereof.
DENSITY — The permitted number of dwelling units per gross area of land
to be developed.
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGN ENGINEER — A person professionally qualified and duly licensed
in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may include, but not
necessarily be limited to, development of project requirements, creation
and development of project design and preparation of drawings and
specifications.
DESIGNATED CENTER — A State Development and Redevelopment Plan
Center, such as urban, regional, town, village, or hamlet, as designated by
the State Planning Commission.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any
land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including the
holder of an option or contract to purchase or any other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or structure, any mining
excavation or landfill, any clearing, grading, or excavation or other activity
that results in land disturbance; and any use or change in the use of any
building or other structure, or land or extension of use of land, by any
person, for which permission is required under the Municipal Land Use
Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. In the case of development of agricultural
lands, development means: any activity that requires a state permit; any
activity reviewed by the County Agricultural Board (CAB) and the State
Agricultural Development Committee (SADC), and municipal review of any
activity not exempted by the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq.
DEVELOPMENT ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The officer referred to in
Section 10B-99.
§ T10B-2 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-2
BAO:903
DEVELOPMENT REGULATION — A zoning ordinance, subdivision
ordinance, site plan ordinance, or other municipal regulation of the use and
development of land, or amendment thereto, adopted and filed pursuant to
this chapter.
DISTURBANCE — The placement of impervious surface, the movement
or exposure of soil or bedrock, or the clearing, cutting, or removal of
vegetation. Milling and/or repaving of existing impervious surfaces shall not
be considered disturbance for the purposes of this section.
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by
drains, grading or other means and includes control of runoff during and
after construction or development to minimize erosion and sedimentation,
to assure the adequacy of existing and proposed culverts and bridges, to
induce water recharge into the ground where practical, to lessen nonpoint
pollution, to maintain the integrity of stream channels for their biological
functions as well as for drainage and the means necessary for water supply
preservation or prevention or alleviation of flooding.
DRAINAGE AREA — A geographic area within which stormwater,
sediments, or dissolved materials drain to a particular receiving waterbody
or to a particular point along a receiving waterbody.
ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION — A municipal advisory body created
pursuant to P.L. 1968, c. 245.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREA — An area or feature which is of
significant environmental value, including but not limited to: stream
corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered or
threatened species; large areas of contiguous open space or upland forest;
steep slopes; well head protection areas; and groundwater recharge areas.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice or gravity.
ESCAPE PROVISIONS — The permanent installation of ladders, steps,
rungs, and/or other features that provide easily accessible means of egress
from a stormwater management measure.
EXPOSURE DISTANCE — The distance between buildings or structures,
which distance may vary with building type, age and whether it contains onsite
fire suppression systems.
FINAL PLAT — The final map of all or a portion of a subdivision which is
presented to the Planning Board for final approval in accordance with this
article which, if approved, shall be filed with the proper county recording
officer.
FINANCIAL HARDSHIP — (a) With respect to commercial property,
including property rented for residential uses, the inability of the applicant
to realize a reasonable return on the property without the proposed work;
(b) with respect to property which is devoted to a charitable non-profit
purpose and is exempt from local property taxes, the inability of the
applicant to carry out such purpose without the proposed work; and (c) with
§ T10B-2 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-2
BAO:904
respect to owner-occupied residential property, the inability of the applicant
to continue owner-occupied residential use without the proposed work.
FIRE FLOWS — The amount or volume of water available to fire hydrants
within or adjacent to a development application, and measured in gallons
per minute ("gpm"), duration of flows or storage capacity as measured in
hours of deliverable flows, and water pressure as measured in pounds per
square inch ("psi").
GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE — Those methods and techniques that use
vegetation, soils and other elements and practices to restore the natural
processes of the land to manage and retain stormwater. Examples of green
infrastructure are but not limited to: rain gardens, green roofs, permeable
pavement; bio-infiltration, cisterns, or vegetated swales.
GROUNDWATER — A body of water below the surface of the land in a zone
of saturation where the spaces between the soil or geological materials are
fully saturated with water.
HABITATS OF ENDANGERED OR THREATENED SPECIES — Those
habitats identified by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection's Landscape Project as approved by the Department's
Endangered and Nongame Species Program.
HISTORIC FEATURES — Fences, principal structures, accessory structures,
outbuildings, gates, gate posts, walls, gateways, wells, windmills,
cemeteries, hedgerows and field rows, landscaping of historic significance,
ponds, bridges, dams, sculptures, walkways, driveways, historic boundary
markers, and archeological sites and as otherwise defined in the standards
established by the United States Secretary of the Interior, provided that
such features that are not located within a historic preservation district
shall be treated as historic features only if so listed in the Princeton Master
Plan or have been so designated by the Council pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-65.1.
HISTORIC PRESERVATION BUFFER DISTRICT — The intervening or
surrounding property that significantly affects or is affected by the quality
and character of a historic site or historic preservation district and as set
forth on the Zoning Map.
HISTORIC PRESERVATION DISTRICT — One or more historic sites and
intervening or surrounding property significantly affecting or affected by
the quality and character of the historic site or sites and as set forth on the
Zoning Map.
HISTORIC PRESERVATION DISTRICTS TYPE 1 AND 2 — Historic
preservation districts as shown on the Zoning Map. The Type 1 districts
are: Maybury Hill; Kingston Mill Historic District; Tusculum; Princeton
Battlefield - Stony Brook Settlement Historic District; Mansgrove; Castle
Howard; Drumthwacket; Drumthwacket outbuildings, consisting of Coach
House/Stables, Greenhouse Potting Shed, Garden Building, Gardener's
House, Farmer's House and Dairy, Cow Barn; Princeton Basin; Delaware
& Raritan Canal Historic District; Joline - Gulick House, Constitution Hill;
Edgerstoune; Olden Manor; and Donald G. Herring Estate - Old Arreton
§ T10B-2 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-2
BAO:905
Road Historic District. The Type 2 Districts are: the Jugtown district; Bank
Street district; Mercer Hill district; Central Historic district; and
Witherspoon-Jackson Historic District. The Type 1 and Type 2 districts are
subject to the review, procedural, and substantive requirements of this
Article; the only differences in the requirements that apply to them concern
visibility parameters and changes in color as outlined below:
Type 1 Type 2
Painting or adding other surface
coloring to an unpainted surface or
adding pre-primed and prefinished
material within the Type 1 district
requires preservation plan review.
Painting or adding other surface
coloring to an unpainted surface or
adding preprimed and prefinished
material within the Type 2 district
requires preservation plan review
Painting or other surface coloring
that is substantially out of character
with the Type 1 district within which
the structure is located is subject to
preservation plan review.
Changing paint color or other
surface coloring within the Type 2
district does not require review
Proposed work that would be visible
from anywhere within the Type 1
district or from the public right-ofway
is subject to preservation plan
review.
Proposed work within the Type 2
district that would be visible from a
public right-of-way is subject to
preservation plan review
HISTORIC PRESERVATION OFFICER — The administrative officer for
processing preservation plans, for planning, developing, coordinating, and
implementing historic, architectural and archeological preservation
projects and activities, and for executing and furthering the purposes of
Article XIII.
HISTORIC PROTECTION AREA — The portion of a property in an historic
preservation zoning district designed to preserve the historic features of
the property in their historic setting and meeting the standards set forth in
Section 10B-387. Historic protection areas shall be designed as a result of
development application review on sites for which pre-mapped preservation
areas have not been established by ordinance.
HISTORIC SITE — Any real property, human-made structure, natural object
or configuration, or any portion or group of the foregoing having historical,
archeological, cultural, scenic or architectural significance so identified
in the Master Plan or designated by the Council pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-65.1.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any functional construction or the elements or
remains of such construction associated with human activities, including
an archeological site, having historical, archeological, cultural, scenic or
architectural significance, provided that such structure that is not located
with a historic preservation district shall be treated as an historic structure
only if so listed in the Princeton Master Plan or has been designated by the
Council pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65.1.
§ T10B-2 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-2
BAO:906
HUC-14 — A watershed or sub-watershed as defined by the United States
Geological Survey with a 14-digit identifier.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been compacted or covered
with a layer of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by
water. Impervious surfaces include roofs and asphalt, concrete, and gravel
surfaces, parking lots, drives, sidewalks, porous asphalt or concrete, pools,
decks and patios.
INFILTRATION — The process by which water from precipitation seeps into
the soil.
INTERESTED PARTY — Any citizen of the State of New Jersey in the case of
a criminal or quasicriminal proceeding; and in the case of a civil proceeding
in any court or an administrative proceeding before a municipal agency, any
person, whether residing within or without the municipality, whose right to
use, acquire, or enjoy property is or may be affected by any action taken
under this chapter, or whose right to use, acquire, or enjoy property under
this chapter, or under any law of New Jersey or of the United States has
been denied, violated or infringed by an action or a failure to act under this
chapter.
LAND — Includes improvements and fixtures on, above or below the
surface.
LOCAL STREETS — Those whose primary function is to provide immediate
access to properties that front upon them.
LOT — A parcel or portion of land separated from other parcels or portions
by description, on a subdivision map or record of survey map or by metes
and bounds in a deed of conveyance, other than a bona fide mortgage, for
the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building development.
LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID) — Utilizing selected stormwater
management measures to replicate predevelopment hydrology in order
to reduce the impacts of development. LID minimizes the creation of
stormwater runoff and pollution by minimizing site disturbance and
impervious cover and by promoting on-site infiltration of precipitation and
runoff.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE — Any security, other than cash, that may
be accepted by the municipality for the maintenance of any improvements
required by this chapter.
MAINTENANCE PLAN — A document required for the maintenance of
stormwater management measures at all major development projects. A
maintenance plan shall contain a specific preventive maintenance tasks and
schedules; cost estimates, including estimated cost of sediment, debris, or
trash removal; and the name, address, and telephone number of the person
or persons responsible for preventive and corrective maintenance including
replacement.
MAJOR COLLECTOR STREETS — Those streets that serve as major access
between various points within the community for a substantial proportion
of the residents thereof.
§ T10B-2 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-2
BAO:907
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Any development that results in either the
disturbance of 1/2 or more acres of land, an increase in impervious surface
of 5,000 square feet, or an increase in the peak 100-year stormwater runoff
rate from the development site of more than 0.5 CFS.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision not classified as a minor
subdivision.
MASTER PLAN — A composite of one or more written or graphic proposals
for the development of the municipality or region adopted pursuant to
Article V of this Chapter.
MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE — Compliance with the specific
objective to the greatest extent possible taking into account equitable
considerations and competing factors, including but not limited to,
environmental benefits, pollutant removal effectiveness, regulatory
compliance, ability to implement given site-specific environmental
conditions, cost and technical or engineering feasibility.
MINOR COLLECTOR STREETS — Those streets that provide local access
within the municipality for a limited proportion of the residents thereof.
MINOR DEVELOPMENT — Any development that results in an increase
in impervious surface of 400 or more square feet but does not meet the
definition of a major development.
MINOR SITE PLAN — A development of one or more lots, that: (a) proposes
new development within the scope of development specifically permitted by
ordinance as a minor site plan; (b) does not involve planned development,
any new street or extension of any off-tract improvement that is to be
prorated pursuant to Section 30 of the Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-42); and (c) contains the information reasonably required in order
to make an informed determination as to whether the requirements
established by this chapter for approval of a minor site plan have been met.
MINOR SUBDIVISION — A subdivision of land for the creation of not
more than two lots; provided that such subdivision does not involve a
planned development, or any new street, or the extension of any off-tract
improvement the cost of which is to be prorated pursuant to Section 30 of
the Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42).
MITIGATION — Suitable compensation or offsetting actions when an
applicant for approval under this ordinance has demonstrated the inability
or impracticality of strict on-site compliance with the stormwater
management requirements set forth in this section or an approved regional
stormwater management plan and, on the basis of such demonstration,
has received a waiver from strict compliance from the Princeton Planning
Board.
MULTI-FAMILY STRUCTURES —
NONTOWNHOUSE (CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT) — Freestanding buildings
containing three, four, five or six dwelling units, with each unit sharing
with another unit or units one or more vertical or horizontal common walls
and with each unit having a separate exterior entrance. If a multi-family
§ T10B-2 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-2
BAO:908
structure also meets the definition of a townhouse structure, it shall be
considered a townhouse structure.
MUNICIPAL AGENCY — The Planning Board, Zoning Board of Adjustment
or Princeton Council, or any agency created by or responsible to the
municipality, when acting pursuant to this chapter.
MUNICIPAL ENGINEER — The person appointed to such position by the
Princeton Council or such person's designee.
MUNICIPAL LAND USE LAW — Chapter 291 of the Laws of New Jersey,
1975 as amended from time to time.
MUNICIPAL OFFICER — Any person whether compensated or not, whether
part-time or full-time: (1) elected to any office of a municipal agency; (2)
serving on a municipal agency which has the authority to enact ordinances,
approve development applications or grant zoning variances; (3) who is
a member of an independent municipal, county or regional authority; or
(4) who is a managerial executive or confidential employee of a municipal
agency, as defined in Section 3 of the "New Jersey Employer-Employee
Relations Act," P.L.1941, c. (N.J.S.A. 34:13A-3), but shall not mean any
employee of a school district or member of a school board.
MUNICIPAL OFFICIAL — A municipal officer.
MUNICIPALITY — The municipality of Princeton.
NODE — An area designated by the State Planning Commission
concentrating facilities and activities that are not organized in a compact
form.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot the area, dimensions and location of
which were lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of a zoning
ordinance but that fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district
in which it is located by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure the size, dimensions and
location of which were lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment
of a zoning ordinance, but that fails to conform to the requirements of the
zoning district in which it is located by reason of such adoption, revision or
amendment.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use or activity that was lawful prior to the
adoption, revision or amendment of a zoning ordinance, but that fails to
conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by
reason of such adoption, revision or amendment.
NONSTRUCTURAL STORMWATER MANAGEMENT — Utilizing strategies
and measures that manage stormwater runoff quantity and quality in the
absence of structural stormwater measures, such as minimizing site
disturbance, preserving natural vegetation and other important site
features, reducing and disconnecting impervious cover, minimizing
proposed ground slopes, utilizing native vegetation, minimizing turf grass
lawns, increasing time of concentration, and maintaining and enhancing
natural drainage features and characteristics.
§ T10B-2 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-2
BAO:909
NUTRIENT — A chemical element or compound (such as nitrogen or
phosphorus) that is essential to and promotes the development of plants,
algae, and other vegetation and organisms.
NUTRIENT CONCENTRATION — The amount of a nutrient in a specified
volume of water.
NUTRIENT LOAD — The total amount of a nutrient entering a surface
or groundwater resource during a given time period. Nutrients may enter
the water resource from runoff, recharge, point source discharges, or the
atmosphere in the form of wet and/or dry deposition.
OFF-TRACT — Located neither on the property that is the subject of a
development application nor on a contiguous portion of a street or right-ofway.
OFFICE-RESEARCH LOT — A lot within a special office-research
subdivision used exclusively for the purposes set forth for special officeresearch
developments under zoning regulations.
OFFSITE — Located outside the lot lines of the lot in question, but within
the property (of which the lot is a part) that is the subject of a development
application or within a contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way.
ON-SITE FIRE SUPPRESSION SYSTEMS — Methods or systems for
extinguishing fires, including but not limited to automatic sprinkler
systems, static water sources on site, such as ponds and pools and any other
methods reasonably calculated to achieve adequate fire protection.
ON-TRACT — Located on the property that is the subject of a development
application or on a contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way.
ONSITE — Located on the lot in question.
OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved
and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public or private use
or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of land
adjoining or neighboring such open space; provided, that such areas may
be improved with only those buildings, structures, streets and off street
parking and other improvements that are designed to be incidental to the
natural openness of the land.
OPEN SPACE USES — Any use of common open space for park or open
space purposes, conservation of land or other natural resources or historic
or scenic purposes.
ORDINARY MAINTENANCE — The repair of any deterioration, wear or
damage to a structure, or any part thereof, in order to return the same
as nearly as practicable to its condition prior to the occurrence of such
deterioration, wear, or damage. Ordinary maintenance shall further include
replacement of exterior elements or accessory hardware, including signs,
using the same materials and having the same appearance and painting
which is not an alteration.
OVERFLOW GRATE — A device intended to protect the opening in the top
of an outlet structure in a stormwater management measure.
§ T10B-2 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-2
BAO:910
OVERLAY ZONE DISTRICT — A zoning district made up of underlying zone
districts or parts of zone districts as shown on the Zoning Map. An overlay
zone district controls certain standards and procedures for covered areas
not inconsistent with the bulk and use requirements of the underlying zone
districts.
OWNER OR DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of
a lot or of any land proposed to be subdivided or included in a proposed
development, including the holder of an option or contract to purchase, or
other person having an enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
PARCEL — An area of land formally described and recorded with block and
lot numbers, by metes and bounds, by ownership, or in such a manner as to
specifically identify the dimensions and/or boundaries.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE — Any security that may be accepted by the
municipality, including cash, provided that the municipality shall not require
more than 10% of the total performance guarantee in cash.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et
seq.
PERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that is capable of transmitting or
infiltrating a significant amount of precipitation into underlying material.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT — Planned unit development, planned unit
residential development, residential cluster, planned commercial
development or planned industrial development.
PLANNED UNIT RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area with a specified
minimum contiguous acreage of five acres or more to be developed as a
single entity according to a plan containing one or more residential clusters,
which may include appropriate commercial or public or quasi-public uses,
all primarily for the benefit of the residential development.
PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board established by Article II of this
chapter.
PLAT — A map or maps of a subdivision or site plan.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge, munitions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes, radioactive
substance (except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as
amended (42 U.S.C. § 2011 et seq.)), thermal waste, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal, agricultural, and
construction waste or runoff, or other residue discharged directly or
indirectly to the land, ground waters or surface waters of the state, or to
a domestic treatment works. "Pollutant" includes both hazardous and nonhazardous
pollutants.
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL — The conferral of certain rights as to site plans
and major subdivisions pursuant to this chapter prior to final approval and
§ T10B-2 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-2
BAO:911
after specific elements of a development plan have been approved by the
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment.
PRELIMINARY FLOOR PLANS AND ELEVATIONS — Architectural
drawings prepared during early and introductory stages of the design of a
project, illustrating in a schematic form its scope, scale and relationship to
its site and immediate environs.
PRELIMINARY PLAT — The preliminary map indicating the proposed layout
of a subdivision that is submitted for preliminary approval pursuant to
Article IX of this Chapter.
PRESERVATION AREA — The portion of a property in an historic
preservation district premapped by ordinance or, if not pre-mapped,
established during preservation plan review and designed to preserve the
historic features of the property in their historic setting.
PRESERVATION PLAN — The application and accompanying documents
required by Article XIII of this chapter and by the rules of the Historic
Preservation Commission for any action for which preservation plan
approval is required.
PRIMARY OR ARTERIAL STREETS — Those that do or are expected to
handle substantial volumes of through traffic.
PUBLIC AREAS — Public parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other
recreational areas and public open spaces; scenic and historic sites; and
sites for schools and other public buildings and structures.
PUBLIC DRAINAGE WAY — The land reserved or dedicated for the
installation of storm water sewers or drainage ditches, or required along
a natural stream or watercourse for preserving the biological as well as
drainage function of the channel and providing for the flow of water to
safeguard the public against flood damage, sedimentation and erosion and
to assure the adequacy of existing and proposed culverts and bridges,
to induce water recharge into the ground where practical and to lessen
nonpoint pollution.
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE — An open space area conveyed or otherwise
dedicated to the municipality, a municipal agency, the regional board of
education, a state or county agency, or any other public body for
recreational or conservational uses.
QUORUM — The majority of the full authorized membership of a municipal
agency.
RECHARGE — The amount of precipitation that infiltrates into the ground
and migrates to a depth below the root zone depth of any vegetation on that
ground.
RELEVANT FIRE PROTECTION SECTOR — The area of potential fire
hazard or impact including and surrounding a development or proposed
development, as well as all structures or buildings located therein, and
taking into account, as appropriate, the types and pools and any other
methods reasonably calculated to achieve adequate fire protection.
§ T10B-2 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-2
BAO:912
RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER — An area to be developed as a single entity
according to a plan containing residential housing units that have a common
or public open space area as an appurtenance.
RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT — Any development pursuant to
the provision of Article IX, Division 9 of this Chapter.
RESIDENTIAL DENSITY — The number of dwelling units per gross acre of
residential land area including proposed streets, easements and open space
portions of a development.
RESUBDIVISION — The further division or relocation of lot lines of any
lot or lots within a subdivision previously made and approved or recorded
according to law; or the alteration of any streets or the establishment of
any new streets within any subdivision previously made and approved or
recorded according to law. Not included are conveyances merely combining
existing lots by deed or other instrument.
RETROFITTING — The steps taken to improve the fire protection of existing
structures or areas, including but not limited to the installation of on-site
fire suppression systems.
REVIEW AGENCY — The municipal entity or official that is responsible
for the review of a major development project for compliance with the
requirements of this Chapter's stormwater management regulations.
SEDIMENTATION — The deposit of soil that has been transported from its
site of origin by water, ice, wind, gravity or other natural means as a product
of erosion.
SINGLE FAMILY STRUCTURE (CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT) — A
freestanding structure containing only one dwelling unit.
SITE — The lot or lots upon which development is to occur or has occurred.
SITE DEVELOPMENT — Any proposal or undertaking for which site plan
approval is required pursuant to Section 10B-205 or Section 10B-238 and
that is not exempt pursuant to Section 10B-206.
SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots on which is shown: (i)
the existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including but not necessarily
limited to topography, vegetation, drainage, flood plains, marshes, and
waterways; (ii) the location of all existing and proposed buildings, drives,
parking spaces, walkways, means of ingress or egress, drainage facilities,
utility services, landscaping, structures and signs, lighting, and screening
devices; and (iii) any other information that may be reasonably required in
order to make an informed determination as to approval of the plan by the
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment pursuant to this chapter.
SKETCH PLAT — The sketch map of a subdivision of sufficient accuracy to
be used for the purpose of discussion and classification and meeting the
requirements of Section 10B-157.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin.
§ T10B-2 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-2
BAO:913
SOLID AND FLOATABLE MATERIALS — Sediment, debris, trash, and other
floating, suspended, or settleable solids.
SOURCE MATERIAL — Any material or machinery located at an industrial
facility that is directly or indirectly related to process, manufacturing,
or other industrial activities, that could be a source of pollutants in any
industrial stormwater discharge to surface or groundwater. Source
materials include, but are not limited to raw materials, intermediate
products, final products, waste materials, by-products, industrial machinery
and fuels, and lubricants, solvents, and detergents that are related to
process, manufacturing, or other industrial activities that are exposed to
stormwater.
SPECIAL OFFICE-RESEARCH SUBDIVISION — Any major subdivision
involving a planned commercial development in the O-R zoning district and
employing the reduction in lot area provisions set forth for special officeresearch
developments under Princeton's zoning regulations.
SPECIAL PERMIT — A permit directed to be issued pursuant to Section
10B-115 for a building or structure in the bed of a mapped street, drainage
way, flood control basin or public area or pursuant to Section 10B-116 for
the erection of a building or structure on a lot that does not abut a street.
STATE DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN METROPOLITAN
PLANNING AREA (PA1) — An area delineated on the State Plan Policy Map
and adopted by the State Planning Commission that is intended to be the
focus for much of the state's future redevelopment and revitalization efforts.
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — The geographic application of the State
Development and Redevelopment Plan's goals and statewide policies and
the official map of these goals and policies.
STORM DRAINAGE ENGINEER — A qualified engineer appointed or
engaged by the Governing Body on a case-by-case basis or otherwise, after
consultation with the municipal engineer, for the purpose of reviewing and
reporting upon the engineering aspects of surface water drainage facilities
involved in a site development pursuant to Section 10B-227. The municipal
engineer may be designated as storm drainage engineer.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — An excavation or embankment
and related areas designed to receive, retain, and discharge stormwater
runoff. A stormwater management basin may either be normally dry or
retain water in a permanent pool. A stormwater management basin may be
located on or below the ground surface.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE OR FEATURE — Any structural
or nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program, or other
method, including green infrastructure, intended to control or reduce
stormwater runoff and associated pollutants, or to induce or control the
infiltration or groundwater recharge of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or
illegal non-stormwater discharges into stormwater conveyances.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — The portion of precipitation that is not
intercepted by vegetation or infiltrates into the ground but instead ponds or
§ T10B-2 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-2
BAO:914
flows across the surface of the ground or structures. Stormwater runoff may
be collected in swales, gutters, storm sewers, channels, and other drainage
facilities and transported to waterways, waterbodies, or stormwater
management measures.
STREAM BUFFER — A strip of land located adjacent to a stream channel
consisting of natural, undisturbed vegetative cover that serves as a
protective area between uplands and riparian lands.
STREAM CORRIDOR — See definition of "Waterway Corridor" in Section
10B-203.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive or
other way: (i) that is an existing state, county or municipal roadway; (ii)
shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law; (iii) approved by
official action as provided by this chapter; or (iv) shown on a plat duly
filed and recorded in the office of the county recording officer prior to
the appointment of a Planning Board and the grant to such Board of the
power to review plats; including the land between the street lines, whether
improved or unimproved, and whether or not comprising pavement,
shoulders, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, parking areas and other areas.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for
occupancy, use, or ornamentation whether installed on, above, or below the
surface of a parcel of land. The word structure for purposes of this chapter
shall not apply to service utilities entirely below the ground, nor shall it
apply to tents used in connection with reunions of alumni of educational
institutions or tents or fences used for private social affairs such as
weddings and parties and in place for two weeks or less.
SUBDIVIDER — Any person commencing proceedings under Article IX of
this Chapter to effect a subdivision of land for himself or for another.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or
more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for sale or development.
The following shall not be considered subdivisions within the meaning of
this chapter, if no new streets are created: (a) divisions of land found by
the Planning Board or subdivision committee thereof appointed by the Chair
to be for agricultural purposes where all resulting parcels are five acres
or larger in size; (b) divisions of property by testamentary or intestate
provisions; (c) divisions of property upon court order, including but not
limited to judgments of foreclosure; (d) consolidation of existing lots by
deed or other recorded instrument; and (e) the conveyance of one or more
adjoining lots, tracts or parcels of land, owned by the same person or
persons and all of which are found and certified by the administrative officer
to conform to the requirements of the municipal development regulations
and are shown and designated as separate lots, tracts or parcels on the tax
map of the municipality. The term "subdivision" shall also include the term
"resubdivision".
SUBDIVISION COMMITTEE — A committee of at least three Planning
Board members appointed by the chair of the Planning Board for the
purpose of classifying subdivisions in accordance with the provisions of
§ T10B-2 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-2
BAO:915
Article IX of this Chapter, and having such other duties relating to
subdivisions as may be conferred on it by the Planning Board or by law.
THREATENED AND ENDANGERED SPECIES — Those species whose
prospects for survival in New Jersey are in immediate danger because
of a loss or change in habitat, overexploitation, predation, competition,
disease, disturbance or contamination. Assistance is needed to prevent
future extinction in New Jersey. Threatened species are those who may
become endangered if conditions surrounding them begin to or continue
to deteriorate. Habitats of endangered or threatened species are those
identified by the Department's Landscape Project as approved by the
Department's Endangered and Nongame Species Program.
TIME OF CONCENTRATION — The time it takes for stormwater runoff to
travel from the hydraulically most distant point of a watershed or drainage
area to the point of interest within that watershed or drainage area.
TOWNHOUSE STRUCTURES (CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT) — Freestanding
buildings containing two, three, four, five or six townhouse units.
TOWNHOUSE UNIT (CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT) — A section of a
townhouse structure containing only one dwelling unit which has freestanding
walls on two sides (or, if at the end of the townhouse structure,
three sides) and shares party walls with units on both sides (or, if it is at the
end of a townhouse structure, shares a party wall on one side), with the unit
having a separate exterior entrance.
TRACT — An area of land that is the subject of a development application.
TRANSCRIPT — A typed or printed verbatim record of the proceedings or
reproduction thereof.
TRANSITION AREA — An area of protected upland adjacent to a freshwater
wetland that minimizes adverse impacts on the wetland or serves as an
integral component of the wetlands ecosystem.
TRASH RACK — A device intended to intercept runoff-borne trash and
debris that might otherwise block the hydraulic openings in an outlet
structure in a stormwater management measure.
UNDERLYING ZONE DISTRICT — A zoning district that forms a constituent
part of an overlay zone district. Underlying zone districts control bulk and
use requirements.
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA — Previously developed portions of areas
delineated on the State Plan Policy Map as the Metropolitan Planning Area
(PA1); designated centers, cores or nodes.
VARIANCE — A variance from zoning regulations granted pursuant to
Section 10B-13(c) or 10B-13(d).
WATER PURVEYOR — The regular source of water to fire hydrants, such as
a public utility or any public water system.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams,
wetlands, and bodies of surface or groundwater, whether natural or
§ T10B-2 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-2
BAO:916
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by surface water
or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and
that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as
hydrophytic vegetation.
ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT — The Board established by Article III
of this chapter.
ZONING OFFICER — The person appointed by the Princeton Council to
exercise the functions set for such position in this chapter.
ZONING PERMIT — A document signed by the Zoning Officer that: (i)
is required by zoning regulations as a condition precedent to the
commencement of a use or the erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, conversion or installation of a structure, including signage,
fences, and walks, or building; (ii) acknowledges that such use, structure or
building complies with the zoning regulations or duly authorized variance
therefrom; and (iii) does not involve approval of a development application
by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment.
§ T10B-3. Exemptions for uses operated by local units of
government. [Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-3]
Uses operated by the municipality and by its agencies and boards shall be
exempt from the provisions of the municipality's land use regulations.
§ T10B-2 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-3
BAO:917

ARTICLE II
Planning Board
§ T10B-4. Planning Board established; membership; voting rights;
limitations. [Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-4]
The Planning Board heretofore created is continued and is hereby
established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. It shall consist of nine
members in the following four classes:
(a) Class I: The Mayor or the Mayor's designee in the absence of the Mayor.
(b) Class II: one of the officials of the municipality other than a member of
the Princeton Council to be appointed by the Mayor, provided that if
there is a member of the Environmental Commission who is also a
member of the Planning Board as required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 that
person shall be deemed to be the Class II Planning Board member if
there is both a member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment and a
member of the Board of Education among the Class IV members.
(c) Class III: a member of the Princeton Council to be appointed by it.
(d) Class IV: six other citizens of the municipality to be appointed by the
Mayor. The members of Class IV shall hold no other municipal office,
except that one member may be a member of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment or the Historic Preservation Commission and one member
may be a member of the Board of Education. A member of the
Environmental Commission who is also a member of the Planning Board
as required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 shall be a Class IV Planning Board
member unless there be among the Class IV or alternate members of
the Planning Board both a member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment
or the Historic Preservation Commission and a member of the Board of
Education, in which case the member of the Environmental Commission
shall be deemed to be the Class II member of the Planning Board.
(e) Alternates: In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23.1, there are hereby
created two alternate memberships to the Princeton Planning Board.
Alternate members shall be appointed by the Mayor for Class IV
members and shall meet the qualifications for Class IV members of the
nine-member Planning Board. Alternate members shall be designated
at the time of appointment by the Mayor as "Alternate No. 1" and
"Alternate No. 2." The terms of the alternate members shall be for two
years, except that the terms of the alternate members shall be such that
the term of not more than one alternate member shall expire in any one
year; provided, however, that in no instance shall the terms of the
alternate members first appointed exceed two years. A vacancy
occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled by the
appointing authority for the unexpired term only.
(1) Alternate members may participate in discussions of the
proceedings, but may not vote except in the absence or
§ T10B-4 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-4
BAO:919
§ T10B-5. Terms. [Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-5]
disqualification of a regular member of any class. A vote shall not
be delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead of an
alternate member. In the event that a choice must be made as to
which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote.
(f) Other provisions.
(1) All regular and alternate members except the Class II member shall
be residents of Princeton.
(2) Except as otherwise permitted, Class IV members and alternate
members shall hold no other municipal office or employment. For
purposes of this section, membership on a municipal board or
commission whose function is advisory in nature and the
establishment of which is discretionary and not required by statute
shall not be considered the holding of municipal office.
(3) Members of the Planning Board shall serve without compensation,
but may be reimbursed for expenses authorized in advance and
incurred in the performance of their duties.
(4) No members or alternate members shall be permitted to act on any
matter in which they have, directly or indirectly, any personal or
financial interest.
(5) Except for members exempted by statute from this requirement,
persons who serve as members or alternate members of the
Planning Board shall be required to complete an approved basic
course in land use law and planning within 18 months of their
appointment in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-23.3(b) and (c).
(a) The term of the member composing Class I shall correspond with the
Mayor's official tenure or, if the member is the Mayor's designee in the
absence of the Mayor, the designee shall serve at the pleasure of the
Mayor during the Mayor's official tenure. The terms of the members
composing Class II and Class III shall be for one year or terminate at
the completion of their respective terms of office, whichever occurs
first.
(b) The terms of all Class IV members first appointed pursuant to this
chapter shall be determined so that to the greatest practicable extent
the expiration of such terms shall be evenly distributed over the first
four years after their appointment as determined by resolution of the
Princeton Council; provided, however, that no term of any member shall
exceed four years and further provided that nothing herein shall affect
the term of any present member of the Planning Board, all of whom
shall continue in office until the completion of the term for which they
were appointed. Thereafter, all Class IV members shall be appointed for
§ T10B-4 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-5
BAO:920
§ T10B-6. Organization of the Board. [Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-6]
The Planning Board shall elect a chair and vice chair from the members of
Class IV, select a secretary who may or may not be a member or alternate
member of the Planning Board or a municipal employee, and create and fill
such other offices as are established by ordinance. An alternate member
may not serve as chair or vice chair of the Planning Board.
§ T10B-7. Members of Zoning Board of Adjustment serving as
temporary members of the Planning Board. [Ord. No. 2015-20
§ 10B-7]
If the Planning Board lacks a quorum because any of its regular or alternate
members is prohibited by subsection b of section 14 of P.L. 1975, c.291
(C.40:55D-23) or section 13 of P.L.1979, c.216 (C.40:55D-23.1) from acting
on a matter due to the member's personal or financial interests therein,
regular members of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be called upon
to serve, for that matter only, as temporary members of the Planning
Board in order of seniority of continuous service to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment until there are the minimum number of members necessary to
constitute a quorum to act upon the matter without any personal or financial
interest therein, whether direct or indirect. If a choice has to be made
between regular members of equal seniority, the chair of the Zoning Board
of Adjustment shall make the choice.
§ T10B-8. Powers and duties. [Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-8]
The Board shall adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary
to carry into effect the provisions and purposes of this chapter. In the
issuance of subpoenas, administration of oaths and taking of testimony, the
provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law of 1953 (N.J.S.A.
2A:67A et seq.) shall apply. The Board shall also have the following powers
and duties:
terms of four years except as otherwise herein provided. All terms shall
run from January 1 of the year in which the appointment was made.
(c) The term of any alternate member shall be two years. The terms of
alternate members shall be staggered.
(d) Removal from office. Any member including an alternate member of the
Planning Board other than the Class I member may be removed by the
Princeton Council for cause after a public hearing, if the member
requests one.
(e) Vacancies. If a vacancy in any class of the Planning Board occurs other
than by expiration of the term, it shall be filled by appointment, as
provided herein, for the unexpired term.
(a) Master Plan. To prepare and adopt and from time to time amend a
master plan for the physical development of the municipality in
§ T10B-5 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-8
BAO:921
accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. The Board
may make such additional surveys and studies as may be necessary or
desirable to carry out its duties.
(b) Administration of chapter. To administer the provisions of this chapter,
including review of subdivisions, site plans, conditional uses and
waivers and of variances, directed issuance of permits, and
preservation plans coming within its jurisdiction.
(c) Development regulations. To consider and make reports to the
Princeton Council within 35 days after referral as to any proposed
development regulation or amendment thereto submitted to it pursuant
to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55d-26(a) and also pass upon other
matters specifically referred to the Planning Board by the Princeton
Council pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26(b) and any
other matters as the Board deems appropriate.
(d) Capital improvement program. If authorized by Princeton Council,
prepare a program of municipal capital improvement projects as set
forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-29.
(e) Long range facility plan. To review and issue findings pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-31b concerning any long-range facilities plan submitted
to the Board as required by the "Educational Facilities Construction and
Financing Act," P.L.2000, c. 72 (C.18A:7G-1 et al.)
(f) Public expenditure review. To review and make recommendations in
conjunction with the Master Plan of any action undertaken by Princeton
Council or any other public agency having jurisdiction over the subject
matter necessitating the expenditure of any public funds incidental to
the location, character or extent of such project within 45 days of
referral of such action for review. This referral requirement shall apply
to Princeton Council and to action by a housing, parking, highway,
special district, or other authority, redevelopment agency, board of
education or other similar public agency, State, county or municipal and
to any public entity taking any action to permit the location, erection,
use or maintenance of an outdoor advertising sign required to be
permitted pursuant to P.L. 1991, c. 413 (C.27:5-5 et seq).
(g) Outside agency reviews. To participate in the preparation and review of
programs or plans required by state or federal law or regulations.
(h) Continued planning. To assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a
continuous planning process.
(i) Advisory duties. To perform such other advisory duties as are assigned
to it by ordinance or resolution of the Princeton Council for the aid and
assistance of the Princeton Council or other agencies or officers.
(j) Other referrals. The Princeton Council may by ordinance provide for
the reference of any matter or class of matters to the Planning Board
before final action thereon by a municipal body or municipal officer
§ T10B-8 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-8
BAO:922
§ T10B-9. Powers as to applications for development; powers in lieu
of Zoning Board of Adjustment; informal applications. [Ord. No.
2015-20 § 10B-9]
§ T10B-10. Site Plan Review Advisory Board. [Ord. No. 2015-20
§ 10B-10]
having final authority thereon, except for any matter under the
jurisdiction of the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
(k) Adoption of bylaws. The Planning Board is authorized to adopt bylaws
and other rules governing its procedural operation.
(a) The Planning Board shall receive, review and act upon applications for
approval of subdivision plats, site plans and conditional uses, except
where such authority is conferred upon the Zoning Board of Adjustment
in conjunction with the Zoning Board of Adjustment's review of
applications for approval of variances pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d.
(b) The Planning Board, in lieu of the Zoning Board of Adjustment and to
the same extent and subject to the same restrictions as such Board,
shall receive, review, and act upon applications or appeals for variances
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c and applications for special permits,
but only in conjunction with the Planning Board's review of applications
for approval of subdivision plats, site plans or conditional uses.
(c) At the request of the developer, the Planning Board shall grant an
informal review of a concept plan for a development for which the
developer intends to prepare and submit an application for
development.
(a) An advisory committee to be known as the Site Plan Review Advisory
Board (SPRAB) is hereby created for purpose of reviewing site plans
and making recommendations to the Planning Board and the Zoning
Board of Adjustment. It shall consist of eight regular members and two
alternate members. Six of the regular members and the two alternate
members shall be appointed by the Mayor. Two of the regular members
shall be appointed by the Environmental Commission from among its
members, each to serve for a term of one year. The term of office of the
other regular members of the Site Plan Review Advisory Board shall be
four years, and the term of office of the alternate members shall be two
years. The terms of office shall be computed from the first day of
January of the year of each appointment. Of the first regular members
appointed by the Mayor, one shall be for a term of one year, two for a
term of two years, one for a term of three years, and two for a term of
four years. Of the first appointments of alternate members, one shall be
for a term of one year and one for a term of two years. At the time of
their appointments, alternate members shall be designated as
"Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2." Vacancies in regular or
alternate membership shall be filled in the same manner as
appointments are made, and those occurring other than by expiration of
§ T10B-8 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-10
BAO:923
a term shall be filled for the unexpired term only. Members shall
serve after the expiration of their terms until their successors shall
be appointed and qualified. Insofar as practicable, appointees shall be
architects, landscape architects, planners, engineers or other persons
qualified in site planning or sustainable design or environmental design
or protection. Alternate members may participate in discussions of the
proceedings, but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification
of a regular member. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular
member may vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a
choice must be made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate
No. 1 shall vote.
(b) The Site Plan Review Advisory Board shall advise and assist the board
of jurisdiction in reviewing site plan applications in the manner
prescribed in this chapter. It shall have no power to take any official
action required of the board of jurisdiction. Nothing herein shall be
construed as precluding the advisory board from inspecting site
developments and making reports and recommendations as to their
progress and as to their compliance with the requirements of this
chapter.
(c) The Site Plan Review Advisory Board shall consult with the Health
Commission, the Traffic Safety Committee, Shade Tree Commission,
Engineering Department, Department of Emergency and Safety
Services, Planning Board, and Zoning Board of Adjustment, as deemed
necessary or desirable.
§ T10B-10 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-10
BAO:924
ARTICLE III
Zoning Board Of Adjustment
§ T10B-11. Zoning Board of Adjustment established; composition;
terms; vacancies; disqualification of members; alternate members;
officers. [Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-11; Ord. No. 2015-33]
(a) The Zoning Board of Adjustment heretofore created is continued and is
hereby established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
(b) The Board shall consist of seven regular members and four alternate
members.
(c) Regular members shall be appointed by the Princeton Council for terms
of four years each, computed from January 1 of the year of their
appointment, except that full terms of regular members filled for the
first time under this article shall be so fixed (for four or less years) and
arranged so that, to the greatest practicable extent, the expiration of all
terms of regular members will be distributed evenly over the first four
years after the initial appointment under this chapter.
(d) Alternate members shall also be appointed by the Princeton Council,
and their terms shall be two years each, computed from January 1 of the
year of their appointment, except that of the appointments to alternate
membership first made under this chapter, one shall be for a term of
one year. They shall be designated by the Princeton Council at the time
of their appointment as "Alternate No. 1," "Alternate No. 2," "Alternate
No. 3" and "Alternate No. 4."
(e) A vacancy occurring in either type of membership otherwise than by
expiration of a term shall be filled for the unexpired term only.
(f) No regular or alternate members may hold any elective office or other
municipal office in the Municipality, nor shall any members be
permitted to act on any matter in which they have, directly or indirectly,
any personal or financial interest.
(g) Alternate members may participate in discussions of the proceedings,
but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular
member. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular member
may vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a choice
must be made as to which alternate member is to vote, alternate
members shall vote in the order of their numerical designations.
(h) Officers. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall elect a chair and a vicechair
from among its members and shall also select a secretary, who
may but need not be a member of the Board.
(i) Except for members exempted by statute from this requirement,
persons who serve as members or alternate members of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment shall be required to complete an approved basic
course in land use law and planning within 18 months of their
§ T10B-11 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-11
BAO:925
§ T10B-12. Members of Planning Board serving as temporary
members of the Zoning Board of Adjustment. [Ord. No. 2015-20
§ 10B-12]
If the Zoning Board of Adjustment lacks a quorum because any of its
regular or alternate members is prohibited by section 56 of P.L. 1975, c.291
(C.40:55D-69) from acting on a matter due to the member's personal or
financial interest therein, Class IV members of the Planning Board shall
be called upon to serve, for that matter only, as temporary members of
the Zoning Board of Adjustment. The Class IV members of the Planning
Board shall be called upon to serve in order of seniority of continuous
service on the Planning Board until there are the minimum number of
members necessary to constitute a quorum to act upon the matter without
any personal or financial interest therein, whether direct or indirect. If a
choice has to be made between Class IV members of equal seniority, the
Chair of the Planning Board shall make the choice.
§ T10B-13. Powers as to appeals, interpretations and variances.
[Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-13]
The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have the power to:
appointment in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-23.3(b) and (c).
(a) Appeals. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant
that there is error in any order, requirement, decision or refusal made
by any municipal official based on or made in enforcement of the zoning
ordinance;
(b) Interpretations. Hear and decide requests for interpretation of the
zoning map or ordinance;
(c) Hardship and flexible "c" variances.
(1) Where (a) by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or
shape of a specific piece of property, (b) or by reason of exceptional
topographic conditions or physical features uniquely affecting a
specific piece of property, or (c) by reason of an extraordinary and
exceptional situation uniquely affecting a specific piece of property
or the structures lawfully existing thereon, the strict application of
any zoning regulation would result in peculiar and exceptional
practical difficulties to, or exceptional and undue hardship upon,
the developer of such property, grant, upon an application or an
appeal relating to such property, a variance from such strict
application of such regulation so as to relieve such difficulties or
hardship;
(2) Where in an application relating to a specific piece of property the
purposes of the Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.)
or of the Educational Facilities Construction and Financing Act
§ T10B-11 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-13
BAO:926
§ T10B-14. Powers in lieu of the Planning Board as to subdivisions,
site plans and conditional uses. [Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-14]
(N.J.S.A. 18A:7G-1 et al.) would be advanced by deviation from the
zoning ordinance requirements and the benefits of the deviation
would substantially outweigh any detriment, grant a variance to
allow departure from zoning regulations; provided, however, that
the fact that a proposed use is an inherently beneficial use shall
not be dispositive of a decision on a variance under this subsection
and provided that no variance from those departures enumerated
in Section 10B-13(d) shall be granted under this subsection; and
provided, further, that the proposed development does not require
approval by the Planning Board of a subdivision, site plan or
conditional use in conjunction with which the Planning Board has
power to review a request for a variance pursuant to Section
10B-13(c).
(d) Grant a variance to allow departure from zoning regulations in
particular cases and for special reasons to permit (1) a use or principal
structure in a district restricted against such use or principal structure,
(2) an expansion of a nonconforming use, (3) deviation from a
specification or standard pertaining solely to a conditional use, (4) an
increase in the permitted floor area ratio, or (5) an increase in the
permitted density as applied to the required lot area for a lot or lots for
detached one or two dwelling unit buildings which lot or lots are either
an isolated undersized lot or lots resulting from a minor subdivision, or
(6) a height of a principal structure which exceeds by 10 feet or 10% the
maximum height permitted in the district for a principal structure. A
variance under this subsection shall be granted only by the affirmative
vote of at least five members.
(e) No variance or other relief may be granted under the terms of this
section, including a variance or other relief involving an inherently
beneficial use, without a showing that such variance or other relief can
be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and will not
substantially impair the intent and purpose of the zone plan and zoning
ordinance.
(a) The Zoning Board of Adjustment, in lieu of the Planning Board and to
the same extent and subject to the same restrictions as such board,
shall receive, review and act upon applications for approval of
subdivision plats, site plans and conditional uses, but only in
conjunction with the Zoning Board of Adjustment's review of
applications for approval of variances pursuant to Section 10B-13(d).
(b) The developer may elect to submit a separate application requesting
approval of the variance and a subsequent application for any required
approval of a subdivision, site plan, or conditional use. The separate
approval of the variance shall be conditioned upon the grant of all
required subsequent approvals by the Zoning Board of Adjustment. No
such subsequent approval shall be granted unless such approval can be
§ T10B-13 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-14
BAO:927
§ T10B-15. Powers as to special permits. [Ord. No. 2015-20
§ 10B-15]
The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall receive, review and act upon appeals
or applications for the issuance of special permits, except where such
authority is conferred upon the Planning Board in conjunction with the
Planning Board's review of applications for approval of subdivision plats,
site plans or conditional uses.
§ T10B-16. Annual report. [Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-16]
The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall, at least once a year, review its
decisions on applications and appeals for variances and prepare and adopt
by resolution a report on its findings on zoning ordinance provisions which
were the subject of variance requests and its recommendations for zoning
ordinance amendment or revision, if any. The Zoning Board of Adjustment
shall send copies of the report and resolution to the Princeton Council and
Planning Board.
§ T10B-17. Appeals to Zoning Board of Adjustment from
administrative decisions; direct application in lieu of appeal. [Ord.
No. 2015-20 § 10B-17]
§ T10B-18. Stay of proceedings by appeal; exception. [Ord. No.
2015-20 § 10B-18]
An appeal to the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall stay all proceedings in
furtherance of the action with respect to which the decision appealed from
was made unless the officer from whose action the appeal is taken certifies
to the Zoning Board of Adjustment, after the notice of appeal has been
granted without substantial detriment to the public good and without
substantial impairment of the intent and purpose of the zone plan and
zoning ordinance. The number of votes of Board members required to
grant any such subsequent approval shall be as otherwise provided
in this chapter for the approval in question, and the special vote for
variances pursuant to Section 10B-13(d) shall not be required.
(a) Appeals to the Zoning Board of Adjustment may be taken by any
interested party affected by any decision of any official of the
municipality based on or made in the enforcement of the zoning
ordinance. Such appeal shall be taken within 20 days by filing a notice
of appeal with the administrative officer and with the official from
whom the appeal is taken, specifying the grounds of such appeal. The
official from whom the appeal is taken shall immediately transmit to the
Board through the administrative officer all the papers constituting the
record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
(b) A developer may file an application for development with the Zoning
Board of Adjustment for action under any of its powers without prior
application to any municipal official.
§ T10B-14 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-18
BAO:928
filed, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in the
opinion of the officer, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case,
proceedings shall not be stayed other than by an order of the Superior Court
upon notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken.
§ T10B-19. Decision on appeal. [Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-19]
The Zoning Board of Adjustment may reverse or affirm, wholly or in part,
or may modify the action, order, requirement, decision, interpretation, or
determination appealed from and to that end have all the powers of the
official from whom the appeal is taken.
§ T10B-18 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-19
BAO:929

ARTICLE IIIA
[Reserved (BRye Oserrdv.e Ndo). 2014-44]
§ T10B-19.1. (Reserved)
§ T10B-19.1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-19.1
BAO:931

ARTICLE IV
Administration And Procedure In General
DIVISION 1
General Provisions
§ T10B-20. Rules and regulations of municipal agencies. [Ord. No.
2015-20 § 10B-20]
Every municipal agency shall adopt and may amend reasonable rules and
regulations, not inconsistent with the Municipal Land Use Law or this
chapter, for the administration of its functions, powers and duties, including
hearings, and shall furnish a copy thereof to any person upon request and
may charge a reasonable fee for such copy. Copies of all such rules and
regulations and amendments thereto shall be maintained in the office of the
administrative officer.
§ T10B-21. Published and mailed notices. [Ord. No. 2015-20
§ 10B-21]
§ T10B-22. Experts and staff. [Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-22]
The Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment may employ or
contract for and fix the compensation of legal counsel, other than the
Municipal Attorney, and experts and other servicing personnel as it may
deem necessary not exceeding, exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount
appropriated by the Princeton Council for its use.
§ T10B-23. Appropriations. [Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-23]
The Princeton Council shall make provision in its budget for an appropriate
fund for the expenses of the Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
§ T10B-24. Conflicts of interest. [Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-24]
Members of the Planning Board, Zoning Board of Adjustment or other
municipal agency shall not act on any matter in which they have either
directly or indirectly any personal or financial interest. Whenever any such
members disqualify themselves from acting on a particular matter, they
shall not continue to sit with the board on the hearing of such matter and
shall not participate in any discussion or decision relating thereto.
(a) Whenever any notice by publication is required or permitted under the
provisions of this chapter, it shall be published in the official newspaper
of the municipality, if there be one, or in a newspaper of general
circulation in the municipality.
(b) Whenever any notice is required or permitted to be given by certified
mail under the provisions of this chapter, such mailed notice shall be
deemed complete upon mailing.
§ T10B-20 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-24
BAO:933

DIVISION 2
Meetings of Municipal Agencies
§ T10B-25. Regular meetings. [Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-25]
Every municipal agency shall hold regular meetings at the times and places
fixed by its rules. Regular meetings shall be scheduled not less than once
a month and shall be held as scheduled unless canceled for lack of
applications for development to process.
§ T10B-26. Special meetings. [Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-26]
Special meetings may be provided for at the call of the Chair or at the
request of any two members, and such shall be held on notice to the
members and the public in accordance with applicable legal requirements.
§ T10B-27. Open to public. [Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-27]
All regular and special meetings shall be open to the public, and notice
thereof shall be given in accordance with the requirements of the Open
Public Meetings Act, P.L. 1975, c. 231. An executive session for the purpose
of discussing and studying any matters to come before either Board shall
not be deemed a regular or special meeting in accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-9.
§ T10B-28. Actions at meetings; quorum. [Ord. No. 2015-20
§ 10B-28]
No action except adjournment shall be taken at any meeting without a
quorum being present. All actions shall be taken by a majority vote of
the members present at the meeting, except as otherwise provided in this
chapter or required by law. Failure of a motion to receive the number of
votes required to approve an application for development shall be deemed
an action denying the application.
§ T10B-29. Voting by members notwithstanding absence from
meetings. [Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-29]
Members of a municipal agency who were absent for one or more of the
meetings at which a hearing was held shall be eligible to vote on the matter
upon which the hearing was conducted, notwithstanding their absence from
one or more of the meetings; provided, however, that such members have
available to them the transcript or recording of all of the hearings from
which they were absent and certify in writing to the agency that they have
read such transcript or listened to such recording.
§ T10B-30. Minutes. [Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-30]
Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept and shall include
the names of the persons appearing and addressing the municipal agency
and the persons appearing by attorney, the action taken by the agency,
§ T10B-25 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-30
BAO:935
the findings, if any, made by it and the reasons therefor. The minutes shall
thereafter be made available for public inspection during normal business
hours at the office of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as
the case may be, and shall be posted on the municipal website.
§ T10B-30 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-30
BAO:936
DIVISION 3
Applications and Appeals to Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Adjustment
§ T10B-31. Forms. [Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-31]
Whenever an application for development to the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment is permitted or required by this chapter, it shall be in
such form, submitted to the administrative officer in such number of copies,
and accompanied by such maps, documents and materials as are prescribed
by rule of the board and by this chapter.
§ T10B-32. Application fees; educational training fees; escrow
deposits and inspection fees. [Ord. No. 2014-44; Ord. No. 2015-20
§ 10B-32; Ord. No. 2015-37 § 2; Ord. No. 2016-26; Ord. No. 2017-53]
(a) Each such application for development shall be accompanied by
payment of an application fee, escrow deposit and inspection fee to the
municipality. In addition, pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:87-1.6(b), each
application for development, including administrative waivers, shall
pay an educational training fee in the amount of $30. Application fee/
educational training fee and escrow deposits shall be provided in
separate payment as follows:
Application Application Fee Escrow Account
Administrative waiver
(Section 10B-206(d))
$325 $500
Classification of minor site
plan
$400 $2,000
Conditional use $375 $1,000
Education Fee $30 None
Issuance of a permit
(other than provided for in
this section)
$100 None
Modifications of approved
site plan or subdivision
$400 $2,000
Preliminary major
subdivision approval
$500 plus
$25 per lot
$300 per lot for first
10 lots; $100 per lot
thereafter. Minimum
deposit of $3,000
Final major subdivision $250 $1,000 plus $100
per lot
§ T10B-31 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-32
BAO:937
Application Application Fee Escrow Account
Preliminary major site
plan approval involving a
related application for
preliminary major
subdivision approval and/
or preliminary cluster
approval (subject to an
additional fee as required
by Section 10B-216)
$500 $200 per acre or
part thereof and $25
per dwelling.
Minimum deposit of
$3,000
Preliminary site plan
approval not involving a
related application for
preliminary major
subdivision approval and/
or preliminary cluster
approval
$25 per 1,000
square feet or part
thereof of building
construction
$150 per 1,000
square feet or part
thereof of building
construction.
Minimum deposit of
$4,000
Final site plan approval $500 $2,500 plus $100
per 1,000 sf of
building (when not
involving a cluster
application)
Request for relief from
condition of approval
$300 $2,000
Request for zone change $1,500 $2,500
Review of Section
10B-227-17 project site
stormwater management
submission requirements
None $1,500 pursuant to
section 10B-216
Request for Master Plan
Amendment
$1,000 $2,500
Residential cluster
developments involving
units with zero lot lines
$250 plus $10 per
zero lot line unit
$50 per zero lot line
unit. Minimum
deposit of $2,500
Section 10B-53 list of
property owners
$0.25 per name, or
$10, whichever is
greater
None
Section 10B-13(c) zoning
variance relief
$200 per variance
except for 1 and 2
family dwellings
which shall be $150
for all variances
sought
$750
§ T10B-32 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-32
BAO:938
Application Application Fee Escrow Account
Section 10B-13(d) zoning
variance relief
$500 $1,500
Section 10B-53 public
utility registration
Initial registration $10 None
Annual registration $5 None
Section 10B-63
publication charge
$50 None
Site plan concept review $400 $100 per 1,000 sf or
part thereof of
building
construction.
Minimum deposit of
$2,500
Subdivision classification
or minor subdivision
$400 $2,000
Subdivision concept
review
$400 $100 per lot for first
10 lots; $75 per lot
thereafter. Minimum
deposit of $2,500
Waivers from design
standards
$100 $500
Zoning relief or variance
from official error, and
zoning board
interpretation on zoning
regulation
$50 $250
Zoning Permits:
Commercial
a. Signs $80 None
b. Use inquiries/
certifications
$100 None
c. Any other non
residential permits
$80 None
Residential
a. 1-2 family buildings $500 None
b. Additions/Pools $200 None
c. Accessory structures
up to 400 sf $60 None
§ T10B-32 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-32
BAO:939
Application Application Fee Escrow Account
400 sf and greater $200 None
d. AC units $60 None
e. Flats (apartments) $100 None
(b) Each application for preservation plan approval, whether or not part of
an application for development, shall be accompanied by payment of an
application fee, escrow deposit and, to the extent otherwise provided,
an inspection fee to the municipality.
Type of
Structure or
Application
Preservation
Plan
Application
Fee Escrow
Other
Applicable
Fees
Residential
Structure (no
variance)
$75 No Escrow Fees None
Residential
Structure -
variance, use,
conditional use,
etc.
$75 All applicable All applicable
fees
Commercial
Structure
$75 All applicable All applicable
fees
(c) The application fee as set forth hereinabove is a flat fee to cover direct
administrative expenses and other than professional services and is
nonrefundable. The escrow account as set forth hereinabove is
established to cover the cost of professional services, including but not
limited to engineering, professional planning, stenographic shorthand
reporting, legal, landscape consulting by landscape architects or other
professionals, if appropriate, and other expenses connected with the
review of submitted materials, the related hearing process and followup
thereto, including costs incurred during any review of a concept
plan. The applicant shall execute an escrow agreement to authorize
payment of said expenses.
Sums not utilized in the review process shall be returned to the
applicant within a reasonable period of time after the Finance Officer
certifies that all professional services to be paid by escrow funds have
been completed and billed. Unless the applicant otherwise requests,
unexpended escrow deposits for concept reviews shall be credited
against deposits due upon the filing of an application for development.
If additional fees or escrow funds are deemed necessary, the applicant
shall be notified of the required additional amount and shall add such
sum to the account as required by the Planning Board or Zoning Board
of Adjustment. Payment shall be due from the applicant within 15 days
§ T10B-32 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-32
BAO:940
of receipt of the notice. If at the time of the hearing, the applicant
is in default of any required escrow payments or fees, the board of
jurisdiction may deny the application. At the request of the applicant,
the municipal finance officer shall provide the applicant with a
statement of all escrow fees received, a list of amounts charged to the
escrow account, and the amount of the current balance in the account.
Whether or not specifically so stated, the current payment of all escrow
fees which become due shall be a condition of the approval of any
application.
Where applicable, no construction permit or certificate of occupancy
shall be issued until all escrow charges have been paid. All escrow
charges which are due and owing shall become a lien upon the
premises with respect to which said charges are required and shall
remain so until paid. Said overdue charges shall accrue the same
interest from time to time as taxes upon real estate in the municipality.
The municipality shall have the same remedies for the collection thereof
with interest, cost and penalties as it has by law for the collection of
taxes upon real estate. The applicant shall be responsible for all costs
of collection of unpaid fees, including reasonable attorneys' fees. All
escrow fees shall be administered by the municipality in accordance
with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.1.
Requests for waivers or modifications of application fees or escrow
deposits shall be made to the Princeton Council and may be granted
for good cause shown, such as, but not limited to, economic hardship,
governmental relations, or in the interests of justice.
(d) In addition to the fees provided for herein, each applicant for
development shall reimburse the municipality for all reasonable
inspection fees required for inspections to be conducted pursuant to
Section 10B-161(b). Prior to the issuance of any development permits,
the developer shall deposit with the municipal treasurer, for placement
in a special trust fund account, a sum equal to 5% of the amount of the
performance guarantee estimate of the cost of improvements to be built
in the development to be applied to payment of inspection costs. If the
inspection costs exceed such fund, the developer shall deposit with the
municipal treasurer additional sums upon notice from the
administrative officer. The inspection fee shall in no case be less than
$100. If the 5% of the amount of performance guarantee estimate of
costs of improvement in the opinion of the municipality exceeds the
anticipated reasonable inspection fees, the administrative officer shall
adjust the deposit provided for hereinabove to reflect the anticipated
inspection fees. The municipal treasurer shall return any balance of the
inspection deposit to the developer upon expiration of the maintenance
bond, together with the paid invoices for all expenses charged.
§ T10B-32 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-33
BAO:941
§ T10B-33. Availability of applications to Environmental
Commission. [Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-33]
If the Environmental Commission has prepared and submitted to the
Planning Board an index of the natural resources of the municipality or
region, the Planning Board shall make available to the Environmental
Commission an informational copy of every application for development
submitted to the Planning Board. Failure to do so shall not invalidate any
hearing or proceeding.
§ T10B-34. Applications for conditional uses to include related site
plans; simultaneous review of applications for conditional uses, site
plans and subdivisions. [Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-34]
§ T10B-35. Applications to Planning Board for subdivision, site plan
or conditional use approval to include request for related hardship
or flexible "c" variance or special permit. [Ord. No. 2015-20
§ 10B-35]
Each application to the Planning Board for approval of a subdivision plat,
site plan or conditional use shall include a request for any hardship or
flexible "c" variance within the Board's jurisdiction and any special permit
that is required in relation to such subdivision, site plan or conditional use.
§ T10B-36. Applications to Zoning Board of Adjustment for use
variance to include request for related subdivision site plan or
conditional use approval. [Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-36]
Each application to the Zoning Board of Adjustment for the granting of
a variance pursuant to Section 10B-13(d) shall include a request for any
subdivision, site plan and conditional use approval that is required in
relation to such use variance.
§ T10B-37. Completeness of applications. [Ord. No. 2015-20
§ 10B-37]
An application for development shall be complete for the purpose of
commencing the applicable time period for action by a municipal agency
when so certified by the administrative officer. In the event that the
administrative officer does not certify the application to be complete within
45 days of the date of its submission, the application shall be deemed
complete upon expiration of the forty-five-day period for the purposes of
(a) Each application for a conditional use shall include a request for any
required site plan approval that is related thereto.
(b) The Planning Board shall have the power to review and approve or deny
applications for conditional uses or site plans simultaneously with
applications for subdivision approval without the developer being
required to make further application to the Planning Board or the
Planning Board being required to hold further hearings.
§ T10B-33 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-37
BAO:942
commencing the applicable time period unless (1) the application lacks
information indicated on a checklist provided to the applicant pursuant to
Section 10B-38 and (2) administrative officer has notified the applicant, in
writing, of the deficiencies in the application within 45 days of submission
of the application. The applicant may request that one or more of the
submission requirements be waived, in which event the agency or its
authorized committee shall grant or deny the request within 45 days.
Nothing herein shall be construed as diminishing the applicant's obligation
to prove in the application process that the applicant is entitled to approval
of the application. The municipal agency may subsequently require
correction of any information found to be in error and submission of
additional documents as are reasonably necessary to make an informed
decision as to whether the requirements necessary for approval of the
application for development have been met. The application shall not be
deemed incomplete for lack of any such additional information or any
revision in the accompanying documents so required by the municipal
agency.
§ T10B-38. Checklists. [Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-38]
The checklists referred to in Section 10B-37 shall list the following
applicable plans:
(a) For subdivision sketch plat (including minor subdivision), the
information required by Section 10B-157.
(b) For preliminary plat of major subdivision, the information required by
Section 10B-158.
(c) For final plat of major subdivision, the information required by Section
10B-159.
(d) For site plan classification (including minor site plan), the information
required by Section 10B-207.1 in sketch plat form.
(e) For preliminary and final site plan, the information required by Sections
10B-230.
(f) For final site plan, the information required by Sections 17A-196 and
17A-197.
(g) For an application for development that requests a variance pursuant to
Section 10B-13(c) or (d) or a special permit and that is not accompanied
by a site plan, the following information in sketch plat form:
(1) The size, shape and location of buildings and their relationship to
surrounding properties and buildings thereon and on both sides of
adjacent streets;
(2) The location, layout and dimensions of parking and loading areas,
with an indication of areas to be paved;
(3) All parking spaces, driveways and access points to public streets;
§ T10B-37 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-38
BAO:943
§ T10B-39. Incomplete applications for preliminary site plan or
minor subdivision approval; applications deemed complete. [Ord.
No. 2015-20 § 10B-39]
If any application for development including an application for classification
of the site plan or subdivision is found to be incomplete by the
administrative officer or if it is not accompanied by the required fee, the
applicant shall be so notified in writing of such fact and of the deficiencies
by the administrative officer within 45 days after the submission of the
application, and the application shall be deemed not properly submitted
until the deficiencies are corrected. If notice is not given within such period,
the application shall be deemed to have been properly submitted.
(4) All required setback lines;
(5) Rights-of-way and easements;
(6) Location and height of fences, retaining walls and railings;
(7) Key map showing entire project in its relationship to surrounding
areas, roads and watercourses;
(8) Zone districts of subject property and adjacent properties;
(9) Legend comparing proposed site conditions with zoning
requirements applicable to the property; and
(10) Floor plans showing existing conditions and proposed alterations.
In addition, the checklist shall also indicate that the information
to be included in the required application form, the required
application fee and the submission of a fire protection plan in
accordance with the requirements of Division 14 of this article are
necessary for a complete application. It shall also provide for proof
that property taxes are current.
The administrative officer shall prepare such checklists and shall
furnish the same to applicants together with the appropriate
application form.
§ T10B-38 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-39
BAO:944
DIVISION 4
Hearings on Master Plan and Applications for Development
§ T10B-40. Hearing required. [Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-40]
The municipal agency shall hold a hearing on each proposed adoption,
amendment or revision of the master plan and on each matter for which
notice is required pursuant to Section 10B-46(c). A hearing or proceeding
held, or decision or recommendation made, by the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment shall not be invalidated if a member has participated in
the hearing or proceeding or in the decision making or recommendation and
that member is subsequently found not to have completed the basic course
in land use law and planning required by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23.3.
§ T10B-41. Documents to be filed and available for public
inspection; other documents. [Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-41]
Any maps and documents proposed or for which approval is sought shall be
on file and available for public inspection at least 10 days before the date of
the hearing during normal business hours in the office of the administrative
officer. Other documents, records or testimony may be produced at the
hearing to substantiate, clarify or supplement the previously filed maps and
documents.
§ T10B-42. Oaths and subpoenas. [Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-42]
The officer presiding at the hearing, or such person as the officer may
designate, shall have the power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas
to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant
evidence. The provisions of the County and Municipal Investigation Law,
P.L. 1953, c. 38 (C.2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall apply.
§ T10B-43. Testimony of witnesses as to applications for
development. [Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-43]
The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application for development
shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the presiding officer or board
attorney, and the right of cross-examination shall be permitted to all
interested parties through their attorneys, if represented, or directly if
not represented, subject to the discretion of the presiding officer and to
reasonable limitations as to time and number of witnesses.
§ T10B-44. Rules of evidence. [Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-44]
Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable, but the agency may
exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence.
§ T10B-45. Recordings of proceedings; transcripts; cost. [Ord. No.
2015-20 § 10B-45]
§ T10B-40 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-45
BAO:945
(a) The municipal agency shall provide for the verbatim recording of the
proceedings by either stenographic, mechanical or electronic means
and shall furnish a transcript, or duplicate recording in lieu thereof, on
request to any interested party at his expense.
(b) If the agency elects to furnish a transcript, the person requesting the
same shall deposit with the municipality at the time of the request the
estimated cost of the transcript (calculated at the maximum permitted
in N.J.S.A. 2A:11-15) for the purpose of defraying the cost of the
transcript to the municipality. If the actual cost is less than the amount
of the deposit, the difference shall be refunded to the depositor, but if
the actual cost exceeds the amount of the deposit, the excess shall be
paid by the depositor to the municipality upon demand.
(c) If the agency elects to furnish a duplicate recording of the proceedings
in lieu of a transcript, the person requesting the same shall pay $10 for
each tape of the recording to the municipality at the time of the request.
(d) Any transcript that is furnished by the municipal agency and any
transcript of a duplicate recording that is obtained by an interested
party for use by the municipal governing body on an appeal shall be
certified in writing by the transcriber to be accurate.
§ T10B-45 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-45
BAO:946
DIVISION 5
Notice of Hearings on Master Plan and Applications for
Development
§ T10B-46. Notice required; length of notice; exceptions. [Ord. No.
2015-20 § 10B-46]
§ T10B-47. Contents. [Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-47]
The notice shall state the date, time and place of the hearing, the nature of
the matter or matters to be considered and the location and times at which
any maps and documents proposed or for which approval is sought are
available in the office of the administrative officer. In addition, in the case of
an application for development, the notice shall contain an identification of
the property proposed for development by both street address, if any, and
by reference to lot and block numbers as shown on the current tax duplicate
in the municipal assessor's office. Notice of any application for development
(a) Notice of hearings shall be given by the Planning Board as to the
proposed adoption, amendment or revision of the master plan.
(b) Notices of hearings shall be given by the applicant for:
(1) All applications for development, including all categories of site
plan review, but not including final approvals of major subdivisions
unless as part of the application relief is sought from the Planning
Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment for a variance pursuant to
Section 10B-13(c) (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c) or for a special permit
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 to 36;
(2) Extensions of approvals for five or more years pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-49d and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-52b;
(3) Modification or elimination of a condition or conditions in a
memorializing resolution in any situation where the application
being memorialized required public notice;
(4) Appeals or determinations by the Zoning Officer pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70a as to a specific property or properties; and
(5) For request for interpretation pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70b as to
a specific property or properties;
(c) Public notice shall be given by a public entity seeking to erect an
outdoor advertising sign on land owed or controlled by a public entity
as required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-31 or by a private entity
seeking to erect an outdoor advertising sign on public land or land
owned by a public entity.
(d) Notices shall be given at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing,
except as otherwise provided in this chapter as to applications for
approval of minor subdivisions.
§ T10B-46 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-47
BAO:947
shall also include reference to all requests made in conjunction therewith,
whether for approval of a site plan, subdivision, conditional use, variance,
or special permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 or -36.
§ T10B-48. Notice by publication required. [Ord. No. 2015-20
§ 10B-48]
Notice shall be given in all cases by publication in the official newspaper of
the municipality, if there is one, or in a newspaper of general circulation in
the municipality.
§ T10B-49. Notice by personal service or certified mail to adjoining
municipalities. [Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-49]
Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the clerk of any
adjoining municipality in cases involving property located within 200 feet of
such municipality.
§ T10B-50. Notice by personal service or certified mail to county
planning board. [Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-50]
Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the county
planning board in cases of proposed adoption, amendment or revision of
the master plan and in cases of applications for development of property
adjacent to an existing county road or a proposed road shown on the official
county map or county master plan or property adjoining other county land
or property situated within 200 feet of a municipal boundary. Such notice
shall also include any master plan proposed for adoption or any proposed
amendment or revision thereof.
§ T10B-51. Notice by personal service or certified mail to
commissioner of transportation. [Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-51]
Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Commissioner of the New Jersey Department of Transportation in cases of
applications for development of property adjacent to a state highway.
§ T10B-52. Notice by personal service or certified mail to the state
planning commission. [Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-52]
Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the state
planning commission in cases of applications for development of property
exceeding 150 acres or 500 dwelling units, and such notice shall include
a copy of any maps or documents required to be on file with the
administrative officer.
§ T10B-47 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-53
BAO:948
§ T10B-53. Notice by personal service or certified mail to property
owners; condominiums, etc.; list of property owners to be furnished.
[Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-53]
In all cases in which notice is required, notice shall be given to the owners
of all real property, as shown on the current tax duplicate, located in the
state and within 200 feet in all directions of the property that is the subject
of the hearing and to public utilities registering with the administrative
officer by serving a copy thereof on such owners or their agents in charge
of the property or mailing a copy thereof by certified mail to such owners
at their address as shown on such tax duplicate. This requirement shall be
deemed satisfied by notice to the condominium association in the case of
any unit owner whose unit has a unit above or below it or by notice to the
horizontal property regime in the case of any co-owner whose apartment
has an apartment above or below it. Notice may be given to a partnership
owner to any partner; a corporate owner to its president, a vice-president,
secretary or other person authorized by appointment or by law to accept
service on behalf of the corporation and to a registered public utility to
the person whose name appears on the registration form. Notice to a
condominium association, horizontal property regime, community trust or
homeowners association required because of its ownership of common
elements or areas located within 200 feet of the property that is the subject
of the hearing, may be made in the same manner as to a corporation without
further notice to unit owners or homeowners on account of such common
elements or areas. The administrative officer shall, within seven days after
written request by the applicant, make and certify a list from the current
tax duplicate of the names and addresses of the property owners and public
utilities entitled to notice as aforesaid, and a sum as provided for in Section
10B-32(a) shall be charged for such list. The applicant shall be entitled to
rely upon the information contained in such list, and failure to give notice
to any owner not on the list shall not invalidate any hearing or proceeding.
§ T10B-54. Proof of service. [Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-54]
An affidavit of proof of the giving of notice as required by this division for
any application for development shall be filed by the applicant with the
municipal agency at or prior to the hearing.
§ T10B-55. Notice of adjoining municipality, county planning board,
commissioner of transportation and State Planning Commission not
required in certain cases. [Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-55]
Notice pursuant to Sections 10B-48 to 10B-51 shall not be required unless
notice by publication pursuant to Section 10B-45 and notice pursuant to
Section 10B-52 are required.
§ T10B-53 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-55
BAO:949

DIVISION 6
Notice of Adoption of Master Plan
§ T10B-56. Notice to county planning board of adoption required.
[Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-56]
Notice of each adoption, amendment or revision of the master plan shall
be given to the county planning board by personal service or certified mail
not more than 30 days after the date of such adoption, amendment or
revision, and such notice shall include a copy of such adopted master plan,
amendment or revision.
§ T10B-56 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-56
BAO:951

DIVISION 7
Decisions on Applications for Development
§ T10B-57. Decisions to be reduced to writing and include findings
and conclusions; resolution of memorialization; time limitations.
[Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-57]
The municipal agency shall include findings of fact and conclusions based
thereon in each decision on any application for development and shall
reduce the decision to writing. The municipal agency shall provide the
findings and conclusions through:
§ T10B-58. County planning board approval. [Ord. No. 2015-20
§ 10B-58]
Whenever review or approval of any application by the county planning
board is required by N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3 or -6.6, the municipal agency shall
condition any approval that it grants upon timely receipt of a favorable
report on the application by the county planning board or upon county
planning board approval by default for failure to report thereon within the
required time period.
(a) A resolution adopted at a meeting held within the time period provided
in this chapter and the Municipal Land Use Law for action by the
municipal agency on the application for development; or
(b) A memorializing resolution adopted at a meeting held not later than 45
days after the date of the meeting at which the municipal agency voted
to grant or deny approval. Only the members of the municipal agency
who voted for the action taken may vote on the memorializing
resolution, and the vote of a majority of such members present at the
meeting at which the resolution is presented for adoption shall be
sufficient to adopt the resolution. An action resulting from the failure of
a motion to approve an application pursuant to Section 10B-28 shall be
memorialized by resolution as provided above, with those members
voting against the motion for approval being the members eligible to
vote on the memorializing resolution. The vote on any such resolution
shall be deemed to be a memorialization of the action of the municipal
agency and not to be an action of the municipal agency; however, the
date of the adoption of the resolution shall constitute the date of the
decision for the purposes of the mailings, filings and publications
required by Sections 10B-61 to 10B-62.
If the municipal agency fails to adopt a resolution or memorializing
resolution as hereinabove specified, any interested person may appeal
to the Superior Court in a summary manner for an order compelling
the municipal agency to reduce its findings and conclusions to writing
within a stated time, and the cost of the application, including
attorney's fees, shall be assessed against the municipality.
§ T10B-57 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-59
BAO:953
§ T10B-59. Developments barred by administrative or judicial order.
[Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-59]
In the event that a developer submits an application for development
proposing a development that is barred or prevented, directly or indirectly,
by a legal action instituted by any state agency, political subdivision or
other party to protect the public health and welfare or by a directive or
order issued by any state agency, political subdivision or court of competent
jurisdiction to protect the public health and welfare, the municipal agency
shall process such application for development in accordance with this
chapter, and if such application complies with the requirements of this
chapter, the municipal agency shall approve such application conditioned
on removal of such legal barrier to development.
§ T10B-60. Approval by other governmental agencies. [Ord. No.
2015-20 § 10B-60]
In the event that a development proposed by an application for development
requires an approval by a governmental agency other than the municipal
agency, the municipal agency shall, in appropriate instances, condition its
approval upon the subsequent approval of such governmental agency.
§ T10B-61. Decisions to be furnished to applicant and others. [Ord.
No. 2015-20 § 10B-61]
A copy of each decision shall be mailed by the municipal agency within 10
days after the date of decision to the applicant or, if represented, then to
his attorney without separate charge and to all others upon request for a
reasonable fee.
§ T10B-62. Filing in office of administrative officer. [Ord. No.
2015-20 § 10B-62]
A copy of each decision shall also be filed by the municipal agency in the
office of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, who shall make
a copy of the filed decision available to any interested party for a reasonable
fee and available for public inspection at the office of the Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Adjustment during reasonable hours.
§ T10B-63. Publication. [Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-63]
A brief notice of each decision shall be published by the administrative
officer in the official newspaper of the municipality. The municipality shall
charge pursuant to Section 10B-32 for such publication. The applicant also
may cause such publication to be made. The time for appeal from the
decision shall run from the date of the first publication, whether such is
made by the administrative officer or the applicant.
§ T10B-59 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-64
BAO:954
§ T10B-64. Time for decision on applications to Planning Board for
preliminary approval of site plans and major subdivisions. [Ord. No.
2015-20 § 10B-64]
Preliminary approval shall be granted or denied on applications to the
Planning Board for a site plan of 10 acres or less and 10 dwelling units or
less or for a major subdivision of 10 or fewer lots within 45 days and for a
site plan of more than 10 acres or more than 10 dwelling units or for a major
subdivision of more than 10 lots within 95 days after the date of submission
of a complete application to the administrative officer, except as otherwise
provided in Sections 10B-67 to 10B-71.
§ T10B-65. Time for decision on applications to Planning Board for
minor subdivision approval and final approval of site plans and
major subdivisions. [Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-65]
Final approval of site plans and major subdivisions and approval of minor
subdivisions shall be granted or denied on applications made to the
Planning Board within 45 days after the date of submission of a complete
application to the administrative officer, except as otherwise provided in
Sections 10B-67 to 10B-71.
§ T10B-66. Time for decision on application to Planning Board for
conditional use approval. [Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-66]
Approval of conditional uses shall be granted or denied on applications
made to the Planning Board within 95 days after the date of submission
of a complete application to the administrative officer, except as otherwise
provided in Sections 10B-67 to 10B-69.
§ T10B-67. Time for decision on applications or appeals as to
zoning regulations or for special permits pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-34 to -36. [Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-67]
The municipal agency shall decide appeals or applications for variances,
interpretations or decisions as to zoning regulations or for special permits
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 to 36, not later than 120 days after the date
an appeal is taken from the action of the municipal official or administrative
officer, or after a complete application is submitted to the administrative
officer, except as otherwise provided in Section 10B-68.
§ T10B-68. Time for decision when Planning Board reviews
conditional uses or site plans simultaneously with subdivisions.
[Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-68]
Whenever the Planning Board reviews conditional uses or site plans
simultaneously with subdivisions, the longest period of time for action in
any such case shall apply to all such cases.
§ T10B-69. Time for decision when Planning Board reviews
application for subdivision, site plan or conditional use approval
§ T10B-64 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-69
BAO:955
that includes request for variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c
or special permit. [Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-69]
Whenever an application to the Planning Board for approval of a subdivision
plat, site plan or conditional use includes a request for a variance or special
permit, the Planning Board shall grant or deny approval of the application
within 120 days after the date of submission of a complete application to
the administrative officer.
§ T10B-70. Time for decision when Planning Board reviews
application for conditional use that includes request for site plan
approval. [Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-70]
Whenever the Planning Board reviews an application for conditional use
that includes a request for site plan approval, the Planning Board shall
grant or deny approval of the application within 95 days after the date of
submission of a complete application to the administrative officer.
§ T10B-71. Time for decision when Zoning Board of Adjustment
reviews subdivision, site plan or conditional use in conjunction with
use variance. [Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-71]
Whenever an application is made to the Zoning Board of Adjustment for
subdivision or site plan approval in conjunction with the Board's review of a
variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d, the Zoning Board of Adjustment
shall grant or deny approval of the application within 120 days after the
date of submission of a complete application to the administrative officer.
In the event that the developer elects to submit separate consecutive
applications pursuant to Section 10B-13(b), the aforesaid 120-day limitation
shall apply to the application for approval of the variance pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d and the period for granting of the subsequent approval
shall be as otherwise provided in this chapter.
§ T10B-72. Extension of time for decision. [Ord. No. 2015-20
§ 10B-72]
Any time period specified for action by a municipal agency may be extended
with the consent of the applicant or appellant.
§ T10B-73. Failure to make decision within time. [Ord. No. 2015-20
§ 10B-73]
The failure of any municipal agency to act within such time period or
extension thereof shall constitute a decision favorable to the applicant or
appellant. A certificate of the administrative officer as to such failure shall
be issued on request of the applicant or appellant, and it shall be sufficient
in lieu of written endorsement or other evidence of approval required by
this chapter and shall be accepted as such by the county clerk for any
purposes with respect to filing subdivision plats.
§ T10B-69 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-73
BAO:956
DIVISION 8
Appeals to Governing Body on Applications for Development
§ T10B-74. Appeals permitted from decision of Zoning Board of
Adjustment on applications approving variances pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d. [Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-74]
Any interested party may appeal to the Princeton Council any final decision
of the Zoning Board of Adjustment approving an application pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d.
§ T10B-75. Time and manner of appeal; fees. [Ord. No. 2015-20
§ 10B-75]
Such appeal shall be made within 10 days of the date of publication of
such final decision pursuant to Section 10B-63. The appeal to the Princeton
Council shall be made by serving the municipal clerk in person or by
certified mail with a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof and
the name and address of the appellant and of the appellant's attorney, if
represented. Such appeal shall be decided by the Princeton Council only
upon the record established before the Zoning Board of Adjustment. The
appellant shall pay to the municipal clerk the sum of $100 as a fee for the
appeal.
§ T10B-76. Proceedings stayed by appeal; exceptions. [Ord. No.
2015-20 § 10B-76]
An appeal to the Princeton Council shall stay all proceedings in furtherance
of the action with respect to which the decision appealed from was made
unless the Zoning Board of Adjustment certifies to the Princeton Council,
after the notice of appeal has been filed with said Zoning Board of
Adjustment, that by reason of facts stated in the certification that a stay
would in said Board's opinion cause imminent peril to life or property, and
in such case proceedings shall not be stayed other than by order of the
Superior Court upon notice to said Zoning Board of Adjustment and on good
cause shown.
§ T10B-77. Time for arranging for a transcript; copies of transcript;
failure to comply. [Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-77]
The appellant shall:
(a) Within five days of service of the notice of appeal, arrange for a
transcript of the proceedings pursuant to Section 10B-45 for use by the
Princeton Council and pay a deposit of $50 or the estimated cost of such
transcript, whichever is less; or
(b) Within 35 days of service of the notice of appeal, submit a transcript as
otherwise arranged to the municipal clerk. If the Zoning Board of
Adjustment did not have a stenographic transcript made of the
proceeding, then the appellant shall arrange to obtain a duplicate copy
§ T10B-74 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-77
BAO:957
§ T10B-78. Notice of hearing. [Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-78]
Notice of the meeting to review the record below shall be given by the
Princeton Council by personal service or certified mail to the appellant, to
those entitled to notice of a decision pursuant to Section 10B-61 and to
the Zoning Board of Adjustment at least 10 days prior to the date of the
meeting.
§ T10B-79. Appeal to be decided on record; argument permitted;
recording of meeting. [Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-79]
The Princeton Council shall conclude a review of the record below not later
than 95 days from the date of publication of notice of the decision below
pursuant to Section 10B-63 unless the applicant consents in writing to an
extension of such period. Failure of the Princeton Council to hold a hearing
and conclude a review of the record below and to render a decision within
such specified period shall constitute a decision affirming the action of
the Zoning Board of Adjustment. The parties may submit oral and written
argument on the record at such meeting, and the Princeton Council shall
provide for a verbatim recording and transcript of such meeting in the
manner provided for in Section 10B-45.
§ T10B-80. Power to affirm, reverse, remand or modify; vote
required to reverse, remand or modify. [Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-80]
The Princeton Council may reverse, remand or affirm with or without
the imposition of conditions the final decision of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment approving a variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d. The
review shall be made on the record made before the Zoning Board of
Adjustment. The affirmative vote of a majority of the full authorized
membership of the Princeton Council shall be necessary to reverse or
remand to the Zoning Board of Adjustment or to impose conditions on or
alter conditions to any final action of said Board. Otherwise, the final action
of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be deemed to be affirmed. A tie
vote of the Princeton Council shall constitute affirmance of the decision of
the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
§ T10B-81. Furnishing copies of decision. [Ord. No. 2015-20
§ 10B-81]
Not later than 10 days after the date of decision, the Princeton Council
shall mail a copy of the decision to the appellant or, if represented, then
of the tape recording of the proceeding below and have a transcript
prepared from said duplicate tape and filed with the municipal clerk
pursuant to this subsection.
(c) Should the appellant fail to arrange for the transcript as provided for in
subsection (a) hereinabove or file same with the municipal clerk as
provided for in subsection (b) hereinabove, the Princeton Council may
dismiss the appeal for failure to prosecute.
§ T10B-77 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-81
BAO:958
to the appellant's attorney, without separate charge and with a reasonable
charge to any interested party who has requested it. A brief notice of the
decision shall be published in the official newspaper of the municipality.
Such publication shall be arranged by the municipal clerk, provided that
nothing contained herein shall be construed as preventing the appellants
from arranging such publication if they so desire. The Princeton Council
may make a reasonable charge for its publication. The period of time in
which an appeal to a court of competent jurisdiction may be made shall run
from the date of first publication, whether arranged by the municipality or
the appellant.
Nothing in this division shall be construed to restrict the right of any party
to obtain a review of any court of competent jurisdiction according to law.
§ T10B-81 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-81
BAO:959

DIVISION 9
Appeals and Petitions to Board of Public Utilities
§ T10B-82. Appeal to Board optional; time for such. [Ord. No.
2015-20 § 10B-82]
If a public utility, as defined in N.J.S.A. 40A:2-13, is aggrieved by the action
of a municipal agency through such agency's exercise of its powers under
this chapter with respect to any action in which the public utility has an
interest, an appeal to the Board of Public Utilities may be taken within
45 days after such action without appeal to the Princeton Council unless
such public utility so chooses. If the public utility chooses to appeal to the
Princeton Council, further appeal to the Board of Public Utilities may be
taken by the utility within 35 days after action by the Princeton Council.
§ T10B-83. Notice and hearing by Board. [Ord. No. 2015-20
§ 10B-83]
A hearing on the appeal of a public utility to the Board of Public Utilities
shall be had on notice to the agency from which the appeal is taken and to
all parties primarily concerned, all of whom shall be afforded an opportunity
to be heard.
§ T10B-84. Decision may supersede land use regulations. [Ord. No.
2015-20 § 10B-84]
If, after such hearing, the Board of Public Utilities finds that the present or
proposed use by the public utility of the land described in the petition is
necessary for the service, convenience or welfare of the public, the public
utility may proceed in accordance with such decision of the Board of Public
Utilities, notwithstanding any provision of this chapter or any regulation
made under the authority of this chapter.
§ T10B-85. Board may on direct petition supersede land use
regulations as to utility installations in more than one municipality.
[Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-85]
Neither this chapter nor any regulation made under authority thereof shall
apply to a development proposed by a public utility for installation in more
than one municipality for the furnishing of service, if, upon a petition of the
public utility, the Board of Public Utilities shall after the hearing, of which
any municipalities affected shall have notice, decides that the proposed
installation of the development in question is reasonably necessary for the
service, convenience or welfare of the public.
§ T10B-86. Right to judicial review preserved. [Ord. No. 2015-20
§ 10B-86]
Nothing in this division shall be construed to restrict the right of any
interested party to obtain a review of the action of the municipal agency
§ T10B-82 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-86
BAO:961
or of the Board of Public Utilities by any court of competent jurisdiction
according to law.
§ T10B-86 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-86
BAO:962
DIVISION 10
Tolling of Running of Period of Approval of Applications for
Development
§ T10B-87. Running of approval period tolled by certain disabilities.
[Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-87]
In the event that during the period of effectiveness provided for the
approval of any application for development the developer is barred or
prevented, directly or indirectly, from proceeding with the development
otherwise permitted under such approval by a legal action instituted by
any state agency, political subdivision or other party to protect the public
health and welfare or by a directive or order issued by any state agency,
political subdivision or court of competent jurisdiction to protect the public
health or welfare, and the developer is otherwise ready, willing and able to
proceed with such development, the running of the period of effectiveness
of approval under this chapter shall be suspended for the period of time
such legal action is pending or such directive or order is in effect.
§ T10B-87 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-87
BAO:963

DIVISION 11
Development Regulations
§ T10B-88. Referral of development regulations to Planning Board.
[Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-88]
Before adopting, amending or revising any development regulation, the
Princeton Council shall refer such to the Planning Board for report and
recommendation with respect to identification of any provisions in the
proposed development regulation, revision or amendment that are
inconsistent with the Master Plan and recommendations concerning those
inconsistencies and any other matters as the Planning Board deems
appropriate, and shall review the Planning Board's report and
recommendation when considering the adoption thereof. The Princeton
Council may disapprove or change any such recommendation only by a
majority vote of its full authorized membership, and in such event it shall
record in its minutes the reasons for not following the same. Failure of the
Planning Board to transmit such report within 35 days after the Princeton
Council has made such referral shall relieve the Princeton Council of the
other requirements of this section.
§ T10B-89. Hearing on development regulations. [Ord. No. 2015-20
§ 10B-89]
The Princeton Council shall hold a hearing before adopting, amending or
revising any development regulation.
§ T10B-90. Notice of hearing. [Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-90]
Notice of such hearing shall be given by the Princeton Council by personal
service or certified mail at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing to
the county planning board and, in cases involving property situated within
200 feet of an adjoining municipality, to the clerk of such municipality.
In addition, notice of hearing on amendment to the zoning ordinance
proposing a change to the classification or boundaries of a zoning district,
exclusive of classification or boundary changes recommended in a periodic
general re-examination of the Master Plan by the Planning Board pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-89, shall be given at least 10 days prior to the hearing
by the municipal clerk to the owners of all real property as shown in the
current tax duplicates located, in the case of classification change, within
the district and within the State within 200 feet in all directions of the
boundaries of the district and located, in the case of a boundary change, in
the State within 200 feet in all directions of the proposed new boundaries
of the district that is the subject of the hearing.
§ T10B-91. Contents of notice. [Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-91]
Such notice shall state the date, time and place of the hearing and the
nature of the matters to be considered and shall include a copy of the
proposed development regulation or amendment or revision thereof.
§ T10B-88 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-92
BAO:965
§ T10B-92. Contents of and manner of notice when a zoning district
classification or boundary is proposed to be changed. [Ord. No.
2015-20 § 10B-92]
§ T10B-93. Notice of adoption of capital improvement program.
[Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-93]
Notice of the adoption of any capital improvement program or amendment
or revision thereof shall be given by the Princeton Council to the county
planning board by personal service or certified mail within 30 days after the
date of such adoption, and such notice shall include a copy of such adopted,
capital improvement program, amendment or revision.
§ T10B-94. Development regulations not effective until filed with
county authorities. [Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-94]
No zoning, subdivision or site plan ordinance or any amendment or revision
thereof shall take effect until a copy thereof is filed with the county planning
board.
(a) In addition to the contents of the notice as required by Section 10B-90,
notice for a development regulation or amendment that proposes a
change to the classification or boundaries of a zoning district or
districts shall include an identification of the affected zoning districts
and proposed boundary changes, if any, by street names, common
names or other identifiable landmarks and by reference to lot and block
numbers as shown in the current tax duplicate of the municipal tax
assessor's office. Such notice shall be given by serving a copy thereof on
the property owner as shown on the current tax duplicate or agent in
charge of the property or mailing a copy thereof by certified mail and
regular mail to the property owner at the address as shown on the
current tax duplicate.
(b) Notice to a partnership owner may be made by service upon any
partner. Notice to a corporate owner may be made by service upon its
president, a vice-president, secretary or other person authorized by
appointment or by law to accept service on behalf of the corporation.
Notice to a condominium association, horizontal property regime,
community trust or homeowners' association, because of its ownership
of common elements or areas located within 200 feet of the boundary of
the district that is the subject of the hearing, may be made in the same
manner as to a corporation, in addition to notice to unit owners, coowners
or home owners on account of such common elements or areas.
(c) The municipal clerk shall execute affidavits of proof of service of the
notices required by this section and shall keep the affidavits on file
along with the proof of publication of the notice of the required public
hearing on the proposed zoning ordinance change. Cost of the notice
provision shall be the responsibility of the proponent of the amendment.
§ T10B-92 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-95
BAO:966
§ T10B-95. Filing of development regulations with municipal clerk.
[Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-95]
Copies of all development regulations and any amendments or revisions
thereof shall be filed and maintained in the office of the municipal clerk.
§ T10B-96. General laws as to passage of ordinances unaffected.
[Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-96]
The requirements of this division as to development regulations shall be in
addition to those imposed by law generally for the passage of ordinances.
§ T10B-95 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-96
BAO:967

DIVISION 12
Reexamination of Master Plan and Development Regulations
§ T10B-97. Reexamination and report to be made periodically by
Planning Board. [Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-97]
The Princeton Council shall, at least every 10 years, provide for a general
reexamination of the Master Plan and development regulations by the
Planning Board, which shall prepare and adopt by resolution a report on the
findings of such reexamination. The Board shall send a copy of the report
and resolution to the Princeton Council and the county planning board and
a notice that the required resolution have been prepared to the clerk of
each adjoining municipality. The ten-year period shall commence with the
submission of the preceding Planning Board report.
§ T10B-98. Contents of report. [Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-98]
The report of the Planning Board shall state:
(a) The major problems and objectives, if any, relating to land development
in the municipality and region at the time of the preceding report.
(b) The extent to which such problems and objectives have been reduced or
have increased subsequent to such date.
(c) The extent to which there have been significant changes in the
assumptions, policies and objectives forming the basis for the Master
Plan or development regulations as last revised, with particular regard
to the density and distribution of population and land uses, housing
conditions, circulation, conservation of natural resources, energy
conservation, and changes in state, county and municipal policies and
objectives.
(d) The specific changes, if any, recommended for such plan or regulations,
including underlying objectives, policies and standards, or the decision
as to whether a new plan or regulations should be prepared.
§ T10B-97 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-98
BAO:969

DIVISION 13
Enforcement
§ T10B-99. Municipal engineer as enforcement officer. [Ord. No.
2015-20 § 10B-99]
The municipal engineer shall have such powers and duties as are prescribed
in this division and elsewhere in this chapter and shall have the power to
adopt such forms, rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this chapter,
as deemed by the municipal engineer to be desirable or necessary to carry
out his or her duties.
§ T10B-100. Approval by municipal engineer required for
undertaking development. [Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-100]
Approval by the municipal engineer on such form as he or she shall prepare
shall be obtained prior to the undertaking of any development for which
permission is required under this chapter, and such undertaking shall be
in accordance with such approval and may continue only so long as the
approval is valid and subsisting.
§ T10B-101. Enforcement of development approvals. [Ord. No.
2015-20 § 10B-101]
The municipal engineer shall enforce the required implementation of
subdivisions, site plans and zoning variances approved under laws or
ordinances in effect prior to the adoption of this chapter and superseded
hereby, and for such purpose the municipal engineer shall have all of the
powers and duties prescribed in this division.
§ T10B-102. Selling land before subdivision approval; penalty;
actions. [Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-102]
(a) If, before final subdivision approval has been granted, any person
transfers or sells or agrees to transfer or sell as owner or agent, except
pursuant to an agreement expressly conditioned on final subdivision
approval, any land that forms a part of a subdivision for which approval
is required by this chapter, such person shall be subject to a penalty not
to exceed $1,000, and each lot disposition so made may be deemed a
separate violation.
(b) In addition to the foregoing, the municipality may institute and
maintain a civil action for injunctive relief and to set aside and
invalidate any conveyance made pursuant to such a contract of sale if a
certificate of compliance has not been issued in accordance with
Section 10B-103. Any such action must be brought within two years
after the date of the recording of the instrument of transfer, sale or
conveyance of such land or within six years if unrecorded. In any such
action the transferee, purchaser or grantee shall be entitled to a lien
upon the portion of the land from which the subdivision was made that
remains in the possession of the developer or its successors, to secure
§ T10B-99 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-102
BAO:971
§ T10B-103. Certificate as to approval of subdivision. [Ord. No.
2015-20 § 10B-103]
§ T10B-104. Rights of owner of land covered by certificate or on
failure to issue certificate. [Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-104]
the return of any deposits made or purchase price paid and also, a
reasonable search fee, survey expense and title closing expense, if any.
(a) The prospective purchaser, prospective mortgagee or any other person
interested in any land that forms part of a subdivision may apply in
writing to the municipal clerk for the issuance of a certificate certifying
whether such subdivision has been approved by the Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Adjustment. Such application shall contain a diagram
showing the location and dimensions of the land to be covered by the
certificate and the name of the owner thereof.
(b) The municipal clerk shall make and issue such certificate within 15 days
after the receipt of such written application and the fees therefor. Such
officer shall keep a duplicate copy of each certificate, consecutively
numbered, including a statement of the fee charged, in a binder as a
permanent record of his or her office.
(c) Each such certificate shall be designated a "certificate as to approval of
subdivision of land," and shall certify:
(1) Whether there exists in the municipality a duly established
Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment and whether there
is an ordinance controlling subdivision of land adopted under the
authority of the Municipal Land Use Law;
(2) Whether the subdivision, as it relates to the land shown in such
application, has been approved by the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment and, if so, state the date of such approval and
any extensions and terms thereof and that the subdivision of which
the lands are a part is a validly existing subdivision; and
(3) Whether such subdivision, if the same has not been approved, is
statutorily exempt from the requirement of approval as provided in
the Municipal Land Use Law.
(d) The municipal clerk shall be entitled to demand and receive for such
certificate issued by him or her a reasonable fee not in excess of those
provided in Section 54:5-14 and 54:5-15 of the Revised Statutes of New
Jersey. The fees so collected by such officer shall be paid by him or her
to the municipality.
(a) Any person who shall acquire for a valuable consideration an interest in
the lands covered by any such certificate of approval of a subdivision in
reliance upon the information therein contained shall hold such interest
free of any right, remedy or action which could be prosecuted or
§ T10B-102 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-104
BAO:972
§ T10B-105. Injunctive relief. [Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-105]
In case any development is undertaken, occupied or used in violation of
this chapter or any rule, regulation or order made under the authority of
this chapter, or in case such violation is threatened, the municipal engineer,
in his or her own official behalf or on behalf of the municipality or any
municipal agency or any interested party, in addition to other remedies, may
institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such violation,
or to restrain, correct or abate such violation or to prevent any illegal act,
conduct, business, occupancy or use in or about the premises that are the
subject of the development; provided, that no such action or proceeding
shall be instituted by the municipal engineer in any court other than the
municipal court, except in case of emergency, unless the Princeton Council
shall first have authorized such.
§ T10B-106. Right of entry. [Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-106]
The municipal engineer shall have the right to enter any premises at any
reasonable time for the purpose of making inspections in the course of
his or her duties or, as permitted by law, to investigate violations of this
chapter, provided that the owner has, by virtue of signing the application
form for development approval or in such other form as he or she provides
or on which a municipality requires signature, has consented to such entry.
The application form for development approval shall contain a provision
providing for such owner consent.
§ T10B-107. Penalties. [Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-107]
maintained by the municipality pursuant to the provisions of Section
10B-102.
(b) If the municipal clerk fails to issue any such certificate within 15 days
after receipt of an application and the fees therefor, any person
acquiring an interest in the lands described in such application shall
hold such interest free of any right, remedy or action which could be
prosecuted or maintained by the municipality pursuant to Section
10B-102.
(a) Except as otherwise provided in Section 10B-102, any person who
violates any provision of this chapter or any rule, regulation or order
made under the authority of this chapter, shall be subject to all
penalties set forth in this Code. In cases of continuing violations, each
day that such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
Any complaint to impose such penalty may be filed in municipal court
on behalf of the state by the municipal engineer, any municipal police
officer or any interested party.
(b) Any person who is convicted of violating this chapter or any other rule,
regulation, or order promulgated pursuant to this Code within one year
of the date of a previous violation of the same provision shall be deemed
and treated as a repeat offender. The additional fine imposed by the
§ T10B-104 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-107
BAO:973
§ T10B-108. Records. [Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-108]
The administrative officer shall maintain in his or her office a record of
all development permits and all actions, proceedings or complaints taken,
instituted or filed by him or her.
court upon a person for a repeated offense shall be calculated
separately from the fine imposed by the violation of the provision.
(c) Any person convicted of violating this chapter or any other land use
ordinance of the municipality or any other rule, regulation, or order
promulgated pursuant to this code or other municipal ordinance and
who is in default of the payment of any fine imposed for the violation
may, at the court's discretion, be imprisoned for a term not exceeding
90 days or be required to perform community service for a period not
exceeding 90 days.
§ T10B-107 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-108
BAO:974
DIVISION 14
Fire Protection
[Division 14 was replaced in entirety by Ord. No. 2018-11 § 3]
[Prior history includes Ord. Nos. 89-30 and 2015-20]
§ T10B-109. Fire protection.
§ T10B-109.1. Planning Board and Zoning Board duties to review
applicant's fire protection plan; referral to engineer and engineer's
review. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 3]
(a) Jurisdiction. The Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment,
pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1, et seq.,
shall have jurisdiction to determine the fire protection safety of each
application for development as defined in Section 10B-2 as an integral
part of its review of an application for a variance, site plan or
subdivision approval.
(b) Completeness of application. No development application will be
considered complete unless the applicant submits a fire protection plan
(hereafter "plan") as required by this division.
(c) Referral to engineer. Upon receipt of an application for development,
the Planning Board or Zoning Board shall refer the plan to the
municipal engineer to render a written fire protection opinion as to
whether the Planning Board or Zoning Board should approve the plan.
The engineer's opinion shall set forth numbered findings regarding the
following:
(1) The fire protection sector applicable to the development
application, determined after consideration of the types of
structures proposed for the development, and structures on nearby
or adjacent properties, their uses and landscaping characteristics,
where appropriate, and the adequacy and accessibility of fire
hydrants within the relevant fire protection sector;
(2) Fire flows from existing or proposed fire hydrants within the
proposed development, taking into account the distance and
spacing between fire hydrants, the capacity of the relevant water
purveyor to provide adequate fire flows at all times, including
periods of maximum water demand and usage, in light of the
adequacy of transmission, pumping, distribution and storage
systems;
(3) The sufficiency of on-site fire suppression systems, if proposed by
the applicant;
(4) The capacities of firefighting to be made available by municipal or
other firefighting sources, if any;
§ T10B-109 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-109.1
BAO:975
§ T10B-109.2. Adoption of fire flow standards as applied to new
development proposals. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 3]
(5) The opportunities for retrofitting or fire-proofing of nearby
structures, after determination of exposure distances to such
structures, their age and fire-proofing condition;
(6) Any other method or combination of methods of achieving the same
level of fire protection as would be provided through strict
compliance with the relevant fire flow standards as set forth in
Table 1;
(7) In rendering an opinion, the engineer shall base his or her findings
on the actual development proposal, and not such development as
may be permitted as of right within the relevant zoning district, as
set forth in Table 1 Fire Flow GPM Requirements Princeton.
(d) The engineer shall consult with and obtain the views of the zoning
official, fire marshal and the fire chief, or their designated
representatives, which views shall be referenced in the opinion and be
attached thereto. If the engineer determines that the plan is incomplete
or that additional information is needed, the engineer shall notify the
applicant and the Planning Board or Zoning Board, as appropriate, as
soon as possible, not exceeding 45 calendar days after actual receipt of
the application. A determination that the applicant's fire protection plan
remains incomplete shall require a finding that the development plan is
also incomplete.
(e) After the engineer determines that the applicant's plan, including any
supplemental information supplied by the applicant and any other
source, is complete, the engineer shall render a written opinion on
whether the plan will provide adequate fire protection and safety to the
occupants of the proposed development and to adjacent properties
located within the relevant fire protection sector of the proposed new
development and shall state the basis for same.
(f) Upon receipt of the engineer's fire protection opinion, the Planning
Board or Zoning Board, as appropriate, shall incorporate the opinion
and its findings into its review of the development application. If the
Planning Board or Zoning Board determines that the engineer has
overlooked relevant factors or information, the Planning Board or
Zoning Board shall remand the matter to the engineer with directions
to reconsider the plan in light of the additional factors or new
information, and to report back within a specific period of time. The
Planning Board or Zoning Board may make said referral back to the
engineer a condition of approval of said development.
(a) Princeton hereby adopts the minimum fire flow standards set forth for
each zoning district in Table 1, subject to such limitations and
clarifications as appear in this section, as standards of adequate fire
protection. (See Section 10B-109.4 for Table 1)
§ T10B-109.1 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-109.2
BAO:976
§ T10B-109.3. Fire protection plans; contents thereof; engineer's
review and findings. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 3]
(b) The engineer shall periodically review NFPA standards and other
authoritative sources and determine whether Table 1 or any other
article, section, procedure or standard in this division should be
modified accordingly. Promptly thereafter, the engineer shall inform the
mayor and the Planning Board of any amendments which the engineer,
following consultation with the zoning officer, fire marshal and fire
chief, or their designated representatives, determines are necessary or
appropriate in Table 1 or any other section of this division.
(c) If the zoning officer determines that any zoning district has been
changed or that some material change in permissible construction,
construction materials, development bulk, use or densities may
materially affect the required fire flows for fire hydrants within said
district, the zoning officer shall inform the engineer upon the making of
such a finding, who shall then proceed to determine the appropriate
NFPA standard for certification to the Governing Body for the
amendment of Table 1.
(a) Each application for site plan and subdivision approval and each
application for a variance shall submit a fire protection plan ("plan")
which shall set forth information regarding the relevant fire protection
sector, exposure distances, distance and spacing of fire hydrants,
accessibility of fire hydrants, the adequacy of fire flows to nearby fire
hydrants, the size and type of building construction, the intended
occupancy and use of buildings, fire protection practices, and related
factors, pertinent or helpful to the engineer's review.
(b) In the case of an application for: (1) any project which is exempt from
site plan review; (2) minor subdivision approval; (3) any other
development application involving the construction or reconstruction of
less than 500 square feet of building; or (4) a variance or site plan
approval subject to administrative approval, the engineer may waive
the requirements of this division after consultation with the fire
marshal, the fire chief or their designated representatives, provided
that such waiver can be granted without impairing the intent of this
division and said waiver is set forth in a concise written statement
which sets forth the basis for the waiver.
(c) The plan shall demonstrate how the applicant proposes to meet or
exceed the levels of fire protection provided through strict compliance
with the fire flow standards applicable to fire hydrants located or to be
located in the zoning district and/or residential density of the subject
property as set forth in Table 1.
(d) The plan may propose to assure adequate fire protection within the
relevant fire protection sector in a reasonable manner, including:
§ T10B-109.2 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-109.3
BAO:977
§ T10B-109.4. Table 1 - Fire flow GPM requirements. [Ord. No.
2018-11 § 3]
TABLE 1
FIRE FLOW GPM REQUIREMENTS
PRINCETON
In Gallons Per Minute ("GPM")
RATING SYSTEM
Residential Density GPM
Less than 0.5 dwelling units an acre
(du/acre)
500
Between 0.5 du/acre and 0.99 du/
acre
750
Between 1 du/acre and 2 du/acre 1,000
Between 2 du/acre and 4 du/acre 1,500
Between 4 du/acre and 7 du/acre 2,500
Between 7 du/acre and 15 du/acre 3,000
(1) Compliance with fire flows set forth in Table 1, which may be
demonstrated through actual flow tests or reliable computer
models or other calculations or predictive techniques;
(2) The installation of on-site fire suppression or containment systems,
including but not limited to: (i) automatic fire suppression
sprinklers supplied with an adequate source of water and other
methods of fire suppression; (ii) booster pumps for augmenting fire
flows; (iii) stand-by sources of water or other methods of fire
suppression. Said plan shall also include an alternate fire
protection plan in compliance with Section 109.3(a) which shall
demonstrate the adequacy of said plan once adequate fire flows are
available so as to supplement the proposed on-site fire suppression
system.
(3) Some combination of (a) through (c), as set forth above.
(e) The applicant shall provide the engineer with such documentation,
calculations, responses to questions and other information as the
engineer may require to determine whether the applicant's plan will
provide adequate fire protection, as provided in this division.
(f) The engineer, after consultation with the Planning Board, Zoning
Board, legal counsel, the fire marshal and fire chief, shall prepare forms
and guidance bulletins for the use of applicants in the preparation of
their fire protection plans, and shall make these forms and guidance
bulletins available upon request at no charge or for such charge as the
Governing Body may set by ordinance.
§ T10B-109.3 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-109.4
BAO:978
TABLE 1
FIRE FLOW GPM REQUIREMENTS
PRINCETON
In Gallons Per Minute ("GPM")
RATING SYSTEM
Residential Density GPM
Over 15 du/acre 4,000
Commercial Zone
POR 2,500
B-1, B-1, B-2 2,500
OR-1 & OR-2 3,000
S-1 & S-2 3,000
R-O & G-1 3,000
SC 3,500
RO, SB, RB & NB 3000
CB 4,000
MRRO 4,000
E-1, E-2, E-3 & E-4 3,000
§ T10B-109.4 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-109.4
BAO:979

ARTICLE V
Master Plan
§ T10B-110. Preparation, adoption and modification. [Ord. No.
2015-20 § 10B-110]
The Planning Board shall prepare and adopt, and may from time to time
amend or revise, a master plan, or component parts thereof to guide the use
of lands within the municipality in a manner that protects public health and
safety and promotes the general welfare.
§ T10B-111. Form and elements. [Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-111]
The master plan shall generally comprise a report or statement and land
use and development proposals with maps, diagrams and text, presenting
at least the following elements (a) and (b) and, where appropriate, the
following elements (c) through (p) and such other elements as may be
permitted or required from time to time by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.:
(a) A statement of objectives, principles, assumptions, policies and
standards upon which the constituent proposals for the physical,
economic and social development of the region are based;
(b) A land use plan element taking into account and stating its relationship
to the statement provided for in paragraph (a) hereof and the other
master plan elements provided for in paragraph (c) through (p) hereof
and natural conditions including, but not necessarily limited to,
topography, soil conditions, water supply, drainage, flood plain areas,
marshes and woodlands; showing the existing and proposed location,
extent and intensity of development of land to be used in the future for
varying types of residential, commercial, industrial, agricultural,
recreational, educational and other public and private purposes or
combination of purposes; stating the relationship thereof to the existing
and any proposed master plan and zoning ordinance; showing the
existing and proposed location of any airports and the boundaries of
any airport safety zones delineated pursuant to the "Air Safety and
Zoning Act of 1983," P.L. 1983, c.260 (C.6:1-80 et al.); and including a
statement of the standards of population density and development
intensity recommended for the municipality;
(c) A housing plan element pursuant to section 10 of P.L. 1985, c.222
(N.J.S.A. 52:27D-310), including but not limited to, residential
standards and proposals for the construction and improvement of
housing;
(d) A circulation plan element showing the location and types of facilities
for all modes of transportation required for the efficient movement of
people and goods into, about and through the municipality, taking into
account the functional highway classification system of the Federal
Highway Administration and the types, locations, conditions and
§ T10B-110 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-111
BAO:981
availability of existing and proposed transportation facilities, including
air, water, road and rail;
(e) A utility service plan element analyzing the need for and showing the
future general location of water supply and distribution facilities,
drainage and flood control facilities, sewerage and waste treatment,
solid waste disposal and provision for other related utilities, and
including any storm water management plan required pursuant to the
provisions of P.L. 1981, c.32 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-93 et al.). If the
municipality prepares a utility service plan element as a condition for
adopting a development transfer ordinance pursuant to subsection c of
section 4 of P.L.2004, c.2 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-140), the plan element shall
address the provisions of utilities in the receiving zone as provided
thereunder;
(f) A community facilities plan element showing the location and type of
educational or cultural facilities, historic sites, libraries, hospitals, fire
houses, police stations and other related facilities, including their
relation to the surrounding areas;
(g) A recreation plan element showing a comprehensive system of areas
and public sites for recreation;
(h) A conservation plan element providing for the preservation,
conservation, and utilization of natural resources, including, to the
extent appropriate, energy, open space, water supply, forests, soil,
marshes, wetlands, harbors, rivers and other waters, fisheries,
endangered or threatened species wildlife and other natural resources.
It shall systematically analyze the impact of each other component and
element of the master plan on the present and future preservation,
conservation and utilization of those resources;
(i) An economic plan element considering all aspects of economic
development and sustained economic vitality, including a comparison of
the types of employment expected to be provided by the economic
development to be promoted with the characteristics of the labor pool
resident in the municipality and nearby areas and an analysis of the
stability and diversity of the economic development to be promoted;
(j) An historic preservation plan element indicating the location and
significance of historic sites and historic districts; identifying the
standards used to assess worthiness for historic site or district
identification; and analyzing the impact of each component and element
of the master plan on the preservation of historic sites and districts;
(k) Appendices or separate reports containing the technical foundation for
the master plan and its constituent elements.
(l) A recycling plan element that incorporates the State Recycling Plan
goals, including provisions for the collection, disposition and recycling
of recyclable materials designated in the municipal recycling ordinance
and for the collection, disposition and recycling of recyclable materials
§ T10B-111 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-111
BAO:982
§ T10B-112. Staging. [Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-112]
The master plan and its plan elements may be divided into subplans and
subplan elements projected according to periods of time or staging
sequences.
§ T10B-113. Relationship to other plans. [Ord. No. 2015-20
§ 10B-113]
The master plan shall include a specific policy statement indicating the
relationship of the proposed development of the region, as developed in
the master plan, to (1) the master plans of contiguous municipalities, (2)
the master plan of the County of Mercer, (3) the State Development and
Redevelopment Plan adopted pursuant to the State Planning Act, sections
1 through 12 of P.L.1985, c.398 (N.J.S.A. 52:18A-196 et seq.) and (4) the
district solid waste management plan of the County of Mercer required
pursuant to the provisions of the "Solid Waste Management Act," P.L. 1970,
c.39 (N.J.S.A. 13:1E-1 et seq.).
within any development proposal for the construction of 50 or more
units of single-family residential or 25 or more units of multi-family
residential housing and any commercial or industrial development
proposal for the utilization of 1,000 square feet or more of land;
(m) A farmland preservation plan element, which shall include: an inventory
of farm properties and a map illustrating significant areas of
agricultural land; a statement showing that municipal ordinances
support and promote agriculture as a business; and a plan for
preserving as much farmland as possible in the short term by
leveraging moneys made available by P.L.1999, c.152 (N.J.S.A. 13:8C-1
et al.) through a variety of mechanisms including, but not limited to,
utilizing option agreements and installment purchases and encouraging
donations of permanent development easements;
(n) A development transfer plan element which sets forth the public
purposes, the locations of sending and receiving zones and the
technical details of a development transfer program based on the
provisions of section 5 of P.L.2004, c.2 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-141);
(o) An educational facilities plan element which incorporates the purposes
and goals of the long-range facilities plan required to be submitted to
the Commissioner of Education by a school district pursuant to section
4 of P.L.2000, c.72 (N.J.S.A. 18A:7G-4); and
(p) A green buildings and environmental sustainability plan element, which
shall provide for encourage, and promote the efficient use of natural
resources and the installation and usage of renewable energy systems;
consider the impact of buildings on the local regional and global
environment; allow ecosystems to function naturally; conserve and
reuse water; treat storm water on site; and optimize climatic conditions
through site orientation and design.
§ T10B-111 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-113
BAO:983

ARTICLE VI
Capital Project Review.
§ T10B-114. Review of capital projects. [Ord. No. 2015-20
§ 10B-114]
(a) Whenever the Planning Board has adopted any portion of the Master
Plan, the Princeton Council or any other public agency having
jurisdiction over the subject matter, before taking action necessitating
the expenditure of any public funds incidental to the location, character
or extent of a capital project, shall refer the action involving such
specific project to the Planning Board for review and recommendation
in conjunction with the Master Plan and shall not act thereon without
such recommendation or until 45 days have elapsed after such
reference without receiving such recommendation. This requirement
shall apply to action by a housing, parking, highway, special district or
other authority, redevelopment agency, school board or other similar
public agency, state, county or municipal. In addition, this requirement
shall apply to any public entity taking any action to permit the location,
erection, use or maintenance of an outdoor advertising sign required to
be permitted pursuant to P.L.1991, C.413 (N.J.S.A. 27:5-5 et seq.).
(b) The Planning Board shall review and issue findings concerning any
long-range facilities plan submitted to the board pursuant to the
Educational Facilities Construction and Financing Act, P.L.2000, C.72
(N.J.S.A. 18A:7G-1 et al.), for the purpose of review of the extent to
which the long-range facilities plan is informed by, and consistent with,
at least the land use plan element and the housing element contained
within the Master Plan and such other elements of the Master Plan as
the Planning Board deems necessary to determine whether prospective
sites for school facilities contained in the long-range facilities plan
promote more effective and efficient coordination of school
construction with the development efforts of the municipality. The
Planning Board shall devote at least one full meeting of the board to
presentation and review of the long-range facilities plan prior to
adoption of a resolution setting forth the board's findings.
§ T10B-114 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-114
BAO:985

ARTICLE VII
Special Permits
§ T10B-115. Direction for issuance of permits for buildings or
structures in reserved areas. [Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-115]
No permit shall be issued for any building or structure in the bed of any
street or public drainage way, flood control basin or public area reserved
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-44 as shown on the Master Plan or shown on
a plat filed pursuant to this chapter except as herein provided. Whenever
one or more parcels of land upon which is located the bed of such a
mapped street or public drainage way, flood control basin or public area so
reserved cannot yield a reasonable return to the owner unless such a permit
is granted, the Zoning Board of Adjustment may, in a specific case, upon
application or appeal filed with the municipal engineer, by an affirmative
vote of a majority of its full authorized membership direct the issuance
of such permit, which shall as little as practicable increase the cost of
opening such street and tend to cause a minimum change of the Master
Plan, and the Board shall, as a condition of granting the permit, impose
reasonable requirements so as to promote the health, morals, safety and
general welfare of the public.
§ T10B-116. Building lots to abut a street. [Ord. No. 2015-20
§ 10B-117]
No permit for the erection of any building or structure shall be issued
unless the lot abuts a street giving access to such proposed building or
structure. Such street shall be an existing state, county or municipal street
or highway or a street shown upon a plat approved by the Planning Board
or Zoning Board of Adjustment or a street on a plat duly filed in the office
of the county clerk prior to the passage of this chapter or under any prior
law or ordinance that required prior approval of plats by the governing
body or other authorized body. Before any such permit shall be issued,
(a) such street shall have been certified to be suitably improved to the
satisfaction of the Princeton Council, or such suitable improvement shall
have been ensured by means of a performance guarantee, in accordance
with standards and specifications for road improvements approved by the
Princeton Council as adequate in respect to the public health, safety and
general welfare under the special circumstance of the particular street, and
(b) it shall have been established that the proposed access conforms with
the standards of the State Highway Access Management Code adopted by
the Commissioner of Transportation under section 3 of the "State Highway
Access Management Act", P.L. 1989, c.32 in the case of a state highway,
with the standards of any access management code adopted by the county
under N.J.S.A. 27:16-1 in the case of a county road or highway, and with the
standards of any municipal access management code adopted under N.J.S.A.
40:67-1 in the case of a municipal street or highway.
§ T10B-115 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-117
BAO:987
§ T10B-117. Appeals. [Ord. No. 2015-20 § 10B-117]
Where the enforcement of Section 10B-115 would entail practical difficulty
or unnecessary hardship or where the circumstances of the case do not
require the building or structure to be related to a street, the Zoning Board
of Adjustment may upon application or appeal filed with the municipal
engineer vary the application of Section 10B-115 and direct the issuance
of a permit, subject to conditions that will provide adequate access for
firefighting equipment, ambulances and other emergency vehicles
necessary for the protection of health and safety and that will protect any
future street layout shown on the Circulation Plan Element of the Master
Plan.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall not exercise the power otherwise
granted by this section if the proposed development requires approval
by the Planning Board of a subdivision, site plan or conditional use in
conjunction with which the Planning Board has power to direct the issuance
of a permit pursuant to subsection c of section 47 P.L. 1975, c.291
(C.40:55D-60).
§ T10B-118. through § T10B-126. (Reserved)
§ T10B-117 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-118
BAO:988
ARTICLE VIII
[Article VIII Was RSuepbldaicveisdi oInns E Anntdir eStiyt eB PylaOnrsd.. No. 2018-11 § 4]
[Prior history includes Ord. Nos. 856, 969, 970, 85-11, 90-36, 91-26 and
94-8]
§ T10B-127. Simultaneous processing. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
The Planning Board shall have the power to review and approve or deny
conditional uses or site plans simultaneously with review for subdivision
approval without the developer being required to make further application
to the Planning Board or the Planning Board being required to hold further
hearings. Prior to being scheduled for a hearing, all reports, application
forms, checklists, plans and details must be provided electronically, such as
through Princeton's Seemless Docs form link or such other means as may
be directed from time to time by the planning department.
§ T10B-128. Compliance with zoning regulations. [Ord. No. 2018-11
§ 4]
Every subdivision or site plan shall conform to the applicable zoning
regulations of this Chapter.
§ T10B-128.1. Compliance with state, county and municipal
highway and/or street access management codes. [Ord. No. 2018-11
§ 4]
Every subdivision or site plan shall conform to the state highway access
management code adopted by the commissioner of transportation under
section 3 of the "State Highway Access Management Act", P.L. 1989, c. 32,
with respect to any state highway within the municipality.
Every subdivision or site plan shall conform to any access management code
adopted by the county under N.J.S.A. 27:16-1, with respect to any county
roads within the municipality.
Every subdivision or site plan shall conform to any municipal access
management code adopted under N.J.S.A. 40:67-1, with respect to municipal
streets.
§ T10B-129. Exceptions from subdivisions and site plan regulations
in connection with minor subdivisions and preliminary subdivision
and site plan approvals. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
The Planning Board, when acting on applications for subdivision approval
or site plan approval, shall have the power to grant such exceptions from
the requirements of subdivision or site plan approval as may be reasonable
and within the general purpose and intent of the provisions of this Chapter
for subdivision or site plan review and approval, if the literal enforcement of
one or more of such provisions is impracticable or will exact undue hardship
because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in question, subject to
the provisions of Section 10B-227.
§ T10B-127 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-130
BAO:989
§ T10B-130. Substantial amendments in course of preliminary
review. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
If in the course of reviewing an application for preliminary approval of a
major subdivision or for preliminary approval of a site plan the Planning
Board requires any substantial amendment in the layout of improvements
proposed by the developer that have been the subject of a hearing, an
amended application shall be submitted and proceeded upon as in the case
of the original application.
§ T10B-131. Rights conferred by preliminary approval. [Ord. No.
2018-11 § 4]
Preliminary approval of a major subdivision or a site plan shall, except as
provided in paragraph (d) of this section, confer upon the applicant the
following rights for a three-year period from the date of the preliminary
approval:
(a) That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary approval
was granted shall not be changed, including, but not limited to, use
requirements; layout and design standards for streets, curbs and
sidewalks; lot size; yard dimensions; off-tract improvements; and any
requirements peculiar to site plan approval. However, nothing herein
shall be construed to prevent the municipality from modifying by
ordinance such general terms and conditions of preliminary approval as
relate to public health and safety.
(b) That the applicant may submit for final approval on or before the
expiration date of preliminary approval the whole or sections of the
preliminary subdivision plat or site plan.
(c) That the applicant may apply for and the Planning Board may grant
extensions of such preliminary approval for additional periods of at
least one year but not to exceed a total extension of two years;
provided, that if the design standards have been revised by ordinance,
such revised standards may govern.
(d) In the case of a subdivision or site plan for an area of 50 acres or more,
the Planning Board may grant the rights referred to in the above
paragraphs of this section for such period of time, longer than three
years, as shall be determined by the Planning Board to be reasonable,
taking into consideration the number of dwelling units and
nonresidential floor area permissible under preliminary approval,
economic conditions and the comprehensiveness of the development.
The applicant may apply for thereafter and the Planning Board may
thereafter grant an extension to preliminary approval for such
additional period of time as shall be determined by the Planning Board
to be reasonable, taking into consideration the number of dwelling
units and nonresidential floor area permissible under preliminary
approval, the potential number of dwelling units and nonresidential
floor area of the section or sections awaiting final approval, economic
§ T10B-130 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-131
BAO:990
§ T10B-132. Deviations as to certain planned developments in
course of final review. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
The Planning Board, in the course of reviewing an application for final
approval of a major subdivision or a site plan involving a planned unit
residential development or a residential cluster, may permit minimal
deviations from the conditions of preliminary approval attaching to such
development or cluster plan if necessitated by change of conditions beyond
the control of the developer since the date of preliminary approval, without
the developer being required to submit another application for development
for preliminary approval.
§ T10B-133. Guarantees. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
conditions and the comprehensiveness of the development; provided,
that if the design standards have been revised, such revised standards
may govern.
(a) The Planning Board shall require as a condition of final subdivision or
site plan approval the furnishing of a performance guarantee in favor of
the municipality for the purpose of assuring the installation of the
required on-tract improvements within two years as to a subdivision
and within such reasonable time as the board shall fix as to a site plan.
The guarantee shall be in an amount not to exceed 120% of the cost of
such installation as estimated by the municipal engineer.
(b) The Planning Board shall also require as a condition of final subdivision
or final site plan approval the posting of a maintenance guarantee with
the municipal Governing Body for the purpose of assuring the
maintenance of required on-tract improvements for a period of two
years for a subdivision or site plan after final acceptance of the
improvements. The maintenance guarantee shall be in an amount equal
to 15% of the cost of the improvements as estimated by the municipal
engineer.
(c) In the event that governmental agencies or public utilities other than
the municipality will automatically own utilities to be installed or if
required on-tract improvements are covered by a performance or
maintenance guarantee to another governmental agency or to the
municipality in connection with any other development application, no
performance or maintenance guarantee, as the case may be, shall be
required by the municipality for such utilities or improvements.
(d) A performance or maintenance guarantee may be in the form of a
surety bond issued by a bonding or surety company approved by the
Governing Body, a certified check returnable to the developer after full
compliance or any type of surety or collateral approved by the
municipal attorney. 10% of the total performance guarantee shall be
paid by a cash payment and no cash shall be required for the
maintenance guarantee or any part thereof. All guarantees shall be
§ T10B-131 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-133
BAO:991
approved by the municipal attorney as to form, sufficiency and
execution.
(e) The time allowed for installation of the improvements for which the
performance guarantee has been provided may be extended by the
Governing Body by resolution. As a condition or as a part of any such
extension, the amount of any performance guarantee shall be increased
or reduced, as the case may be, to an amount not to exceed 120% of the
cost of the installation as determined as of the time of the passage of
the resolution.
(f) If the required improvements are not completed or corrected in
accordance with the performance or maintenance guarantee, the
obligor and surety, if any, shall be liable thereon to the municipality for
the reasonable cost of the improvements not completed or corrected
and the municipality may, either prior to or after the receipt of the
proceeds thereof, complete such improvements.
(g) Upon substantial completion of all required appurtenant utility
improvements and the connection of same to the public system, the
obligor may notify the Governing Body, in writing, by certified mail
addressed in care of the municipal clerk of the completion or
substantial completion of improvements and shall send a copy thereof
to the municipal engineer. Thereupon the municipal engineer shall
inspect all improvements of which such notice has been given and shall
file a detailed report in writing with the Governing Body, indicating
either approval, partial approval or rejection of such improvements
with a statement of reasons for any rejection. The cost of the
improvements as approved or rejected shall be set forth.
(h) The Governing Body shall either approve, partially approve or reject the
improvements on the basis of the report of the municipal engineer and
shall notify the obligor, in writing, by certified mail of the contents of
such report and the action of the Governing Body with relation thereto
not later than 65 days after receipt of the notice from the obligor of the
completion of the improvements. Where partial approval is granted, the
obligor shall be released from all liability pursuant to its performance
guarantee, except for that portion sufficient to secure installation of the
improvements not yet approved; provided that 30% of the amount of the
performance guarantee posted may be retained to insure completion of
all improvements. Failure of the Governing Body to send or provide
such notification to the obligor within 65 days shall be deemed to
constitute approval of the improvements and the obligor and surety, if
any, shall be released from all liability pursuant to such performance
guarantee for such improvements.
(i) If any portion of the required improvements is rejected, the Governing
Body may require the obligor to complete such improvements and,
upon completion, the same procedure of notification as set forth in the
preceding paragraph shall be followed.
§ T10B-133 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-133
BAO:992
§ T10B-134. Rights Conferred by Final Approval. [Ord. No. 2018-11
§ 4]
(j) The obligor shall reimburse the municipality for all reasonable
inspection fees paid to the municipal engineer for the foregoing
inspection of improvements and such fees shall constitute part of the
cost of the improvements covered by a guarantee; provided that the
Planning Board may require of the developer a deposit with the
municipality for all or a portion of the reasonably anticipated fees to be
paid to the municipal engineer for such inspection.
(k) Performance and maintenance guarantees pertaining to site plan
improvements shall also be subject to the requirements of Section
10B-224.
(l) Nothing herein, however, shall be construed to limit the right of the
obligor to contest by legal proceedings any determination of the
Governing Body or the municipal engineer.
(m) In the event that the final approval of a subdivision or site plan is by
stages or sections pursuant to Section 10B-131(b), the provisions of this
Section 10B-133 shall be applied by stage or section.
(a) The zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary approval of a
major subdivision or a site plan first granted and all other rights
conferred upon the developer by the preliminary approval thereof,
whether conditionally or otherwise, shall not be changed for a period of
two years after the date of final approval; but, in the case of a major
subdivision, the rights conferred by this section shall expire if the final
plat has not been duly and timely filed with the county recording officer.
(b) If the developer has followed the standards prescribed for final
approval and, in the case of a subdivision, has duly and timely filed the
plat with the county recording officer, the Planning Board may extend
such period of protection for extensions of one year, but not more than
three such extensions.
(c) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Chapter, the granting of
final approval terminates the time period of protective rights attaching
to preliminary approval for sections of the subdivision or site plan
granted final approval.
(d) In the case of a subdivision or site plan for a planned unit residential
development or residential cluster of 50 acres or more or a
conventional subdivision or site plan for 150 acres or more, the
Planning Board may grant the rights referred to in paragraph (a) of this
section for such a period of time longer than two years as shall be
determined by the Planning Board to be reasonable taking into
consideration the number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor
area permissible under final approval, economic conditions and the
comprehensiveness of the development. The developer may apply for
§ T10B-133 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-134
BAO:993
§ T10B-135. Deviations after final approval. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
The Planning Board may permit a deviation from a subdivision or site plan
as finally approved if caused by change of conditions beyond the control of
the developer since the date of final approval and if the deviation would not
substantially alter the character of the development or substantially impair
the intent and purpose of the master plan and zoning ordinance.
§ T10B-136. Reservation of Public Areas. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
thereafter, and the Planning Board may thereafter grant, an extension
of final approval for such additional period of time as shall be
determined by the Planning Board to be reasonable taking into
consideration the number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor
area permissible under final approval, the number of dwelling units
and nonresidential floor area remaining to be developed, economic
conditions and the comprehensiveness of the development.
(a) If the master plan or the official map provides for the reservation of
designated streets, public drainageways, flood control basins or public
areas within the proposed development, the Planning Board may,
before approving a subdivision or site plan, further require that such
streets, ways, basins or areas be shown on the subdivision plat or site
plan in locations and sizes suitable to their intended uses. The Planning
Board may reserve the location and extent of such streets, ways, basins
or public areas shown on the plat or plan for a period of one year after
the approval of the final plat or plan or within such further time as may
be agreed to by the developer.
(b) Unless during such period or extension thereof the municipality shall
have entered into a contract to purchase or shall have instituted
condemnation proceedings according to law for the fee or a lesser
interest in the land comprising such streets, ways, basins or public
areas, the developer shall not be bound by such reservations shown on
the plat or plan and may proceed to use such land for private use in
accordance with applicable development regulations.
(c) The developer shall be entitled to just compensation for actual loss
found to be caused by such temporary reservation and deprivation of
use. In such instance, unless a lesser amount has previously been
mutually agreed upon, just compensation shall be deemed to be the fair
market value of an option to purchase the land reserved for the period
of reservation; provided, that determination of such fair market value
shall include, but not be limited to, consideration of the real property
taxes apportioned to the land reserved and prorated for the period of
reservation. The developer shall be compensated for the reasonable
increased cost of legal, engineering or other professional services
incurred in connection with obtaining subdivision approval or site plan
approval, as the case may be, caused by the reservation.
§ T10B-134 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-136
BAO:994
§ T10B-136.1. Common and Public Improvements. [Ord. No.
2018-11 § 4]
When approving subdivision and site plan applications, including
applications for residential and nonresidential clusters, the may require
that any improvements, such as sidewalks, bike paths, jogging trails, and
recreational facilities, designed to be made available to the general public
or to the residents or occupants of the development shall be completed
at such time in the sequence of development as it deems appropriate,
including before issuance of the first certificate of occupancy.
§ T10B-136.2. Notice of Common and Public Improvements. [Ord.
No. 2018-11 § 4]
Applicants for subdivision and site plan approval containing any of the
improvements set forth in Section 10B-136.1 or providing for land
dedications or conveyances to the municipality of any other interest in the
property which is the subject of the development application, including
easements, shall provide a notice of the improvements and proposed land
dedications or conveyances to prospective purchasers of dwelling units
within the development. Such notice shall be in plain language and shall be
in a form acceptable to the attorney for the Board. It shall be provided prior
to the time a contract of sale is executed. As to conveyances which have
not been made and as to improvements which have not been completed,
such notice shall also be provided to any subsequent purchaser of the unit
prior to the time the contract therefor is executed. A copy of each executed
notice, with a signed acknowledgment that the purchaser has read and
understood the notice, shall be filed by the developer and any subsequent
seller with the Board. Failure of a seller to give the required notice to a
purchaser shall not be a basis for the purchaser to object to the proposed
improvements, dedications, or conveyances.
(d) The amount and terms of payment of compensation for the reservation
of any public area shall be determined promptly by the Governing Body,
with due regard for the provisions of the preceding paragraph, after
affording the developer an opportunity to be heard. Such determination
shall be reduced to writing and furnished to the developer and the
Planning Board.
(e) The provisions of this section shall not apply to streets and roads, flood
control basins or drainage ways necessitated by the subdivision or land
development and required for final approval of the subdivision or site
plan.
§ T10B-136 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-136.2
BAO:995

ARTICLE IX
[Article IX Was ReplacedS Iunb Edinvtiisrieotnys By Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
[Prior history includes Ord. Nos. 856, 875, 947, 955, 1020,1028, 82-17,
83-3, 84-21, 85-9, 85-11, 85-12, 86-5, 87-27, 88-2, 89-30, 90-37, 92-37,
94-13, 95-20, 97-20, 2009-25, 2013-4, 2014-44, 2015-20 and 2017-46]
§ T10B-137 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-136.2
BAO:997

DIVISION 1
Generally
§ T10B-137. (Reserved)
§ T10B-138. Purpose of article. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
The purpose of this article is to provide for the submission and processing of
applications for approval of subdivisions in a manner not inconsistent with
the Municipal Land Use Law or with other provisions of this Chapter.
§ T10B-139. Subdivision approval required. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
No land may be subdivided unless approved in accordance with the
procedures and standards set forth in this article and in other applicable
provisions of this Chapter.
§ T10B-139.1. Combinations of lots. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
An owner wishing to combine existing lots by deed or other instrument shall
be exempt from the requirement of subdivision approval provided:
§ T10B-140. Provisions of article deemed minimum requirements.
[Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
The rules, regulations and standards of this article shall be considered the
minimum requirements for the protection of the public health, safety and
welfare of the citizens of the municipality. Any action taken by the Planning
Board under this article shall give primary consideration to such matters
and to the welfare of the entire community.
(a) That no other lot lines are being altered;
(b) The land is in common ownership; and
(c) No zoning violations are created or enlarged.
However, for purposes of providing notice to the municipality, the
applicant shall be required to file deed(s) and sketch plat with the
municipal engineer.
§ T10B-137 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-140
BAO:999

DIVISION 2
Sketch Plat Classification and Minor Subdivision Approval
§ T10B-141. (Reserved)
§ T10B-142. Minor subdivisions — Notice and public hearing;
approval; conditions; prior approvals. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
§ T10B-143. Minor Subdivisions Combined with Applications For
Other Relief. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
In cases where an application for minor subdivision approval under the
sketch plat procedure is combined with a related application for
development that is within the jurisdiction of the Planning Board, the
application for minor subdivision approval shall be referred to the Planning
Board for action after review by the subdivision committee and shall be
subject to the hearing and notice requirements of Divisions 4 and 5 of
Article IV.
§ T10B-144. Number and distribution of minor subdivision sketch
plats. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
Before any approved sketch plat of a minor subdivision shall be returned
to the applicant, the applicant shall supply sufficient copies to the Planning
Board for distribution as follows:
(a) Notice pursuant to Section 10B-46(b)(1) shall be provided for hearings
on all applications for minor subdivision. If the subdivision committee
by unanimous action of all of its members present and voting finds that
the application conforms to the definition of "minor subdivision" in
Section 10B-2, it may classify and approve the sketch plat as a minor
subdivision, a notation to that effect shall be made in the sketch plat,
the applicant shall be so notified and the plat shall be forwarded to the
chairman and secretary for their signatures and shall be returned to the
applicant within one week following the next regular meeting of the
Planning Board. Minor subdivision approval shall be deemed to be final
approval of the subdivision by the Planning Board. If the minor
subdivision committee does not unanimously endorse an application for
approval, it shall refer it to the Planning Board who shall then review
the application.
(b) Approval may be conditioned upon terms providing for the installation
and maintenance of required on-tract improvements and the guarantee
thereof.
(c) No minor subdivision shall be approved that involves any lot, tract or
parcel that shall have been approved as a minor subdivision within one
year of the prior approval.
(a) Municipal engineer.
§ T10B-141 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-144
BAO:1001
§ T10B-145. Expiration of Approval of Minor Subdivision;
Confirmation by Filing Deed or Plat. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
§ T10B-146. Protection of Approved Minor Subdivision Against
Subsequent Changes in Regulations. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
The zoning requirements and general terms and conditions, whether
conditional or otherwise, upon which minor subdivision approval was
granted shall not be changed for a period of two years after the date on
which the resolution of approval is adopted, provided that the approved
minor subdivision shall have been duly and timely filed or recorded.
§ T10B-147. Classification as Major Subdivision; Optional Sketch
Plat. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
If a subdivision sketch plat is classified as a major subdivision, a notation
to that effect shall be made thereon. After an opportunity has been afforded
the applicant for discussion before the Planning Board, the plat shall be
returned to the applicant for compliance with Division 3 of this article. In
the course of discussion, the applicant may submit one or more amended
sketch plats of a major subdivision directly to the Planning Board without
action by the subdivision committee. No action of the Planning Board in
such discussion shall constitute preliminary approval of a major subdivision.
(b) Development enforcement officer.
(c) Tax assessor.
(d) Secretary of the Planning Board.
(e) County Planning Board.
(a) Approval of a minor subdivision shall expire 190 days after the date on
which the resolution of approval is adopted, unless within such period a
plat in conformity with such approval and the provisions of N.J.S.A.
46:26A-1 et seq. or a deed clearly describing the approved minor
subdivision is filed by the developer with the county recording officer,
the municipal engineer and the municipal tax assessor. Any such plat or
deed accepted for such filing shall have been signed by the chairman
and secretary of the Planning Board.
(b) In reviewing an application for a minor subdivision, the subdivision
committee may accept a plat not in conformity with N.J.S.A. 46:26A-1 et
seq., but if the developer chooses to file the minor subdivision as
provided herein by plat rather than by deed, then such plat shall
conform with the provisions of the statute.
(c) The developer shall file with the secretary of the Planning Board a copy
of such deed or plat with a notation thereon of the date and index
reference of such filing or recording with the county recording officer.
§ T10B-144 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-148
BAO:1002
§ T10B-148. Procedure in Cases Where Optional Sketch Plat
Procedure Not Used. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
If the sketch plat optional procedures set forth in the preceding section is
not used, then the procedure in all cases, including minor subdivisions, shall
begin with Division 3 of this article.
§ T10B-148 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-148
BAO:1003

DIVISION 3
Preliminary Subdivision Approval
§ T10B-149. Major Subdivisions Subject to Site Plan Review. [Ord.
No. 2018-11 § 4]
Preliminary plats of major subdivisions submitted under this division shall
also be subject to site plan review and approval in accordance with Article
X of this Chapter, and no such preliminary plat shall be approved under this
division unless approval under Article X is also granted. The Planning Board
may make such rules and regulations regarding applications for such dual
approvals, not inconsistent with the intent and purpose of such approvals,
as in its judgment will coordinate the processing thereof and minimize
duplication of effort and materials in connection therewith.
§ T10B-150. Applications for Preliminary Approval of Major
Subdivisions and Certain Minor Subdivisions. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
§ T10B-151. Decisions of Planning Board; notation of preliminary
approval. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
(a) Every application for approval of a major subdivision and every
application for approval of a minor subdivision where the optional
sketch plat procedure of Division 2 of this article is not utilized shall be
submitted to the administrative officer for preliminary approval by the
Planning Board.
(b) At least three copies of the application form shall be submitted, and
they shall be accompanied by at least eight copies of the preliminary
plat in the form and with the information required under Section
10B-158 and by such other information as is reasonably necessary to an
informed decision as to whether the requirements for preliminary
approval have been met.
(c) If approved by the administrative officer as to form, the application and
preliminary plat shall be referred to the Planning Board for review and
appropriate action.
(d) Copies of the preliminary plat shall be forwarded by the secretary of the
Planning Board, prior to the hearing thereon, to the Board of Health
and to such other municipal, county and state officials as the Planning
Board shall specify.
(a) If the Planning Board, after notice and hearing, shall determine that the
requirements for preliminary approval pursuant to this article have
been met, it shall render its decision granting preliminary approval of
the subdivision; otherwise, it shall render its decision denying
preliminary approval. Preliminary approval may be conditioned upon
compliance with applicable requirements of this Chapter.
§ T10B-149 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-151
BAO:1005
(b) If preliminary approval is granted, the chairman and secretary of the
Planning Board shall affix their signatures to the preliminary plat with a
notation that it has received preliminary approval, and the plat shall be
returned to the applicant for compliance with final approval
requirements.
§ T10B-151 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-151
BAO:1006
DIVISION 4
Final Subdivision Approval
§ T10B-152. Applications for final approval of subdivisions. [Ord.
No. 2018-11 § 4]
§ T10B-153. Accompanying Statement of Municipal Engineer as to
Utilities and On-Tract Improvements. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
The final plat shall be accompanied by a statement by the municipal
engineer that he has received a map showing all utilities and all other
required on-tract improvements in exact location and elevation, identifying
those portions already installed and those to be installed, and specifying
those utilities and other on-tract improvements that are to be covered by
performance or maintenance guarantees.
§ T10B-154. Accompanying Statement of County Engineer. [Ord.
No. 2018-11 § 4]
The final plat of a subdivision showing any bridge or culvert across or
under a public road or street within the subdivision shall be accompanied
by a statement of the county engineer that he has approved the final
construction plans for any such bridges and culverts shown thereon and
specifying the amount he deems necessary to be included in any
performance guarantee to assure the completion thereof.
§ T10B-155. Requirements for and grant of final approval. [Ord. No.
2018-11 § 4]
(a) An application for final approval of a subdivision that has received
preliminary approval may be made within the time specified in Section
10B-131 above.
(b) The final plat shall be submitted to the Planning Board for final
approval within three years from the date of preliminary approval,
except as otherwise provided in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-49d. The following
items are to be filed with the Planning Board Secretary:
One original and five copies of the application for final subdivision;
One original and five copies of the completed checklist;
Up to 30 copies of the final subdivision map not greater that 24 inches
by 36 inches in size showing the information requested in the checklist.
(c) If approved by the administrative officer as to form, the application and
final plat shall be referred to the Planning Board for review and
appropriate action.
(a) If the Planning Board, after notice to the extent required by Division 5
of Article IV and after hearing shall determine that the detailed
drawings, specifications and estimates of the application for final
§ T10B-152 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-155
BAO:1007
§ T10B-156. Expiration of Final Approval; Filing of Final Plat with
County Recording Officer. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
approval conform to the standards established by this article for final
approval, and to the conditions of preliminary approval, and to the
standards prescribed by the "Map Filing Law," (P.L. 1960, c. 141; C.
46:23-9.9 et seq.), it shall render its decision granting final approval
of the subdivision; otherwise, it shall render its decision denying final
approval.
(b) The Planning Board shall not grant final approval unless prior thereto
the applicant shall have complied with the requirements of this article
as to the installation and maintenance of on-tract improvements or
unless such approval is conditioned upon the furnishing of guarantees
therefor in accordance with Section 10B-133.
(c) Upon final approval by the Planning Board, the chairman and secretary
shall affix their signatures to the final plat with a notation that it has
received final approval, and copies shall be distributed to the, municipal
engineer, development enforcement officer, construction official, tax
assessor, Planning Board and secretary of the Planning Board.
(a) Final approval of a major subdivision shall expire 95 days from the date
of signing of the plat unless within such period the plat shall have been
duly filed by the developer with the county recording officer. The
Planning Board may for good cause shown extend the period for
recording for an additional period not to exceed 190 days from the date
of signing of the plat.
(b) No subdivision plat shall be accepted for filing by the county recording
officer until it has been approved by the Planning Board as indicated on
the instrument by the signature of the chairman and secretary of the
Planning Board. If the county recording officer records any plat without
such approval, such recording shall be deemed null and void, and upon
request of the municipality, the plat shall be expunged from the official
records.
(c) The applicant will be required to provide two mylars (in addition to
what is required for filing with Mercer County) to be signed by the
municipal engineer, board chair, board secretary, municipal clerk, and
Mercer County Planning Board. Upon confirmation of the filing, the
applicant shall submit to the planning department two mylars (with the
filing date and filing number on the plat) along with five sets of the filed
map.
§ T10B-155 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-156
BAO:1008
DIVISION 5
Plat Details; Checklists
§ T10B-157. Minor subdivision checklist. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
The following checklist is designed to inform applicants as to what is
required in preparing minor subdivision plans for board review. Applicants
shall check off items to confirm that they are included as part of the
submission. Checklist items omitted can result in the application being
found incomplete and therefore delay consideration by the Board. Utilities,
details, profiles, etc. may be shown on separate sheets. This checklist must
be submitted with the application. Applications filed which include a waiver
request for any of the above items, shall be accompanied by a written
statement in support of each waiver request.
The total number of copies to be submitted is dependent upon which Board
hears the application. This information can be found in the cover sheet of
the application.
(a) General Requirements.
(1) Completed application form (one original and five copies).
Maximum number of copies required is 30.
(2) Complete subdivision plan signed and sealed by appropriate
professional pursuant to State licensing requirements Section
N.J.S.A. 45:8-45 (10 sets; 14 if a variance is requested). Plans not to
exceed 24 inches by 36 inches and all sheets must be the same size.
All plans must be collated and folded. Maximum number of copies
required is 30.
(3) Application and Escrow Fees. Separate checks required.
(4) Fire Protection Plan in accordance with the Municipal Code
Sections 10B-109.1 through § T10B-109.4. (6 copies) Maximum
number of copies required is 30.
a. Fire protection map (6 copies, Maximum number of copies
required is 30.) indicating:
1. Existing and proposed hydrants.
2. Distances between hydrants.
3. Distances to nearest hydrant.
4. Water main location, size and location where supply is
coming from.
b. Narrative containing information regarding the relevant fire
protection sector as well as distances and spacing of fire
hydrants. (Six copies to be submitted, Maximum number of
copies required is 30.) This information must all include:
§ T10B-157 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-157
BAO:1009
1. Exposure distances.
2. Accessibility of fire hydrants.
3. Demonstrating that fire flows at nearby fire hydrants,
meets or exceeds municipal standards.
4. Size and type of building construction.
5. Intended use and occupancy of building.
6. Fire protection practices.
(5) Completed checklist. (original + 5 copies) Maximum number of
copies required is 30.
(6) Letter from the Tax Collector stating that all taxes and assessments
paid to date.
(7) If required, completed variance appeal form and/or conditional use
form. (6 copies) Maximum number of copies required is 30.
(8) Completed W-9 and escrow agreement.
(9) Two copies of the sealed survey for the entire tract.
(10) Submission of historic preservation plan pursuant to municipal
ordinances if in a historic district or historic district buffer zone
including:
a. Photographs of the property in question and surrounding
properties.
b. Product specifications, where appropriate.
c. Elevations and details for proposed new construction.
d. Floor plans.
e. Documentation sufficient to demonstrate how the proposed
improvement appears in context.
(b) Subdivision Plat:
(1) Tract name.
(2) Tax Map sheet, lot and block numbers.
(3) Date, north arrow and graphic scale (min. one inch equals 200
feet).
(4) Name, address and signature of record owner.
(5) Name and address of applicant (if other than owner).
(6) Property owners in schedule form within 200 feet parcel.
§ T10B-157 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-157
BAO:1010
(7) Key Map at a scale of one inch equals 400 feet, showing the
following information within 700 feet of the property:
a. Zoning districts and boundary delineations.
b. Streets and roads.
c. Streams, water courses, bodies of water, and property lines.
d. Master Plan designations.
e. Block and lot numbers.
(8) Area of original tract.
(9) Lot and house numbers of proposed lots.
(10) Zoning regulations for district and proposed dimensions in
schedule form (showing required, existing and proposed
conditions).
(11) All required building setback lines as well as the shortest distance
from existing buildings on the tract to new or existing property
lines.
(12) Master Plan designations for right-of-way, open space, recreation,
etc.
(13) Title Block in compliance with N.J.A.C. 13:40-1.1 et seq.
(14) At a minimum: one corner of the plat should have horizontal
coordinates and vertical datum based upon municipal
monumentation. If available, applicant is to provide the subdivision
plat on disk using NJ State Plane Coordinates (NAD 83 & NGVD
88).
(c) Existing and Proposed Features:
(1) Size, shape and locations of buildings on the tract, on adjoining
property and on opposite side of the adjacent street(s).
(2) Steep slope locations of grades in excess of 25%.
(3) Rock outcroppings, and/or boulder fields.
(4) Contours of site: two foot intervals.
(5) Locations, type and size of sanitary sewer and water services and
connection within the tract and adjacent servicing mains.
(6) Locations of on-site and off-site electric, telephone, gas and CATV
facilities and service line connections.
(7) Utility easements with owner entity identification.
(8) Location of tree masses including type and approximate height.
§ T10B-157 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-157
BAO:1011
(9) Location of hedgerows and/or screening, fences, walls, etc.
(10) Locations of streams, ponds, swales, ditches including flow
direction, flood hazard areas, floodway lines, wetland areas and
waterway corridors.
(11) Existing and proposed survey markers at all property line corners.
(12) Monumentation along existing and proposed right-of-way lines in
accordance with the "Map Filing Law" standards.
(13) Percolation and soil log test results and locations with the
appropriate Health Agency approval signature, when connection to
existing or proposed utility systems cannot be obtained.
(d) Required Notes for All Plans:
(1) If the extension of water mains is required, the spacing and
location of hydrants will comply with the standards of the New
Jersey American Water Company and approved by the Municipal
Engineer and Fire Prevention Official.
(2) Electric, telephone, CATV and all other wire served utility
extensions and services shall be installed underground with
standards established by the servicing utility company and
approved by the Municipal Engineer.
(3) All drainage and sewer easements for public purpose shall be
dedicated to the municipality, unless otherwise noted.
(4) All construction to be in accordance with the final construction
plans as approved by the Municipal Engineer.
(5) All areas where natural vegetation and/or specimen trees are to
remain shall be protected by the erection of fencing and no
disturbance shall occur prior to inspection by the Municipal
Engineer and the issuance of written authorization to proceed with
construction. These protective measures shall not be altered or
removed without the approval by the Municipal Engineer.
(6) On minor applications (if plat is not to be filed with County) there
shall be the following note on plan: "Deed of both lots must be
recorded with the Mercer County Clerk's Office."
(e) Required Signature Format on All Plans:
Approved by the Planning Board of Princeton as a Minor Subdivision
Development.
_______________ _______________
Chairman Date
_______________ _______________
Secretary Date
§ T10B-157 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-157
BAO:1012
§ T10B-158. Preliminary Major Subdivision Checklist. [Ord. No.
2018-11 § 4]
The following checklist is designed to inform applicants as to what is
required in preparing preliminary major subdivision plans for board review.
Applicants should check off item to confirm that they are included as part
of the submission. Checklist items omitted can result in application being
found incomplete and therefore delay consideration by the Board. Utilities,
details, profiles, etc. may be shown on separate sheets. This checklist must
be submitted with the application. Applications filed which include a waiver
request for any of the checklist items, shall be accompanied by a written
statement in support of each waiver request.
The total number of copies to be submitted depends upon which board
hears the application. This information can be found in the cover sheet of
the application.
_______________ _______________
Engineer Date
The undersigned, hereby acknowledges that the information contained
herein is true and complete to the best of its knowledge.
This_____ day of_______________, 20_____.
_______________
Applicant
_______________ _______________
Notary Owner
(a) General Requirements:
(1) Completed application form (original + 5 copies). Maximum
number of copies required is 30.
(2) Complete subdivision plans signed and sealed by appropriate
professional pursuant to State licensing requirements Section
N.J.S.A. 45:8-45 (14 copies). Plans not to exceed 24 inches by 36
inches and all sheets must be the same size. All plans must be
collated and folded. Maximum number of copies is 30.
(3) Application and Escrow Fees. Separate checks required.
(4) Fire Protection Plan in accordance with Princeton Code Section
10B-109.1 through § T10B-109.4 Maximum number of copies is 30.
a. Fire protection map (14 copies Maximum number of copies is
30) indicating:
1. Existing and proposed hydrants.
2. Distances between hydrants.
§ T10B-157 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-158
BAO:1013
3. Distances to nearest hydrants.
4. Water main location, size and location where supply is
coming from.
b. Narrative containing information regarding the relevant fire
protection sector as well as distances and spacing of fire
hydrants. (14 copies to be submitted) Maximum number of
copies is 30. This information must also include:
1. Exposure distances.
2. Accessibility of fire hydrants.
3. Demonstrating that fire flows at nearby fire hydrants,
meets or exceeds municipal standards.
4. Size and type of building construction.
5. Intended use and occupancy of building.
6. Fire protection practices.
(5) Completed checklist (original + 5 copies) Maximum number of
copies is 30.
(6) Letter from the Tax Collector stating that all taxes and assessments
paid to date.
(7) If required, completed variance appeal form and/or conditional use
form (6 copies). Maximum number of copies is 30.
(8) Completed W-9 and escrow agreement.
(9) Two copies of the sealed survey for the entire tract.
(10) Submission of historic preservation plan pursuant to municipal
ordinances, if in a historic district or historic district buffer zone
including:
a. Photographs of the property in question and surrounding
properties.
b. Product specifications, where appropriate.
c. Elevations and details for proposed new construction.
d. Floor plans.
e. Documentation sufficient to demonstrate how the proposed
improvement appears in context.
f. Archaeological and historic sites survey.
g. Archaeological and historic sites construction protocol.
§ T10B-158 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-158
BAO:1014
h. Delineated historic protection area or pre-mapped historic
preservation area.
i. When available, historic photographs, maps, plot plans and
other historic site documentation.
j. Plot plan of property showing location of all existing and
proposed structures, with relationship to surrounding
building(s) on adjoining properties, zoning setback,
driveways(s), and existing and proposed utilities
(b) Preliminary Subdivision Plan: legibly drawn or reproduced at a scale of
not less than (one inch equals 100 feet). Preliminary plats shall be
drawn by a land surveyor licensed by the state. The Preliminary Plans
shall be designed in compliance with the provisions of municipal
ordinance and shall show the following information:
(1) Tract name.
(2) Tax Map sheet, lot and block numbers.
(3) Date, north arrow and graphic scale (min. one inch equals 200
feet).
(4) Name, address and signature of record owner.
(5) Name and address of applicant (if other than owner).
(6) Property owners in schedule form within 200 feet of parcel.
(7) Name, address and seal of person who prepared the map.
(8) Key Map at a scale of one inch equals 400 feet, showing the
following information within 1,500 feet of the property:
a. Zoning districts and boundary delineations.
b. Streets and roads.
c. Streams, water courses, bodies of water, and property lines.
d. Master Plan designations.
e. Block and lot numbers.
(9) The location of that portion of the land to be subdivided in relation
to the entire tract.
(10) Location and right-of-way widths of streets and roads within 400
feet of any part of the property proposed to be subdivided.
(11) Suggested street names.
(12) Zoning regulations for district and proposed dimensions in
schedule form (showing required, existing and proposed
conditions).
§ T10B-158 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-158
BAO:1015
(13) Proposed block, lot numbers, property lines and dimensions of lots
of the land to be subdivided.
(14) All required building setback lines as well as the shortest distance
from existing buildings on the tract to new or existing property
lines.
(15) Master Plan designations for right-of-way, open space, recreation,
etc.
(16) Title Block in compliance with N.J.A.C. 13:40-1.1 et seq.
(17) At a minimum: one corner of the plat should have horizontal
coordinates and vertical datum based upon municipal
monumentation. If available, applicant is to provide the subdivision
plat on disk using NJ State Plane Coordinates (NAD 83 and NGVD
88).
(c) Existing and Proposed Features:
(1) Benchmark and data from which it was derived. The location and
elevation of a permanent benchmark, accessibly placed, together
with a notation as to the datum from which it was established and
sufficient elevations of five foot contours to determine the general
slope and natural drainage.
(2) Locations of streams, waterway corridors, water courses, flood
hazard and flood plain areas, bodies of water and wetland areas.
Location and elevation of all existing watercourses.
(3) Rock outcroppings, and/or boulder fields.
(4) Right-of-way dedications with acreage and boundary information.
(5) Steep slope locations of grades in excess of 15 feet.
(6) Size, shape and locations of buildings on the tract, on adjoining
property and on opposite side of the adjacent street(s).
(7) Location and elevation of existing buildings, sewers and water
mains and all other significant features. However, elevations or
contours need not be shown for land subdivisions with a gross area
of less than 10 acres or for subdivisions containing no new streets
or roads.
(8) Location of hedgerows and/or screening fences, walls, etc.
(9) Location of scenic, historical, archaeological and landmark sites.
(10) Location of tree masses including type and approximate height.
(11) A tree survey that shall:
a. Denote the location and approximate height of those trees on
the site, including both those being removed and preserved,
§ T10B-158 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-158
BAO:1016
that are within 200 feet of the construction's limit of
disturbance, which shall include all utilities and driveway
areas, and that are eight inches caliper D.S.H. or greater. Trees
with multiple trunks shall be shown on the tree survey if the
average of the D.S.H. of the tree's multiple trunks is eight
inches caliper or greater.
b. Include a tree removal/preservation key detailing size, species
and condition of the trees shown on the survey.
c. Delineate the limit of disturbance for construction taking into
account vehicular access and egress, equipment and material
storage, grading, utilities, installation and other construction
activity that may detrimentally impact the remaining trees. The
limit of disturbance should extend to the drip line of the trees,
at a minimum and be species specific.
(d) Drainage and Utility Plan:
(1) Existing and proposed contours of site: two foot intervals.
(2) Center line profile and cross sections at twenty-five foot intervals,
for all proposed streets.
(3) Plans and profiles of proposed utility lines layouts and easements
for sewers, storm drains, water, gas, electric and CATV, as well as
parks, playgrounds and other public areas.
(4) Plan of proposed utility layout for sanitary and storm sewers,
electric, telephone, CATV, gas and street lighting.
(5) Location and type of inlets, storm and sanitary sewer pipes, swales,
berms, storm detention facilities, etc.
(6) Location of off-site/adjacent electric, telephone, gas, water, storm
and sanitary sewers and CATV servicing mains and service line
connections.
(7) Utility easements with owner entity identification.
(8) Plan, profile and grades of existing adjacent roads/street which
provide direct access into the proposed development.
(9) Proposed building setback lines for each street.
(10) If applicable, location of proposed percolation and soil logs and
results of such test on the plan for on-site private septic systems.
(11) Construction details of on-tract improvements, including street
cross sections, drainage structures, curbs, sidewalk/bicycle paths,
pipe beddings, etc.
§ T10B-158 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-158
BAO:1017
(12) Monumentation along existing and proposed right-of-way lines in
accordance with the standards set forth in N.J.S.A. 46:26A-1 et seq.
Benchmark and data from which it was derived.
(13) All streets and other areas proposed to be dedicated to the public
or designed for public use.
(14) Where the preliminary plat covers only a part of the entire parcel a
sketch of the prospective future street system of the unsubmitted
part shall be furnished. The street system of the submitted part will
be considered in the light of adjustments and connections with the
future street system of the part not submitted.
(e) Landscaping and Lighting Plan:
(1) Location, height and types of proposed plantings and/or
screenings.
(2) Location of existing trees greater than eight inch caliper with
species identification.
(3) Location of existing shrubs, hedgerows and screening.
(4) Location of existing and proposed street site lighting, height, type
and illuminair standard.
(f) Soil Map:
(1) Location of steep slopes in excess of 7%, with markings showing
slope percentages.
(2) Location of soil group type boundaries with soil identification.
(3) Location of buildings and/or storm water detention basin facilities.
(4) Location of streams, wetlands and approximate areas of aquifer
recharge and discharge.
(5) Location of areas of high water table and/or bedrock.
(g) Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan:
(1) Existing and proposed contours at two foot intervals.
(2) Location of present and proposed drains and culverts with their
discharge capacities and velocities and supporting computations
and identification of conditions below outlets.
(3) A site grading plan showing proposed cut and fill areas together
with existing and proposed profiles of these areas.
(4) All drainage and sewer easements for public purpose shall be
dedicated to the municipality unless otherwise noted.
§ T10B-158 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-158
BAO:1018
(5) Delineation of any area subject to flooding from 100-year storm in
compliance with the Flood Plains Act or applicable municipal
zoning.
(6) Delineation of streams within the project area.
(7) Location of all proposed soil erosion and sediment control facilities.
(8) Proposed sequence of development.
(9) Planned soil erosion and sediment control measures and facilities
with supporting computations based upon standards promulgated
by the New Jersey Conservation Soil Committee.
(10) Soil erosion control details.
(11) Plans for maintenance of permanent soil erosion and sediment
control measures and facilities during and after construction,
including responsibility for maintenance of facilities after the
development is completed.
(h) Requirement for Residential Cluster only:
(1) Location and extent of Common Open Space.
(2) Statement of the nature of owning entity (e.g. Homeowners'
Association), and a description of the documentation which will
provide for the maintenance of the Common Open Space in
perpetuity.
(3) An outline of the covenants and restrictions describing the rights,
limitations and obligations of the owners and occupants of the
dwelling units relative to the Common Open Space.
(4) For developments involving zero lot line units or structures, a plan
showing imaginary lot lines to demonstrate compliance with lot line
standards.
(5) Schematic plans and elevation drawings for all buildings (except
for single-family lots proposed to be sold as vacant land to
individual purchasers).
(i) Required Contents of Environmental Information Statement:
(1) Map, list and description of soil types on the site, derived from
Mercer County Soil Survey.
(2) Brief description of the surficial geology of the area.
(3) Estimate potable water demand in gallons per day and the source
of water supply.
(4) Character, estimated tonnage and method of solid waste disposal
and storage.
§ T10B-158 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-158
BAO:1019
(5) Proposed uses, processes or equipment which will affect the
ambient air quality, such as, but not limited to, those relating to
heating, air conditioning, incineration and materials processing.
(j) Applications Providing Affordable Housing:
(1) Any application involving affordable housing must include 14
copies of the following documents filled out in draft form for
attorney review:
a. For units proposed to be for sale, the affordable housing
agreement, repayment mortgage and repayment mortgage
note.
b. For units proposed for rental, declaration of covenants,
conditions and restrictions; affordable housing agreement for
rental properties.
(2) Floor plans indicating location, number of bedrooms and size of
affordable units.
(k) Required Notes for All Plans:
(1) If the extension of water mains is required, the spacing and
location of hydrants will comply with the standards of New Jersey
American Water Company and approved by the Municipal Engineer
and Fire Prevention Official.
(2) Electric, telephone, CATV and all other wire served utility
extensions and services shall be installed underground with
standards established by the servicing utility company and
approved by the municipal engineer.
(3) All drainage and sewer easements for public purposes shall be
dedicated to the municipality, unless otherwise noted.
(4) All construction to be in accordance with the final construction
plans as approved by the municipal engineer.
(5) All areas where natural vegetation and/or specimen trees are to
remain shall be protected by the erection of fencing and no
disturbance shall occur prior to inspection by the municipal
engineer and the issuance of written authorization to proceed with
construction. These protective measures shall not be altered or
removed without the approval by the municipal engineer.
(6) Information and calculations regarding proposed drainage
including total area to be paved or built upon, estimating volume
and rate of runoff, proposed changes to existing drainage, drainage
plans, and details in accordance with the municipal ordinance.
(7) Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control plan, together with report.
§ T10B-158 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-158
BAO:1020
§ T10B-159. Final major subdivision checklist. [Ord. No. 2018-11
§ 4]
The following checklist is designed to inform applicants as to what is
required in preparing final major subdivision plans for board review.
Applicants shall check off items to confirm that they are included as part of
the submission. Checklist items omitted can result in the application being
found incomplete and therefore delay consideration by the Board. Utilities,
details, profiles, etc. may be shown on separate sheets. This checklist must
be submitted with the application. Applications filed which include a waiver
request for any of the above items, shall be accompanied by a written
statement in support of each waiver request.
The total number of copies to be submitted is dependent upon which board
hears your application. This information can be found in the cover sheet of
the application.
(8) Traffic study, including widths and conditions of existing roads in
the area and impacts of the proposed developments on traffic
volumes.
(9) Required governmental licenses, permits and approvals and the
status of each.
The undersigned hereby acknowledges that the information
contained herein is true and complete to the best of its knowledge.
This_____day of_______________,20_____.
_______________
Applicant
_______________ _______________
Notary Owner
(l) Green Development Information Statement/Checklist.
Introduction. The Green Development Checklist and information
statement outlines the contents for the Information Statement and is
based on the LEED system standards for building and neighborhood
development and Sustainable Jersey’s Model Green Development
Checklist, but is not intended to be exclusive; incorporation of
additional sustainable development practices in development projects
is strongly encouraged to help Princeton become a more sustainable
community.
Editor's Note: The Green Development Information Statement/
Checklist is included as an attachment to this chapter.
(a) General Requirements:
(1) Completed application form (one original and five copies).
Maximum number of copies required is 30.
§ T10B-158 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-159
BAO:1021
(2) Complete subdivision plan signed and sealed by appropriate
professional pursuant to State licensing requirements Section
N.J.S.A. 45:8-45 (6 copies). Maximum number of copies required is
30.
(3) Plans not to exceed 24 inches by 36 inches and all sheets must be
the same size. All plans must be collated and folded. Maximum
number of copies required is 30.
(4) Application and Escrow Fees. Separate checks required.
(5) Fire Protection Plan in accordance with Municipal Code Section
10B-109.1 through § T10B-109.4 (6 copies). Maximum number of
copies required is 30.
a. Fire protection map (14 copies. Maximum number of copies
required is 30.) indicating:
1. Existing and proposed hydrants.
2. Distances between hydrants.
3. Distances to nearest hydrant.
4. Watermain location, size and location where supply is
coming from.
b. Narrative containing information regarding the relevant fire
protection sector as well as distances and spacing of fire
hydrants. (14 copies to be submitted.) Maximum number of
copies required is 30. This information must also include:
1. Exposure distances.
2. Accessibility of fire hydrants.
3. Demonstrating that fire flows at nearby fire hydrants,
meets or exceeds municipal standards.
4. Size and type of building construction.
5. Intended use and occupancy of building.
6. Fire protection practices.
(6) Completed checklist. (Six copies) Maximum number of copies
required is 30.
(7) Certificate from the Tax Collector stating that all taxes and
assessments paid to date.
(8) If required, completed variance appeal form and/or conditional use
form (six copies). Maximum number of copies required is 30.
(9) Completed W-9 and escrow agreement.
§ T10B-159 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-159
BAO:1022
(10) Submission of historic preservation plan when property is located
in a historic district or suggested historic district as identified in
the Princeton Master Plan, pursuant to municipal ordinances
including:
a. Photographs of the property in question and surrounding
properties.
b. Product specifications, where appropriate.
c. Elevations and details for proposed new construction.
d. Floor plans.
e. Documentation sufficient to demonstrate how the proposed
improvement appears in context.
f. Archaeological and historic sites survey.
g. Archaeological and historic sites construction protocol.
h. Delineated historic protection area or pre-mapped historic
preservation area.
i. When available, historic photographs, maps, plot plans and
other historic site documentation.
j. Plot plan of property showing location of all existing and
proposed structures, with relationship to surrounding
building(s) on adjoining properties, zoning setback,
driveways(s), and existing and proposed utilities.
(b) Subdivision Plat: legibly drawn or reproduced at a scale of not less than
(one inch equal 100 feet). Plats shall be drawn by a land surveyor
licensed by the state.
(1) The final plat shall be accompanied by a statement from the
municipal engineer that he has received a map showing all utilities
and all other required on-tract improvements in exact location and
elevation, identifying those portions already installed and those to
be installed and specifying those utilities and other on-tract
improvements that are to be covered by performance or
maintenance guarantees.
(2) At a minimum: one corner of the plat should have horizontal
coordinates and vertical datum based upon municipal
monumentation. If available, applicant is to provide the subdivision
plat in digital format using NJ State Plane Coordinates (NAD 83 &
NGVD 88).
(3) The final plat of a subdivision showing any bridge or culvert across
or under a public road or street within the subdivision shall be
accompanied by a statement from the engineer of jurisdiction that
he has approved the final construction plans for any such bridges
§ T10B-159 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-159
BAO:1023
and culverts shown thereon and specifying the amount deemed
necessary to be included in any performance guarantee to assure
the completion thereof.
(c) Final Subdivision Plat: legibly drawn or reproduced at a scale of not less
than (one inch equal 100 feet). Final plats shall be drawn by a land
surveyor licensed by the state.
(1) Tract name.
(2) Tax Map sheet, lot and block numbers.
(3) Date, north arrow and graphic scale (min. one inch equal 200 feet).
(4) Name, address and signature of record owner.
(5) Name and address of applicant (if other than owner).
(6) Property owners in schedule form 200 feet of parcel.
(7) Key Map at a scale of one inch equals 400 feet, showing following
information within 500 feet of the property.
a. Zoning districts and boundary delineations.
b. Streets and roads.
c. Streams, water courses, bodies of water, and property lines.
d. Master Plan designations.
e. Block and lot numbers.
(8) Name, address and seal of person who prepared map.
(9) Acreage of tract to be subdivided, to the nearest 10th of an acre.
(10) Sufficient elevations or contours to determine the general slope
and natural drainage of the land and the high and low points and
cross sections and center line profiles for all proposed new streets.
(11) Tract boundary lines, all lot lines and other site lines with accurate
dimensions, bearings or deflection angles and radii areas and
central angles of all curves.
(12) Right-of-way lines of streets, easements and other rights-of-way.
(13) Land to be reserved or dedicated to public use.
(14) Proposed street names.
(15) The designation of the purpose of any easement or land reserved to
public use shall be designated and the proposed use of sites, other
than residential, shall be noted.
§ T10B-159 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-159
BAO:1024
(16) Plans and profiles of proposed utility layouts, including sewers,
storm drains, water, gas and electricity showing feasible
connections to existing or any proposed utility systems.
(17) Proposed lot and street numbers as obtained from the municipal
engineer. Each block shall be numbered and the lots within each
block shall be numbered consecutively.
(18) All required setback lines on each lot.
(19) Location and elevation of a permanent benchmark together with a
notation as to the datum from which it was established. Location
and description of monuments.
(20) Acreage of all proposed lots to the nearest hundredths.
(21) Names of owners, lot numbers and block for all adjoining land.
(22) If applicable, percolation and soil log test for each lot if they have
not been made and shown on the preliminary plat for each lot.
(23) Certification by engineer or surveyor as to accuracy of details of
plat.
(24) Certification that the applicant or agency or owner of the land has
given consent under an option agreement.
(25) Zoning regulations for district and proposed dimensions in
schedule form (showing required, existing and proposed
conditions).
(26) Location of existing buildings, driveways and service utilities and
notation as to being removed or retained.
(27) Monumentation along existing and proposed right-of-way lines in
accordance with the standards set forth in N.J.S.A. 46:26A-1 et seq.
(28) Master Plan designations for right-of-way, open space, recreation
etc.
(29) When approval of a plat is required by any officer or body of a
municipality, county or state, such approval shall be certified by the
Board Secretary or Municipal Clerk on the plat source pursuant
N.J.S.A. 46:26A-1 et seq.
(30) Title Block in compliance with N.J.S.A. 13:40-1.1 et seq.
(d) Required Notes for All Plans:
(1) If the extension of water mains is required, the spacing and
location of hydrants will comply with the standards of New Jersey
American Water Company and approved by the Municipal Engineer
and Fire Prevention Official.
§ T10B-159 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-159
BAO:1025
(2) Electric, telephone, CATV and all other wire served utility
extensions and services shall be installed underground with
standards established by the servicing utility company and
approved by the municipal engineer.
(3) All drainage and sewer easements for public purposes shall be
dedicated to the municipality, unless otherwise noted.
(4) All construction to be in accordance with the final construction
plans as approved by the municipal engineer.
(5) All areas where natural vegetation and/or specimen trees are to
remain shall be protected by the erection of fencing and no
disturbance shall occur prior to inspection by the municipal
engineer and the issuance of written authorization to proceed with
construction. These protective measures shall not be altered or
removed without the approval by the municipal engineer.
(6) All street lighting to be approved by the municipal engineer.
(e) Requirements for Residential Clusters:
(1) The location and extent of common open space, with accurate
dimensions, bearings and acreage.
(2) Documentation of title to common open space and the
documentation establishing the owning entity, in final and
recordable form subject to and accompanied by the approval of the
municipal attorney and board attorney.
(3) For developments involving zero lot line units or structures, a plan
showing imaginary lot lines to demonstrate compliance with
required lot line standards.
(4) The declaration of covenants and restrictions in final and
recordable form, subject to and accompanied by the approval of the
municipal attorney and board attorney.
(5) Plans and elevation drawings for all buildings (except for single
family lots proposed to be sold as vacant land to individual
purchasers).
The undersigned, hereby acknowledges that the information
contained herein is true and complete to the best of its knowledge.
This _____ day of _______________, 20_____.
_______________
Applicant
_______________ _______________
Notary Owner
§ T10B-159 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-159
BAO:1026
DIVISION 6
Required On-Tract Improvements
§ T10B-160. Required improvements; installation; guarantees.
[Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
The following improvements shall be installed by the subdivider before
final approval is granted, or such approval shall be conditioned upon the
subdivider's furnishing of guarantees for the installation and maintenance
of said improvements in accordance with Section 10B-133:
(a) Streets. All new streets shall be graded and surfaced in keeping with
the specifications and standards approved by the Governing Body and
on file in the office of the municipal engineer, and in accordance with
the NJDOT Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction
(latest edition with all baseline document change incorporated). The
minimum pavement section shall be two inches of bituminous concrete
surface course, Mix I-5; over five inches of bituminous stabilized base
course, Mix I-2; over five inches of compacted dense graded aggregate
base course; over compacted subgrade to 95% standard proctor
density.
Right of way and cartway widths shall be in accordance with the
standards found in the Princeton Community Master Plan Appendix
B-1.
(b) Street signs. Appropriate street signs meeting the MUTCD standards
approved by the municipal engineer as to size and location shall be
installed at the intersection of all streets.
(c) Shade trees. Shade trees shall be planted along each side of every new
street at intervals, in types, sizes and locations according to standards
adopted by the Governing Body on file in the office of the municipal
engineer.
(d) Topsoil protection. No topsoil shall be removed from the site or used as
spoil. Topsoil moved during the course of construction shall be
redistributed within the area of the subdivision.
(e) Monuments. Monuments shall be of the size and shape required by
N.J.S.A. 46:26A-1 et seq. and shall be placed in accordance therewith.
(f) Storm drains, sanitary sewers and utilities. Storm drains and sewers,
culverts, sanitary sewers, septic tanks and all utilities shall be installed
in each subdivision in accordance with standards approved by the
municipal engineer and acceptable to the Governing Body. All such
installations shall be connected with an approved system and shall be
adequate for all present and probable future development of the
subdivision.
(g) Curbs. Curbs shall be constructed and installed along all streets in
accordance with the specifications adopted by the Governing Body and
§ T10B-160 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-160
BAO:1027
on file in the offices of the municipal clerk and the municipal engineer,
as such specifications may be amended from time to time by the
Governing Body; provided, that the Planning Board may waive this
requirement as to curbs along streets or parts of streets where the
street grade is 3.5% or less, but only if the Board finds that curbs
are unnecessary, with regard to the proper channeling of waters, the
elevation of adjoining lands, the permeability of adjacent soils and the
ability of such soils to absorb water from street surfaces.
(h) Wired-served utilities. Distribution supply lines, services and street
lighting supply facilities for electricity, telephone and other wire-served
utilities shall be installed underground and in accordance with the
specifications of the serving utility company and with the provisions of
the applicable standard terms and conditions incorporated as a part of
the company's tariff, as such are then on file with the state board of
public utility commissioners; provided, that the utility company
approves such installation. The subdivider shall request such
installation of the serving utility company and shall submit to the
Planning Board a written instrument from such company evidencing its
disposition of such request. If approved and if so directed by the
Planning Board, the subdivider shall arrange with the utility company
for such underground installation. In connection with underground
installations, the subdivider shall install street lighting standards of a
type and in the manner approved by the Planning Board.
(i) Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be constructed on both sides of any new
road. On existing roads sidewalks shall be constructed and installed in
conformance with the master plan except in cases where the Planning
Board finds that such a sidewalk will neither (a) extend an existing
sidewalk or one whose construction is imminent, nor (b) serve a
substantial existing need regardless of connection to other sidewalks.
In all cases where the Planning Board finds that sidewalks need not be
constructed, the developer shall provide an in-lieu payment equal to the
cost to the municipality of constructing the sidewalk. Sidewalks shall be
constructed and installed in such other cases (whether or not shown on
the master plan) where the Planning Board shall determine that the
public safety or convenience will thereby be served by reason of:
(1) The actual or prospective density of population in the subdivision
and surrounding areas:
(2) The size and character of the streets in the subdivision and their
relation to the existing or prospective traffic pattern of the
municipality; or
(3) The relationship of the subdivision to actual or prospective public
service areas such as business districts, park or recreation areas or
school sites and the actual or reasonable anticipated pedestrian or
bicycle traffic generated or to be generated thereby.
§ T10B-160 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-160
BAO:1028
§ T10B-161. Inspection and approval by municipal engineer; cost of
inspection to be paid by developer. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
Where sidewalks are required, sidewalks shall be a minimum of five
feet wide and located as approved by the Board. Sidewalks shall
be 4,500 psi concrete or an equivalent approved by the Board and
shall be constructed in accordance with NJDOT specifications.
(j) Bicycle paths. Bicycle paths shall be constructed in conformance with
the master plan except in cases where the Planning Board finds that
such a bicycle path will neither (a) extend an existing bicycle path or
one whose construction is imminent, nor (b) serve a substantial existing
need regardless of connection to other bicycle paths. In all cases where
the Planning Board finds that the bicycle path need not be constructed,
the developer shall provide an in-lieu payment equal to the cost to the
municipality of constructing the bicycle path. Bicycle paths shall be
constructed and installed in such other cases (whether or not shown on
the master plan) where the Planning Board shall determine that the
public safety or convenience will thereby be served by reason of:
(1) The actual or prospective density of population in the subdivision
and surrounding areas;
(2) The size and character of the streets in the subdivision and their
relation to the existing or prospective traffic pattern of the
municipality; or
(3) The relationship of the subdivision to actual or prospective public
service areas such as business districts, park or recreation areas or
school sites and the actual or reasonable anticipated pedestrian or
bicycle traffic generated or to be generated thereby.
(a) All of the improvements listed in the preceding section shall be subject
to inspection and approval by the municipal engineer, who shall be
notified by the developer at least one business day prior to the start of
construction. No underground installation shall be covered until
inspected and approved.
(b) The cost of inspection by the municipal engineer shall be deemed part
of the cost of such improvements and shall be borne by the developer
and paid to the municipality in accordance with the provisions of
Section 10B-32(d).
§ T10B-160 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-161
BAO:1029

DIVISION 7
Off-Tract Improvements
§ T10B-162. Essential off-tract connections. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
In cases in which a proposed subdivision has no direct access to a public
street or in which it has no direct access to a public sanitary sewer and
does not qualify for sewage disposal by individual septic systems, whereby
the subdivision cannot qualify for approval under this article, the Planning
Board may nevertheless grant preliminary approval upon condition that the
subdivider acquire, improve and dedicate to the municipality such street or
sewer connection between the subdivision and an existing public street or
sanitary sewer, as the case may be, as shall be approved by the Planning
Board. Such off-tract connections shall be subject to the provisions of this
article as if they were required on-tract improvements. The dedication
thereof shall be subject to approval of the municipal attorney as to form.
The provisions of this section shall be applicable only upon the request and
with the consent of the subdivider.
§ T10B-163. Off-tract improvements. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
(a) The Planning Board shall require, as a condition of final subdivision or
site plan approval, that the developer pay his pro rata share of the cost
of providing only reasonable and necessary street improvements and
water, sewerage and drainage facilities, and easements therefor,
located outside the property limits of the development but necessitated
or required by construction or improvements within such development.
Such contribution for a developer's pro rata share shall only be
required where the off-tract improvements are to be constructed
pursuant to provisions of the circulation and comprehensive utility
service plans included in the Princeton community master plan. The
developer shall contribute his pro rata share of the costs, except that in
the case where all costs for the required improvements can be properly
allocated to the developer, the developer may be required to install the
improvement.
(b) The developer shall pay the full cost or shall be required to construct
off-tract improvements that are wholly necessitated by the proposed
development where said improvements do not benefit any land other
than the land within the subdivision or site plan.
(c) The developer shall pay the developer's pro rata share of the cost of
providing reasonable and necessary street improvements and water,
sewerage and drainage facilities, and easements therefor, located
outside the property limits of the developer's subdivision or
development but necessitated or required by construction or
improvements within such subdivision or development. Such
improvements shall be deemed reasonable and necessary when they
are set forth in the circulation plan element and the utility service plan
element of the Master Plan.
§ T10B-162 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-163
BAO:1031
(d) The standards by which the Board shall determine the proportionate or
pro rata amount of the cost of the facilities to be borne by each
developer or owner within a related and common area shall not be
altered subsequent to preliminary subdivision or site plan approval, as
the case may be. The allocation of costs shall be based on the following
standards:
(1) The Board shall consider the total cost of the off-site improvements,
the benefits conferred upon the subdivision or development, the
needs created by the subdivision or development, population and
land use projections for the general areas of the subdivision or
development and other areas to be served by the off-site
improvements, and the condition and periods of usefulness.
(2) Road, curb, gutter and sidewalk improvements shall be based upon
the anticipated increase of traffic generated by the subdivision or
development of the tract. In determining such traffic increase, the
Board may consider traffic counts, existing and projected traffic
patterns, condition of roads and sidewalks in the area and other
factors related to the need created by the subdivision or
development and the anticipated benefit thereto.
(3) Drainage facilities shall be based upon the percentage relationship
between the subdivision acreage or tract being developed, as the
case may be, and the acreage of the total drainage basins involved.
(4) Sewerage facilities shall be based upon the proportion that the
subdivision's or development's total anticipated volume of sewage
effluent bears to the existing capacity of existing and proposed
sewage facilities, including but not limited to lines and other
appurtenances leading to and servicing the subdivision or tract
being developed. The Board may also consider types of effluent and
particular problems requiring special equipment or added costs for
treatment.
(5) Water supply and distribution facilities shall be based upon the
added facilities required by the total anticipated water use
requirements of the subdivision or tract being developed.
(6) Where an applicant or developer pays the amount determined as its
pro rata share under protest, they must institute legal action within
one year of such payment in order to preserve the right to a judicial
determination as to the fairness and reasonableness of such
amount.
(e) Any money received by the municipality for off-tract improvements to
be constructed or installed by the municipality pursuant to the
provisions of this section shall be deposited in a suitable depository
therefor and shall be used only for the improvements for which they are
deposited or improvements satisfying the same purpose. If construction
of improvements for which the municipality is responsible has not
commenced within 10 years from the date of deposit, the amount
§ T10B-163 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-163
BAO:1032
deposited together with any interest thereon shall be returned to the
developer or his successor in interest.
§ T10B-163 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-163
BAO:1033

DIVISION 8
Design Standards
§ T10B-164. Compliance with division. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
Subdivision plats shall conform to the following standards and, if proposed
for property located in a historic preservation zoning district or historic
preservation buffer zoning district, to the standards and criteria set forth
in Article XIII, Historic Preservation. They shall be designed so as to
encourage good development patterns within the municipality. Subdivisions
shall conform to the proposals and conditions shown on the official map
and the master plan. The streets, drainage rights-of-way, school sites, public
parks and playgrounds shown on an officially adopted master plan or official
map shall be considered in approval of subdivision plats, shall be shown
on final plats and shall be such as to lend themselves to the harmonious
development of the municipality and enhance the public welfare in
accordance with the design standards established by this division. In the
design review of subdivisions, the Planning Board may, at its discretion,
seek the advice of qualified professionals, or municipal agencies, citizen
groups, commissions or the like.
§ T10B-165. Arrangement of streets. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
The arrangement of streets shall be such as to provide for the appropriate
continuous extension of existing, mapped or potential streets, which shall
be without offset intersections in the case of streets other than local streets,
and so oriented as to permit, within the limits of practicability and feasibility
the buildings constructed thereon to maximize solar gain.
§ T10B-166. Heavy traffic on local streets to be discouraged. [Ord.
No. 2018-11 § 4]
A local street shall be designed so as to discourage through or heavy traffic
in two ways:
§ T10B-167. Measurement and width of right of way; right of way of
existing nonconforming streets. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
The right-of-way width of streets shall be measured from lot line to lot line
and shall not be less than 50 feet or such greater width as shall be shown
on the master plan or official map, if such exists.
§ T10B-168. Additional width to be dedicated to right-of-way of
existing nonconforming streets. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
(a) It generally should be so laid out as not to provide a "short cut" to
streets or property beyond the proposed subdivision.
(b) Potential speed of traffic should be discouraged by curved alignment or
other means.
§ T10B-164 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-168
BAO:1035
§ T10B-169. Marginal service road or reverse frontage. [Ord. No.
2018-11 § 4]
Subdivisions abutting streets other than local streets shall provide a
marginal service road or reverse frontage with a buffer strip for planting or
such other means of separation of through and local traffic as the Planning
Board may determine appropriate. The Board may waive this requirement
where because of the size, shape or topography of a parcel, it shall be
impracticable to provide such marginal service road or reverse frontage, or
where the subdivision shall involve only change in the common boundary of
adjacent lots without the creation of any additional lots.
§ T10B-170. Reserve strips to be placed under municipality's
control. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
No subdivision showing reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be
approved except where the control and disposal of land comprising such
strips has been placed in the municipality under conditions approved by the
Planning Board.
§ T10B-171. Required grades. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
Grades of local streets shall not exceed 10%. Grades on other streets shall
not exceed 7%. No street shall have a minimum grade of less than 0.7 of
1%.
(a) Subdivisions that adjoin or include existing streets that do not conform
to widths as shown on the master plan or official map or the street
width requirements of this division shall dedicate additional width
along either one or both sides of the road. If the subdivision is along one
side only, one-half of the required extra width shall be dedicated.
(b) Improvements to existing roads contiguous to the property are the sole
responsibility of the developer, who shall reconstruct such roadway to
the center line and extend all related utilities through the improved
section.
(c) Reconstruction of existing municipal roads on the opposite side of the
center line deemed necessary by the municipal engineer to assure
roadway safety shall be the responsibility of the developer along
undeveloped frontage. If the adjoining property is developed within a
period of 10 years, the developer shall be reimbursed by the owner or
developer of the adjoining or affected property for cost of the widening
beyond the center line. The cost of the reimbursement shall be
established at the time of initial construction of the improvement as a
portion of the performance bond.
§ T10B-168 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-172
BAO:1036
§ T10B-172. Changes in grade. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
All changes in grade where the grade is 1% or greater shall be connected by
vertical curves of sufficient radius to provide a smooth transition and proper
sight distance, but not so great as to create drainage problems.
§ T10B-173. Intersections. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
Street intersections shall be as nearly right angles as is practicable and in
no case shall an intersection be less than 60°. Curb or paving line radii at
street intersections shall be not less than 30 feet and property line radii
shall be not less than 20 feet. A diagonal cutoff may be substituted for a
rounded property line, provided that visibility, sidewalk width and curb or
paving line radii are not reduced thereby.
§ T10B-174. Jog offsets of less than 250 feet to be avoided. [Ord.
No. 2018-11 § 4]
Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 250 feet shall be avoided.
Streets other than local streets shall be continuous and any offset avoided.
§ T10B-175. Deflection in connecting street lines. [Ord. No.
2018-11 § 4]
When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any one point by
more than 10°, they shall be connected by a curve with a radius of not
less than 300 feet for local streets and 500 feet for streets other than local
streets.
§ T10B-176. Reverse curves. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between reverse curves
on streets other than local streets.
§ T10B-177. Dead ends. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
Dead end streets (cul-de-sacs) may not serve more than 25 lots and shall
provide a turnaround at the end with a radius of not less than 60 feet
tangent, whenever practicable, to the right of the street. If a dead end
street is of a temporary nature, a similar turnaround shall be provided
and provisions made for future extension of the street and reversion of the
excess right of way to the adjoining properties.
§ T10B-178. Street names. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
No street shall have a name that duplicates another or so nearly duplicates
another as to be confused with the names of existing streets. The
continuation of an existing street shall have the same name.
§ T10B-172 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-178.1
BAO:1037
§ T10B-178.1. Street lighting. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
Subdivision plats shall conform to the following design standards with
regard to the installation of street lights:
§ T10B-179. Access to major subdivisions. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
In order to minimize potential dangers and inconveniences from the
blocking of a single access to the existing street system and to promote
the circulation of emergency vehicles and services, every major subdivision
involving a new street shall, unless the Planning Board shall specifically
find that such is not practicable, be served by not less than two access
streets to the existing street system and, if possible, connecting to two
different streets in the existing street system, provided that such access
streets are on land controlled by the subdivider. Such access streets shall
be so designed as to discourage through traffic.
In addition, for the greater convenience of the public, if such subdivision
contains 15 or more lots and a street access to the existing street system is
at or near one end of the subdivision with no access street at the other end,
at least one bicycle path on an easement not less than 12 feet in width shall,
unless the Planning Board shall specifically find that such is not practicable,
be provided to give access to the street system at or near the opposite end
of such subdivision in such location as shall be determined by the Planning
Board, provided that such path is on land controlled by the subdivider.
(a) All plats shall contain a street lighting layout utilizing underground
wiring facilities which are to be installed within the proposed
development.
(b) Street lights shall only be installed at all entrances to the new
developments intersecting with the municipality's existing road system,
at all road intersections, curves in the road, cul-de-sacs throughout the
development and other hazardous areas as determined by the
municipality.
(c) The street light wiring layout shall allow for street lights at an average
staggered spacing of 250 feet.
(d) Street lights shall be activated prior to the issuance of the first
certificate of occupancy within any new development.
(e) Street lights shall be installed on gray laminated wooden poles with a
luminary mounted at a twenty-one foot mounting height or on black
fiberglass poles with a luminary mounted at a thirteen-foot mounting
height. LED lighting fixtures of 20 watts shall be installed except at
intersections where 36 watt fixtures shall be installed.
(f) In addition to complying with the requirements set forth hereinabove,
the requirements set forth in Chapter 19, Article VI, Street Lights, of
the Princeton Township Code.
§ T10B-178.1 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-180
BAO:1038
§ T10B-180. Blocks. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due
regard to:
§ T10B-181. Lot size generally. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
Lot dimensions and area shall conform to the requirements of Article XI of
this Chapter.
§ T10B-182. Side lot lines. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
Insofar as is practicable, side lot lines shall be at right angles or radial to
street lines.
§ T10B-183. Lot frontage. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
Each residential lot shall front on an approved local street of the width
required by this article. For subdivisions abutting streets other than local
streets, such frontage requirement may be satisfied by providing frontage
on a marginal service road or by providing reverse frontage. If, however,
because of the size, shape or topography of a parcel, it shall be
impracticable to provide such marginal service road or reverse frontage, or
if the subdivision involves only change in the common boundary of adjacent
lots, without the creation of any additional lots, the Planning Board may
waive the requirement of frontage on a local street and may permit such
frontage to be on a street other than a local street.
§ T10B-184. Building or set back lines. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
Building or set back lines conforming to Article XI of this Chapter and
the lawful requirements of any other municipal, county or state authority
shall be established. The Planning Board shall have the right to prescribe
a building or setback line of greater depth, but not exceeding 50 feet, in
cases in which the Planning Board shall determine that the public safety,
welfare or convenience will thereby be served by reason of the character
or volume of vehicular traffic, either actual or reasonably to be anticipated,
(a) Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the
type of use contemplated.
(b) Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions.
(c) Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street
traffic.
(d) Limitations and opportunities of topography.
(e) Driveway access to residential property being only by local streets.
(f) Block sizes being sufficient to meet all area, yard and parking
requirements of such particular uses, in the case of other than singlefamily
residential uses.
§ T10B-180 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-184
BAO:1039
in the abutting street, regard being given to the nature of the permitted
uses in the subdivision and the relationship of such street to the existing or
prospective traffic pattern of the municipality.
§ T10B-185. Denial of subdivision under unusual suitability
conditions. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
§ T10B-186. Service easements. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
In large scale developments, easements along rear property lines or
elsewhere for utility installation may be required. Such easements shall be
at least 15 feet wide and located in consultation with the companies or
municipal departments concerned.
§ T10B-187. Storm water easements. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, channel
or street, there shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage
right of way conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourse,
and such further width or construction or both as will be adequate for the
purpose.
§ T10B-188. Preservation of natural features. [Ord. No. 2018-11
§ 4]
Natural features such as trees, brooks, hilltops and views shall be preserved
whenever possible in designing any subdivision containing such features.
§ T10B-188.1. Fire protection plan. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
Each application for development seeking subdivision approval shall submit
a fire protection plan in accordance with the requirements of Article IV,
Division 14 of this Chapter.
(a) Where there is a question as to the suitability of lots for their intended
use due to factors such as steep slopes, stream corridors, rock
formations, flood conditions or similar circumstances, the Planning
Board may, after adequate investigation, withhold approval of such lots.
(b) The Planning Board may deny an application for subdivision approval
where a significant portion of the tract is unsuitable for development by
reason of its geology and topography or other significant natural
features (such as landscape, stands of mature trees, brooks, ponds,
hilltops, and views) or other environmental or ecological constraints; or
where the proposed development would substantially degrade unique
or irreplaceable land types or the critical areas specified in Section
10B-233(h) or substantially impair the regenerative capacity of aquifers
and other ground water supplies; or where the proposed development
would not permit the preservation of historic sites in an appropriate
setting. In such cases, the Planning Board may suggest to the applicant
that it consider resubmitting the application as a residential cluster.
§ T10B-184 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-188.1
BAO:1040
DIVISION 9
Residential Clusters
§ T10B-189. Statement of purpose. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
The Municipal Council to implement the goals and objectives of the
Princeton master plan has determined that the residential cluster
development technique should be allowed and encouraged in particular
zoning districts as an alternative to conventional development, in order:
(a) To allow for innovation in residential development to meet the demands
of the citizens for a variety of housing types, sizes, designs and forms of
ownership and affordable housing opportunities.
(b) To provide a flexible design method which can relate the type and
layout of residential developments to the particular site constraints and
to the particular demands for housing and related facilities.
(c) To protect environmentally sensitive lands, such as stream corridors,
steep slopes and other critical site features and natural resources by
requiring that the more fragile areas of the site remain in preserved
open space.
(d) To allow the most developable areas of the site to be more intensely
developed in return for retaining other portions of the site in common
open space.
(e) To allow residential developments to be designed and constructed at a
lower cost per dwelling unit for streets, utilities, and other site
improvements.
(f) To reduce the amount of blasting and other subsurface disturbances
required for street and utility installations.
(g) To provide for recreation facilities which are appropriate to the needs
and convenient to the residents of the development.
(h) To allow for the installation of pedestrian and bicycle circulation
networks to serve the residents of the development and which are
integrated with the other community facilities.
(i) To provide a desirable visual environment through creative
development techniques and design arrangements related to the
particular site.
(j) To provide substantive and administrative regulations which can
control development pressures so that the flexibility and innovation
allowed is channeled into developments which accomplish the purposes
herein stated.
§ T10B-189 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-189.1
BAO:1041
§ T10B-189.1. Required findings. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
The Planning Board shall grant preliminary subdivision and/or site plan
approval for proposed residential cluster applications only if it finds and
reduces to writing the following facts and conclusions:
§ T10B-190. Application for approval generally. [Ord. No. 2018-11
§ 4]
An applicant when submitting a development application for major
subdivision or site plan approval, may at the same time seek approval of a
residential cluster if the development is located in a zoning district in which
residential clusters are permitted uses. All applications for residential
clusters shall include sufficient information to enable the Planning Board
to determine whether the requirements of this division have been met. In
addition, all provisions of this Chapter relating to subdivision and site plan
approval shall apply, except as modified by the provisions of this division.
The design standards and plat details of the subdivision article shall apply
even if only site plan approval is required. All applicants seeking approval
of a residential cluster development are encouraged to utilize the concept
review procedure pursuant to Section 10B-9 before applying for preliminary
approval.
(a) That departures by the proposed development from zoning regulations,
if any, otherwise applicable to the tract conform to the applicable
standards of this division;
(b) That the proposals for maintenance and conservation of the common
open space are reliable and such common open space is consistent with
the requirements for same as hereinafter set forth in this division.
(c) That adequate provision has been made through the physical design of
the residential cluster for public services, control over vehicular and
pedestrian traffic, the amenities of light and air, and recreation and
visual enjoyment.
(d) That the residential cluster will not have an unreasonably adverse
impact upon the area in which it is proposed to be established. This
evaluation shall include reference to the Natural Resources Inventory.
(e) In the case of a residential cluster which contemplates construction
over a period of years, that the terms and conditions intended to protect
the interests of the public and of the residents, occupants and owners of
the proposed development in the total completion of the development
are adequate.
(f) That the residential cluster complies with all applicable requirements of
this division and chapter.
§ T10B-189.1 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-190.1
BAO:1042
§ T10B-190.1. Applications for preliminary approval. [Ord. No.
2018-11 § 4]
In addition to the requirements for preliminary subdivision and site plan
approval set forth in this Chapter, the following information shall be shown
on or shall accompany the application for preliminary approval of a cluster
development:
§ T10B-190.2. Applications for final approval. [Ord. No. 2018-11
§ 4]
In addition to the requirements for final subdivision and site plan approval
set forth in this Chapter, the following information shall be shown on or
shall accompany the application for final approval of a cluster development:
(a) Data on or accompanying the preliminary plat showing the location and
extent of common open space, a statement of the nature of the owning
entity, such as a homeowner's association, and a description of the
documentation which will provide for the retention and maintenance of
the common open space for open space uses in perpetuity.
(b) An outline of the covenants and restrictions describing the rights,
limitations and obligations of the owners and occupants of the dwelling
units relative to the common open space and its appurtenant facilities
and to the dwelling units and their appurtenant land and facilities, and
in the entity which will own or control the common open space.
(c) If all or a portion of the development will involve zero lot line units or
structures, a plat shall be submitted showing imaginary lot lines
superimposed to show compliance with the required lot line standards
of this division.
(d) Schematic plans and elevation drawings for all buildings whether or not
the applicant plans to be responsible for the construction, except that
elevations for single family structures need not be submitted if the
applicant proposes to sell such house lots as vacant land to individual
purchasers.
(a) The location and extent of common open space, with accurate
dimensions, bearings and acreage.
(b) Documentation of title to common open space, and the documentation
establishing the owning entity, in final and recordable form, subject to
and accompanied by the approval of the municipal attorney all in
accordance with the preliminary approval. The documentation of title
shall be recorded in the office of the county clerk, and a copy of such
recorded documentation certified by the county clerk shall be furnished
to the municipality by and at the cost and expense of the applicant after
the approval of the final plat. The documentation establishing the
owning entity shall, if necessary, be filed with the Secretary of State and
a certified copy shall be furnished to the municipality by and at the cost
and expense of the applicant after the approval of the final plat.
§ T10B-190.1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-190.2
BAO:1043
§ T10B-191. Permitted uses. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
The following uses or any combination thereof are permitted in a residential
cluster:
§ T10B-191.1. Minimum tract size; contiguous lands. [Ord. No.
2018-11 § 4]
(c) The declaration of covenants and restrictions, in final and recordable
form, subject to and accompanied by the approval of the municipal
attorney, all in accordance with the terms of the preliminary approval
including documentation to insure the retention and maintenance of the
common open space for open space use in perpetuity. Such
documentation shall be recorded in the office of the county clerk and a
copy of such recorded documentation certified by the county clerk shall
be furnished to the municipality by and at the cost and expense of the
applicant after the approval of the final plat.
(d) A deed in recordable form which provides that any local property taxes
that would otherwise be assessed against common open space shall
instead be assessed against the residential units within the
development that have a right of enjoyment of said common open space
in proportion to the assessed values of said units, and said deed shall
further provide that any amounts so assessed against the residential
units shall thereupon become a lien and tax on said units and be added
to and be part of the taxes to be levied and assessed thereon and
enforced and collected with interest by the same officers and in the
same manner as other taxes.
(e) Building drawings as required by Section 10B-230 for all buildings for
which plans and elevation drawings are required by subsection (d) of
Section 10B-190.1.
(a) Single family structures. Conversion of single family structures to two
family structures shall be prohibited.
(b) Two family structures.
(c) Multi-family structures other than townhouses, limited to a maximum of
20% of the units in the development. Multi-family structures shall only
be permitted in residential clusters on tracts of more than 25 acres.
(d) Townhouse structures.
(e) Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to the principal
uses allowed herein.
(a) Each residential cluster shall consist of at least six contiguous acres
except that at least eight contiguous acres shall be required in the R-A
district.
§ T10B-190.2 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-191.1
BAO:1044
§ T10B-191.2. Permitted gross density. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
(b) An application for approval of a residential cluster shall include all
undeveloped contiguous land in the same ownership unless this
requirement is waived by the Board. Undeveloped land includes the
portion of a developed lot which is in excess of the minimum lot sizes for
the zoning district. The standard for granting a waiver from this
requirement is whether the contiguous undeveloped land sought to be
excluded can be separately developed with no greater adverse
environmental impact than if developed as part of the proposed cluster.
For this purpose conceptual plans shall be submitted showing how the
contiguous undeveloped land could be separately developed.
(c) Public streets shall not be deemed to make land non-contiguous for
purposes of this section.
(a) Maximum gross density. The maximum number of dwelling units
permitted in a residential cluster is the number of dwelling units which
could be constructed on the tract (excluding the area of existing and
proposed streets) if the tract were being developed as a conventional
development in conformance with the zoning regulations set forth in
Section 10B-246 and related provisions for the zoning district in which
the tract is located. In determining the number of dwelling units, lots
which are precluded because of unusable areas shall not be counted.
For purposes of this section "unusable areas" shall be determined with
reference to Section 10B-254.1 (steep slopes), Section 10B-238 (flood
hazard areas), Section 10B-233(h) (wetlands) and Section 10B-185
(other unusual suitability conditions). In applications in which it is
proposed that the maximum gross density is to be computed under
subsections (b) or (c) of this section, the applicant may submit a
schematic test subdivision for a conventional development for purposes
of demonstrating that the alternative computation under subsection (b)
will not exceed by more than 50% the number of units which could be
produced under a conventional development, unless the municipal
engineer determines that a more detailed submission is required.
(b) Cluster density bonus. A density bonus, computed as hereinafter stated,
is hereby authorized for residential clusters which in addition to
meeting the basic requirements of this division (residential clusters)
achieves one or more of the following design objectives:
(1) Residential clusters designed with walking paths of at least 1,000
lineal feet at locations through the common open space approved
by the Planning Board, with the use of those walking paths being
dedicated by easement to the municipality for the use of the
general public; or
(2) Residential clusters designed with more than 50% common open
space; or
§ T10B-191.1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-191.2
BAO:1045
(3) Residential clusters designed with an active recreation area of at
least one-half acre, dedicated and conveniently accessible to the
public, provided that the Municipal Council has agreed to accept
said dedication. This area may also be counted toward the
developer's obligation to provide on-site active recreation areas for
the residents of the development; or
(4) Residential clusters which dedicate suitable land for affordable
housing provided the Municipal Council has agreed to accept said
dedication. The dedicated land must have:
a. Sewer service or be in an area that permits sewer service; and
b. Frontage on an existing road or proposed roadway which is
part of a development; and
c. No more than 20% in steep slopes, defined as slopes greater
than 50%, wetlands, wetland buffers and wetland transition
areas, as shown on an approved letter of interpretation, and
flood hazard areas and riparian areas,
d. All structures removed and be free of any environmental
hazards.
The density bonus units shall be in addition to the number
of units which may be constructed under the calculation in
Section 191.2(a). The bonus units in a residential cluster shall
be subject to the same requirements as apply to the units
permitted under Section 10B-191.2(a). The housing units to be
constructed in the dedicated affordable housing site are not
subject to the provisions of the residential cluster but shall be
subject to the standards adopted by the Municipal Council.
(c) The number of bonus units shall be calculated as follows:
(1) For public access to the approved walking paths in the common
open space the bonus shall be 5% but this bonus may be increased
by an additional 5% if the linear feet of dedicated paths exceeds
1,000 linear feet and is equal to the lesser of (i) 5,000 linear feet or
(ii) that number which is 1% of the area of the preserved open
space. The total bonus for this category shall not exceed 10%.
(2) For common open space in excess of 50%, the bonus shall be 5% for
each additional 10% of common open space but the total bonus for
this category shall not exceed 10%.
(3) For a dedicated public active recreation area meeting the above
stated design objectives, the bonus shall be 5% with an additional
bonus of 5% for each additional one acre of dedicated area, but the
total bonus for this category shall not exceed 15%. With the
approval of the Board this area may be located off-site.
§ T10B-191.2 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-191.2
BAO:1046
(4) To be eligible for the affordable housing land dedication bonus the
residential cluster must have:
a. A tract size of at least 75 acres.
b. At least 70% of the tract must be common open space of which
at least 60% shall be in preserved open space either dedicated
to the municipality or maintained and owned by a homeowners'
association.
c. A minimum setback of 100 feet from off tract property lines.
This area shall be planted with appropriate planting and
screening material in areas that are not currently wooded.
Such landscaping shall consist of a mixture of evergreen and
deciduous trees and shrubs so as to produce a screen at least
eight feet in height within two growing seasons. The plantings
shall not be arranged in a straight row but rather staggered to
create a more natural appearance.
The bonus for dedicating land for affordable housing shall be
calculated as follows: for every one acre of land dedicated
to the municipality for affordable housing in excess of one
acre, the developer shall receive a 15% bonus for housing
units in a conventional development. This land dedication shall
not relieve the developer from any other applicable affordable
housing fee. The total bonus for this category shall not exceed
30%.
If the developer exceeds the minimum requirements for a
bonus in a category, there shall be an additional bonus
interpolated from the above numbers, e.g., a 7% bonus for 64%
common open space, or 12% bonus for a 1.9 acre public service
recreation area. If the developer qualifies for a bonus in more
than one category, the bonuses shall be cumulative but shall
not exceed 50%. A fractional bonus for units of 0.5 or more
shall be rounded up.
By way of example, if the number of dwelling units authorized
under Section 10B-191.2(a) is 50 units and if the residential
cluster is designed with 64% open space and if a one and
nine-tenths acre active recreation area is dedicated as a public
active recreation area, the bonus for these two categories will
be 19% or 10 additional units. In addition to the above, if the
residential cluster is designed with eight acres of preserved
open space and with public access of 2,790 lineal feet of
walking paths, then the bonus for this category will be 9%, and
the total bonus will be 28% or 14 additional units.
§ T10B-191.2 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-191.3
BAO:1047
§ T10B-191.3. Form of ownership; zero lot lines. [Ord. No. 2018-11
§ 4]
It is not the intent of this division to prescribe the form of ownership for
the dwelling units in a residential cluster and the ownership may be fee
simple, condominium, or cooperative or any combination thereof. However
for purposes of regulating the location of buildings within the cluster
development it is necessary to prescribe lot sizes, dimensions and setbacks
standards. (See Section 10B-192.) Each dwelling unit or structure shall
be located so that it would comply with the prescribed lot standards if
imaginary lot lines were superimposed on the development.
§ T10B-192. Lot standards for clusters in which less than 80% of
the tract is devoted to open space. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
The following standards shall apply to clusters in which less than 80% of the
tract is devoted to open space.
(a) Single-family structures. Single-family structures shall have the
following lot area, dimensions and yard setback requirements.
(1) Minimum width and frontage. No lot shall have a width or frontage
less than 75 feet.
(2) Maximum depth. No lot shall have a depth of more than three times
its width.
(3) Minimum area. No lot shall have an area of less than 10,000 square
feet.
(4) Front and rear yard setbacks. The front yard setback shall be not
less than 15 feet, and the rear yard setback shall not be less than
25 feet.
(5) Setbacks for corner lots. Corner lots shall observe a setback of at
least 15 feet from each street right-of-way line.
(6) Side yard setback. Each lot shall have combined side yard setbacks
of at least 30 feet, but neither side yard setback shall be less than
10 feet, except that one of the side yards may be reduced to zero
feet; provided that the sill of the window in a building abutting a lot
line shall be no less than seven feet above the elevation of the
ground and shall contain no windows if it is a common or abutting
wall with a building on the adjacent lot.
(7) Floor area ratio. The maximum floor area ratio shall be as follows:
Lot size
F.A.R.
(max %)
10,000 to 10,890 square feet 25
10,891 to 21,780 square feet 20
§ T10B-191.3 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-192
BAO:1048
Lot size
F.A.R.
(max %)
21,781 to 43,560 square feet 15
43,561 to 65,340 square feet 12.5
65,341 square feet or more 10
(b) Two-family structures. Two-family structures shall have the following
lot area, dimensions and yard setback requirements:
(1) Minimum width and frontage. No lot shall have a width or frontage
of less than 100 feet.
(2) Maximum depth. No lot shall have a depth of more than three times
its width.
(3) Minimum area. No lot shall have an area of less than 12,000 square
feet.
(4) Front and rear yard setbacks. The front yard setback shall be not
less than 15 feet, and the rear yard setback shall be not less than
25 feet.
(5) Setbacks of corner lots. Corner lots shall observe a setback of at
least 15 feet from each street right-of-way line.
(6) Side yard setback. Each side yard setback shall be at least 20 feet.
(7) Floor area ratio. The maximum floor area shall be the same as is set
forth in Section 10B-192(a)(7).
(c) Townhouse units. Townhouse units shall have the following lot area,
dimensions, yard setback, and outdoor living space requirements:
(1) Minimum width and frontage, lot and building. No lot shall have a
width of less than 20 feet, nor a lot frontage of less than 20 feet. No
townhouse unit shall have a width of less than 20 feet.
(2) Maximum depth. No lot shall have a depth of more than five times
its width.
(3) Minimum area. No lot shall have an area of less than 2,000 square
feet.
(4) Front and rear yard setbacks. Each lot shall have a combined front
and rear yard setback of at least 35 feet, but neither the front nor
rear yard setback shall be less than 15 feet.
(5) Setbacks for corner lots. Corner lots shall observe a setback of at
least 15 feet from each street right-of-way line or common parking
area, whichever is greater.
§ T10B-192 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-192
BAO:1049
§ T10B-192.1. Lot standards for clusters in which at least 80% of
the tract is devoted to open space. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
The following standards shall apply to clusters in which at least 80% of the
tract is devoted to open space.
(6) Side yard. There shall be a side yard of not less than 15 feet for
each end townhouse unit.
(7) Outdoor living space. There should be direct access from each
townhouse unit to outdoor living space having an area of not less
than 300 square feet in size, having no single dimension of less
than 15 feet, which shall be clear of structures and shall be
designed for the recreational use of the occupants of the
townhouse unit. The space may be at ground level or elevated and
may be composed of any materials designed to create a patio
surface or may be a wood deck area, lawn, or other surface or
structure or combination thereof, in whole or in part. Adequate
visual screening from neighboring dwelling units and their outdoor
living space, adjacent parking areas and roadways shall be
provided which may consist of plantings, masonry structures or
wood fencing. Architectural elements, such as masonry walls and
fences, shall be compatible in both style and materials with the
dwelling unit of which it is a part.
(d) Multi-family structures. Because the dwelling units in multi-family
structures may contain a variety of configurations, no specific lot
dimensions are prescribed for the individual units. Each multi-family
structure shall conform to the following requirements:
(1) Minimum area. Each multi-family structure shall be on a lot having
an area of 2,800 square feet per dwelling unit in the structure.
(2) Front and rear yard setbacks. Each multi-family structure shall
have a combined front and rear yard setback of at least 35 feet, but
neither the front nor rear yard setback shall be less than 15 feet.
(3) Setbacks from corners. The portion of a multi-family structure at a
corner shall observe a setback of at least 15 feet from each street
right-of-way line or common parking area, whichever is greater.
(4) Side yard. Each multi-family structure shall have a side yard of not
less than 15 feet.
(5) Outdoor living space. Each unit in a multi-family structure shall
have outdoor living space comparable to that required from each
townhouse unit, but the Planning Board may allow those
requirements to be adjusted as may be necessary to accommodate
the different arrangements of units.
(a) Single-family structures. Single-family structures shall have the
following lot area, dimensions and yard setback requirements:
§ T10B-192 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-192.1
BAO:1050
(1) Minimum width and frontage. No lot shall have a width or frontage
of less than 55 feet, except for a flag lot, which shall have a
minimum width and frontage of 15 feet. The width of adjacent lots
shall be varied in order to reduce the appearance of a uniform
subdivision. A maximum of 10% of all lots may be flag lots.
(2) Minimum depth. No lot shall have a depth of less than 110 feet.
(3) Minimum area. No lot shall have an area of less than 6,500 square
feet.
(4) Front and rear yard setbacks. The front yard setback shall be not
less than 15 feet, and the rear yard setback shall not be less than
25 feet.
(5) Setbacks for corner lots. Corner lots shall observe a setback of at
least 15 feet from each street right-of-way line.
(6) Side yard setback. Each lot shall have combined side yard setbacks
of at least 25 feet, but neither side yard setback shall be less than
10 feet, except that one of the side yards may be reduced to zero
feet; provided that the sill of any window in a building abutting a lot
line shall be no less than seven feet above the elevation of the
ground and shall contain no windows if it is a common or abutting
wall with a building on the adjacent lot.
(7) Floor area ratio. The maximum floor area ratio shall be as follows:
Lot size
F.A.R.
(max %)
6,500 square feet or less 35
6,501 to 8,500 square feet 30
8,501 to 10,890 square feet 25
10,891 to 21,780 square feet 20
21,781 to 43,560 square feet 15
43,561 to 65,340 square feet 12.5
65,341 square feet or more 10
For purposes of this subsection, gross floor area shall not include
porches, garages, carports and basements.
(b) Two-family structures. Two-family structures shall have the following
lot area, dimensions and yard setback requirements:
(1) Minimum width and frontage. No lot shall have a width or frontage
of less than 100 feet.
(2) Minimum depth. No lot shall have a depth of less than 110 feet.
§ T10B-192.1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-192.1
BAO:1051
§ T10B-193. Arrangement of buildings; height. [Ord. No. 2018-11
§ 4]
(3) Minimum area. No lot shall have an area of less than 11,000 square
feet.
(4) Front and rear yard setbacks. The front yard setback shall be not
less than 15 feet, and the rear yard setback shall be not less than
25 feet.
(5) Setbacks of corner lots. Corner lots shall observe a setback of at
least 15 feet from each street right-of-way line.
(6) Side yard setback. Each side yard setback shall be at least 20 feet.
(a) Distances between buildings. Multifamily and townhouse structures
shall be no closer to each other or to single-family structures or twofamily
structures than 60 feet on the plane which describes the
buildings as backing or fronting each other. An accessory structure
related to a townhouse structure or multi-family shall be no closer than
20 feet to an accessory structure related to another townhouse
structure or multi-family structure. Garages for adjacent townhouse
units may be attached to each other.
(b) Siting of buildings. In addition to the other requirements of this division
and the requirements of Article X of this Chapter, the following
standards shall govern the location and arrangement of buildings.
(1) Structures shall be located on the least environmentally vulnerable
land on the tract as determined with reference to the Natural
Resources Inventory and shall be sited in one or more clusters in a
manner most appropriate to the natural features of the tract.
(2) Each dwelling unit shall be located so that it is accessible by police,
fire fighting and emergency vehicles.
(3) Each dwelling unit location shall be reasonably related to the
appurtenant parking areas.
(4) Each dwelling unit shall have at least two exposures. All buildings
shall be designated and sited in an energy-efficient manner.
(5) Each dwelling unit shall be provided reasonable visual and
acoustical privacy and shall comply with the requirements of
Sections 10B-280 and 10B-281.
(c) Internal setbacks from off-tract property lines. A buffer area shall be
required along the property lines of the tract as follows: along existing
public streets — a distance equal to the minimum front yard building
setback requirement for the zoning district; and along other property
lines of the tract — a distance equal to at least 40 feet or such greater
setback as the Planning Board may determine to be necessary to be
protective for the existing neighborhood or adjoining public open
§ T10B-192.1 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-193
BAO:1052
§ T10B-194. Common open space. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
space. The Board may require the buffer area to be landscaped
pursuant to the provisions of Sections 10B-305 to 10B-310. Structures
in the residential cluster shall be located and sized so as to avoid abrupt
changes from the existing neighborhood development pattern.
(d) Length and offsets. Townhouse structures and multi-family structures
shall not have a length on a single plane in excess of 180 feet and shall
be designed with offsets or other architectural features so as to provide
breaks in the linear plane.
(e) Height limitations. No principal structure shall have a height greater
than 30 feet to the top of the building plate and no accessory structure
shall have a height greater than 20 feet.
(a) Amount; exclusions. At least 40% of the tract shall be devoted to
common open space (usable and preserved for the benefit of the
residents of the residential cluster) and at least 50% of the required
common open space shall be in preserved open space. The following, or
the land under the following, shall not be considered common open
space: streets, driveways and parking areas; sidewalks and bicycle
paths not in or contiguous to the common open space; the lot areas of
individual lots or assigned to dwelling units or structures in zero lot line
developments; outdoor living space required for an individual dwelling
unit; structures other than those permitted in paragraph (a) (1) of this
section; and all other land which cannot reasonably be considered
common open space. The land area on which detention basins are
constructed, to the extent of 4% of the tract, may be counted as open
space which is usable open space.
(1) Usable open space. Usable open space includes common open
space devoted to or reserved for active and passive recreation uses.
To the extent appropriate to the nature of the proposed residential
cluster and to the needs of the prospective residents, a portion of
the common open space shall be designated and developed for
active and passive recreation uses. In addition, the Planning Board
may require the developer to designate areas as reserved for future
active and passive recreation uses. Active recreation uses shall
include areas devoted to swimming pools, lakes, tennis and other
racquet sport courts, stables, organized sports, playgrounds,
community gardens, and clubhouses. Passive recreation use shall
include areas devoted to lawns, picnic areas, court yards, and other
cleared areas which cannot reasonably be described as being
retained in their natural state.
(2) Preserved open space. Preserved open space shall include that
portion of the common open space not devoted to or reserved for
active and passive recreation uses, except that unpaved paths for
walking, bicycling, or horseback riding shall be permitted.
Preserved open space otherwise shall be retained in its natural
§ T10B-193 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-194
BAO:1053
§ T10B-194.1. Location and configuration of the common open
space. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
The common open space shall be located and arranged in a manner
consistent with the provisions of Section 10B-188 and Section 10B-226 and
with the following:
state; or in the general condition in which it existed prior to the
proposed development of the remaining portions of the tract, with
or without minimal periodic maintenance to prevent the natural
progression of vegetative growth. Preserved open space may
include existing farmland wherever feasible or agricultural uses,
as permitted under Section 10B-194(b) below, and shall include
such environmentally sensitive areas as stream corridors, slopes of
15% grade or greater, unique natural features or lands of historic
significance as identified on the Environmental Resources
Inventory of Princeton, wetlands and areas of high water table,
areas of high concentration of boulders, mature stands of native
vegetation, and extraordinary wildlife, nesting, feeding, or
breeding grounds. Wherever feasible, not less than 80% of the
preserved open space shall be in two compact and contiguous
parcels.
(b) Agricultural uses. Common open space may be devoted to agricultural
uses but only if the land proposed for such use was actively devoted to
the type of agricultural use proposed within the thirty-year period prior
to the date on which the agricultural use is to be resumed.
(a) The siting shall be appropriate for the topography and geology of the
parcel;
(b) The common open space shall be related to surrounding development
and public roads so as to produce an open quality of the residential
cluster when seen from such vantage points;
(c) The common open space shall be accessible to all residents of the
residential cluster. The maximum feasible number of dwelling units
shall be adjacent to the common open space, and there shall be a close
visual and physical relationship between the common open space and
as many dwelling units as is reasonably possible.
(d) Recreation facilities shall be reasonably accessible to the residents of
the residential cluster. They shall be located in an area which will not be
detrimental to adjacent property owners or residents by virtue of noise,
light, glare and any other objectionable features emanating from such a
facility.
(e) The configuration of common open space area should be so arranged
that connections can be made to existing or future adjacent open
spaces and to contiguous publicly owned open space.
§ T10B-194 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-194.1
BAO:1054
§ T10B-194.2. Ownership and maintenance of the common open
space. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
§ T10B-195. Other site design standards. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
(f) Not less than 60% of the common open space shall be in one compact
and contiguous parcel and the remainder shall be in linear parks,
having a minimum width of 75 feet, connecting sections of the
development. Sections of common open space not connected to other
sections of common open space shall be kept to the minimum required
by particular site constraints.
(g) No more than 70% of the common open space required by Section
10B-194(a) or used for the computation of the additional bonus under
Section 10B-191.2(c) shall be satisfied by the areas devoted to existing
or new lakes and/or agricultural uses.
(h) No more than 70% of the preserved open space required by Section
10B-194(a) or used for the computation of the additional bonus under
Section 10B-191.2(c) shall be satisfied by areas devoted to existing
lakes and/or agricultural uses.
(a) The developer shall establish an organization for the ownership and/or
maintenance of the common open space for the benefit of owners or
residents of the residential cluster. Such organization shall not be
dissolved and shall not dispose of any common open space by sale or
otherwise except to an organization established to own and maintain
the common open space for the benefit of such residential cluster, and
thereafter such organization shall not be dissolved or disposed of any of
its common open space without first offering to dedicate such to the
municipality. Any disposition of the common open space shall be subject
to the requirement that the common open space will be retained and
maintained for open space use in perpetuity.
(b) In the event that such organization shall fail to maintain the common
open space in reasonable order and condition, the municipal engineer
or the Governing Body or its designee may utilize the procedures set
forth in Section 31 of the Municipal Land Use Law (C.40:55D-43 b & c)
to assure proper maintenance at the expense of the properties within
the residential cluster.
(a) Pedestrian and bicycle circulation. In addition to complying with the
requirements of paragraphs (i) and (j) of Section 10B-160 and
paragraph (g) of Section 10B-226:
(1) Sidewalks and bicycle paths shall be provided so as to connect to
pedestrian circulation systems already developed, or expected to
be developed, adjacent to the tract; and
(2) Bicycle paths whether or not proposed by the master plan, shall be
provided so as to connect to existing bicycle paths already
§ T10B-194.1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-195
BAO:1055
§ T10B-196. Staged development. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
If the residential cluster is to be developed in stages, the Planning Board
shall permit the total area proposed for common open space to be divided
among the sections submitted for final plat approval; provided that each
stage contains an amount of open space sufficient to meet the needs of the
residents of that section of the development, and provided further that this
can be accomplished in a manner which is consistent with the requirements
of Sections 10B-194, 10B-194.1.
§ T10B-197. Previously approved residential cluster subdivisions.
[Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
Any residential cluster subdivision for which preliminary subdivision and
site plan approval has been granted prior to the effective date of this
division, may be developed under the pre-existing cluster provisions.
§ T10B-198. through 10B-202. (Reserved)
developed, or for which the municipality has developed plans,
adjacent to the tract and to bicycle paths proposed on the master
plan and otherwise when the standards set forth in paragraphs
(i)(1)-(3) of Section 10B-160 (as applied to bicycle paths rather than
sidewalks) have been met.
(b) Landscaping and other improvements. In addition to the requirements
of paragraph (c) of Section 10B-160 and Sections 10B-304 to 10B-310,
all areas other than preserved open space shall be suitably landscaped.
Shade trees shall be provided along walks, driveways, and parking
areas. The Planning Board may require such grading, drainage,
walkways, fencing, lights and such other improvements in the common
open space as it shall deem appropriate to enhance the intended open
space uses. Screening or buffers consisting of fencing or landscaping
may be required around recreation, parking, utility and refuse disposal
areas, and around other similar areas as determined by the Planning
Board. All landscaping shall be maintained in good condition and shall
be replaced where necessary by the organization established pursuant
to Section 10B-194.2(a).
(c) Parking requirements. The parking spaces required by Section 10B-282
shall be designed and located pursuant to Sections 10B-287 to
10B-291.1.
§ T10B-195 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-198
BAO:1056
ARTICLE X
[Article X Was Replaced ISni tEen Ptilraentsy By Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
[Prior history includes Ord. Nos. 856, 874, 894, 915, 917, 935, 950, 969,
970, 975, 980, 1028, 1028, 82-29, 83-8, 83-18, 85-11, 85-21, 87-27, 89-30,
89-32, 90-15, 90-23, 90-37, 94-10, 94-11, 97-19, 97-20, 97-23, 2006-9,
2006-35, 2008-27, 2009-25, 2010-28, 2010-33, 2013-4, 2014-44, 2015-20
and 2017-30]
§ T10B-203 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-198
BAO:1057

DIVISION 1
Generally
§ T10B-203. Surface parking design standards. [Ord. No. 2018-11
§ 4]
(a) General design standards.
(1.) Off-Street parking lots shall be oriented to, and located within a
reasonable walking distance of, the buildings they are designed to
serve.
(2.) Access to parking lots shall be designed so as not to induce queues
on travel ways, and to provide adequate pedestrian circulation and
safety. There shall be adequate provision for ingress to and egress
from all parking spaces to ensure ease of mobility, ample clearance,
and safety of vehicles and pedestrians.
(3.) All parking areas, regardless of size and location, shall be suitably
drained and maintained.
(4.) Parking spaces shall be nine feet by 18 feet.
(5.) Where sidewalks occur in parking areas, parked vehicles shall not
overhang or extend over the sidewalk unless an additional two feet
of sidewalk width are provided to accommodate such overhang.
(6.) Designated fire lanes a minimum of 18 feet in width shall be
required as provided for in the Uniform Fire Code. All off-street
parking lots shall have adequate designations to indicate traffic
flow and parking spaces.
(7.) Parking lots shall be provided with turning bays or other means of
turning at intervals of not greater than 1,200 feet. Turning bays,
such as hammerheads or other configurations, shall measure at
least 18 feet by 60 feet, or provide equivalent maneuvering space.
(8.) Parking lots having more than 100 spaces shall have a minimum of
two means of ingress and two means of egress, or be provided with
a divided-type entrance.
(b) Parking aisle width.
(1.) The provision of parking spaces shall also include adequate
driveways and necessary turning areas for handling the vehicles for
which provision is made. Parking areas shall be designed to permit
each motor vehicle to proceed to and from the parking space
provided for it without requiring the moving of any other motor
vehicles. Aisles providing access to parking spaces shall have the
minimum dimensions identified in Table 1 below. Where the angle
of parking is different on both sides of the aisle, the larger aisle
width shall prevail.
§ T10B-203 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-203
BAO:1059
Table 1
Angle of Parking
Space
(degrees)
One-way Aisle
(feet)
Two-way Aisle
(feet)
90 22 24
60 18 19
45 15 19
30 11 17
Parallel 11 17
(c) Surface parking pavement standards.
(1.) All parking and loading areas and access drives shall be paved as
outlined below or the equivalent, as determined by the municipal
engineer, and approved as part of the development application.
Where engineering standards support parking lots that utilize
porous pavement, the parking lot shall be paved with a minimum
three inches of porous asphalt, a maximum one inch choker course,
clean uniformly graded coarse aggregate, at a depth sufficient to
provide the necessary storage volume utilizing a 40% void ratio,
and a non-woven fabric liner, prepared and constructed in
accordance with the aforesaid New Jersey State Highway
Department Specifications and amendments thereto.
(2.) Areas of ingress or egress, loading and unloading areas, major
interior driveways or access aisles and other areas likely to
experience similar heavy traffic shall be curbed and paved with not
less than four inches of compacted base course of plant-mixed
bituminous, stabilized base course, Mix I-2 shall be constructed in
accordance with the New Jersey State Highway Department
Standard Specifications for Roads and Bridge Construction (latest
edition) and amendments thereto. A minimum two-inch-thick
compacted wearing surface of bituminous concrete (Mix I-5) shall
be constructed thereon in accordance with the aforesaid New
Jersey State Highway Department Specifications and amendments
thereto.
(3.) Parking stall areas and other areas likely to experience similar light
traffic shall be paved with not less than three inches of compacted
base course of plant-mixed bituminous, stabilized base course Mix
I-5, prepared and constructed in accordance with the aforesaid
New Jersey State Highway Department Specifications and
amendments thereto. A minimum of two-inch thick compacted
wearing surface of bituminous concrete (Mix I-5) shall be
constructed thereon, also in accordance with the aforesaid New
Jersey State Highway Department Specifications and amendments
thereto.
§ T10B-203 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-204
BAO:1060
§ T10B-204. (Reserved)
§ T10B-205. Site plan approval required. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
No structure shall be erected, relocated, enlarged, demolished, or
externally altered or reconstructed nor shall the use of any structure be
changed or shall any land be cleared or altered nor shall the use of any
land be changed nor shall any watercourse be diverted or its channel or
flood plain dredged or filled nor shall any open parking area, accessory
or otherwise, be constructed, installed or enlarged nor shall any land be
subdivided nor shall any building permit, certificate of occupancy, fence
permit, or other required permit be issued with respect to any such
structure, land or parking area, except in accordance with final approval
of a site plan for such development granted pursuant to this article, unless
exempted in accordance with section 10B-206.
§ T10B-205.1. Modification of approved site plans. [Ord. No.
2018-11 § 4]
If an applicant seeks to modify a site plan which has already received
site plan approval, before the site development as approved has been fully
constructed or installed, then an application for site plan approval of the
modification may be submitted and processed as if it were a separate
application for the modification notwithstanding that the original site plan
approval was approved by the Board after public hearing except as provided
below:
The modification shall be referred to the full board for action and shall
be subject to the hearing and notice requirements of Divisions 4 and 5 of
Article IV of this Chapter: (1) if the modification is not determined to be
exempt under section 10B-206(d) or is not classified and approved as a
minor site plan under section 10B-211; or (2) if the modification sought is of
a condition specifically imposed by the Board.
§ T10B-206. Exemptions. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
The following are exempt from the requirements of this article:
(a) Minor subdivisions.
(b) Individual lot applications for detached one-dwelling unit or twodwelling-
unit buildings permitted as of right under applicable zoning
regulations, and structures and uses incidental thereto; but this
exemption shall not apply wherever three or more dwelling units are
proposed to be constructed under common ownership or control on
contiguous lots or on lots within the same subdivision under
construction permit issued during the same period of 12 months
beginning with the date of the first permit issued.
(c) Any development proposal which is for a permitted use or an approved
conditional use which the zoning officer and municipal engineer
§ T10B-204 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-206
BAO:1061
§ T10B-206.1. Administrative exemption checklist. [Ord. No.
2018-11 § 4]
determine will have no detrimental impact, as measured by the criteria
and standards set forth in section 10B-226, if the planning director
concurs, provided that the development does not increase the degree
of noncompliance or create a new noncompliance with respect to any
bulk regulations set forth in this Chapter. The request for exemption
shall be made by the filing of a classification application pursuant to
the provisions of section 10B-207(a). If the development is found to be
exempt under this paragraph, the zoning officer, municipal engineer,
and planning director shall confirm this by placing the notation "exempt
under section 10B-206(c)" on the submitted plan and by signing and
filing the plan with the Planning Board.
(d) Any development proposal for which the municipality is the applicant.
(e) The demolition of a detached one dwelling-unit or two dwelling-unit
building which is not a part of a development project for which site plan
approval is otherwise required.
(f) Any building or use permitted as of right on a lot of 30 acres or more in
the E-2 district in the former Borough consisting of 5,000 square feet of
building area or less or a parking area of 10 or fewer parking spaces
that are 150 feet or more distant from a public street.
(a) Checklist for Administrative Exemption.
(1.) Six sets (original + five copies) of completed application.
(2.) Six copies of narrative providing written detail as to the application
proposal.
(3.) Payment of fees.
(4.) Six sets of plans drawn to graphic scale, min. one inch equal 50 feet
(plans are not to exceed 24 inches by 36 inches, all sheets must be
the same size and all plans must be folded and collated) to include
the following:
a All structures.
b All stoned and paved areas, including delineation of parking
stalls.
c Existing and proposed landscaping.
d Lighting.
e Existing and proposed floor plans, with the area(s) subject to
change clearly defined.
§ T10B-206 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-206.1
BAO:1062
f If changes to the HVAC are proposed, applicant is to provide
information regarding noise and odors as it pertains to the
adjacent properties.
g Bulk zoning regulations for district in schedule form (showing
required, existing and proposed conditions).
h Photographs showing existing conditions.
i Submission of historic preservation plan when property is
located in a historic district or historic buffer district, pursuant
to municipal ordinances including:
1. Photographs of the property in question and surrounding
properties.
2. Product specifications, where appropriate.
3. Elevations and details for proposed new construction.
4. Floor plans.
5. Documentation sufficient to demonstrate how the
proposed improvement appears in context.
6. Archaeological and historic sites survey.
7. Archaeological and historic sites construction protocol.
8. Delineated historic protection area or pre-mapped historic
preservation area.
9. When available, historic photographs, maps, plot plans
and other historic site documentation.
10. Plot plan of property showing location of all existing and
proposed structures, with relationship to surrounding
building(s) on adjoining properties, zoning setback,
driveways(s), and existing and proposed utilities.
§ T10B-206.1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-206.1
BAO:1063

DIVISION 2
Classification of Site Plans
§ T10B-207. Applications for classification; early review. [Ord. No.
2018-11 § 4]
§ T10B-207.1. Minor site plan checklist. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
The following checklist is designed to inform applicants as to what is
required in preparing minor site plans for board review. Applicants shall
check off items to confirm that they are included as part of the submission.
Checklist items omitted can result in the application being found incomplete
and therefore delay consideration by the Board. Utilities, details, profiles,
etc. may be shown on separate sheets. This checklist must be submitted
with the application. Applications filed which include a waiver request for
any of the checklist items, shall be accompanied by a written statement in
support of each waiver request.
*The total number of copies to be submitted is dependent upon which board
hears your application. This information can be found in the cover sheet of
the application.
(a) Any applicant for site development approval may, in lieu of filing an
application for preliminary site plan approval, file with the
administrative officer five copies of a site plan of the proposed
development in sketch plat form, together with a basic description of
the development, on an application form to be provided by the Planning
Board for purposes of classification and preliminary discussion. Such
applications shall be known and designated as classification
applications and shall be processed in accordance with this division.
Five copies of classification applications, each containing all required
documentation, shall be submitted.
(b) An applicant or his architect may arrange an early review meeting with
the committee, preferably in the schematic design phase of the
architect's project development. Such an early review is generally
deemed desirable, but especially so in the case of larger scope projects
and in the case of others that may require exceptions or variances
under subdivision or zoning regulations. The purpose of such early
review is to provide an informal and free exchange of ideas so as to
facilitate the making of adjustments or changes in the site development
with a minimum of expense to the applicant.
(c) The architectural drawings of the architectural concept of development
for early review may be simplified in their extent and schematic in
character.
(a) General Requirements:
(1.) Completed application form (original + five copies). *Maximum
number of copies required is 30.
§ T10B-207 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-207.1
BAO:1065
(2.) Complete site plan and architectural drawings signed and sealed
by an appropriate professional pursuant to State licensing
requirements (14 copies). Plans are not to exceed 24 inches by 36
inches and all sheets must be the same size. All plans must be
collated and folded. *Maximum number of copies required is 30.
(3.) Application and Escrow Fees. Separate checks are required.
(4.) Completed W-9 and escrow agreement.
(5.) Fire Protection Plan in accordance with municipal code Section
10B-109.1 through § T10B-109.4 (six copies). *Maximum number of
copies required is 30.
a. Fire protection map (14 copies, *Maximum number of copies
required is 30, indicating:
1. Existing and proposed hydrants.
2. Distances between hydrants.
3. Distances to nearest hydrant.
4. Water main location, size and location where supply is
coming from.
b. Narrative containing information regarding the relevant fire
protection sector as well as distances and spacing of fire
hydrants (14 copies, *Maximum number of copies required is
30.) This information must also include:
1. Exposure distances.
2. Accessibility of fire hydrants.
3. Demonstrating that fire flows at nearby fire hydrants,
meets or exceeds municipal standards.
4. Size and type of building construction.
5. Intended use and occupancy of building.
6. Fire protection practices.
(6.) Completed checklist (original + five copies). *Maximum number of
copies required is 30.
(7.) Letter from the Tax Collector stating that all taxes and assessments
are paid to date.
(8.) If applicable, completed variance appeal form and/or conditional
use form (original + five copies). *Maximum number of copies
required is 30.
§ T10B-207.1 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-207.1
BAO:1066
(9.) Submission of historic preservation plan when the property is
located in a historic district or historic buffer district, pursuant to
municipal ordinances including:
a. Photographs of the property in question and surrounding
properties.
b. Product specifications, where appropriate.
c. Elevations and details for proposed new construction.
d. Floor plans.
e. Documentation sufficient to demonstrate how the proposed
improvement appears in context.
f. Archaeological and historic sites survey.
g. Archaeological and historic sites construction protocol.
h. Delineated historic protection area or pre-mapped historic
preservation area.
i. When available, historic photographs, maps, plot plans and
other historic site documentation.
j. Plot plan of property showing location of all existing and
proposed structures, with relationship to surrounding
buildings on adjoining properties, zoning setback,
driveways(s), and existing and proposed utilities.
(10.) If the project involves affordable housing the following must be
provided:
a. Floor plans showing the location of low and moderate income
units indicating whether the unit is a one-bedroom, twobedroom
or three-bedroom unit.
b. A table listing the number of low and moderate income units,
the size of the units and the number of bedrooms.
c. For units proposed to be for sale, the affordable housing
agreement, repayment mortgage and repayment mortgage
note.
d. For units proposed for rental, declaration of covenants,
conditions and restrictions, and affordable housing agreement
for rental properties.
(b) Site Plan:
(1.) Tract name.
(2.) Tax map sheet, lot and block number.
§ T10B-207.1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-207.1
BAO:1067
(3.) Date, north arrow and graphic scale (min. one inch equals 50 feet).
(4.) Property boundary dimensions and bearings.
(5.) Acreage of the entire tract.
(6.) Key Map showing entire project and its relation to surrounding
areas, roads and watercourses within 500 feet of the property,
including zoning district and zoning boundaries.
(7.) Bulk zoning regulations for district providing existing and proposed
requirements in schedule form (showing required, existing and
proposed conditions).
(8.) Sealed survey.
(9.) Name, address and signature of record owner.
(10.) Name and address of applicant (if other than owner).
(11.) Property owners within 200 feet of parcel listed in schedule form.
(c) Existing and Proposed Features:
(1.) Location of streams, waterway corridors, water-courses, flood
hazard and flood plain areas, bodies of water and wetland areas. All
existing physical features including streams, watercourses, bodies
of water, rock out-croppings, significant soil conditions in areas to
be affected by proposed construction, and an outline of tree masses
on site, with an indication whether such masses are evergreen or
deciduous and their approximate height.
(2.) Right-of-way and/or easement dedications to include owner
identity, acreage and boundary information.
(3.) Size, shape and location of buildings on the tract, on adjoining
properties and on the opposite side of the street(s).
(4.) The location, layout and dimensions of parking, loading areas and
isles, with an indication of the areas to be paved.
(5.) All parking spaces, driveways and access points to public streets.
(6.) Building and parking set back lines.
(7.) Location and height of fences, retaining walls and railings.
(8.) Electric telephone, CATV, gas and all other wire served utility
connections on the tract and on adjacent streets.
(9.) Location, height, size and design of exterior signs and advertising
features. Location of exterior signage and/or advertising features.
(10.) Location and layout of sidewalks and bicycle paths, curbs and
interior walkways. Construction details are to be provided.
§ T10B-207.1 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-207.1
BAO:1068
(11.) Landscaping plan including location, height and types of plantings
and screenings.
(12.) Location of exterior lighting, area of illumination, height and type
of standards.
(13.) Contours at intervals of one foot.
(14.) A tree survey that shall:
a. Denote the location and approximate height of those trees on
the site, including both those being removed and preserved,
that are within 200 feet of the construction's limit of
disturbance, which shall include all utilities and driveway
areas, and that are eight inches caliper D.S.H. or greater. Trees
with multiple trunks shall be shown on the tree survey if the
average of the D.S.H. of the tree's multiple trunks is eight
inches caliper or greater.
b. Include a tree removal/preservation key detailing size, species
and condition of the trees shown on the survey.
c. Delineate the limit of disturbance for construction taking into
account vehicular access and egress, equipment and material
storage, grading, utilities installation and other construction
activity that may detrimentally impact the remaining trees. The
limit of disturbance should extend to the drip line of the trees
at a minimum and be species specific.
(d) Building Drawings:
(1.) A minimum of two site sections indicating elevation changes to be
made to the land on account of the proposed building(s) to include
tree masses and all existing or proposed building(s). At least two of
these sections shall be at right angles and any others shall be at
such locations as to explain the proposed project in the clearest
manner.
(2.) Drawing of all floor plans and roof plans at a minimum of 1/8 inch
equals one foot.
(3.) Roof plans showing exterior air-heating circulation system layout,
if applicable.
(4.) Drawings of all elevations of all proposed buildings indicating their
relation to existing and proposed grades.
(5.) Photographs (black & white or color) of adequate size as
determined by the committee to show existing physical features,
landscaping and any other conditions to be changed by the
proposed project.
§ T10B-207.1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-207.1
BAO:1069
(e) Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plans for disturbance in excess
of 5,000 square feet:
(1.) Existing and proposed contours at intervals not exceeding two feet.
(2.) Location of present and proposed drains and culverts with their
discharge capacities and velocities and supporting computations
and identification of conditions below outlets.
(3.) A site grading plan showing proposed cut and fill areas together
with existing and proposed profiles of this area.
(4.) Delineation of any area subject to flooding from the 100-year storm
in compliance with the Flood Plains Act or applicable municipal
zoning.
(5.) Delineating of streams within project area.
(6.) Location of all proposed soil erosion and sediment control facilities.
(7.) Proposed sequence of development.
(8.) Proposed starting date of each phase in the sequence.
(9.) Identification of land areas to be disturbed and length of time the
soil in each area will be unprotected.
(10.) Proposed date to complete each phase of development.
(11.) Planned soil erosion and sediment control measures and facilities
supporting computations based upon standards promulgated by
the New Jersey Soil Conservation Committee.
(f) Landscaping, Lighting and Signage Plan:
(1.) Landscaping plan including location, height and types of plantings
and screenings.
(2.) Location, height, size and design of exterior signs and advertising
features.
(3.) Location of exterior lighting, areas of illumination, height and type
of standards.
(g) Required Notes for All Plans:
(1.) Electric, telephone, CATV and all other wire served utility
extensions and services shall be installed underground with
standards established by the servicing utility company and
approved by the municipal engineer.
(2.) All construction to be in accordance with the final construction
plans as approved by the municipal engineer.
§ T10B-207.1 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-207.1
BAO:1070
§ T10B-208. Filing dependent upon approval of form and
completeness. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
The administrative officer shall examine each application as to form and
completeness, consulting with the municipal engineer if he so desires and,
in appropriate cases, with the storm drainage engineer and shall notify the
applicant if he approves the application in these respects.
§ T10B-209. Review of applications by administrative officer;
report; referral to committee. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
The administrative officer in consultation with the municipal engineer and,
in appropriate cases, with the storm drainage engineer shall review each
classification application that is filed and prepare a report thereon,
including any recommendations as to whether the proposed site
development should be classified as major or minor, being guided by the
considerations set forth in Sections 10B-210, 10B-211 and 10B-226. Upon
completion of the report, the administrative officer shall forward such,
together with the application, sketch plat and related documents and
information, to the committee.
(3.) All areas where natural vegetation and/or specimen trees are to
remain shall be protected by the erection of fencing and no
disturbance shall occur prior to inspection by the municipal
engineer and the issuance of written authorization to proceed with
construction. These protective measures shall not be altered or
removed without the approval of the municipal engineer.
(h) Required Signature Format on All Plans:
Approved by the Planning Board of Princeton as a Minor Site
Development.
_____________________ _____________________
Chairman Date
______________________ _____________________
Secretary Date
_____________________ _____________________
Engineer Date
The undersigned (applicant) (owner) hereby acknowledges that the
information contained herein is true and complete to the best of its
knowledge.
This __________ day of _____________________ , 20 _____.
_____________________
Applicant
_____________________ _____________________
Notary Owner
§ T10B-207.1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-210
BAO:1071
§ T10B-210. Review by committee. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
The committee shall review each such report, application, and related
material forwarded to it by the administrative officer with the purpose of
judging the anticipated effect on the proposed development in light of the
criteria and standards set forth in section 10B-226 and for properties in a
historic preservation zoning district and historic preservation buffer zoning
district, Article XIII, Historic Preservation in each of the following respects:
§ T10B-211. Classification of development as minor site plan;
approval generally; further proceedings; effect of minor site plan
approval. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
(a) Ecological considerations.
(b) Landscape.
(c) Relation of proposed structure to environment.
(d) Scenic, historical, archaeological and landmark sites.
(e) Surface water drainage.
(f) Driveway connections to public streets.
(g) Traffic effects.
(h) Pedestrian and bicycle safety.
(i) On-site parking and circulation.
(j) Utility services.
(k) Disposal of wastes.
(l) Noise.
(m) Advertising features.
(n) Special features.
(o) Waterway corridors.
(a) If after such review the committee determines that no major
detrimental effects nor so many minor detrimental effects as
cumulatively constitute a major detrimental effect are to be anticipated
in any of the foregoing considerations, and further finds that the
application conforms to the definition of "minor site plan" as set forth in
Section 10B-2, it shall classify the proposed site development as a
minor site plan and shall recommend to the Planning Board approval of
the application as submitted or as modified by the applicant upon the
committee's suggestion. Approval may be conditioned upon terms
providing for the installation and maintenance of required on-tract
improvements and the guarantee thereof. The committee shall forward
the recommendation to the chair of the Planning Board and notify the
§ T10B-210 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-211
BAO:1072
applicant of its action and recommendation. Where the site
development has been classified as a minor site plan and also involves
other related development applications which are within the
jurisdiction of the Planning Board, the application for minor site plan
approval shall be referred to the Planning Board for action and shall
be subject to the hearing and notice requirements of Divisions 4 and
5 in Article IV of this Chapter. Where there are no other related
development applications which are to be referred to the Planning
Board, then following the committee's classification of the application
as a minor site plan and its recommendation of plan approval, the
applicant shall thereupon cause to be published in accordance with
Section 10B-21 a notice as follows:
The Site Plan Review Advisory Board (or Historic Preservation
Commission) has classified a proposed site development (name of
applicant and docket number) _____ as a minor site plan and
recommended approval. The street address, if any, and the lot and
block numbers of the property which is the subject of this application
are __________. The Planning Board of Princeton will approve such
application if no objection is received by the Planning Board within
10 days after this publication. __________ is the date of the Site Plan
Review Advisory Board (or Historic Preservation Commission) meeting
at which the application was classified as a minor site plan and
recommended to be approved. A brief description of the application
is__________. The application and the submitted documents are available
in the Planning Board Office for review. For further information you may
call the office of the Planning Board of Princeton, Telephone Number
(609) 924-5366.
The applicant shall at the same time give notice as set forth in Section
10B-53, including a statement of the date of publication.
(b) Within 10 days after such publication any person aggrieved by reason of
such classification or recommendation may file objections in writing
with the secretary of the Planning Board and request a hearing on such
application by the Board. The Board shall schedule a public hearing by
the full board subject to the hearing and notice requirements of
Divisions 4 and 5 in Article IV of this Chapter. If no written objection or
request for a hearing is received by the Board within 10 days after the
date that the above notice was published, the chair of the Planning
Board may approve the application on behalf of the Planning Board
including the approval of a waiver of the requirements for surface
water drainage pursuant to Section 10B-277(f), and return it to the
applicant without further notice or public hearing. Approval by the
Planning Board shall be endorsed upon the sketch plat and it shall be
signed by the chairman and attested by the secretary.
(c) In cases where the Board is required to hold a hearing, the filing of
proof of publication and service under paragraph (a) of this section
shall be deemed part of the application for development, and the time
within which the Board must act as set forth in Section 10B-65 shall
§ T10B-211 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-211
BAO:1073
§ T10B-212. Classification of development as major; specification of
documentation. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
§ T10B-213. Expeditious processing. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
The procedure set forth in this division is intended to expedite the review,
simplify the form and lessen the expense of applications for site plan
approval of developments from which no major detrimental effects are
anticipated under any of the considerations listed in Section 10B-210. In
furtherance of these objectives, the reviewing authorities are authorized to
expedite the processing of such applications.
§ T10B-214. Appeal to board from action of committee or Planning
Board chairman. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
Any person aggrieved by any action of the committee or chair of the
Planning Board under this division may appeal for reconsideration thereof
to the full board pursuant to the rules of the Board.
begin to run on the date that such proof is filed with the secretary of
the Planning Board.
(d) Approval of a site development as minor shall constitute and have the
force and effect of the final site plan approval.
(a) Whenever the committee determines that one or more major
detrimental effects should be anticipated under the foregoing
considerations, it shall classify the proposed site development as major
and shall advise the applicant of such classification and that further
proceedings must be initiated by filing an application for preliminary
site plan approval as prescribed in Division 3 of this article.
(b) In classifying a proposal as major, the committee on the basis of its
review may determine that less than all of the documentation required
under Divisions 7 and 8 of this article is needed for the processing of an
application for preliminary site plan approval of such proposal. In such
event the committee shall specify what documentation under Divisions
7 and 8 is needed and the applicant shall be required to submit with any
application for preliminary site plan approval for such proposal only the
documentation so specified.
§ T10B-211 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-214
BAO:1074
DIVISION 3
Preliminary Approval of Site Plans
§ T10B-215. Applications for preliminary site plan approval. [Ord.
No. 2018-11 § 4]
§ T10B-216. Additional fee for applications for preliminary approval
involving surface water drainage facilities. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
Applicants involving surface water drainage facilities pursuant to section
10B-227 shall be accompanied by an additional fee of $1,500, which shall
be held in escrow by the municipality under a written agreement with
the applicant for the purpose of defraying the cost to the municipality of
engaging a storm drainage engineer to review the plans for the facilities,
to advise the applicant or his engineer of any problems involving the plans,
and to submit to the Planning Board and flood control committee a written
report of such review upon completion thereof. The escrow agreement shall
be in such form as shall be approved by the municipal attorney and shall
include the following provisions:
(a) Applications for preliminary site plan approval of a development shall
include the supporting documentation set forth in Divisions 7 and 8 of
this article, except as otherwise provided pursuant to paragraph (b) of
this section or pursuant to Section 10B-212(b). Six copies of the
application, each containing all required supporting documentation,
shall be submitted to the administrative officer.
(b) In order to minimize the incurring of needless expense and where
approved by the committee, an application for preliminary approval
involving surface water drainage facilities pursuant to Section 10B-227
may initially include abbreviated documentation in the form of a sketch
map and general description of the proposed drainage features in lieu
of the complete documentation required under paragraph (a) of this
section. In such case, the complete documentation shall be submitted at
such stage as the committee shall deem necessary or desirable for the
purpose of further consideration of the application and further
consideration shall be deferred until the complete documentation is
submitted.
(a) That the escrowed funds shall be used for payment of the fees and
charges incurred by the municipality for the services of the storm
drainage engineer with respect to the facilities;
(b) That if the fees and charges are less than the amount of the escrowed
funds, the difference shall be refunded to the applicant upon demand;
and
(c) That if the fees and charges exceed the amount of the escrowed funds,
the excess shall be paid by the applicant to the municipality upon
demand.
§ T10B-215 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-217
BAO:1075
§ T10B-217. Review of applications by administrative officer;
report; referral. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
The administrative officer shall, upon the filing of an application for
preliminary site plan approval, forward a copy thereof forthwith to the
municipal engineer and, in cases involving surface water drainage facilities
pursuant to section 10B-227, to the storm drainage engineer. The
administrative officer shall review each application and prepare a report
with respect thereto. The report shall include a statement whether, and if
so how, the proposed development is in violation of applicable municipal
zoning, subdivision, flood plain and other regulations, but the applicant
shall not be relieved of the requirements of such regulations by reason
of any matters included in or omitted from the report. Upon completion
of the report, the administrative officer shall forward three copies of the
application and report to the committee, one copy to the Planning Board
and one copy of the report, only, to the applicant, the municipal engineer
and, where appropriate, the storm drainage engineer.
§ T10B-218. Review and report by engineer and storm drainage
engineer. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
The municipal engineer shall review each such application forwarded to
him by the administrative officer and shall prepare a report with respect
thereto. The report shall comment on the adequacy of all engineering
matters included in or affected by the proposal; except, that it need not
comment upon those involving surface water drainage facilities pursuant
to section 10B-227. The engineer shall forward copies of his report to the
committee, the Planning Board, the administrative officer and the applicant.
The storm drainage engineer shall review each such application forwarded
to him by the administrative officer as to the engineering aspects of surface
water drainage facilities involved in the application and shall prepare a
report with respect thereto. Such report shall include, without limitation,
the assumptions and bases employed in his review. The purpose of such
review shall be to ascertain whether the design of the facilities complies
with the provisions of section 10B-227. The review shall include, without
limitation, verification of all methods of computation of runoff from rainfall,
all runoff coefficients used for calculating detention capacity, discharge
rates and bypass capacity and all calculations incidental to the surface
water drainage plan for the development. The storm drainage engineer
shall forward copies of his report to the committee, the Planning Board,
the administrative officer, the municipal engineer and the applicant. The
coordination of surface water drainage plans for separate, but drainagerelated
developments is encouraged, and to that end the review of the
drainage aspects of more than one site development may proceed
simultaneously or in rapid succession.
§ T10B-217 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-219
BAO:1076
§ T10B-219. Review, report and referral by committee. [Ord. No.
2018-11 § 4]
The committee shall review each such application forwarded to it by the
administrative officer within such time after its receipt that the Planning
Board may take action thereon within the time prescribed by section
10B-64. The applicant or his representative may appear informally before
the committee and be heard with respect to the application. After the
completion of its review, the committee shall prepare a report of its findings
and recommendations, being guided by the criteria and standards set forth
in Division 6 of this article. It shall forward three copies of its report and
two copies of the application to the Planning Board. The applicant shall
thereupon promptly furnish six additional site plan prints including the
latest amendments to the Planning Board.
§ T10B-219.1. Review by various commissions. [Ord. No. 2018-11
§ 4]
After any development application for minor site plan, major site plan or
preliminary major subdivision is deemed complete copies of the completed
application and plans shall be sent to the shade tree commission,
environmental commission and traffic safety committee for review. After
its review each commission may prepare a report of its findings and
recommendations to be sent to the Planning Board at least 14 days prior to
that board's scheduled hearing on the development application.
§ T10B-220. Hearing and action by Planning Board. [Ord. No.
2018-11 § 4]
(a) The Planning Board shall review such application and after notice and
hearing shall take official action by granting or denying preliminary
approval or by granting preliminary approval subject to conditions and
safeguards reasonably designed to promote the purposes of this article,
being guided by the criteria and standards set forth in Division 6 of this
article. Preliminary approval shall be subject to any site improvement
requirements imposed pursuant to Division 5 of this article. No
preliminary approval shall be granted if any fees or charges imposed
upon the applicant pursuant to section 10B-216 remain unpaid. The
Board shall furnish copies of the decision to the committee, the
administrative officer, the municipal engineer and, where appropriate,
to the storm drainage engineer, as well as those persons specified in
section 10B-61.
(b) Preliminary approval by the Planning Board shall not relieve the
applicant of the requirements of applicable zoning, subdivision, flood
plain and other regulations.
§ T10B-219 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-220
BAO:1077

DIVISION 4
Final Approval of Site Plans
§ T10B-221. Applications for final site plan approval. [Ord. No.
2018-11 § 4]
§ T10B-222. Statement from engineer. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
The application shall be reviewed by the municipal engineer and, in cases
involving surface water drainage facilities pursuant to section 10B-227, by
the storm drainage engineer, who shall report in writing to the Planning
Board and to the applicant as to the application's compliance with the
requirements for final approval.
§ T10B-223. Grant or denial of final approval. [Ord. No. 2018-11
§ 4]
The Planning Board shall grant final site plan approval if it finds that the
detailed plans, drawings, specifications, estimates and the documentation
of the application conform to the standards established by this article for
final approval and to the conditions for preliminary approval. Otherwise it
shall deny final approval.
(a) An application for final approval of a site plan that has received
preliminary approval may be made within the time limited under
section 10B-131.
(b) The applicant shall submit to the administrative officer for final
approval by the Planning Board six copies of the application, each of
which shall include the final site plan and such supplemental
documentation as is required by Divisions 7 and 8 of this article. The
final site plan and documentation shall be in accordance with the
preliminary site plan, incorporating, however, all changes or
modifications required by the Planning Board in connection with
preliminary approval.
§ T10B-221 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-223
BAO:1079

DIVISION 5
Site Agreement and On-Tract Improvements
§ T10B-224. Site improvements and development limitations;
performance guarantee.
(a) Prior to the granting of any preliminary site plan approval the applicant
shall propose, and prior to the granting of any final site plan approval,
shall enter into an agreement with the municipality, in form satisfactory
to the municipal attorney, requiring the installation and maintenance by
the applicant and the applicant's successors in interest of such on-tract
improvements or imposing such limitations upon or staging of the
development of the site as are deemed necessary by the Planning Board
for implementing the standards and criteria set forth in Division 6 of
this article; provided, that the municipality may cause such
improvements to be installed or maintained and developments in
violation of such limitations to be corrected at the expense of the
applicant or the applicant's successors in interest, if they shall fail to do
so; and granting to the municipality such rights and easements as shall
be reasonably required for access by the municipality to such
improvements and developments for such purposes. As to surface water
drainage facilities required pursuant to section 10B-227, the agreement
shall also provide for inspection thereof annually and after each major
flood by the municipal engineer and for the undertaking by the
applicant and successors of such corrective measures as are shown by
such inspection to be required for the proper functioning of the
facilities. The engineer shall submit a written report as to each such
inspection.
(b) If the Planning Board shall determine that failure to install one or more
of such on-tract improvements would have a direct and significant
adverse effect upon the public health, safety or welfare, and further
that such installation may not be adequately assured by the withholding
of building permits or certificates of occupancy, the Board shall specify
the improvements as to which such determination is made and shall
require that the installation thereof be secured by a performance and
maintenance guarantee furnished and administered in accordance with
the provisions of section 10B-133. No such guarantee shall be cancelled
or reduced as to any improvements required by the county unless the
applicant submits a certification of completion thereof or a written
approval of the reduction by the county engineer; nor shall any
performance guaranty concerning a bridge, culvert or other structure
conducting streams or surface waters directly or indirectly under any
public street or proposed public street or through any drainageway,
structure, pipe, culvert or facility for which the county is responsible be
cancelled unless and until the construction plans for the bridge, culvert
or structure have been filed with the county engineer and the applicant
produces evidence of such filing and of the county engineer's approval
of the design and construction; nor shall any maintenance guarantee
involving surface water drainage facilities pursuant to section 10B-227
§ T10B-224 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-224
BAO:1081
§ T10B-225. Inspection during construction by engineer; stop work
orders; cost to be paid by applicant. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
Such improvements and developments on the site during and upon
completion of their construction shall be subject to inspection and approval
by the municipal engineer, who shall be notified by the applicant at least
24 hours prior to the start of construction. No underground installation
shall be covered until inspected and approved. Approval or reasons for
withholding approval shall be given promptly. If work proceeds without
such approval or not in compliance therewith, the municipal engineer, in
addition to any other remedies available to the municipality, may issue an
order requiring immediate cessation of the affected work and prohibiting
resumption thereof until approval is obtained or noncompliance corrected.
Upon completion of all such improvements and developments, the
applicant's engineer shall certify to the municipal engineer that the same
have been constructed and installed in accordance with the requirements of
this article.
The cost of inspection by the municipal engineer shall be deemed part of
the cost of the improvements, and it shall be borne by the applicant and
paid to the municipality in accordance with fees established therefor by
resolution of the Governing Body on file in the offices of the municipal clerk
and engineer.
be cancelled without the certification of the municipal engineer that all
required maintenance has been performed.
§ T10B-224 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-225
BAO:1082
DIVISION 5.1
Off-Tract Improvements
§ T10B-225.1. Essential off-tract connections. [Ord. No. 2018-11
§ 4]
In cases in which a proposed site plan has no direct access to a public street
or in which it has no direct access to a public sanitary sewer and does not
qualify for sewage disposal by individual septic systems, whereby the site
development cannot qualify for approval under this article, the Planning
Board may nevertheless grant preliminary approval upon condition that the
applicant acquire, improve and dedicate to the municipality such street or
sewer connection between the site and an existing public street or sanitary
sewer, as the case may be, as shall be approved by the Planning Board Such
off-tract connections shall be subject to the provisions of this article as if
they were required on-tract improvements. The dedication thereof shall be
subject to approval of the municipal attorney as to form. The provisions of
this section shall be applicable only upon the request and with the consent
of the applicant.
§ T10B-225.2. Nonessential improvements; assessment of cost.
[Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
(a) In cases, other than those set forth in the preceding section or when the
Board acts pursuant to section 10B-163, in which the Planning Board
shall determine that an off-tract street, sanitary sewerage or storm
drainage improvement is reasonable and necessary, is necessitated or
required by construction or improvements within the site, is based on
circulation or comprehensive utility service plans pursuant to the
master plan, will promote the criteria and standards of Division 6 of this
article and can be most appropriately accomplished in connection with
the development of the site, which is likely to be specially benefited
thereby, the Board shall at the time of final approval of the site plan
recommend to the Governing Body that such off-site improvements be
undertaken by the municipality as local improvements, the cost of
which will be specially assessed against properties benefited thereby in
proportion to and not in excess of the benefits received, pursuant to
chapter 56 of title 40 of the Revised Statutes.
(b) If, in such a case, the layout within the boundaries of the site
development will depend upon the off-tract improvements, the Planning
Board shall grant any preliminary approval upon condition that the
Governing Body adopt an ordinance authorizing such local
improvements and that the site plan layout be compatible with such
improvements, or, alternatively, that if such ordinance is not adopted
within 90 days after the Planning Board recommends the same to the
Governing Body, the site plan layout shall be designed without
reference to such improvements.
§ T10B-225.1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-225.2
BAO:1083
(c) If such an ordinance shall be adopted within such time, all subsequent
proceedings for the making and for the assessment of the cost of the offtract
improvements shall be in accordance with such ordinance and the
aforesaid statute.
§ T10B-225.2 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-225.2
BAO:1084
DIVISION 6
Criteria and Standards
§ T10B-226. Enumeration. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
The following criteria and standards shall be used by the Planning Board
and by the committee in reviewing applications for site plan approval. In
addition, for site plans in a historic preservation zoning district or historic
preservation buffer zoning district the standards and criteria set forth in
Article XIII, Historic Preservation, shall apply. They are intended to provide
a framework within which the designer of the site development is free
to exercise creativity, invention, and innovation. Neither the committee,
commission, nor the Planning Board shall specify or favor any particular
architectural style or design or assist in the design of any of the buildings
submitted for approval. Participation by the committee and the Board shall
be restricted to a reasonable, professional review and, except as otherwise
provided in the following subsections, full responsibility for design shall be
retained by the applicant.
(a) Ecological considerations. The development shall, insofar as
practicable:
(1) Result in minimal impairment of the regenerative capacity of
aquifers and other ground water supplies;
(2) Result in minimal degradation of unique or irreplaceable land types
and minimal adverse impact upon the critical areas specified in
paragraph (h) of section 10B-233;
(3) Conform with existing geologic and topographic features, to the
end that the most appropriate use of land is encouraged; and
(4) Cause minimal interference with the natural functioning of plant
and animal life processes.
(b) Landscape. The historic and natural character of the landscape shall be
preserved, insofar as practicable and environmentally desirable, by
minimizing tree and soil removal. If development of the site
necessitates the removal of established trees, special attention shall be
given to the planting of replacement trees or to other landscape
treatment. (Refer to section 10B-227A for tree preservation, protection
and mitigation standards.) Any grade changes shall be in keeping with
the general appearance of neighboring developed areas. In historic
preservation zoning districts, in historic preservation buffer zoning
districts and on historic sites landscaping shall be in keeping with the
historic character of the district or site. Flexibility should be provided
when reviewing landscaping to include the period of significance and
historical characteristics of the district or site.
(c) Relation of proposed structures to environment. Proposed structures
shall be related harmoniously to themselves, the terrain, existing
buildings and roads, and historically significant features, if any, in the
§ T10B-226 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-226
BAO:1085
vicinity that have a visual relationship to the proposed structures.
The achievement of such harmonious relationship may include the
enclosure of space in conjunction with other existing buildings or other
proposed buildings and the creation of focal points with respect to
avenues of approach, terrain features or other buildings. Proposed
structures shall be so sited as to minimize any adverse impact upon
the surrounding area, and particularly upon any nearby residences and
historic features, by reason of:
(1) Building location, height, bulk and shadows;
(2) Location, intensity, direction and times of use of outdoor or indoor
lighting (refer to section 10B-317.1);
(3) Likelihood of nuisances;
(4) Other similar considerations.
Appropriate natural or artificial screening may be required to
minimize any such adverse impact.
(d) Scenic, historical, archaeological and landmark sites. Scenic, historical,
archaeological and landmark sites and features that are located on or
adjacent to the proposed development shall be preserved and protected
insofar as practical. Additionally, any existing tree or vegetation that
threatens to damage a historic structure in a historic preservation
zoning district, a historic preservation buffer zoning district or a
historic site on the national or state historic registers shall be
considered for removal.
(e) Surface water drainage. As provided pursuant to section 10B-227.
(f) Driveway connections to public streets. All entrance and exit driveways
to public streets shall be located with due consideration for traffic flow
and so as to afford maximum safety to traffic on the public streets. All
such entrances and exits shall be so located and designated as to:
(1) Conform with municipal sight triangle requirements at corners;
(2) Achieve maximum practicable distance from street intersections
and from existing and proposed access connections from adjacent
properties;
(3) Minimize left-hand turns and other turning movements; and
(4) Discourage the routing of vehicular traffic to and through local
residential streets.
(g) Traffic effects. The site development proposal generally shall minimize
adverse traffic effects on the road networks serving the area in
question, either those existing or as included in the master plan.
(h) Pedestrian and bicycle safety. Insofar as practicable, pedestrian and
bicycle circulation shall be separated from motor vehicle circulation.
§ T10B-226 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-226
BAO:1086
Safe and convenient pedestrian circulation, including appropriate
sidewalks, shall be provided on the site and its approaches. The
pedestrian circulation plan shall be designed to minimize adverse
effects of vehicular traffic upon sidewalks and bicycle paths.
(i) On-site parking and circulation. The location, width and layout of
interior drives shall be appropriate for the proposed interior
circulation. The location and layout of accessory off-street parking and
loading spaces shall provide for efficient circulation and the safety of
pedestrians and vehicles. The effect on historic features, if any, shall be
considered so as to minimize such effect. Insofar as practicable,
separate rows or aisles in parking areas shall be divided by trees,
shrubbery, and other landscaping devices. The location of parking areas
shall not detract from the design of proposed buildings and structures
or from the appearance of the existing neighboring buildings,
structures, and landscape. Provision shall be made for access by police,
fire, and emergency vehicles.
(j) Utility services. Electric, telephone and other wire served utility lines
and service connections shall be underground insofar as feasible and
subject to state public utilities regulations. Any utility installations
remaining aboveground shall be located so as to have a harmonious
relation to neighboring properties and to the site.
(k) Disposal of wastes and recyclables. There shall be adequate provision
for the disposal of all solid, liquid and gaseous wastes and for the
avoidance or odors and other air pollutants that may be generated at
the site. All applicable federal, state and local pollution control
standards shall be observed. All commercial, institutional and
residential buildings over three units in number shall submit a recycling
plan which demonstrates that adequate provisions have been made for
recyclable material.
(l) Noise. All applicable federal, state and local regulations dealing with
the control of outside noise which is expected to be generated at the
site shall be complied with.
(m) Advertising features. The size, location, height, design, color, texture,
lighting and materials of permanent signs and outdoor advertising
structures or features shall not detract from the design of proposed
buildings and structures or of the surrounding properties.
(n) Special features. Outside storage areas, service and machinery
installations, service areas, truck loading areas, utility buildings and
structures and similar accessory areas and structures shall be subject
to such setbacks, screen plantings or other screening methods as shall
reasonably be required to prevent any adverse effect upon the
environment or nearby property.
(o) Waterway corridors. Site plans shall be designed so as to preserve from
disturbance waterway corridors as defined in section 10B-203. For
purposes of this section, disturbance shall include but not be limited to:
§ T10B-226 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-226
BAO:1087
(1) Cutting and clearing of trees and brush;
(2) Altering of watercourses;
(3) Regrading of the natural contours (filling or removal of fill);
(4) Any construction including any on-site sewage disposal system.
All new lots in major subdivisions and all building locations in major
site plans shall be designed to provide sufficient areas outside of
waterway corridors and within required setbacks to accommodate
a structure for which it is being created as well as any normal
accessory uses appurtenant thereto which would require
disturbance. The following may be permitted within waterway
corridors:
a. Unpaved hiking paths and bridle paths;
b. Installation, repairs, or replacement during periods of low flow
of sanitary sewer lines and sewage pumping stations or other
utility lines within or across a waterway corridor;
c. Culverts, bridges, road or driveway crossings, and stormwater
runoff detention facilities, in cases where location of these
outside of the waterway corridor is demonstrated not to be
feasible;
d. Fences, provided that they are designed and located so as to
allow free passage of floodwaters and debris;
e. Ponds and lakes, if flow of feeder streams can be demonstrated
to be sufficient to sustain volume.
Should it be determined that any of the provisions of this
paragraph (o) are preempted by the Freshwater Wetlands
Protection Act and the regulations promulgated thereunder,
then as to any of the provisions of this subparagraph which are
preempted, the state law shall apply. This subparagraph shall
be administered and construed to the extent practicable so as
to avoid preemption by the Freshwater Wetlands Protection
Act.
(p) Special technological impacts. Where the proposed site development
involves emissions, noise, wastes, materials, equipment, or other
hazards which require specialized expertise to evaluate, the
administrative officer shall refer the applicant's submissions to the
municipal-retained environmental consultant (or to several consultants
where more than one field of expertise is involved), requesting an
independent review of the environmental impact of the project to be set
forth in a report to the Board having review jurisdiction. The cost of
these studies shall be charged to the applicant's escrow account
established pursuant to section 10B-32.
§ T10B-226 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-226.1
BAO:1088
§ T10B-226.1. Additional design standards for the R-O and MRRO
districts. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
In addition to the criteria and standards found in section 10B-226, the
following criteria and standards shall be used by all municipal agencies
in reviewing applications for site plan or subdivision approval in the R-O
and MRRO districts. These criteria and standards are intended to provide
a framework within which the designer of the site development is free to
exercise creativity, invention and innovation.
(a) Building design and location.
(1) New developments should be compatible with surrounding
buildings.
(2) New buildings should be integrated in a nondisruptive fashion into
the complex balance of bulk, height and scale.
(3) Design elements such as colors, textures and materials should be
carefully reviewed and shall be incorporated into construction to
help soften and mitigate the appearance of new or existing
buildings.
(4) Careful consideration should be given to a visual impact new
buildings will have on the surrounding community.
(5) New buildings should be designed to avoid a monolithic
appearance.
(b) Reuse and recycling.
(1) To the extent practical, new construction shall comply with the U.S.
Green Building Council's Leadership in Energy and Environmental
Design (LEED) rating system.
(c) Streetscape.
(1) New building facades along public streets should relate well in
composition and scale to development in the area.
(2) Both existing and new building facades should be designed with
variable openings that are pedestrian friendly and break up the
building face.
(3) Careful consideration shall be given to the mass and bulk of any
buildings to insure they are harmonious with their surroundings.
(4) Retail uses should front on Witherspoon Street or public plaza area.
(5) Reuse of existing structures shall include a streetscape plan to
provide for a pedestrian friendly area.
(6) Nonresidential uses in the MRRO zone should not extend for more
than 180 feet along any exterior facade.
§ T10B-226.1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-226.1
BAO:1089
§ T10B-227. Stormwater management: scope and purpose. [Ord.
No. 2018-11 § 4]
(7) Any development application must include a streetscape plan
indicating how the site can become more pedestrian friendly area.
(d) Open space.
(1) Open space should be adequately connected to the public walkway
system:
(2) Paving types and patterns should relate to the intended character
of the street or open space area.
(3) Street furniture (benches, trash baskets, lamp standards) should be
provided to enhance the character of the open space areas.
(4) Open spaces in the MRRO zone should be designed to encourage
the interaction of people living within the new development and the
neighborhood. The development shall have an enhanced system of
public spaces and pathways that provide linkages between and
through the development as well as the surrounding neighborhood.
(e) Circulation.
(1) Sidewalks should be provided along any street or drive.
(2) Consideration should be given in the design of any site plan to
encourage transit or jitney services.
(3) In the MRRO zone.
a. A new street is envisioned. Access points should be open and
accessible by the public. At least two points of vehicular
ingress and egress should be provided.
b. Any development should demonstrate how the public and
residents will circulate in and through the site.
c. A private gated community is not allowed for the site.
d. Safe and efficient traffic circulation should be provided. Traffic
safety studies (indicating peak hour, weekend traffic
generation rates and an analysis of the surrounding
intersections) sold be provided as part of site plan review for
any development of the site.
e. Permitted uses should be supported by a parking garage
except for a very limited amount of internal surface parking. If
additional parking spaces are required, they should be
provided as part of site plan review for any development of the
site.
§ T10B-226.1 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-227
BAO:1090
(a) Stormwater management is the process of minimizing the creation of
stormwater runoff at land developments and directing resulting runoff
through appropriate nonstructural and structural stormwater
management measures so as to control flooding, recharge ground
water, and prevent pollution of water resources. Stormwater
management shall occur with the understanding and acceptance of
precipitation and stormwater runoff as resources.
(b) The purpose of this section is to establish minimum stormwater
management requirements for proposed major developments in order
to manage the quantity and quality of stormwater runoff entering
surface and ground waters.
Specifically, the purpose of this section is to:
(1) Prevent increases in flood damage to public health, safety and
property;
(2) Minimize increases in stormwater runoff rates and volumes;
(3) Induce groundwater recharge wherever suitable infiltration, soil
permeability, and favorable geological conditions exist;
(4) Prevent increases in nonpoint source pollution;
(5) Preserve existing natural drainage patterns wherever practicable;
(6) Maintain the integrity and stability of stream channels and buffers
for their ecological, drainage, conveyance, and other beneficial
functions;
(7) Control and minimize soil erosion and the transport and deposition
of sediment;
(8) Minimize public safety hazards at stormwater management
measures; and
(9) Protect surface and groundwater resources from degradation and
diminution.
(c) Applicability.
(1) This section shall be applicable to the following major and minor
developments independent of any requirement for preliminary or
final site plan or subdivision review:
a. Nonresidential major developments; and
b. Aspects of residential major developments that are not
preempted by the Residential Site Improvement Standards
(RSIS) at N.J.A.C. 5:21. The provisions of both this section and
the RSIS are to be applied and reviewed concurrently for any
residential major development.
§ T10B-227 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-227
BAO:1091
§ T10B-227.1. (Reserved)
§ T10B-227.2. Stormwater management requirements. [Ord. No.
2018-11 § 4]
(2) This section shall also be applicable to major development projects
undertaken by the municipality. For such projects, major
development shall be defined as any construction activity that
results in the permanent disturbance of one or more acres of land.
(d) (1) Development approvals issued for subdivisions and site plans
pursuant to this section are to be considered an integral part of
development approvals under the subdivision and site plan review
process and do not relieve the applicant of the responsibility to
secure required permits or approvals for activities regulated by any
other applicable code, rule, act, or ordinance. In their
interpretation and application, the provisions of this section shall
be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the
public health, safety, and general welfare. This section shall be
construed to assure consistency with the requirements of New
Jersey laws and acts amendatory thereof or supplementary thereto,
applicable implementing regulations, and any existing or future
municipal NJPDES Permits and any amendments or revisions
thereto or reissuance thereof. This section is not intended to
interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or
regulation, statute, or other provision of law. Where any provision
of this section imposes requirements different from those imposed
by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of
law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose more
stringent requirements shall control.
(2) Maximum impervious coverage requirements for new and
redeveloped residential lots can be found in Section 10B-246.1.
(a) General requirements.
(1) Stormwater management measures for major developments shall
be designed to meet the erosion control, groundwater recharge,
and stormwater runoff quantity and quality requirements in this
section. As detailed in Section 10B-227.2(b), these requirements
shall be met to the maximum extent practicable by incorporating
nonstructural stormwater management strategies into the design
of these measures. If such strategies alone are not sufficient to
meet these requirements, structural stormwater management
measures necessary to meet these requirements shall be
incorporated into the design along with the practicable
nonstructural strategies.
(2) The requirements in this section do not apply to major development
projects where alternative design and performance requirements
are applicable under either a regional stormwater management
§ T10B-227 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-227.2
BAO:1092
plan or Water Quality Management Plan adopted in accordance
with Department of Environmental Protection rules.
(3) Any application for a new agricultural or horticultural development
that meets the definition of major development in Section
10B-227.1 shall be submitted to the Mercer County Soil
Conservation District for review and approval in accordance with
the requirements in this section and any applicable Soil
Conservation District guidelines for stormwater runoff quantity and
erosion control.
(b) Nonstructural stormwater management requirements.
(1) The requirements of this subsection shall only apply to major
developments to the maximum extent practicable. The
requirements in Section 10B-227.3 through § T10B-227.6 shall be
met by incorporating green infrastructure and nonstructural
stormwater management strategies set forth in Section
10B-227.2(b)(2) into the design. The applicant shall identify the
green infrastructure and nonstructural strategies incorporated into
the design of the project. The applicant shall provide a completed
NJDEP Low Impact Development Checklist and a Nonstructural
Strategies Point System Form. If the applicant contends that it is
not feasible for engineering, environmental or safety reasons to
incorporate any of the green infrastructure and nonstructural
stormwater management strategies identified in Section
10B-227.2(b)(2) into the design of a particular project, the
applicant shall identify in writing the strategy or strategies so
considered and provide a basis for the contention.
(2) Nonstructural stormwater management strategies:
a. Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss;
b. Minimize new impervious surfaces and disconnect the flow of
runoff from impervious surfaces;
c. Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation;
d. Minimize the decrease in the time of concentration from pre-to
post-construction site conditions;
e. Minimize land disturbance including clearing and grading;
f. Minimize soil compaction;
g. Provide low maintenance landscaping that encourages the
retention and planting of native vegetation and minimizes the
use of lawns, fertilizers, and pesticides;
§ T10B-227.2 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-227.2
BAO:1093
h. Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas;
i. Provide source controls that prevent or minimize the use,
exposure and/or mobilization of pollutants and prevent or
minimize the release and transport of those pollutants into
stormwater runoff. Such source controls include, but are not
limited to:
1. Site design features that help to prevent accumulation of
trash and debris in drainage systems, including features
that satisfy Section 10B-227.2(a)(3) below;
2. Site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash
and debris from drainage systems;
3. Site design features that help to prevent and/or contain
spills or other harmful accumulations of pollutants at
industrial or commercial developments; and
4. When establishing vegetation after land disturbance,
applying fertilizer in accordance with the requirements
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and implementing rules.
(3) Except as exempted in Section 10B-227.2(b)(3)c below, site design
features identified under Section 10B-227.2(b)(2)i.2 above shall
comply with the following standard to control the passage of solid
and floatable materials through storm drain inlets:
a. Whenever a ground surface grate is used to collect stormwater
runoff, either of the following grate types shall be used:
1. The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT)
bicycle safe grate as described in Chapter 2.4 of the
NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways
Planning and Design Guidelines (latest edition).
2. A grate with each individual opening in the grate having a
maximum area of seven square inches or a maximum
distance of one-half inch across the smallest opening
dimension.
b. Whenever a curb opening grate is used to collect stormwater
runoff, each individual opening in the grate shall have a
maximum area of seven square inches or a maximum distance
of two inches across the smallest opening dimension.
c. These requirements do not apply:
1. Where the review agency determines that this standard
would cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could
§ T10B-227.2 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-227.2
BAO:1094
§ T10B-227.3. Erosion control requirements. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
The minimum design and performance requirements to control erosion are
those established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A.
4:24-39 et seq.
not practicably be overcome by using additional or larger
storm drain inlets that meet these requirements;
2. Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in section 10B-227.12(a)(1) are conveyed
through any device that is designed, at a minimum, to
prevent delivery of all solid and floatable materials that
could not pass through either one of the following:
(i) A rectangular space four and five-eighths inches long
and 1 1/2 inches wide.
(ii) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch.
3. Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one inch spacing between the bars, to
the elevation of the water quality design storm as specified
in section 10B-227.12(a)(1);
4. Where the Department determines, pursuant to the New
Jersey Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C.
7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet this standard is an
undertaking that constitutes an encroachment or will
damage or destroy the New Jersey Register listed historic
property.
(4) Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater management
measure to meet the requirements in sections 10B-227.3 and
10B-227.4 shall be:
a. Dedicated to a government agency; or
b. Subject to a conservation restriction filed with the Mercer
County Clerk's office; or
c. Subject to an approved equivalent restriction that ensures that
such land area approved by the reviewing agency is
maintained in perpetuity.
(5) Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management strategies is
available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual and the Department's Nonstructural Strategies
Point System.
§ T10B-227.2 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-227.4
BAO:1095
§ T10B-227.4. Groundwater recharge requirements. [Ord. No.
2018-11 § 4]
The minimum design and performance requirements to maintain
groundwater recharge which only apply to major developments are as
follows:
(a) Using the criteria for calculating stormwater runoff and groundwater
recharge in Section 10B-227.12, the design engineer shall comply with
either of the following requirements:
(1) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis that the
post-developed project site maintains 100% of the site's
predeveloped average annual groundwater recharge volume.
(2) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis that any
increase in the project site's projected stormwater runoff volume
produced by the two-year, twenty-four-hour storm from
predeveloped to post-developed conditions is infiltrated.
(b) Groundwater recharge is not required at major development projects
located within an "urban redevelopment area" as defined in Section
10B-277.1 or from those portions of major development projects that
produce stormwater runoff described in Section 10B-227.4(c) below.
(c) The following two types of stormwater runoff shall not be recharged:
(1) Stormwater runoff from areas of high pollutant loading. High
pollutant loading areas are:
a. Areas in industrial and commercial developments where
solvents and/or petroleum products are loaded/unloaded,
stored, or applied;
b. Areas where pesticides are loaded/unloaded or stored;
c. Areas where hazardous materials are expected to be present in
greater than "reportable quantities" as defined by the United
States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR
§ 302.4; and
d. Areas where recharge would be inconsistent with a
Department approved remedial action work plan or landfill
closure plan and areas with high risks for spills of toxic
materials, such as gas stations and vehicle maintenance
facilities; and
(2) Stormwater runoff from industrial areas exposed to "source
material."
(d) The design engineer shall assess and certify the hydraulic impact on the
groundwater table and design the project site and all site groundwater
recharge measures so as to avoid adverse hydraulic impacts. Adverse
§ T10B-227.4 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-227.4
BAO:1096
§ T10B-227.5. Stormwater runoff quantity control requirements.
[Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
The minimum design and performance requirements to control stormwater
runoff quantity are as follows:
hydraulic impacts include, but are not limited to, raising the
groundwater table so as to cause surface ponding, flooding of
basements and other subsurface facilities, and interference with the
proper operation of subsurface sewage disposal systems and other
subsurface structures in the vicinity or down gradient of a groundwater
recharge measure.
(a) Using the criteria for calculating stormwater runoff and groundwater
recharge in Section 10B-227.12, the design engineer shall comply with
either of the following requirements:
(1) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis that the
post-developed stormwater runoff hydrographs from the project
site for the two-, ten-, and 100-year storms at any point in time do
not exceed by a meaningful amount the site's predeveloped runoff
hydrographs for the same storms;
(2) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis that under
post-developed site conditions: 1) there is no increase in
predeveloped stormwater runoff rates from the project site for the
two-, ten-, and 100-year storms; and 2) any increased stormwater
runoff volume or change in stormwater runoff timing for these
storms will not increase flood damage at or downstream of the
project site. When performing this analysis for predeveloped site
conditions, all off-site development levels shall reflect existing
conditions. When performing this analysis for post-developed site
conditions, all off-site development levels shall reflect full
development in accordance with current zoning and land use
ordinances.
(3) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis that the
peak post-developed stormwater runoff rates from the project site
for the two-, ten-, and 100-year storms are 50%, 75% and 80%,
respectively, of the site's peak predeveloped stormwater runoff
rates. The percentages do not have to be applied to runoff from offsite
areas or those portions of the project site that are not proposed
for development at the time of application provided that such areas
are:
a. Protected from future development by conservation easement,
deed restriction, or other acceptable legal measures; or
b. Subject to review under these requirements if they are
proposed for development in the future.
§ T10B-227.4 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-227.6
BAO:1097
§ T10B-227.6. Stormwater runoff quality control requirements.
[Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
The minimum design and performance requirements to control stormwater
runoff quality are as follows:
(a) Using the criteria for calculating stormwater runoff in section
10B-227.12, the design engineer shall demonstrate that the anticipated
annual average post-construction load of total suspended solids (TSS)
in stormwater runoff from the project site will be reduced by 80%
before leaving the project site. Except as provided below:
(1) If the runoff from a project site will drain, directly or indirectly, into
a water with a Total Maximum Daily Load (TMDL), then the TSS
reduction shall be increased to be consistent with the reductions
set forth in the TMDL;
(2) If the runoff from a project site will drain, directly or indirectly, into
a water that is listed under New Jersey's Integrated Water Quality
Assessment Report, then the TSS reduction shall be maximized to
the maximum extent practicable.
(b) The above requirement to reduce TSS load shall only be required if an
additional 5,000 square feet or more of impervious surface is being
proposed on the project site.
(c) The above requirement to reduce TSS load shall not apply to any
stormwater runoff in a discharge regulated under a numeric effluent
limitation for TSS imposed under the New Jersey Pollution Discharge
Elimination System (NJPDES) rules, N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or in a discharge
specifically exempt under a NJPDES permit from this requirement.
Daily limits of TSS (TMDL) may apply to the site development based on
conditions of regulatory approvals.
(d) The design of stormwater management measures to achieve the above
requirement to reduce TSS load shall be based upon the Department's
Water Quality Design Storm of 1 1/4 inches of rainfall in two hours as
described in the Department's Stormwater Management Rules (N.J.A.C.
7:8). The calculation of stormwater runoff volume from this design
storm may include the effects of nonstructural and structural
stormwater management measures.
(e) For the purposes of computing TSS reductions, the values shown in
Table 1 below for stormwater management measures that are designed,
constructed, and maintained in accordance with the current New Jersey
Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual shall be used.
Alternative measures, removal rates, and calculation methods may be
used upon approval by the municipal engineer following consultation
with the municipal storm drainage engineer.
§ T10B-227.6 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-227.6
BAO:1098
Table 1
TSS Removal Rates for Stormwater Management Measures
Stormwater Management
Measure
TSS Removal Rate
(% of mass)
Bioretention Systems 90
Constructed Stormwater Wetland 90
Extended Detention Basin 40-60
Infiltration Structure 80
Manufactured Treatment Device See Section 10B-227.6(f)
Sand Filter 80
Vegetative Filter Strip 60-80
Wet Pond 50-90
Source: New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual,
April 2004
(f) Manufactured treatment devices used to meet the requirements of this
section shall have their pollutant removal rates verified by the New
Jersey Corporation for Advanced Technology and certified by the
Department.
(g) If more than one stormwater management measures are used in series,
the following formula shall be used to calculate the total TSS removal
rate:
R = A + B - (A*B)/100
Where:
R = Total TSS Removal Rate for Both Stormwater Management
Measures
A = TSS Removal Rate from Table 2 for First Stormwater
Management Measure
B = TSS Removal Rate from Table 2 for Second Stormwater
Management Measure
If three or more stormwater management measures are used in series,
the applicant shall calculate the total TSS removal rate for the first two
measures in the series using the above formula and then substitute
the resulting Total TSS Removal Rate (R) for the first measure's TSS
Removal Rate (A) in the formula when calculating the combined result
with the next measure in series.
(h) If there is more than one on-site drainage area discharging stormwater
runoff from the project site, the above requirement to reduce TSS load
rate shall apply to each area.
§ T10B-227.6 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-227.6
BAO:1099
(i) If an on-site drainage area is divided into subareas, the total TSS
reduction for the drainage area can be based upon a weighted average
of the TSS reductions achieved at each subarea based upon relative size
of each subarea.
(j) The design engineer shall also demonstrate that the anticipated annual
average post-construction load of nutrients in stormwater runoff from
the project site will be reduced to the maximum extent feasible before
leaving the project site. The design of stormwater management
measures to achieve the above requirement to reduce nutrient loads
shall be based upon the Department's Water Quality Design Storm of
one and one-quarter inches of rainfall in two hours as described in the
Department's Stormwater Management Rules (N.J.A.C. 7:8). The
calculation of stormwater runoff volume from this design storm may
include the effects of nonstructural and structural stormwater
management measures.
(1) In achieving the above requirement to reduce nutrient loads, the
design of the project site shall include nonstructural and structural
stormwater management measures that optimize nutrient removal
while still achieving the stormwater runoff quantity and quality
control requirement in sections 10B-227.5 and 10B-227.6.
(2) This requirement may be superseded by a more stringent numeric
effluent limitation imposed under the New Jersey Pollution
Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules, N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or in
a discharge specifically exempt under a NJPDES permit from this
requirement. Daily limits for nutrient loading (TMDL) may apply to
the site development based on conditions of regulatory approvals,
or as provided in subsection (a) above.
(k) Special water resource protection areas shall be established along all
waters designated Category One at N.J.A.C. 7:9B, and along all
perennial or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the
Category One waters as shown on USGS Quadrangle Maps or in County
Soil Surveys within the associated HUC14 drainage area. Other
authoritative sources of stream delineation may be utilized such as a
delineation that is part of the municipal or regional stormwater
management plan or a stream delineation overlay prepared by the
Department. These areas shall be designated and protected as follows:
(1) The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water resource
protection area in accordance with one of the following:
a. A 300-foot special water resource protection area shall be
provided on each side of the waterway, measured
perpendicular to the waterway from the top of the bank
outwards or from the centerline of the waterway where the
bank is not defined, consisting of existing vegetation or
vegetation allowed to follow natural succession.
§ T10B-227.6 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-227.6
BAO:1100
b. Encroachment within the designated special water resource
protection area under subsection (k)(l)a above shall only be
allowed where previous development or disturbance has
occurred (for example, pre-existing active agricultural use,
parking area or maintained lawn area). The encroachment
shall only be allowed where the applicant demonstrates to the
satisfaction of the review agency that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection area
will be maintained to the maximum extent practicable. In no
case shall the remaining special water resource protection
area be reduced to less than 150 feet as measured
perpendicular to the top of bank of the waterway or centerline
of the waterway where the bank is undefined. All
encroachments proposed under this subparagraph shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(2) All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow through the
special water resource protection area and shall comply with the
Standard for Off-Site Stability in the "Standards For Soil Erosion
and Sediment Control in New Jersey," established under the Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.
(3) If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through the
special water resource protection area cannot comply with the
Standard For Off-Site Stability in the "Standards for Soil Erosion
and Sediment Control in New Jersey," established under the Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., then the
stabilization measures in accordance with the requirements of the
above standards may be placed within the special water resource
protection area, provided that:
a. Stabilization measures shall not be placed within 150 feet of
the Category One waterway;
b. Pursuant to the Flood Hazard Area Control Act Rules at
N.J.A.C. 7:13-11.2(j)4, runoff from the water quality design
storm that is discharged within a 300-foot riparian zone shall
be treated in accordance with this section to reduce the postconstruction
load of total suspended solids by 95% of the
anticipated load from the developed site, expressed as an
annual average;
c. Thermal pollution by stormwater discharges shall be
addressed to ensure no significant increase or decrease in
temperature occurs in the receiving waterway outside of the
mixing zone;
d. The encroachment shall only be allowed where the applicant
demonstrates to the satisfaction of the review agency that the
ecological value and condition of the special water resource
§ T10B-227.6 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-227.6
BAO:1101
§ T10B-227.7. Stormwater runoff discharge requirements for minor
developments. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
protection area will be maintained to the maximum extent
practicable;
e. A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with the
appropriate Department staff and Soil Conservation District
staff to identify necessary stabilization measures; and
f. All encroachments proposed under this subsection shall be
reviewed and approved by the Department.
(4) If a stream corridor protection plan for a waterway subject to the
requirements of Section 10B-227.6(j) has been approved by the
Department, the provisions of such a plan shall replace the
requirements of Section 10B-227.6(k)1 as the applicable special
water resource protection area requirements for the waterway.
(l) In accordance with the definition of FW1 waters at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4,
stormwater management measures shall be designed to prevent any
increase in stormwater runoff and any new stormwater discharge point
to waters classified as FW1.
(a) The stormwater runoff requirements applicable to minor developments
are as follows:
(1) For each square foot of new impervious surface, two gallons of
stormwater shall be retained on-site using green infrastructure
practices or such other measures as may be required by the
municipal engineer.
(2) All such development shall be subject to review by the municipal
engineer to determine that all stormwater runoff created by the
development is adequately controlled and does not cause an
adverse impact on adjoining property owners.
(3) In such cases where it is determined that, the out flow from the
stormwater management system will impact an adjacent property,
the out flow shall be directed to a storm sewer, gutter, swale, or
other suitable stormwater runoff conveyance measure.
(4) If the municipal engineer determines that the out flow from the
stormwater management system will impact an adjoining property
and the out flow cannot be safely directed to a storm sewer, gutter,
swale, or other suitable stormwater runoff conveyance measure,
the stormwater runoff from the development shall be retained onsite
at a rate of three gallons of storage for each square foot of new
impervious surface using green infrastructure practices or such
other measures as may be required by the municipal engineer.
§ T10B-227.6 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-227.7
BAO:1102
§ T10B-227.8. Threatened and endangered species. [Ord. No.
2018-11 § 4]
When habitat for threatened or endangered species is present on a project
site, stormwater management measures shall be implemented to avoid
adverse impacts to such habitats caused by pollutant discharge, the
creation of concentrated stormwater runoff, or the alteration of recharge.
§ T10B-227.9. Exemptions. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
§ T10B-227.10. Waivers; conditions for. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
(b) The stormwater management feature shall be protected from future
development by conservation easement, deed restriction, or other
acceptable legal measures.
(a) The following linear development projects are exempt from the
requirements of section 10B-227.4 through section 10B-227.7:
(1) The construction of an underground utility line provided that the
disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion;
(2) The construction of an aboveground utility line provided that the
existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent
practicable; and
(3) The construction of a public pedestrian walkway, trail, or other
access measure with a maximum width of 14 feet provided that the
measure is constructed of permeable material.
(a) A waiver from strict compliance with the requirements of section
10B-227.4 through section 10B-227.7 may be granted for the
enlargement of an existing public roadway or railroad or the
construction or enlargement of a public pedestrian access provided that
the following conditions are met:
(1) The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the
project that cannot be accomplished by any other means;
(2) The applicant demonstrates through an alternatives analysis
acceptable to the review agency that, through the use of
nonstructural and structural stormwater management strategies
and measures, the proposed project complies with the
requirements of section 10B-227.4 through section 10B-227.7 to
the maximum extent practicable;
(3) The applicant demonstrates that, in order to fully meet the
requirements of section 10B-227.4 through section 10B-227.7,
existing structures currently in use would need to be condemned;
and
§ T10B-227.7 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-227.10
BAO:1103
§ T10B-227.11. Deferrals. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
A deferral of strict compliance with the requirements of section 10B-227.4
through section 10B-227.7 may be granted for those projects where an
applicant has demonstrated that the impacts of noncompliance will result
in negligible impacts to downstream properties, structures, stormwater
management or conveyance measures, waters of the state, wetlands, and
other water resources. Such a deferral can only be obtained if the applicant
agrees to include the project's features and impacts in the design of
subsequent site development proposals and the deferral is approved by
the municipal engineer and municipal flood and stormwater management
committee. In such cases, the applicant must submit a written deferral
request that demonstrates compliance with the negligible impact
requirements presented above.
§ T10B-227.12. Computation of stormwater runoff and groundwater
recharge. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
(4) The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or otherwise have
rights to land within the upstream drainage area of the receiving
stream that would provide additional opportunities to mitigate
those requirements of section 10B-227.4 through section
10B-227.7 that were not achievable on site. Rights to such land
shall include the potential to obtain such rights through
condemnation provided that no existing structures currently in use
would be included in such condemnation.
(b) A waiver from strict compliance with the requirements of section
10B-227.4 through section 10B-227.7 may be granted for those projects
where an applicant has demonstrated the inability or impracticality of
strict compliance with the stormwater management requirements set
forth in these subsections. Such a waiver can only be obtained if the
applicant agrees to undertake a suitable mitigation measure as
included in the municipality's stormwater management plan or as
identified by the municipal engineer and approved by the municipal
engineer and municipality's flood and stormwater management
committee. In such cases, the applicant must submit a written waiver
request that presents the reasons why strict compliance cannot be
achieved by the project.
(a) Stormwater runoff.
(1) When computing stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and/or
hydrographs necessary for compliance with the requirements of
section 10B-227.2 the design engineer shall utilize the USDA
Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) runoff
methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation, appropriate
NRCS Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, and appropriate NRCS
twenty-four-hour design storm distribution as described in the
current NRCS National Engineering Handbook Part 630 -
§ T10B-227.10 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-227.12
BAO:1104
Hydrology, the current Technical Release 55 - Urban Hydrology for
Small Watersheds, or superseding NRCS document. Twenty-fourhour
design storm depths shall be based upon the values shown in
Table 2.
Table 2
24-Hour Design Storm Depths for NRCS Methodology
Recurrence Interval
(years)
Depth
(inches)
1 2.8
2 3.3
5 4.2
10 5.0
25 6.2
50 7.2
100 8.3
(2) When computing stormwater runoff rates for the design of storm
sewers, inlets, channels, and other stormwater runoff conveyance
measures, the design engineer may utilize the Rational Method.
Such computations shall be based upon runoff coefficients, rainfall
intensities, and storm frequency factors as approved by the
municipal engineer.
(3) When selecting or computing runoff coefficients for pre-developed
site conditions to comply with the requirements of section
10B-227.5(a), the site's land cover shall be assumed to be woods.
However, a different land cover may be used on all or a portion of
the site if:
a. Such land cover has existed on the site or portion thereof
without interruption for at least 10 years immediately prior to
the time of application; and
b. The design engineer can document the character and extent of
such land cover through the use of photographs, affidavits,
and/or other acceptable land use records.
If more than one land cover has existed on all or a portion of
the site during the 10 years immediately prior to the time of
application, the land cover with the lowest runoff potential as
measured by its NRCS Runoff Curve Number shall be used for
the computations.
(4) All predeveloped land covers shall be assumed to be in good
hydrologic condition and, if cultivated, shall be assumed to have
appropriate conservation practices.
§ T10B-227.12 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-227.12
BAO:1105
§ T10B-227.13. Structural requirements for stormwater
management measures. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
(5) In computing predeveloped project site stormwater runoff rates,
volumes, and/or hydrographs, the design engineer shall include the
effects of all hydrologically significant land features and structures,
such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows, and culverts,
which can affect predeveloped site stormwater runoff rates,
volumes, and/or hydrographs.
(6) In computing stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and/or
hydrographs using the NRCS methodology, the design engineer
shall separately calculate and then combine the runoff volumes
from pervious and directly connected impervious surfaces within a
drainage area.
(7) Computation of stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and/or
hydrographs from unconnected impervious surfaces shall be based
upon the Two-Step Method as described in the current New Jersey
Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual.
(8) Stormwater runoff computation methods other than those
described above may be used upon approval by the municipal
engineer following consultation with the municipal storm drainage
engineer.
(9) If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater management
measure is below the flood hazard design flood elevation as defined
at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the design engineer shall take into account the
effects of tail water in the design of structural stormwater
management measures.
(b) Groundwater recharge.
(1) When computing groundwater recharge rates and/or volumes for
compliance with the requirements of section 10B-227.2, the design
engineer may utilize the New Jersey Groundwater Recharge
Spreadsheet (NJGRS) computer program as described in the
current New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices
Manual.
(2) Alternative groundwater recharge computation methods may be
used upon approval by the municipal engineer following
consultation with the municipal storm drainage engineer.
(a) The design and construction of stormwater management measures
shall include consideration for existing site conditions such as slopes,
depth to seasonal high water table, soil type, permeability and texture,
drainage area size, surface and subsurface drainage patterns, tail
waters, and previous land filling that may cause the measure to fail to
function as intended, to cause harm or damage to persons or property,
or to adversely affect surface water, groundwater, environmentally
§ T10B-227.12 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-227.13
BAO:1106
critical areas, wetlands, or existing surface or subsurface drainage
patterns.
(b) Stormwater management measures shall be designed to minimize
maintenance, facilitate maintenance and repairs, and ensure proper
long-term functioning. They shall be integrated into the overall
landscape plan for the development and, where practicable, shall be
landscaped to serve the additional functions of recreational, scenic, or
open space areas.
(c) Stormwater management measures are to be sequenced in the project
site construction process so that erosion control requirements are met
and the measures are not compromised or impaired by construction
runoff.
(d) Stormwater runoff shall be discharged from the development at such
locations, rates, and velocities as not to create new or additional
existing flooding or erosion downstream.
(e) Stormwater management measures involving the use of dams as
defined in the New Jersey Dam Safety Standards (N.J.A.C. 7:20) shall
comply with all applicable requirements of such standards.
(f) Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Other
stormwater management measures may be utilized provided the design
engineer demonstrated that the proposed measure and its design will
accomplish the required water quality, groundwater recharge and
water quality design and performance standards established by this
ordinance.
(g) Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the requirements
of this ordinance, provided the pollutant removal rates are verified by
the New Jersey Corporation for Advanced Technology and certified by
the Department.
(h) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed,
constructed, and installed to be strong, durable, and corrosion
resistant.
(i) Trash racks shall be installed at the intakes to outlet structures as
appropriate. Such trash racks should be constructed primarily of bars
aligned in the direction of flow with bar spacing of approximately onethird
the diameter or width of the hydraulic opening it is protecting.
Minimum and maximum spacing between such trash rack bars shall be
one inch and six inches, respectively. Transverse bars aligned
perpendicular to flow should be sized and spaced as necessary for rack
stability and strength. Trash racks shall be designed to withstand a
perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per square foot. Trash racks
shall be designed, constructed, and installed to be rigid, durable, and
corrosion resistant. Trash racks must also comply with the safety
requirements of section 10B-227.14(a).
§ T10B-227.13 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-227.13
BAO:1107
§ T10B-227.14. Safety requirements for stormwater management
measures. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
(j) Overflow grates shall be installed on the tops of outlet structures as
appropriate. The overflow grate spacing shall be no more than two
inches across the smallest dimension. The overflow grate shall be
constructed and installed to be rigid, durable, and corrosion resistant,
and shall be designed to withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300
pounds per square foot. Overflow grates must also comply with the
safety requirements of section 10B-227.14(b).
(k) The minimum diameter or dimension of an outlet orifice shall be 2 1/2
inches.
(l) Subsequent to the approval of the major development, appropriate
post-construction soil testing approved by the municipal engineer shall
be performed at all infiltration-based measures to demonstrate that
their construction will allow them to perform in accordance with both
the stormwater management measure and project site requirements of
this section. Measures that fail to meet such requirements following
construction shall be repaired, rehabilitated, and/or replaced as
necessary to achieve such requirements.
(m) Stormwater management measures shall be designed to meet the
minimum safety requirements in section 10B-227.14.
(n) A waiver or exemption from the requirements of this section may be
granted only upon submission of a written request by the applicant
providing the basis for the waiver or exemption and a written finding by
the municipal engineer that such waiver or exemption will have a
negligible effect on the operation, maintenance, and durability of the
stormwater management measure and will not constitute a threat to
public safety or the safety of inspection and maintenance personnel.
(a) Trash racks shall meet the following requirements:
(1) The trash rack shall have sufficient net open area under clean
conditions to convey the highest expected flow rate through the
rack with a maximum velocity of 2 1/2 feet per second.
(2) The trash rack shall be secured to the outlet structure but
removable for emergencies and maintenance.
(3) The trash rack shall not adversely affect the hydraulic performance
of either the outlet structure opening it is protecting or the overall
outlet structure.
(4) The trash rack must also meet the minimum structural
requirements in section 10B-227.13.
(b) Overflow grates shall meet the following requirements:
§ T10B-227.13 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-227.14
BAO:1108
§ T10B-227.15. Maintenance and repair requirements. [Ord. No.
2018-11 § 4]
(1) The overflow grate shall have sufficient net open area under clean
conditions to convey the highest expected flow rate through the
rack with a maximum velocity of 2 1/2 feet per second.
(2) The overflow grate shall be equipped with anti-vortex devices as
necessary to prevent the creation of a flow vortex above the grate.
(3) The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but
removable for emergencies and maintenance.
(4) The overflow shall not adversely affect the hydraulic performance
of either the outlet structure opening it is protecting or the overall
outlet structure.
(5) The overflow grate must also meet the minimum structural
requirements in section 10B-227.13.
(c) Escape provisions at stormwater management measures shall meet the
following requirements:
(1) Escape provisions shall be provided in and/or on all stormwater
management measure outlet structures as necessary to provide
readily accessible means of ingress and egress from the outlet
structure.
(2) The maximum interior slope for an earthen dam, embankment, or
berm at a stormwater management measure shall be steeper three
horizontal to one vertical.
(3) Safety ledges shall be provided on the slopes of all stormwater
management measures having a permanent pool of water deeper
than 2 1/2 feet. Such safety ledges shall be comprised of two steps.
Each step shall be four to six feet in width. One step shall be
located approximately 2 1/2 feet below the permanent water
surface, and the second step shall be located 1 1/2 feet above the
permanent water surface.
(d) All stormwater management measures shall be designed so as to
reasonably assure safety by means of emergency spillways and other
outlets in the event of storms exceeding the measures' maximum design
storm.
(e) A waiver or exemption from the requirements of this section may be
granted only upon submission of a written request by the applicant
providing the basis for the waiver or exemption and a written finding by
the municipal engineer and municipal flood and stormwater
management committee that such waiver or exemption will not
constitute a threat to public safety or the safety of inspection and
maintenance personnel.
§ T10B-227.14 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-227.15
BAO:1109
(a) Preventive, regular and corrective maintenance shall be performed as
necessary to maintain the safe and effective function of all stormwater
management measures. Such maintenance shall include as appropriate
the following actions:
(1) Repairs to or replacement of structures;
(2) Removal of sediment, debris, and trash;
(3) Restoration of eroded areas;
(4) Snow and ice removal;
(5) Fence repair or replacement;
(6) Maintenance and restoration of vegetation;
(7) Repair or replacement of nonvegetated linings; and
(8) Maintenance of manufactured treatment devices according to
manufacturer's recommendation.
(b) The design engineer shall prepare and submit to the review agency a
maintenance plan for the stormwater management measures utilized at
a major development. This plan shall be separate from all other
documents and prepared for ongoing use by the site owners or
operators in performing and documenting maintenance and repair and
by the municipality in ensuring implementation of the maintenance
plan.
(c) The maintenance plan shall contain:
(1) Description of required corrective and preventive maintenance
tasks and schedules;
(2) Cost estimates, including estimated cost of sediment, debris, or
trash removal and disposal;
(3) Safety needs;
(4) Identification of methods and disposal sites for materials removed
during maintenance;
(5) Maintenance requirements for created wetlands and other
ecological systems;
(6) Required safety devices and procedures;
(7) Warranties and operating instructions from the manufacturers of
any manufactured treatment devices;
(8) Right of access provisions for municipal inspection and
maintenance activities; and
§ T10B-227.15 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-227.15
BAO:1110
(9) The name, address, and telephone number of the person
responsible for preventive and corrective maintenance including
measure replacement.
(d) If the maintenance plan identifies a person other than the applicant as
having the responsibility for maintenance, the plan shall include
documentation of such person's agreement to assume this
responsibility or the applicant's obligation to dedicate the stormwater
management measure to such person under an applicable ordinance or
regulation.
(e) Responsibility for maintenance of a stormwater management measure
shall not be assigned or transferred to the owner or tenant of an
individual lot in a residential development unless such owner or tenant
owns or leases the entire residential development. Instead, the fee title
to all of the lots within the development that will have the right to utilize
a stormwater management measure shall contain a deed restriction
requiring the owners of such lots to maintain the measure according to
the requirements of this section.
(f) The current title page of the maintenance plan and the name, address,
and telephone number of the person responsible for maintenance shall
be recorded with the deed of record for each property on which the
stormwater management measure is located unless such maintenance
is the responsibility of a public agency.
(g) The person responsible for maintenance shall maintain a detailed log of
all preventive and corrective maintenance performed at a stormwater
management measure, including a record of all inspections and copies
of all maintenance-related work orders.
(h) The person responsible for maintenance shall evaluate the effectiveness
of the maintenance plan at least once per year and revise the plan as
needed. A copy of any plan revisions shall be submitted to the review
agency. The date of any plan revisions shall be indicated on the title
page of the plan which, along with the name, address, and telephone
number of any new person responsible for maintenance, shall be refiled
with the deed of record for each property on which the stormwater
management measure is located.
(i) The person responsible for maintenance shall retain and make available
a copy of the current maintenance plan upon request to any public
entity with administrative, health, environmental, or safety authority
over the site.
(j) In the event that a stormwater management measure becomes a danger
to public safety or health or is in need of maintenance or repair and
comes to the attention of the municipality, the municipality shall so
notify the person responsible for maintenance in writing. Upon receipt
of that notice, such person shall have 30 days to complete all required
maintenance and/or repair of the facility in a manner that is approved
by the municipal engineer. The municipality, at its discretion, may
§ T10B-227.15 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-227.15
BAO:1111
§ T10B-227.16. Inspection and permitting. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
extend the time allowed for completing required maintenance and/or
repair for good cause. If the responsible person fails or refuses to
perform such maintenance and repair, the municipality may proceed
to do so and shall bill the cost thereof to the person responsible for
maintenance.
(k) Nothing in this section shall preclude the municipality from requiring
the posting of a performance or maintenance guarantee in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.
(l) A waiver or exemption from the requirements of this section may be
granted only upon submission of a written request by the applicant
providing the basis for the waiver or exemption and a written finding by
the municipal engineer and municipal flood and stormwater
management committee that such waiver or exemption will have a
negligible effect on the operation, maintenance, and durability of the
stormwater management measure and will not constitute a threat to
public safety or the safety of inspection and maintenance personnel.
(a) All stormwater management facilities are to be maintained by the
individual property owner, or homeowner's association in accordance
with the approved maintenance plan.
(b) All stormwater management facilities for major developments are
required to obtain a stormwater maintenance permit from the
Princeton engineering department.
(1) The annual fee for the stormwater maintenance permit shall be
$50.
(2) The stormwater maintenance permit shall be renewed each year on
the first business day after January 1st.
(3) A detailed inspection and maintenance report shall be submitted
annually on the first business day after January 1st, to the
Princeton engineering department.
(4) The inspection and maintenance report shall include and not be
limited to;
a. Stormwater inlets and manholes.
b. Detention basin out flow structures.
c. Trash racks and overflow grates.
d. Vegetation.
e. Embankment erosion control.
f. Sediment removal and pond maintenance.
§ T10B-227.15 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-227.16
BAO:1112
§ T10B-227.17. Project site stormwater management submission
requirements. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
g. Mechanical treatment devices utilizing filters shall have a
record of filter replacement as per the manufacturer's
specifications.
(a) When seeking approval of a major development subject to this section,
the applicant shall include the following information regarding the
proposed stormwater management strategies and measures for the
project site in the application for such approval:
(1) Project site stormwater management planning and design
summary. This shall contain a description of the stormwater
management strategies and nonstructural and structural
stormwater management measures included in the proposed
development and shall demonstrate how the proposed development
meets the requirements set forth in this section.
(2) Existing site conditions base map. This map of the existing project
site shall include topography, waterways, roads, structures, and
other existing site features pertinent to the development of
predeveloped stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and/or
hydrographs. The limits of the existing site conditions base map
should extend a minimum of 200 feet beyond the limits of the
proposed development site at an appropriate scale and contour
interval. The review agency may also require upstream and/or
downstream drainage area and conveyance system information as
necessary.
(3) Existing site environmental analysis. This analysis shall include
both written and graphic descriptions of the natural and man-made
features of the existing project site and contiguous areas that
influence stormwater runoff to or from the site. These descriptions
should include soil conditions, slopes, wetlands, waterways and
vegetation on the site. Particular attention should be given to
unique, unusual, or environmentally critical areas and to those that
provide particular opportunities or constraints for development
and/or stormwater management measures.
(4) Project site plans. These plans shall depict at an appropriate scale
proposed site topography and the location of existing and proposed
buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, nonstructural and
structural stormwater management measures and other proposed
development features. The plans shall also clearly show proposed
areas of disturbance and where proposed alterations will occur in
the natural terrain and land cover.
(5) Stormwater management measure plans. These plans shall include
the following information at appropriate scales:
§ T10B-227.16 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-227.17
BAO:1113
a. Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface
contours, land area to be occupied by the stormwater
management facilities and the type of vegetation thereon, land
area to remain in natural vegetation, and details of the
proposed plan to infiltrate, manage, control and dispose of
stormwater.
b. Details of all stormwater management facility designs, during
and after construction, including discharge provisions,
discharge capacity for each outlet at different levels of
detention, and emergency spillway provisions with maximum
discharge capacity of each spillway.
(6) Stormwater management design computations. These shall include
comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design computations for
pre- and post-developed site conditions and all proposed
stormwater management measures necessary for compliance with
the requirements of section 10B-227.2.
(7) Project site soils report. This report shall be included when the
proposed development includes any proposed stormwater
management measures that depend upon stormwater runoff
infiltration to meet the requirements of sections 10B-227.2,
10B-227.13, 10B-227.14, and 10B-227.15. The report shall include
a description of the geologic and hydrologic properties of the site
soils based on on-site soil tests. The type, number, and location of
required soil tests shall be sufficient to determine the suitability of
the soils present at the infiltration-based stormwater management
measure and to obtain necessary measure design data. The
municipality shall be notified in advance of any site soil
investigations and provided the opportunity to witness such
investigations. Upon approval by the municipal engineer,
submission of a complete project site soils report may be deferred
until later stages of the application review process provided that
the applicant submits a partial report based upon site soil data
contained in the Soil Survey of Mercer County and other suitable
sources and agrees in writing to submit the complete report upon
request by the municipal engineer.
(8) Maintenance plan. This plan shall meet the requirements of Section
10B-227.15. Upon approval by the municipal engineer, submission
of a complete maintenance plan may be deferred until later stages
of the application review process provided that the applicant
agrees in writing to address all the requirements of Section
10B-227.15 and to submit the complete plan upon request by the
municipal engineer.
(b) The review agency may, upon approval by the municipal engineer,
modify or waive submission of any of the requirements in Section
10B-227.16 when it can be demonstrated that the information
requested is:
§ T10B-227.17 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-227.17
BAO:1114
§ T10B-227.18. Waivers. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
Unless otherwise provided herein, any waiver or reduction in the
requirements of this section shall not be granted by any review agency
without obtaining and considering the advice and recommendation of the
municipal flood and stormwater management committee.
§ T10B-227.19. Penalties. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
Any person who erects, constructs, alters, repairs, converts, maintains, or
uses any building, structure or land in violation of this section shall be
subject to the penalties described in Section 10B-107 of the Land Use Code.
§ T10B-227A. Tree preservation, protection, and mitigation. [Ord.
No. 2018-11 § 4]
(1) Impossible to obtain; or
(2) Would create a significant economic hardship on the applicant; or
(3) Its absence will not materially affect the review process.
(c) If a stormwater management measure is to be privately owned,
documentation shall be submitted in a form acceptable to the municipal
attorney of the name and address of the owner if then known or, if not, a
statement of the nature of the owning entity such as a homeowners'
association.
(d) If public ownership of a stormwater management measure is
contemplated, the proposed documentation of such ownership shall be
submitted and shall be subject to and accompanied by the approval of
such ownership and terms and conditions thereof by the Governing
Body or other public body that is to assume ownership and by the
approval of the municipal attorney as to form of the proposed
documentation.
(a) Purpose and intent.
(1) It is the purpose of this section to protect the general health, safety,
welfare, and well-being of the residents of Princeton as well as the
integrity of the natural environment and processes upon which the
residents of Princeton depend through the protection of trees and
the preservation, as much as practically possible, of Princeton's
tree canopy. Trees are important cultural, ecological, scenic and
economic resources, and the removal, cutting, and destruction of
trees within Princeton result in increased drainage control costs,
increased soil erosion, increased buildup of atmospheric carbon
and dust, decreased fertility of the soil, and a decrease in the
overall tree canopy.
(2) Therefore, it is in the public interest that Princeton exercise its
police powers and enact the following section to control tree
§ T10B-227.17 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-227A
BAO:1115
cutting, removal and destruction in connection with development
in an effort to meet the objective of preserving, protecting,
enhancing, and maintaining trees and the overall tree canopy.
(b) Tree preservation. A development plan shall be designed to minimize
tree disturbance. Where healthy and desirable trees slated for removal
by a development plan can be saved by reasonable adjustments to the
plan, the applicant working with the municipal engineer and arborist
shall seek to make such adjustments.
The following standards shall be used to identify healthy and desirable
trees:
(1) Size of the tree, including both height and caliper.
(2) Species of the tree. This factor shall take into account the type of
tree and whether it is an invasive species, a rare and/or unusual
type of tree, or a native plant. Preference should be given to
preserving native and unusual trees, or rare or historic species
within a historic preservation zoning district, a historic
preservation buffer zoning district or a historic site on the national
or state historic registers and trees that have a remaining life of
over 50 years.
(3) Condition of the tree. This factor shall take into account:
a. The tree's roots, including anchorage, collar/flare soundness,
mechanical injury, girdling/kinked roots, compaction/
waterlogged roots, toxic gasses/chemical systems, and
presence of insects or diseases.
b. The tree's trunk, including sound bark and wood, cavities,
mechanical or fire injury, cracks, swollen or sunken areas,
presence of insects or disease, fungal growths and lightning
strikes.
c. The tree's scaffold branches, including strong attachment,
vertical branch distribution free of included bark and decay
and cavities. Scaffold branches shall be well proportioned with
proper taper, good wound closure and absence of deadwood,
insects or diseases.
d. The tree's small branches and twigs, including vigor of current
shoots, good distribution throughout canopy, normal
appearance of buds, absence of insects or diseases, and
absence of weak or dead twigs.
e. The tree's foliage and/or buds, including size of foliage and/or
buds, coloration of foliage, wilted or dead leaves, dry buds,
presence of insects or diseases.
f. The tree's age. Preference should be given to preserving trees
that have a remaining life of over 50 years.
§ T10B-227A PRINCETON CODE § T10B-227A
BAO:1116
(4) Locational importance of the tree. This factor shall take into
account the tree's unique functional and aesthetic contributions to
the property; the effect of the removal of the tree from the
landscape; the effect of the removal of the tree on the canopy of the
subject property and abutting properties; the impact of tree's
removal on property's drainage, soil erosion, loss of tree species
and loss of wildlife habitat.
(c) Protection of trees during construction. All trees remaining on site
during construction shall be protected. Developers shall use the
following methods to ensure that trees remaining on site during
construction are not damaged:
(1) No soil shall be deposited or removed within the drip line or within
eight feet of any existing tree trunk, whichever is greater. No
machinery or materials shall be stored, deposited, cleaned, or
operated within the drip line or within eight feet of any existing
trunk, whichever is greater.
(2) Drip lines of trees being preserved on site shall be clearly protected
by wood snow fencing. At no time during construction shall the
placement of the fencing be altered without the written permission
of the municipal engineer.
(3) The grade of the land located along the drip line shall not be raised
or lowered more than six inches unless protected by welling or
retaining methods and in no event shall the welling or retaining
methods be less than eight feet from the trunk of the tree.
(4) All debris created during tree removal and replacement shall be
removed from the site for disposal before any certificate of
occupancy shall be issued.
(5) Where clearing and construction on the site results in accidental
removal or damage of any tree denoted in the tree survey as
remaining on the site, such removed or damaged tree shall be
replaced as set forth in this section.
(6) The construction's limit of disturbance shall be delineated with
snow fencing.
(7) Any and all appropriate measures to maintain the vitality of the
preserved trees on the property shall be denoted on the tree survey.
(d) Mitigation.
(1) Replanting.
a. Planting will occur on-site in accordance with the tree
replacement schedule below. The replanted trees shall be in
accordance with industry standards of 2 1/2 to three inch
caliper. The trees shall be of indigenous species and shall be
site specific.
§ T10B-227A BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-227A
BAO:1117
b. On-site planting is preferred. If on-site planting is not feasible
then off-site planting on public lands may occur with the
written authorization of, and subject to a plan approved by, the
municipal engineer.
c. All planting will be subject to the planting standards detailed in
the document entitled "Engineering Standard Details & Design
Criteria: Department of Engineering" and shall be completed
prior to the release of the performance bond.
d. All planted trees, both planted on-site and off-site, will be
subject to a two-year maintenance guarantee period during
which the applicant will be responsible for all care and
maintenance. During the two-year maintenance period, the
municipal engineer or his designee shall identify all trees that
are weak, diseased, dying or dead, and these trees shall be
replaced by the applicant at no cost to the municipality.
Tree Replacement Schedule
Tree Removed/
Destroyed
Required
Replacement
Tree
Tree Replacement
Fee
Tree with DBH of 8
inches to 16.99
inches
1 Replacement
Tree
$400
Tree with DBH of
17 inches to 30.99
inches
2 Replacement
Trees
$800
Tree with DBH of
31 inches to 38.99
inches
3 Replacement
Trees
$1,200
Tree with DBH of
39 inches or
greater
4 Replacement
Trees
$1,600
(2) Monetary contribution.
a. A monetary contribution in accordance with the tree
replacement schedule above shall be made by the applicant to
the Princeton shade tree escrow fund for each tree removed
that the applicant is not able to replant in accordance with
section 10B-227A(d)(1).
b. Payment must be submitted prior to the release of the
applicant's performance bond.
c. All funds collected shall be made out to the Princeton shade
tree escrow fund and deposited into an escrow account clearly
designated as the Princeton shade tree escrow fund. Funds so
§ T10B-227A PRINCETON CODE § T10B-227A
BAO:1118
§ T10B-228. Application to accessory uses. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
The criteria and standards to review prescribed by this division shall also
apply to all accessory buildings, structures, freestanding signs and other
site features, however related to major buildings or structures of a site
development.
deposited shall be used solely for the planting of trees in public
parks, property surrounding public buildings, and rights-ofway.
d. Any and all appropriations from the Princeton shade tree
escrow fund shall be made by the Governing Body of Princeton,
upon recommendation and report from the shade tree
commission, which shall include locations within the
municipality needing remediation based upon the removal of
trees at those locations nearest the site that generated the
funds.
e. The Princeton shade tree escrow fund shall be administered by
Princeton's chief financial officer. The chief financial officer
shall report (listing by date for the report period) to the
Governing Body, the Planning Board, and the shade tree
commission, on an annual basis, the amount in the Princeton
shade tree escrow fund as of the end of each year, the amount
deposited by each development application or other
contribution, and all amounts dedicated from the escrow fund
for that period. Such report shall be filed with the municipal
clerk and made available as a public record.
§ T10B-227A BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-228
BAO:1119

DIVISION 7
Site Plans and Drawings
§ T10B-229. Site plans and building drawings required. [Ord. No.
2018-11 § 4]
Every application for preliminary or final site plan approval shall be
documented by site plans and building drawings as specified by this
division, except as otherwise provided pursuant to sections 10B-202(b) and
10B-215(b). Such plans and drawings shall accompany and be deemed part
of the application. The plans and drawings may be in schematic preliminary
form, final preliminary form or final working form, at the option of the
applicant. Plans and drawings submitted for preliminary approval may be
submitted for final approval to the extent that they are unchanged.
§ T10B-230. Major site plan checklist. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
The following checklist is designed to inform applicants as to what is
required in preparing final major site plans for board review. Applicants
should check off items to confirm that they are included as part of the
submission. Checklist items omitted can result in the application being
found incomplete and therefore delay consideration by the Board. Utilities,
details, profiles, etc. may be shown on separate sheets. This checklist must
be submitted with the application. Applications filed which include a waiver
request for any of the above items, shall be accompanied by a written
statement in support of each waiver request.
The total number of copies to be submitted is dependent upon which board
hears the application. This information can be found in the cover sheet of
the application.
(a) General Requirements:
(1.) Completed application form (original + five copies). Maximum
number of copies is 30.
(2.) Complete site plan and construction drawings signed and sealed by
an appropriate professional pursuant to state licensing
requirements (14 copies). Plans are not to exceed 24 inches by 36
inches and all sheets must be the same size. All plans must be
collated and folded. *Maximum number of copies is 30.
(3.) Application and Escrow Fees. Separate checks required.
(4.) Fire Protection Plan in accordance with municipal Code Section
10B-109.1 through § T10B-109.4 (six copies). *Maximum number of
copies is 30.
a. Fire protection map (14 copies, *Maximum number of copies is
30.) indicating:
1. Existing and proposed hydrants.
§ T10B-229 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-230
BAO:1121
2. Distances between hydrants.
3. Distances to nearest hydrant.
4. Water main location, size and location where supply is
coming from.
b. Narrative containing information regarding the relevant fire
protection sector as well as distances and spacing of fire
hydrants. (14 copies, *Maximum number of copies is 30.) This
information must also include:
1. Exposure distances.
2. Accessibility of fire hydrants.
3. Demonstrating that fire flows at nearby fire hydrants,
meets or exceeds municipal standards.
4. Size and type of building construction.
5. Intended use and occupancy of building.
6. Fire protection practices.
(5.) Completed checklist (original + five copies). *Maximum number of
copies is 30.
(6.) Letter from the Tax Collector stating that all taxes and assessments
are paid to date.
(7.) If required, completed variance appeal form and/or conditional use
form (original + five copies). *Maximum number of copies is 30.
(8.) Completed W-9 and escrow agreement.
(9.) Two copies of the sealed survey.
(10.) Submission of historic preservation plan when property is located
in a historic district or historic buffer district, pursuant to
municipal ordinances including:
a. Photographs of the property in question and surrounding
properties.
b. Product specifications, where appropriate.
c. Elevations and details for proposed new construction.
d. Floor plans.
e. Documentation sufficient to demonstrate how the proposed
improvement appears in context.
f. Archaeological and historic sites survey.
§ T10B-230 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-230
BAO:1122
g. Archaeological and historic sites construction protocol.
h. Delineated historic protection area or pre-mapped historic
preservation area.
i. When available, historic photographs, maps, plot plans and
other historic site documentation.
j. Plot plan of property showing location of all existing and
proposed structures, with relationship to surrounding
building(s) on adjoining properties, zoning setback,
driveways(s), and existing and proposed utilities.
(b) Site Plan:
(1.) Tract name.
(2.) Tax Map sheet, lot and block number.
(3.) Date, north arrow and graphic scale (min. one inch equals 50 feet).
(4.) Property boundary dimensions and bearings.
(5.) Acreage of the entire tract. Acreage of each lot or plot to be built
upon or otherwise used.
(6.) Property owners within 200 feet of subject property in schedule
form.
(7.) Key map at a scale of one inch equals 400 feet showing the
following information within 1,500 feet of the property:
a. Zoning districts and boundary delineations.
b. Streets and roads.
c. Streams, watercourses, bodies of water and property lines.
d. Block and lot numbers.
(8.) Bulk zoning regulations for district with proposed dimensions in
schedule form (showing required, existing and proposed
conditions).
(9.) Name, address and signature of record owner.
(10.) Name and address of applicant (other than owner).
(c) Existing and Proposed Features:
(1.) Location of streams, waterway corridors, water-courses, flood
hazard and flood plain areas, bodies of water and wetland areas.
(2.) Rock outcroppings and/or boulder fields.
(3.) Right-of-way dedications with acreage and boundary information.
§ T10B-230 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-230
BAO:1123
(4.) Steep slope locations of grades in excess of 15%.
(5.) All existing physical features, including streams, watercourses,
bodies of water, rock -outcroppings, significant soil conditions in
theareas to be affected by proposed construction, and an outline of
tree masses on the site, with an indication whether such masses
are evergreen or deciduous and their approximate height.
(6.) Size, shape and location of buildings on the tract, on adjoining
property and on opposite of the adjacent street(s).
(7.) Off-street parking areas and loading facilities showing location and
dimensions of individual parking spaces, loading spaces, aisles,
traffic flow patterns and driveways for ingress and egress. All
parking spaces, driveways and access points to public streets.
(8.) All required building and parking setback lines.
(9.) Calculations of on-site parking required and proposed in schedule
form.
(10.) Contours at intervals not exceeding two feet.
(11.) Location and type of catch basins or surface water detention
basins and other surface drainage facilities, including stormwater
runoff calculations.
(12.) Location and height offences, retaining walls and railings.
(13.) Electric, telephone, gas and other utilities.
(14.) Location, height, size and illumination of exterior signs and
advertising features. Location and layout of public/private
sidewalks, bicycle paths, curbs and interior walkways.
(15.) Master Plan designation including: open space, roadway widening,
recreation areas, community facility areas, etc.
(16.) Location of tree masses including type and approximate height.
(17.) Facility location for the temporary storage of solid (paper) waste
and recyclable items.
(18.) Landscaping plan including location, height and types of planting
and screenings.
(19.) Rights-of-way easements.
(20.) Location of exterior lighting, area of illumination and height and
type of standards.
(21.) Proposed location and layout of sidewalks, bicycle paths, curbs
and interior walkways.
§ T10B-230 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-230
BAO:1124
(22.)Key map showing entire project and its relation to surrounding
areas, roads and watercourses.
(23.) A tree survey that shall:
a. Denote the location and approximate height of those trees on
the site, including both those being removed and preserved,
that are within 200 feet of the construction's limit of
disturbance, which shall include all utilities and driveway
areas, and that are eight inches caliper D.S.H. or greater. Trees
with multiple trunks shall be shown on the tree survey if the
average of the D.S.H. of the tree's multiple trunks is eight
inches caliper or greater.
b. Include a tree removal/preservation key detailing size, species
and condition of the trees shown on the survey.
c. Delineate the limit of disturbance for construction taking into
account vehicular access and egress, equipment and material
storage, grading, utilities installation and other construction
activity that may detrimentally impact the remaining trees. The
limit of disturbance should extend to the drip line of the trees
at a minimum and be species specific.
(d) Drainage and Utility Plan:
(1.) Existing and proposed contours.
(2.) Contours of site at two foot intervals.
(3.) Location and type of inlets, pipes, swales, berms, storm detention
facilities, building roof leaders, etc.
(4.) Location, type and size of sanitary sewer and water services and
connections within the tract and adjacent off-site servicing mains.
(5.) Location of on-site and off-site electric, telephone, gas, water,
storm and sanitary sewers, and CATV facility service line
connections.
(6.) Utility easement with owner entity identification.
(7.) Construction details.
(8.) Grade elevations at all building corners, first floor level of
buildings, center lines of abutting roads, top and bottom of curbs,
gutters and other pertinent locations.
(9.) Existing and proposed surface water runoff rate and volume to
result from the proposal and a plan to control and dispose of same.
(10.) Proposed changes to existing natural drainage, including major
topographic changes and watercourse diversions.
§ T10B-230 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-230
BAO:1125
(e) Landscaping, Lighting and Signage Plan:
(1.) Location, height and types of proposed plantings and/or
screenings.
(2.) Location of existing trees greater than eight inch caliper with
species identification.
(3.) Location of existing shrubs, hedgerows and screenings.
(4.) Location of existing and proposed exterior lighting, illumination
pattern, height type and illuminair specification.
(5.) Location of advertising signage with graphic details relative to size,
height, materials, color, illumination (if any) and letter style.
(f) Soil Map:
(1.) Location of steep slopes in excess of 7%, with markings showing
slope percentages.
(2.) Location of soil group type boundaries with soil identification.
(3.) Location of buildings and/or storm water detention basin facilities.
(4.) Location of streams, wetlands approximate areas of aquifer
recharge and discharge and waterway corridors.
(5.) Location of highly acid or highly erodible soils.
(6.) Location of areas of high water table and/or bedrock.
(g) Building Drawings:
(1.) Two site sections indicating elevation changes in the land, building
and tree masses.
(2.) Floor plans (14 sets, collated to full site plan).
(3.) Roof plans showing exterior air-heating circulation system layout if
applicable.
(4.) All building elevations.
(5.) Photographs of existing site features.
(6.) Applications Providing Affordable Housing. Any application
involving affordable housing must include 14 copies of the
following documents filled out in draft form for attorney review:
a. For units proposed to be for sale, the affordable housing
agreement, repayment mortgage and repayment mortgage
note.
§ T10B-230 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-230
BAO:1126
b. For units proposed for rental, declaration of covenants,
conditions, and restriction; affordable housing agreement for
rental properties.
c. Floor plans indicating location, number of bedrooms and size
of affordable units.
(h) Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plans:
(1.) Existing and proposed contours at two foot intervals.
(2.) Location of present and proposed drains and culverts with their
discharge capacities and velocities along with supporting
computations and identification of conditions below outlets.
(3.) A site grading plan showing proposed cut and fill areas together
with existing and proposed profiles of this area.
(4.) Delineation of any area subject to flooding from the 100-year storm
in compliance with the Flood Plans Act or applicable municipal
zoning.
(5.) Delineation of streams within the project area.
(6.) Location of all proposed soil erosion and sediment control facilities.
(7.) Proposed sequence of development.
(8.) Proposed starting date of each phase in the sequence.
(9.) Identification of land areas to be disturbed and length of time the
soil in each area will be unprotected.
(10.) Proposed date to complete each phase of development.
(11.) Planned soil erosion and sediment control measures and facilities
supporting computations based upon standards promulgated by
the New Jersey Soil Conservation Committee.
(12.) Soil erosion control details.
(13.) Plans for maintenance of permanent soil erosion and sediment
control measures and facilities during and after construction,
including, responsibility for maintenance of facilities after the
development is completed.
(i) Required Notes for All Plans:
(1.) If the extension of water mains is required, the spacing and
location of hydrants will comply with the standards of the New
Jersey American Water Company and approved by the municipal
engineer and Fire Prevention Official.
(2.) Electric, telephone, CATV, and all other wire served utility
extensions and services shall be installed underground with
§ T10B-230 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-230
BAO:1127
standards established by the servicing utility company and
approved by the municipal engineer.
(3.) All drainage and sewer easements for public purposes shall be
dedicated to the municipality, unless otherwise noted.
(4.) All areas where natural vegetation and/or specimen trees are to
remain shall be protected by the erection of fencing and no
disturbance shall occur prior to inspection by the municipal
engineer and the issuance of written authorization to proceed with
construction. These protective measures shall not be altered or
removed without the approval by the municipal engineer.
(j) Required Contents of Environmental Information Statement:
(1.) Map, list and description of soil types on the site, derived from the
Mercer County Soil Survey.
(2.) Brief description of the surficial geology of the area.
(3.) Estimate potable water demand in gallons per day and the source
of the water supply.
(4.) Estimated sewage to be generated in gallons per day and a general
description of proposed method of sewerage disposal.
(5.) Character, estimated tonnage and method of solid waste disposal
and storage, including recycling measures.
(6.) Proposed uses, processes or equipment which will affect the
ambient air quality, such as, but not limited to, those relating to
heating, air conditioning, incineration and material processing.
(7.) Information and calculations regarding proposed drainage
including total area to be paved or built upon, estimating volume
and rate of runoff, proposed changes to existing drainage, drainage
plans, and details in accordance with the municipal ordinance.
(8.) Soil erosion and sedimentation control plan, together with report.
(9.) Traffic study, including widths and conditions of existing roads in
the area and impacts of the proposed developments on traffic
volumes.
(10.) Required governmental licenses, permits and approvals and the
status of each.
(k) Required Signature Format on All Plans:
Approved by the Planning Board of Princeton as a Minor Site
Development.
_____________________ _____________________
Chairman Date
§ T10B-230 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-230
BAO:1128
§ T10B-231. (Reserved)
§ T10B-231.1. Fire Protection Plan. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
Each application for development seeking site plan approval shall submit a
fire protection plan in accordance with the requirements of Division 14 of
Article IV of this code.
_____________________ _____________________
Secretary Date
_____________________ _____________________
Engineer Date
The undersigned, hereby acknowledges that the information
contained herein is true and complete to the best of its knowledge.
This_____ day of_____________________ 20_____.
_____________________
Applicant
_____________________ _____________________
Notary Owner
(l) Green Development Information Statement/Checklist.
The Green Development Checklist and information statement outlines
the contents for the Information Statement and is based on the LEED
system standards for building and neighborhood development and
Sustainable Jersey’s Model Green Development Checklist, but is not
intended to be exclusive; incorporation of additional sustainable
development practices in development projects is strongly encouraged
to help Princeton become a more sustainable community.
Editor's Note: The Green Development Information Statement/
Checklist is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ T10B-230 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-231.1
BAO:1129

DIVISION 8
Environmental Information Statement
§ T10B-232. Required. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
In order to provide information to aid in the assessment of the
environmental impact of proposed site developments, every application for
preliminary or final site plan approval shall be documented by a statement
containing the matters and materials specified in this division, except as
otherwise provided pursuant to sections 10B-212(b) and 10B-215(b). Such
statement shall accompany and be deemed part of the application.
Documentation submitted for preliminary approval may be resubmitted for
final approval, to the extent that it is unchanged.
§ T10B-233. Contents. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
The required environmental information statement shall contain the
following matters and materials:
(a) Soil. A list of the pertinent sections or sheets of the Mercer County Soil
Survey Map covering the site, a brief description of the surficial geology
of the area and, if deemed necessary by the committee for proper
evaluation of the application, soil boring test results.
(b) Water. Estimated potable water demand in gallons per day and the
source of water supply.
(c) Sewerage facilities. Estimated sewage to be generated in gallons per
day and a general description of on-site and off-site sewage disposal
proposed.
(d) Solid waste disposal. Character and estimated tons per week of solid
waste to be generated and the means of disposal thereof with an
indication as to whether disposal will be by public or private facilities.
(e) Air pollution. The proposed uses, processes or equipment will affect the
ambient air quality, such as, but not limited to, those relating to
heating, air conditioning, incineration and materials-processing.
(f) Drainage. The following information to be provided in all cases:
(1) Estimated existing surface water runoff rate and volume from the
storms specified in section 10B-227(d) (1) and (2).
(2) Total area to be paved or built upon, estimated surface water runoff
rate and volume to result from the proposal along with the
computations of such, estimated land area to be occupied by water
detention facilities and the type of vegetation thereon and details of
a proposed plan to control and dispose of surface water in
accordance with section 10B-227.
§ T10B-232 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-233
BAO:1131
(3) Proposed changes to existing drainage, including topographic
changes and water course diversions, and appropriate measures to
control velocity and erosion at outlets or discharge points.
(4) A plan for control of soil erosion and sedimentation during and
after construction in accordance with applicable laws, together
with a report thereon by the county soil conservation district.
(5) Details of all water detention plans during and after construction,
including discharge provisions, discharge capacity at different
levels of detention and emergency spillway provisions.
(6) Computations substantiating the information required by this
paragraph (f), including the assumptions and bases thereof and
also rates of discharge as a function of time for the storms specified
in section 10B-227 (d) (1) and (2) and for any spillway for more
intense storms.
(g) Traffic. The following traffic data, to be furnished in all cases where the
site development contains more than 50,000 square feet of building
gross floor area:
(1) Widths and conditions of existing roads in the vicinity of the
proposed development that are expected to be affected by the
development.
(2) Existing traffic volumes on such roads.
(3) Estimated increase in traffic volume to be generated by the
development and the distribution of such increase with respect to
time of day and direction of movement.
(h) Critical areas. A description of impacts on critical areas, such as
streams, wetlands, areas of aquifer recharge and discharge, slopes
greater than 20%, highly acid or highly erodible soils, areas with high
water table, mature stands of native vegetation and extraordinary
wildlife nesting, feeding or breeding grounds.
(i) Governmental licenses, permits and approvals. A list of licenses and
permits and other approvals required by municipal, county and state
law and the status of each.
(j) Additional information. Such other information as shall reasonably be
requested to aid in assessing environmental impact and in determining
whether the proposed site development complies with the provisions of
this article.
§ T10B-233 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-233
BAO:1132
DIVISION 9
Floodways and Flood Hazard Areas
§ T10B-234. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
For the purposes of this division, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
CHANNEL — The bed and banks of a stream which convey the normal flow
of the stream that occurs most of the time.
DESIGN FLOOD (FLOODWAY OR FLOOD HAZARD AREA) — The relative
size or magnitude of a flood, expressed as a design discharge in cubic feet
per second, which is developed from hydrologic criteria, represents a major
flood of reasonable expectancy, reflects both flood experience and flood
potential and is the basis of the delineation of the floodway and the flood
hazard area and of the water surface elevations thereof.
DESIGN FLOOD PROFILE (FLOODWAY OR FLOOD HAZARD AREA) — The
elevations of the water surface of the floodway design flood and the flood
hazard area design flood as shown on a flood map.
FLOOD HAZARD AREA "A" — The flood hazard area of the lesser tributaries
of Mountain Brook as shown on the map entitled "Township of Princeton,
Mercer County, New Jersey, Flood Plain Delineation Program, Mountain
Brook, Elson T. Killam Associates, Inc."
FLOOD HAZARD AREA — The floodway and additional portions of the flood
plain that are subject to flood flow at lesser depths and lower velocities than
the floodway, that are inundated by the flood hazard area design flood and
that are delineated on a flood map as a flood hazard area in the municipality.
This definition does not apply to "flood hazard area 'A'."
FLOOD MAP — Any of the maps identified within Section 10B-236.
FLOOD PLAIN — The relatively flat area adjoining the channel which has
been or may be hereafter covered by flood water of a stream.
FLOODWAY — The channel and portions of the adjacent flood plain that
carry the greater part of flood flow at greater depths and velocities than
do the other parts of the flood plain, that constitute the minimum area
required for the passage of flood flows without aggravating flood conditions
upstream and downstream that are necessary to preserve the natural
regimen of the stream for the reasonable passage of the floodway design
flood and that are delineated on a flood map as a floodway in Princeton.
§ T10B-235. Purpose and policy of Division. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
It is found that Stony Brook, the Millstone River, Harry's Brook and
Mountain Brook in the municipality are subject to recurring flooding, that
such flooding damages and endangers life and public and private property
and facilities, that this condition is aggravated by developments and
encroachments in the flood plain and that the most appropriate method of
§ T10B-234 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-235
BAO:1133
alleviating such condition is through regulation of such developments and
encroachments.
The paramount public interest in the flood plain justifies the regulation of
property located therein as provided in this division, which is in the exercise
of the police power of the municipality for the protection of the persons
and property of its inhabitants and for the preservation of the public health,
safety and general welfare.
More particularly, this division is intended to implement the following
studies of flood hazard areas along Stony Brook, the Millstone River, Harry's
Brook and Mountain Brook, and flood hazard areas "A" along the lesser
tributaries of Mountain Brook, insofar as they pertain to the municipality:
§ T10B-236. Map of floodway, flood hazard area and flood hazard
area "A". [Ord. No. 856, § 2; Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
This division consists of this text and the following maps, which are on file
in the offices of the municipal clerk and the municipal engineer and which
are incorporated in this division by reference:
(a) State of New Jersey, Department of Conservation and Economic
Development, Division of Water Policy and Supply, Flood Hazard Report
No. 1, Stony Brook, Princeton Township, Anderson-Nichols and
Company, Incorporated, Consultant, February 1967.
(b) State of New Jersey, Department of Environmental Protection, Division
of Water Resources, Flood Hazard Report No. 12, Millstone River-Rocky
Brook, Anderson-Nichols and Company, Incorporated, Consultant,
February 1973.
(c) Delineation of flood hazard areas along Harry's Brook for the Township
of Princeton, Mercer County, New Jersey, Elson T. Killam Associates,
Incorporated, Environmental and Hydraulic Engineers, June 1974.
(d) Delineation of flood hazard areas along Mountain Brook for the
Township of Princeton, Mercer County, New Jersey, Elson T. Killam
Associates, Incorporated, Environmental and Hydraulic Engineers,
December 1978.
(a) Map entitled '"State of New Jersey, Department of Conservation and
Economic Development, Division of Water Policy and Supply, Stony
Brook, Princeton Township, Delineation of Floodway and Flood Hazard
Area, Anderson-Nichols & Co., Boston, Mass." This map is part of the
study referred to in section 10B-235(a) and it consists of seven sheets,
identified as Plate Nos. 1 through 7, respectively, each showing the plan
and profile of a portion of Stony Brook and the adjacent floodway and
flood hazard area. These sheets encompass in the aggregate
approximately 10 miles of Stony Brook, extending from its junction with
the Millstone River upstream to Province Line Road.
§ T10B-235 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-236
BAO:1134
§ T10B-237. Developments to be processed as classification
applications for minor site developments. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
Site developments requiring site plan approval shall be deemed minor site
developments and shall be processed upon classification applications, as
provided in Division 2 of this article. Approvals of such developments shall
constitute and shall have the force and effect of final site plan approvals.
However, the procedures and standards of review prescribed in sections
10B-239 and 10B-240 shall be applicable and shall supersede those set forth
in such Division 2. Nothing in this Division 9 shall relieve an applicant from
complying with other requirements of this Chapter that are applicable to
the proposed development.
§ T10B-238. Site plan approval required for site development in the
floodway, flood hazard area and flood hazard area "A";
(b) Map entitled "State of New Jersey, Department of Conservation and
Economic Development, Division of Water Policy and Supply,
Delineation of Floodway and Hazard Area, Millstone River, Franklin
Township etc., Anderson-Nichols & Co., Boston, Mass." This map is part
of the study referred to in section 10B-235(b), and insofar as it pertains
to the township, the map consists of three sheets, identified as Plate
Nos. MI-11, MI-12 and MI-13, each showing the plan and profile of a
portion of the Millstone River and the adjacent floodway and flood
hazard area. These sheets encompass in the aggregate approximately
three miles of the Millstone River, extending from its intersection with
the Princeton-Montgomery Township boundary upstream to its junction
with Stony Brook.
(c) Map entitled "Township of Princeton, Mercer County, New Jersey, Flood
Plain Delineation Program, Harry's Brook, Elson T. Killam Associates,
Inc." This map is part of the study referred to in section 10B-235(c) and
consists of nine sheets identified as Plate Nos. HB-1 through HB-9, each
showing the plan and profile of a portion of Harry's Brook or a tributary
thereof and the adjacent floodway and flood hazard area. These sheets
encompass Harry's Brook and its principal tributary branches in the
township, and they were adopted by the New Jersey Water Policy and
Supply Council November 18, 1974.
(d) Map entitled "Township of Princeton, Mercer County, New Jersey, Flood
Plain Delineation Program, Mountain Brook, Elson T. Killam Associates
Inc." This map is part of the study referred to in section 10B-235(d), and
consists of eight sheets identified as plate numbers MB-1 through
MB-8, each showing the plan and profile of a portion of Mountain Brook
or a tributary thereof, and the adjacent floodway and flood hazard area
or the adjacent flood hazard area "A". These sheets encompass
Mountain Brook and certain of its tributary branches in the Township,
and they were adopted by the New Jersey Water Policy and Supply
Council, April 16, 1979.
§ T10B-236 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-238
BAO:1135
determination of floodway, flood hazard area and flood hazard area
"A" to be made by municipal engineer. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
The following regulations shall govern site developments in the floodway,
flood hazard area and flood hazard area "A".
§ T10B-239. Procedure. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
The following procedure shall govern the granting of site plan approvals
required by this division:
(a) Floodway. No building or structure shall be erected or moved, or
externally altered or added to or enlarged, nor shall any material or
equipment be stored, nor shall any fill be placed, nor shall the elevation
of any land be substantially changed, in the floodway, except in
accordance with site plan approval granted as provided by this division;
provided that accepted practices of soil husbandry and the harvesting
of crops, in connection with farming, are not included in the foregoing
prohibitions. For the purposes of this subsection (a) only, the term
"structure" shall include fences which are situated in such a fashion so
as to substantially impede the passage of flood water flow or debris.
(b) Flood Hazard Area. No building or structure greater than 10 feet by 10
feet in size shall be erected or moved, or externally altered or added to
or enlarged, nor shall any fill be placed, nor shall the elevation of any
land be substantially changed in that portion of the flood hazard area
outside of the floodway, or within 100 feet upstream of a culvert
carrying a stream under a road except in accordance with site plan
approval granted as provided by this division; provided that accepted
practices of soil husbandry and the harvesting of crops, in connection
with farming, are not included in the foregoing prohibitions.
(c) Flood Hazard Area "A". The restrictions set forth in subsection (a)
hereinabove applicable to buildings or structures in the floodway shall
also be applicable to flood hazard area "A" unless in accordance with a
site plan approval granted as provided by this division.
(a) The property owner shall apply to the administrative officer for
approval of a site plan, which shall be submitted with the application.
The plan shall include a true and accurate plot plan, submitted in
triplicate, drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 50 feet, with
contour lines at intervals of not more than two feet, showing the exact
size, shape, location and elevation of existing and proposed buildings
and structures and of any proposed fill or regrading, the exact
dimensions and acreage of each lot or plot to be built upon or otherwise
used, the location of the floodway, flood hazard area and flood hazard
area "A" limits, the location, layout and elevation of existing and
proposed parking areas, driveways, drainage culverts, sewer and water
facilities and connections, plantings seedings, screenings, fences and
signs, and such other information as shall be reasonably required for an
evaluation of the effect of the development upon flood control.
§ T10B-238 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-239
BAO:1136
§ T10B-240. (Reserved)
§ T10B-240.1. (Reserved)
§ T10B-240.2. Waterway stream corridor buffers. [Ord. No. 2018-11
§ 4]
Waterway stream buffers shall be calculated in the following manner.
Waterway shall mean:
(b) The administrative officer shall, with such promptness as will enable
the Planning Board to make a timely decision in accordance with
section 10B-58 Division 7 of Article IV, forward the application and the
site plan submitted with the application, together with his written
report thereon, to the Planning Board for review. The report shall state
whether or not the proposed development complies with the
requirements of this division and provisions of applicable zoning
regulations and, if not, it shall specify the respects in which the
development does not comply. A copy of the report shall be furnished to
the applicant. Nothing included in or omitted from the report shall
relieve the applicant from compliance with the requirements of
applicable zoning regulations.
(c) The Planning Board shall review the application, and after giving the
applicant an opportunity to appear and be heard with respect thereto,
shall render its decision approving or disapproving the same, being
guided in its action by the standards set forth in this division. Approval
may be conditional upon the applicant's adoption of specified changes,
and as to applications for development in the floodway and within 100
feet of a culvert carrying a stream under a road, any approval shall be
subject to the approval of the state division of water policy and supply.
(a) Any stream in Princeton for which an adjacent floodway or flood hazard
area has been delineated on any of the maps listed in Section 10B-236
or in the Flood Boundary and Floodway map prepared by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency for the National Flood Insurance
Program; and
(b) Any other watercourse (other than a man-made drainage ditch) in
Princeton identified as a waterway using the following standards:
(1) In all zoning districts other than the R-A and R-B zoning districts, a
waterway shall be identified by the presence of a defined channel
(the distinct appearance of scouring of soil evidenced by exposed
soil and the lack or reduction of vegetation in the stream bed
caused by the periodic or permanent flow of water) having a
contributing watershed area of at least 10 acres;
§ T10B-239 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-240.2
BAO:1137
(2) In the R-A and R-B zoning districts, a waterway shall be identified
as provided in paragraph (1) above but with a defined channel
having a contributing watershed area of at least five acres;
WATERWAY CHANNEL OR CHANNEL OF A WATERWAY - Shall
mean the bed and banks of a waterway which confine and conduct
continuously or intermittently flowing water.
WATERWAY CORRIDOR, FOR A WATERWAY IDENTIFIED IN
ACCORDANCE WITH THE DEFINITION OF A WATERWAY, - Shall
mean the waterway channel and an "adjacent buffer strip"
identified as an area on both sides of the waterway measured from
the top of the channel banks and extending outward therefrom:
a. The minimum distance from the top of each channel bank
specified in Column A of Schedule I; or
b. To the outer limits of the delineated flood hazard area, if any,
plus the distance specified in Column B of Schedule I; and if
the flood hazard area has not been delineated on any of the
maps listed in section 10B-236, the administrative officer may
require the applicant to delineate it; or
c. Where there are slopes of 12% or more contiguous to a channel
bank or the outer limits of a delineated flood hazard area, to
the point where there is a change of grade from 12% or more to
less than 12% (which grade change continues for at least 20
feet) plus the distance specified in Column C of Schedule I;
whichever of (a), (b), or (c) results in the most encompassing
adjacent buffer strip.
§ T10B-240.2 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-240.2
BAO:1138
§ T10B-240.3. Applications for Stream Corridor Buffers. [Ord. No.
2018-11 § 4]
Applications involving surface water drainage facilities pursuant to section
10B-227 shall be accompanied by an additional fee of $1,500, which shall
be held in escrow by the municipality under a written agreement with
the applicant for the purpose of defraying the cost to the municipality of
engaging a storm drainage engineer to review the plans for the facilities,
to advise the applicant or his engineer of any problems involving the plans,
and to submit to the Planning Board or flood control committee a written
report of such review upon completion thereof. The escrow agreement shall
Schedule I
Schedule for Determining
Adjacent Buffer Strips
A B C
Waterway
Category
Minimum
distance
from top of
channel
banks of
waterway
Distance on
either side of
waterway
from outer
limits of any
delineated
flood hazard
area
Distance on
side of
waterway
from top of a
critical slope
contiguous
to Channel
banks or any
delineated
flood hazard
area
Millstone
River Stony
Brook
150 feet 75 feet 50 feet
Harry's Brook,
Mountain
Brook, Van
Horne's
Brook, Cherry
Brook
60 feet 40 feet 30 feet
Other
waterways
identified in
accordance
with the
definition of a
waterway in
this Section
10B-203.
50 feet 25 feet 25 feet
§ T10B-240.2 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-240.3
BAO:1139
be in such form as shall be approved by the municipal attorney and shall
include the following provisions:
(a) That the escrowed funds shall be used for payment of the fees and
charges incurred by the municipality for the services of the storm
drainage engineer with respect to the facilities;
(b) That if the fees and charges are less than the amount of the escrowed
funds, the difference shall be refunded to the applicant upon demand;
and
(c) That if the fees and charges exceed the amount of the escrowed funds,
the excess shall be paid by the applicant to the municipality upon
demand.
Should the administrative officer, upon review of the applicant's
submission, determine that it is necessary for a municipal-retained
consultant to review the applicant's delineation of the waterway
corridor, the administrative officer shall notify the applicant that the
processing of the application will require a review and report on the
waterway corridor delineation by a municipal-retained consultant and
that the applicant must submit a review fee in the amount of $1,500
to be held in escrow. The escrow review fee will be held by the
municipality under a written agreement with the applicant for the
purpose of defraying the cost to the municipality of engaging a
consultant to advise the administrative officer and the applicant or
his engineers of any problems involving the delineation of waterway
corridors, and to submit to the Planning Board a written report of
the consultant's work upon completion thereof. The form of escrow
agreement shall be approved by the municipal attorney and shall be
substantially the same in form as the storm drainage escrow
agreement.
§ T10B-240.3 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-240.3
BAO:1140
ARTICLE XA
[Article XA Was Reserved By( ORredse. rNvoe.d 2)014-4 And Ord. No. 2018-11
§ 4]
§ T10B-240.3.1.
§ T10B-240.3.1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-240.3.1
BAO:1141

ARTICLE XB
[Article XB Was ReGpelanceerdal I Dn eEvnetloirpemtye Bnty POlradn.s No. 2018-11. Prior
History: Ord. No. 92-37]
§ T10B-240.4. General intent. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
The intention of this article is to provide a flexible procedure for review,
consideration, and hearings involving residential planned developments.
This procedure recognizes that the process may involve conditional use
approval, site plan approval, subdivision approval and additional affirmative
findings by the Board with regard to planned developments.
§ T10B-240.5. Applicability. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
Any developer of a parcel of land greater than 100 acres in size located in
the R-1, R-1/AH, R-2, R-2/AH, and R-HF-W zoning districts and for which
the developer is seeking approval of a planned development may submit a
general development plan to the Planning Board prior to the granting of
preliminary subdivision approval.
§ T10B-240.6. Plat required. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
The general development plan shall be submitted on a series of sheets in
plat form at a scale of about one inch equals 200 feet, or such other scale
permitting the entire site to be shown on one sheet not larger than 42
inches by 60 inches. Enlargements of portions of the plan may be submitted
on separate sheets of the same size.
§ T10B-240.7. Contents of general development plan. [Ord. No.
2018-11 § 4]
A general development plan shall include the following:
(a) A general land use plan indicating the tract area and general locations
of the land use uses to be included in the planned development. The
total number of dwelling units and amount of nonresidential floor area
to be provided and proposed land area to be devoted to residential and
nonresidential use shall be set forth. In addition, the proposed types of
nonresidential uses to be included in the planned development shall be
set forth, and the land area to be occupied by each proposed use shall
be estimated. The gross density and intensity of use of the entire
planned development shall be set forth, and a residential gross as well
as net density and a nonresidential floor area ratio shall be provided;
(b) A circulation plan showing the general location and types of
transportation facilities, including facilities for pedestrian access,
within the planned development and any proposed improvement to the
existing transportation system outside the planned development. The
plan shall indicate:
§ T10B-240.4 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-240.7
BAO:1143
(1) Projected peak hour traffic volumes on arterial and collector roads
at the estimated time of completion of the initial proposed section
of the planned development and at the time of completion of
ultimate development of the project, including both internal and
adjacent external volumes.
(2) Peak hour volume capacity relationship or level of service at
ultimate development on major collector and arterial roads
servicing the planned development.
(3) Projected peak hour turning movements at ultimate development
for all major intersections, both internally and adjacent to the
project.
(4) A general description of any off-tract road or intersection
improvements necessitated by the planned development and a
general schedule for their implementation.
(5) The traffic circulation plan shall describe appropriate mass transit
opportunities within and to the planned development, including
any traffic management techniques anticipated to be utilized in
achieving peak hour traffic reductions.
(c) An open space plan showing the proposed land area and general
location of parks and any other land area to be set aside for
conservation and recreational purposes and a general description of
improvements proposed to be made thereon, including a plan for the
operation and maintenance of parks and recreational lands.
(d) A utility plan indicating the need for and showing the proposed location
of sewage and water lines and drainage facilities necessitated by the
physical characteristics of the site, proposed methods for handling solid
waste disposal, and a plan for the operation and maintenance of
proposed utilities;
(e) A storm water management plan setting forth the proposed method of
controlling and managing storm water on the site;
(f) An environmental inventory, including a general description of the
vegetation, soils, topography, geology, surface hydrology, climate and
cultural resources of the site, existing man-made structures or features,
and the probable impact of the development on the environmental
attributes of the site;
(g) A community facility plan indicating the scope and type of supporting
community facilities which may include, but not be limited to,
educational or cultural facilities, historic sites, libraries, hospitals,
firehouses, and police stations;
(h) If applicable, a housing plan outlining the number of housing units to be
provided and the extent to which any housing obligation assigned to the
§ T10B-240.7 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-240.7
BAO:1144
§ T10B-240.8. Effect and duration of approval. [Ord. No. 2018-11
§ 4]
municipality pursuant to P.L. 1985, c. 222 (N.J.S.A. 52:57D-301 et seq.)
will be fulfilled by the development;
(i) A local service plan indicating those public services which the applicant
proposes to provide and which may include, but are not limited to,
water, sewer, cable, and solid waste disposal;
(j) A fiscal report describing the anticipated demand on municipal services
to be generated by the planned development and any other financial
impacts to be faced by the municipality or school district as a result of
the completion of the planned development. The fiscal report shall also
include a detailed projection of property tax revenues which will accrue
to the county, the municipality and school district according to the
timing schedule provided under subsection (k) of this section and
following the completion of the planned development in its entirety;
(k) A proposed timing schedule in the case of a planned development
whose construction is contemplated over a period of years, including
any terms or conditions which are intended to protect the interests of
the public and of the residents who occupy any section of the planned
development prior to the completion of the development in its entirety.
In addition, the timing schedule shall indicate:
(1) That adequate protection is provided to ensure the proper
disposition of each stage through the use of maintenance and
performance guarantees, covenants, and other formal agreements;
(2) Information which indicates that the stage is substantially selffunctioning
and self-sustaining with regard to access, utility
services, parking, common open space, all amenities, and other
similar features. Further, each stage shall be capable of occupancy,
operation, and maintenance upon completion of construction and
development of that stage or, in the case of subsequent stages,
such subsequent stages shall likewise be in harmony with those
under construction or in place;
(3) That each stage is properly related to every other segment of the
planned development and to the community as a whole and to all
necessary community services which are available or which may be
needed to serve the planned development in the future.
(4) A description of the off-tract and off-site improvements that would
be constructed by a particular stage and proposed responsibility
for construction of such improvements, including pro rata share
computations as appropriate.
a. A municipal development agreement, which shall mean a
written agreement between a municipality and a developer
relating to the planned development.
§ T10B-240.7 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-240.8
BAO:1145
§ T10B-240.9. Modification of proposed timing schedule. [Ord. No.
2018-11 § 4]
In the event that the developer seeks to modify the proposed timing
schedule, such modification shall require the approval of the Planning
Board. The Planning Board shall, in deciding whether or not to grant
approval of the modification, take into consideration prevailing economic
and market conditions, anticipated and actual needs for residential units
and nonresidential space within the municipality and the region, and the
availability and capacity of public facilities to accommodate the proposed
development.
§ T10B-240.10. Variation in location of land uses or increase in
density of floor area ratio. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
The developer shall be required to gain the prior approval of the Planning
Board if, after approval of the general development plan, the developer
wishes to make any variation in the location of land uses within the planned
development or to increase the gross density of residential development
or the floor area ratio of nonresidential development in any section of the
planned development.
§ T10B-240.11. Amendment or revision of general development
plan; allowable reductions within original approval. [Ord. No.
2018-11 § 4]
(a) The planned development shall be developed in accordance with the
general development plan approved by the Planning Board
notwithstanding any provision of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et
seq.) or of any ordinance or regulation adopted pursuant thereto after
the effective date of the approval.
(b) The term of the effect of the general development plan approval shall be
determined by the Planning Board using the guidelines set forth in
subsection (c) of this section, except that the term of the effect of the
approval shall not exceed 20 years from the date upon which the
developer receives final approval of the first section of the planned
development.
(c) In making its determination regarding the duration of the effect of
approval of the general development plan, the Planning Board shall
consider: the number of dwelling units or amount of nonresidential
floor area to be constructed; prevailing economic conditions; the timing
schedule to be followed in completing the development and the
likelihood of its fulfillment; the developer's capability of completing the
proposed development; traffic management techniques and the level of
infrastructure improvements contemplated; and the contents of the
general development plan and any conditions which the Planning Board
attaches to the approval thereof.
§ T10B-240.8 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-240.11
BAO:1146
§ T10B-240.12. Notice of completion of section of development;
notice by municipality of nonfulfillment; hearing; termination of
approval; cause. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
(a) Except as provided hereunder, once a general development plan has
been approved by the Planning Board, it may be amended or revised
only upon application by the developer approved by the Planning Board.
(b) A developer, without violating the terms of the approval pursuant to this
section, may, in undertaking any section of the planned development,
reduce the number of residential units or amounts of nonresidential
floor space by no more than 15%; provided, however, that a developer
may not reduce the number of residential units to be provided pursuant
to P.L. 1985, c. 222 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.), without prior
municipal approval.
(a) Upon the completion of each section of the development as set forth in
the approved general development plan, the developer shall notify the
municipal clerk by certified mail that the developer has fulfilled his
obligations under the approved plan. For the purposes of this section,
"completion" of any section of the development shall mean that the
developer has acquired a certificate of occupancy for every residential
unit or every nonresidential structure as set forth in the approved
general development plan and pursuant to section 15 of P.L. 1975, c.
217 (N.J.S.A. 52:57D-133). If the municipality does not receive such
notification at the completion of any section of the development, the
municipality shall notify the developer, by certified mail, in order to
determine whether or not the terms of the approved plan are being
complied with.
If a developer does not complete any section of the development within
the time required in the Planning Board's approval of the general
development plan, or if at any time the municipality has cause to
believe that the developer is not fulfilling his obligations pursuant
to the approved plan, the municipality may so notify the developer,
by certified mail, and the developer shall have 10 days within which
to give evidence that he is fulfilling his obligations pursuant to the
approved plan. The municipality, upon advice and recommendation of
the Planning Board, thereafter shall conduct a hearing to determine
whether or not the developer is in violation of the approved plan. If,
after such a hearing, the municipality finds good cause to terminate the
approval, it shall provide written notice of same to the developer and
the approval shall be terminated 30 days thereafter.
(b) In the event that a developer who has general development plan
approval does not apply for preliminary approval for the planned
development which is the subject of that general development plan
approval within five years of the date upon which the general
development plan was approved by the Planning Board, the
municipality shall have cause to terminate the approval. However, the
Planning Board in establishing the timing schedule and the municipality
§ T10B-240.11 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-240.12
BAO:1147
§ T10B-240.13. Termination of Approval Upon Completion of
Development. [Ord. No. 2018-11 § 4]
In the event that a development which is the subject of an approved general
development plan is completed before the end of the term of the approval,
the approval shall terminate with the completion of the development. For
the purposes of this section, a development shall be considered complete on
the date upon which a certificate of occupancy has been issued for the final
residential or nonresidential structure in the last section of the development
in accordance with the timing schedule set forth in the approved general
development plan and the developer has fulfilled all of his obligations
pursuant to the approval.
in negotiating the development agreement respectively, may allow for
preliminary approval for section(s) of the planned development to be
applied for subsequent to five years of the date upon which the general
development plan has been approved by the Planning Board; in which
case, the municipality shall not have cause to terminate the general
development plan approval as long as the timing schedule and the
development agreement allowing section by section preliminary
approvals subsequent to the five-year period are being met.
§ T10B-240.12 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-240.13
BAO:1148
ARTICLE XI
Zoning
DIVISION 1
Generally
§ T10B-241. Definitions. [Ord. No. 856, § 2; Ord. No. 88-48, § 1; Ord.
No. 94-19, § 1; Ord. No. 94-22, § 1; Ord. No. 95-5, § 1; Ord. No.
96-18; Ord. No. 97-2, § 1; Ord. No. 2005-42, § 1; Ord. No. 2015-48
§ 1; Ord. No. 2016-42 § 6; Ord. No. 2017-8 § 1; Ord. No. 2017-30 § 5;
Ord. No. 2017-52 § 1; Ord. No. 2018-24 §§ 2, 3, 5; Ord. No. 2019-6]
Words used in this article and not defined in this section or elsewhere in this
article, shall have the meanings given in Webster's Unabridged Dictionary,
second edition, but for the purposes of this article, the following words
and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this
section:
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A structure, the use of which is customarily
incidental and subordinate to that of the main building on the same lot,
such as a detached garage, carport, barn, green house, woodshed, toolshed,
kennel or summerhouse.
ACCESSORY USE — The use of a structure or lot, or portions thereof,
which use is customarily incidental and subordinate to the main use of the
structure or lot.
APARTMENT HOUSE — Same as "Structure, multifamily."
ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENCE — A facility which is licensed by the
department of health, in accordance with N.J.A.C. 8:36, to provide
apartment-style housing and congregate dining and to assure that assisted
living services are available when needed. "Assisted living services" means
a coordinated array of supportive personal and health services, available 24
hours per day, to residents who have been assessed to need these services,
including residents who require formal long-term care.
ATTIC — The part of a building that is immediately below and wholly or
partly within the roof framing.
AUTOMOBILE LAUNDRY — Any establishment for the washing of
automobiles or other motor vehicles, using a chain or other conveyor to
move the vehicles or using various automatic devices for the application of
soap, water, steam, air or other materials required in the cleaning process.
BASEMENT — Space in which the ceiling (defined as the bottom of the
structural members of the floor above) is less than four feet above the
average finished grade line along the outside walls of the building and is
more than seven feet measured from the finished floor, except at points of
entry or access.
BUILDING — Same as "Structure."
§ T10B-241 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-241
BAO:1149
BUILDING LINE — The horizontal projection in plan of all covered or roofed
areas of a structure whether permanent or temporary.
CAMP — A group of tents, huts or other shelters, usually located near a lake
or in the woods, forming a temporary residence, especially in summer.
COMMERCIAL CHICKEN FARM — A place where chickens are assembled
for growth, fattening or egg production before sale or slaughter for
commercial purposes.
COMMERCIAL DOG KENNEL — A business in which more than three dogs
over six months old are kept for sale, treatment, training, boarding or
breeding.
CONTINUING CARE RETIREMENT COMMUNITY (CCRC) — A
development of residential living units exclusively for persons who are 62
years of age or older, or for couples, one of whom is at least 62 years
of age, which provides a continuum of accommodations and care from
independent living to nursing care units and which provides "continuing
care" as an integral part of the residential development. Continuing care
is the provision of lodging and nursing, medical or other health related
services at the CCRC or at another location to an individual pursuant to an
agreement effective for the life of the individual or for a period greater than
one year, and, in consideration of the payment of an entrance fee with or
without other periodic charges, provided that the person receiving the care
is not related to the person who provides the care.
DORMITORY — A structure containing sleeping rooms of not less than
80 square feet each, and containing complete sanitary facilities, although
not necessarily within individual rooms, occupied only by students of an
educational institution, excluding spouses and children of such students,
and assigned supervisory staff.
DWELLING UNIT — A group of interrelated rooms in other than a dormitory
which: (a) are intended or designed for the use of one family, (b) are
separated from other space by lockable doors, (c) have access to the
outdoors without crossing through any part of another dwelling unit and (d)
have living and sleeping facilities, cooking facilities, fixed or portable, and
complete sanitary facilities. A flat shall not be considered a dwelling unit.
EMPLOYEE, DOMESTIC — A person fully employed in domestic duties
while on dwelling premises.
FAMILY — A group of persons, all related to each other by blood or
marriage, who live and cook together in one dwelling unit as one household;
or a group of persons, not exceeding four in number, all of whom live and
cook together in one dwelling unit as one household, but some or all of
whom are not related to the others by blood or marriage. Children who are
members of families by reason of their relationship by adoption or who are
foster children placed with such families in a dwelling by the state division
of youth and family services or by a duly incorporated child care agency or
who are placed pursuant to law in single family dwellings known as group
homes shall be deemed children related by blood for the purpose of this
definition. As used in this definition, "group home" means and includes any
§ T10B-241 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-241
BAO:1150
single family dwelling used in the placement of children pursuant to law
and recognized as a group home by the state department of institutions
and agencies, in accordance with rules and regulations adopted by the
commissioner of institutions and agencies; provided, however, that no group
home shall contain more than 12 children.
FARMING — Agricultural activity or the keeping or raising of livestock,
poultry, or small animals upon a lot or plot in single ownership of not less
than three acres and not constituting a chicken farm or piggery.
FENCE — A vertical assemblage, generally along a single plane, including
corner and line posts, solid or partially open. A fence in excess of six feet,
six inches from grade is considered a "structure" for the purposes of this
chapter, except that if a fence relates to active farming (referred to as "farm
fences"), it shall be a structure only if it exceeds eight feet from grade.
FLAT — A group of rooms constituting separate and distinct living quarters
in a single-family house in accordance with the provisions of section
10B-274.
FLOOR AREA — The total area of all of the stories of all structures on
the lot, measured from the outside faces of the exterior walls or from
the exterior roof edges where the structure has no walls and including
the following, although not by way of limitation: interior balconies and
mezzanines, roofed and/or enclosed areas such as sheds, barns, garages,
and carports.
Attic space in a single family or two family residence with a height of seven
feet or more measured from the finished floor to the roof rafter shall be
counted as floor area except for that area that is up to one-third of the
area of the floor directly below. Attic areas in a single-family or two family
residence with a height of less than seven feet measured from finished floor
to roof rafter shall not be counted as floor area.
If an interior space in a one or two family structure has a ceiling height of
12 feet or greater, the floor area of that space shall be counted twice for the
purpose of floor area calculation. If an interior space in a one or two family
structure has a sloped ceiling, only that portion of the floor having a ceiling
height of 12 feet or greater shall be counted twice for the purpose of floor
area calculation.
For single- and two-family dwellings, the following shall be exempt from the
calculation of floor area (see Fig.1):
Basements.
A/C condenser units, generators, transformers, above-ground fuel tanks and
other similar devices, not to exceed 100 square feet in the aggregate. The
area in excess of 100 square feet in the aggregate shall be counted as floor
area.
(A) Non-enclosed one-story porches, porticos, stoops and entrance
platforms, up to 200 square feet. Any additional square footage beyond the
first 200 square feet shall be included in the calculation.
(B) That portion of any garage, porte-cochere, carport or other accessory
structure that is located behind the rearmost wall of the dwelling (C),
provided that said structure is no greater than one story and 15 feet in
height to the peak of the roof, not to exceed 300 square feet.
§ T10B-241 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-241
BAO:1151
Figure 1
FLOOR AREA RATIO — The gross floor area of all buidlings on a lot divided
by the lot area.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS — [Deleted by Ord. No. 2015-48]
FLOOR AREA, NET — [Deleted by Ord. No. 2015-48 § 1]
GARAGE, COMMERCIAL — A building used for the off-street storage of
motor vehicles, the provisions of incidental gasoline service, the sale of
accessories and the repair of motor vehicles excluding body work, but not
used for the sale of motor vehicles.
GARAGE, MOTOR COURT — A garage located in between the front of a
structure and the street and which is accessible from a paved courtyard
located at the interior of the lot.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — An accessory building incidental to a house as defined
herein, which accessory building is intended for the off-street storages of
motor vehicles belonging to the inhabitants of such house, but in which
garage no business, service or occupation is conducted or rendered for
profit. The rental of storage space for more than two cars not owned by
persons residing in the house is considered a business for profit.
GARDEN WALL — Any wall assembled, erected or attached to an object
having location on or in the ground, to provide a grade separation or
landscape planter. Steps shall not be considered a garden wall.
GASOLINE SERVICE STATION — An area of land, including any structure
thereon, that is used primarily for the retail sale and direct delivery to motor
vehicles of motor fuel and lubricants, as well as such incidental services as
the lubrication and hand washing of motor vehicles and the sale, installation
and minor repair of automobile accessories such as tires and batteries, and
which area is not used for the sale of motor vehicles.
GOLF COURSE/CLUB — A golf course is a tract improved with a full-size,
professional golf course with a minimum of 18 holes with the necessary
and usual accessory uses and structures. The course shall be owned and
operated by one or more entities (the "club") with the obligation to maintain
the golf course and related facilities. Together they are referred to as a "golf
course/club."
§ T10B-241 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-241
BAO:1152
HEIGHT OF BUILDING — The greatest vertical distance between the
average level of finished grade or pre-construction grade, whichever is
lower in elevation, along all the exterior walls of a building and each of the
following:
HOME OCCUPATION — An occupation customarily carried on in a dwelling
unit by an occupant of the residence, which occupation is clearly an
accessory use incidental to the residential use. A "home occupation" shall
not include any occupation that gives external evidence of nonresidential
use, nor shall it include a barbershop, beauty parlor, commercial caterer,
commercial rental office, medical doctor or dentist, or studio where
dancing, music or other personal instruction is offered to more than one
pupil at one time or where concerts or recitals are held.
HOTEL — Any structure providing overnight accommodation, in other than
dwelling units, for hire to the travelling public.
HOUSE, APARTMENT — Same as "Structure, multi-family."
HOUSE, MULTI-FAMILY — Same as "Structure, multi-family."
HOUSE, ROOMING — A single-family or semi-detached house, occupied by
one or more roomers in accordance with the provisions of section 10B-273.
HOUSE, ROW — Same as "Structure, multi-family."
HOUSE, SEMI-DETACHED — One section of a structure that contains two
sections, each of which has free-standing walls on three sides and shares
a party wall with the other section on the fourth side, and each of which
contains only one dwelling unit or only one dwelling unit and a flat.
HOUSE, SINGLE-FAMILY — Same as "Structure, single-family."
HOUSE, TRAILER — Same as "Trailer, house."
IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE — The part of the lot that is covered by
impervious surfaces.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been compacted or covered
with a layer of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
(a) The highest ridge of the roof, in the case of a pitched roof;
(b) The highest parapet or cornice level, in the case of a flat roof;
The highest point of any structure that rises wholly or partly above
the roof line and whose area together with the area of all other such
structures exceeds 10% of the ground floor area of the building that
supports it; excepting, however, structures that constitute or house
mechanical equipment for such building; provided, that all the
structures that rise wholly or partly above the roof line do not exceed
in the aggregate 20% of the ground floor area of such building.
The finished grades of depressed courts, to the extent that they are
below abutting ground level, shall be disregarded in height
computations.
(c)
§ T10B-241 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-241
BAO:1153
Impervious surfaces include roofs and asphalt, concrete, and stone drives,
sidewalks, porous asphalt or concrete, decks, pools and patios.
INSTITUTION OF HIGHER LEARNING — An educational institution of
higher learning chartered by the state, or a private educational institution
approved by, and subject to regulations prescribed by, the state, and giving
instruction or affording facilities for study in academic or technical subjects
only at or above the college level.
JUNK YARDS — The use of any space, whether inside or outside a building,
for the storage, keeping or abandonment of junk, including scrap metals or
other scrap materials, or for the dismantling, demolition or abandonment of
automobiles or other vehicles or machinery or parts thereof.
LABORATORY RESEARCH — A building or portion thereof equipped for
technological research, scientific experimentation, investigation,
observation and/or engineering development in the natural physical or
social sciences that often provides controlled conditions involving the
testing of drugs, chemicals, mechanical or scientific/technological
components and consumer products, may include the engineering and
product development, including but not limited to the following: innovative
and maker space, fabrication laboratories, rapid prototype spaces,
collaborative areas used for the discussion, review and/or research areas,
laboratory areas where the experimentation, development or testing is
performed; the offices, common work areas, accessory facilities and
hallways located within the laboratory research areas and used in
connection with such laboratory research areas; support and development
areas directly related to the laboratory research areas such as storage, or
holding areas for laboratory equipment, products, packaging and supplies;
focus and consumer testing group areas; pilot plants, and utility corridors
and utility rooms directly related to the laboratory research areas.
LOT — A lot of record, lawfully created by deed or conveyance, or by
subdivision on a subdivision map.
LOT LINE, FRONT — The continuous line formed by the lot frontage. A
corner lot shall be deemed to have two front lot lines, one along each of its
lot frontages.
LOT LINE, REAR — Any lot line, except a front or side lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE — A continuous line which runs back from an intersection
with the lot front line, and which forms the boundary line between the lot
and the adjacent parcel of land.
LOT WIDTH — The distance between the side lines of a lot measured along
a straight line lying between the required front and rear building setbacks
and making equal angles with the side lines. For a corner lot, the lot width is
the distance between one of its front lot lines and the side lot line opposite
thereto, measured along a straight line making equal angles with such front
and side lot lines and lying between the required front building setback
from the other front lot line and the required side building setback from the
side lot line opposite such other front lot line.
§ T10B-241 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-241
BAO:1154
LOT, CORNER — A lot fronting on two streets at their intersection.
LOT, COVERAGE — The ratio of the total area of the plan projections of
all buildings and of all outdoor parking space on a lot to the gross area
of that lot, expressed as a percentage. For this purpose, a plan projection
is the projection to ground level of the largest horizontal cross section
of a building above ground level; except, that structures or portions of
structures whose roofs are accessible directly from ground level for outdoor
use by pedestrians shall not count as lot coverage; provided, that the
surfaces of such roofs shall not be more than three feet above the highest
surrounding grade elevation nor more than 10 feet above the average
surrounding grade; and provided, further, that no part of such roof surface
is used for vehicular parking. Anything herein to the contrary
notwithstanding, the plan projection of an unroofed stadium shall be the
area of the cross section of the stadium structure midway between the
highest level thereof and the level of the playing field therein.
LOT, DEPTH — The shortest distance between the front and rear lot lines,
or, as to a corner lot, between the front lot line not used as a terminus in
measuring lot width and the side lot line opposite such front lot line.
LOT, FRONTAGE — The continuous distance along which a lot abuts a
street. A corner lot shall be deemed to have two lot frontages, one along
each street.
LOT, IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE — The ratio, the numerator of which is the
area of lot coverage plus the area of all other impervious cover, and the
denominator of which is the gross area of the lot.
For single- and two-family dwellings, the following shall be exempt from the
calculation of impervious coverage (see Fig. 1):
A/C condenser units, generators, transformers, above-ground fuel tanks and
other similar devices, not to exceed 100 square feet in the aggregate. The
area in excess of 100 square feet in the aggregate shall be counted as
impervious coverage.
(A) Non-enclosed one-story porches, porticos, stoops and entrance
platforms, up to 200 square feet. Any additional square footage beyond the
first 200 square feet shall be included in the calculation.
(B) That portion of any garage, porte-cochere, carport or other accessory
structure that is located behind the rearmost wall of the dwelling (C),
provided that said structure is no greater than one story and 15 feet in
height to the peak of the roof, not to exceed 300 square feet.
§ T10B-241 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-241
BAO:1155
Figure 1
Note: the exemptions listed in the definition of impervious cover are for
purposes of this article only. With respect to the municipality's stormwater
management regulations, the definition of "impervious surface" set forth
in Article X shall control.
LOT, ZONING — An area of land, with definite boundaries designated on
a plat satisfactory to the development enforcement officer and filed with
the township clerk, of size, dimensions and frontage adequate to satisfy this
article with respect to buildings thereon and the provisions of article IX with
respect to streets and lot layout. The length or depth of a zoning lot shall
not exceed three times its width at the building line and zoning lots may not
overlap.
MOBILE HOME — Same as "Trailer, house."
MOTEL AND AUTO COURT — Same as "Hotel."
NUISANCE FACTORS — Any offensive, annoying, unpleasant or obnoxious
thing or practice, a cause or source of annoyance, especially continuing or
repeating invasion or disturbance of another's right, including the actual or
potential emanation of any physical characteristics of activity or use across
a property line, which emanation can be perceived by or affects a human
being or the generation of an excessive or concentrated movement of people
or things, such as:
(a) Noise.
(b) Dust.
(c) Smoke.
(d) Fumes.
(e) Odor.
(f) Glare.
(g) Flashes.
(h) Vibration.
(i) Shock waves.
§ T10B-241 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-241
BAO:1156
NURSING HOME — A facility which is licensed by the department of health,
in accordance with N.J.A.C. 8:39, to provide health care under medical
supervision and continuous nursing care for 24 or more consecutive hours
to patients who do not require the degree of care and treatment which a
hospital provides and who, because of their physical or mental condition,
require continuous nursing home-level care.
OPEN AIR COMMERCIAL AMUSEMENTS — Any land, building, devices
or activities for amusement and profit perceptible from a public right of
way, such as drive-in theatres, golf driving ranges, miniature golf courses,
archery, ferris wheels, shooting galleries, open front restaurants or snack
bars, swimming pools and other features found in commercial areas.
PARKING LOT — An area which contains two or more off-street parking
spaces.
PARKING SPACE, OFF-STREET — An area not less than nine feet by 19
feet, which is accessible from a street but not located on a street, which is
both suitable and intended for the parking of a passenger motor vehicle and
which may include a garage or carport.
PIGGERY — A place where pigs are assembled for growth or fattening
before sale or slaughter.
PLACE OF WORSHIP — A place of worship is a building or structure where
persons regularly assemble for worship, which by design and construction
are primarily intended for the conducting of organized religious services
and accessory uses associated therewith.
QUARRYING — The removal from the earth of stone, sand, gravel, minerals,
topsoil or other natural material for the purpose of sale or any other
commercial purpose, other than such as may be incidental to excavating or
regarding in connection with or in anticipation of building development or
landscaping on the site.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle other than an automobile, such as
a travel trailer, a boat and boat trailer, an aircraft or a light truck or bus
containing sleeping accommodations, which is intended and employed only
for noncommercial recreational use.
RESTAURANT — Any establishment, however designated, at which food
is sold for consumption on the premises, but normally to patrons seated
within an enclosed building. However, a snack bar at a public or community
playground, playfield, park or swimming pool, operated solely by the agency
(j) Heat.
(k) Electronic or atomic radiation.
(l) Objectionable effluent.
(m) Noise of congregation of people, particularly at night.
(n) Vehicular traffic.
§ T10B-241 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-241
BAO:1157
or group operating the recreational facilities and for the convenience of the
patrons of the facilities, shall not be deemed to be a restaurant.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN — An establishment where patrons are served
food, soft drinks, ice cream and similar confections for consumption mainly
outside the confines of the principal building or in vehicles parked upon the
premises, regardless of whether or not, in addition thereto, seats or other
accommodations are provided for the patrons.
RIGHT-OF-WAY LINES — The boundary lines of land used or intended for
use as streets and from which setback and other requirements shall begin.
Where existing records are vague or show a lesser dimension, they shall be
considered to be not less than 50 feet apart, 25 feet from the centerline of
streets.
ROOM — A completely enclosed interior space containing no partitions
higher than four feet.
ROOMER — A person who occupies a rooming house in accordance with the
provisions of section 10B-273 and who is not related in direct line by blood
or marriage to the owner of the house.
ROOMING HOUSE — Same as "House, rooming."
SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS — The schedule of regulations annexed to
this article.
SERVICE STATION — Same as "Gasoline service station."
SETBACK, BUILDING ALONG DISTRICT BOUNDARY — The shortest
distance between the building line and the district boundary line.
SETBACK, BUILDING FRONT — The shortest distance between the
building line and the front lot line.
SETBACK, BUILDING REAR — The shortest distance between the building
line and the rear lot line.
SETBACK, BUILDING SIDE — The shortest distance between the building
line and the side lot line.
SETBACK, PARKING ALONG DISTRICT BOUNDARY LINE — The shortest
distance between the perimeter line of the parking area and the district
boundary line.
SETBACK, PARKING FRONT — The shortest distance between the
perimeter line of the parking area and the front lot line.
SETBACK, PARKING REAR — The shortest distance between the perimeter
line of the parking area and the rear lot line.
SETBACK, PARKING SIDE — The shortest distance between the perimeter
line of the parking area and the side lot line.
SIGN — A visible device for attracting attention or giving information
through the use of letters, symbols or any other means, such as flags and
pennants. Its area shall be considered as being the total area containing
all letters, symbols and other devices, or the area of its background if
§ T10B-241 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-241
BAO:1158
distinguishable from a larger background such as the wall of a building.
In the case of multi-faceted signs, the area shall include all the faces of
the sign. Not included or restricted are the flag, pennant or insignia of any
nation, state, city or other political unit, or of any educational institution,
or temporary signs of any political, educational, charitable, philanthropic,
civic, religious or like campaign, drive or event.
SINGLE-FAMILY HOUSE — Same as "Structure, single-family."
STORY — Any covered area whether finished or not, with a clear headroom
of seven feet or more measured from the finished floor to the ceiling
(defined as the bottom of the structural members of the floor or roof above).
If the covered area also meets the definition of "basement," it shall not be
considered a "story."
STREET — Any right-of-way defined in article IX and any private right-ofway
necessary to provide access to buildings. Not included in this definition
are privately owned roads or driveways on campuses of educational
institutions; provided, that such are not customarily used by the general
public to traverse such campuses. Nonexhaustive examples of private roads
that are so used by the general public and which, therefore, are included
in this definition of street, are Springdale Road Extension, Faculty Road,
Hartley Avenue, Western Way east of Broadmead and Broadmead.
STREET LEVEL — The elevation of the center line of a street.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed, assembled or erected, the use of
which requires location on the ground or attachment to something having
location on or in the ground; this shall include fences and garden walls
more than six feet, six inches from grade, farm fences in excess of eight feet
from grade, tanks, towers, advertising devices, bins, tents, lunch wagons,
trailers, dining cars, recreation vehicles, or similar structures on wheels
or other supports used for business or living purposes. This includes any
structure equipped with a roof, whether permanent or temporary, such as
porches, awnings, canopies, summer houses, arbors, balconies and similar
elements. The word "structure" shall not apply to service utilities entirely
below the ground, nor shall it apply to tents used in connection with
reunions of alumni of educational institutions for periods of two weeks or
less, nor shall it apply to tents or fences used for private social affairs such
as weddings and parties and in place for one week or less.
STRUCTURE, MULTIFAMILY — A structure containing more than one
dwelling unit.
STRUCTURE, SINGLE-FAMILY — A freestanding structure containing only
one dwelling unit or only one dwelling unit and a flat.
SWIMMING POOL — Any pool which is constructed, used or maintained to
provide recreational facilities for swimming, bathing or wading and which
is capable of containing water to a depth greater than 18 inches, and all
buildings, equipment and appurtenances thereto.
TAVERN — A business selling alcoholic beverages for consumption on the
premises.
§ T10B-241 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-241
BAO:1159
TOURIST HOME — Same as "Hotel."
TRAILER CAMP AND COURT — An area designed for the parking of trailers
of any kind.
TRAILER, HOUSE — Structures designed to be moved from place to place,
which are enclosed and used for sleeping or other human occupancy.
TRAILER, TRAVEL — Structures designed to be moved from place to place,
which may be partially enclosed with canvas or other material, and which
are used for sleeping and other human occupancy during the course of
activities commonly known as "camping" or "caravaning."
USE, ACCESSORY — Same as "Accessory use."
WADING POOL — Any pool which is constructed, used or maintained to
provide recreational facilities for wading, and which is capable of
containing water to a maximum depth not greater than 18 inches, and all
buildings, equipments and appurtenances thereto.
YARD — An open space area existing between a building line and the
adjacent most nearly parallel lot line.
§ T10B-242. Zoning map. [Ord. No. 856, § 2; Ord. No. 971, § 3; Ord.
No. 983, § 1; Ord. No. 1014, § 1; Ord. No. 1031, § 1; Ord. No. 82-17,
§ 1; Ord. No. 83-9, § 1; Ord. No. 83-23, § 1; Ord. No. 84-31, § 1; Ord.
No. 86-14, § 1; Ord. No. 86-15, § 1; Ord. No. 87-14, § 1; Ord. No.
87-15, § 1; Ord. No. 87-27, § 11; Ord. No. 87-31, § 1; Ord. No. 88-34,
§ 1; Ord. No. 88-44, § 1; Ord. No. 89-20, § 1; Ord. No. 90-12, § 1; Ord.
No. 92-27, § 1; Ord. No. 92-33, § 2; Ord. No. 92-34, § 1; Ord. No.
92-37, § 5; Ord. No. 94-9, § 1; Ord. No. 94-10, § 3; Ord. No. 96-19,
§ 2; Ord. No. 96-20, § 2; Ord. No. 2001-28, § 2; Ord. No. 2001-29, § 2;
Ord. No. 2003-5, § 1; Ord. No. 2004-12, § 1; Ord. No. 2007-4, § 1;
Ord. No. 2011-16, § 3; Ord. No. 2014-43 § 3; Ord. No. 2016-11; Ord.
No. 2016-16; Ord. No. 2016-25.]
A. Zoning Map Adopted.
This article shall consist of the text thereof and the zoning map on file
in the office of the township clerk, said map being entitled, "Zoning
Map, Princeton Township, Mercer County, New Jersey," prepared by
the Princeton Township Engineering Department, as revised through
March 8, 2007; the map on file in the office of the township clerk
entitled, "Overlay Zoning Map of Historic Preservation Districts and
Historic Preservation Buffer Districts, Princeton Township, Mercer
County" as revised through November 12, 1992 and the map on file
in the office of the township clerk entitled, "Overlay Zoning Map for
Residential Community Overlay Zone, Princeton Township, Mercer
County" as revised through February 24, 2003.
B. Zoning Map Amendments; Overlay Map Amendments.31
31.Editor's Note: Beginning with Ord. No. 2014-43, Zoning Map amendments are listed
individually.
§ T10B-241 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-242
BAO:1160
§ T10B-243. Compliance With Article. [Ord. No. 856, § 2]
No building shall be erected, moved, altered, added to or enlarged, except
in conformity with this article.
No building shall have a design or be used, and no land shall be used for
any purpose or in any manner other than as specified in this article.
§ T10B-243.1. Compliance With State, County and Municipal
Highway and/or Street Access Management Codes. [Ord. No. 90-36,
§ 3.]
Land adjacent to state highways shall be regulated in conformity with the
state highway access management code adopted by the commissioner of
transportation under section 3 of the "State Highway Access Management
Act," P.L. 1989, c. 32; land with access to county roads and highways shall
be regulated in conformity with any access management code adopted by
Ord. No. 2014-43 §§ 4, 5: The Zoning Map is amended to remove the
Residential Senior Community-1 Overlay Zone (RSC-1) District. The
underlying RA and RB residential zoning districts shall remain in full
force and effect and nothing shall be construed as altering or removing
them.
Ord. No. 2016-11. The Zoning Map of the Township of Princeton is
hereby amended to include Block 9301, lot 22 in the E4 Zone District.
Ord. No. 2016-16 § 2. The "Overlay Zoning Map of Historic Preservation
Districts and Historic Preservation Buffer Districts, Princeton, Mercer
County, New Jersey" is hereby amended to add thereto the
Witherspoon-Jackson Historic District, whose boundaries shall be as
shown on Exhibit "A" attached hereto, consisting of the following:
Blocks 13.01, 15.01, 15.02, 15.03, 15.04, 17.01, 17.02, 17.03, 17.04,
24.01 Lot 7; Block 21.01 Lots 11 through 18, and 21; Block 21.04 Lots
29, 29.0101 through 29.0105, 29.0201 through 29.0204; Block 6902
Lots 8 through 20, 21.01, 22 through 27,33 through 41, 43 through 47,
49 through 51, 56 through 66 and Lot 70; Block 6903 Lots 2 through 4,
4.01, 4.02, 5 through 9, 9.01, 9.02, 10 through 12, 13 through 23 and
31: and Blocks 6904, 6905 and 6907.32
Ord. No. 2016-25 § 1. The "Overlay Zoning Map of Historic Preservation
Districts and Historic Preservation Buffer Districts, Princeton, Mercer
County, New Jersey" is hereby amended to delete Block 21.01, Lot 14
from the Witherspoon-Jackson Historic District, whose boundaries shall
be as shown on Exhibit "A" attached hereto.33
Ord. No. 2019-10 § 2. Rezone Block 901 Lot 21 from the S-2 Service
District No. 2 to the AH-3 Affordable Housing-3 District.
32.Editor's Note: Exhibit "A" may be found on file in the Princeton Municipal Offices.
33.Editor's Note: Exhibit "A" may be found on file in the Princeton Municipal Offices.
§ T10B-242 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-243.1
BAO:1161
the county under R.S. 27:16-1; and land with access to municipal streets
and highways shall be regulated in conformity with any municipal access
management code adopted under R.S. 40:67-1. This section shall not be
construed as requiring the establishment of minimum lot sizes or minimum
frontage requirements for lots adjacent to or restricted from access to a
state highway.
§ T10B-243.2. Exemptions. [Ord. No. 89-30, § 2; Ord. No. 90-36,
§ 4.]
The following are exempt from the requirements of this article:
(a) Any development for which the township is the applicant.
§ T10B-243.1 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-243.2
BAO:1162
DIVISION 2
Zoning Districts
BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-243.2
BAO:1163

SUBDIVISION 2.1
In General
§ T10B-244. Division of township into zoning districts. [Ord. No.
856, § 2; Ord. No. 971, § 1; Ord. No. 983, § 2; Ord. No. 1014, § 2;
Ord. No. 1031, § 2; Ord. No. 82-17, § 2; Ord. No. 83-9, § 2; Ord. No.
84-31, § 2; Ord. No. 86-14, § 2; Ord. No. 87-27, § 12; Ord. No. 88-44,
§ 2; Ord. No. 89-13, § 1; Ord. No. 90-12, § 2; Ord. No. 96-19, § 3; Ord.
No. 96-20, § 3; Ord. No. 2001-28, § 1; Ord. No. 2001-29, § 1; Ord. No.
2003-2, § 1; Ord. No. 2006-35; Ord. No. 2011-16, § 1; Ord. No.
2014-43; Ord. No. 2019-10 § 1]
The territory of the Township of Princeton is hereby divided into zoning
districts, as shown on the zoning map, designated as follows:
Arts, Education and Transit District (AET)
Residence District No. R-A (R-A)
Residence District No. R-B (R-B)
Residence District No. R-T (R-T)
Residence District No. 1 (R-1)
Residence District No. 2 (R-2)
Residence District No. 3 (R-3)
Residence District No. 4 (R-4)
Residence District No. 5 (R-5)
Residence District No. 6 (R-6)
Residence District No. 7 (R-7)
Residence District No. 8 (R-8)
Residence District No. 9 (R-9)
Residence District No. R-H (R-H)
Professional Office-Residence District (POR)
Business District No. 1 (B-1)
Business District No. 2 (B-2)
Shopping Center District (SC)
Education District No. 2 (E-2)
Education District No. 3 (E-3)
Education District No. 4 (E-4)
Office Research District No. 1 (OR-1)
Office Research District No. 2 (OR-2)
Service District No. 1 (S-1)
Service District No. 2 (S-2)
§ T10B-244 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-244
BAO:1165
Retail-Office District (R-O)
Residential Market Program District No. R-M (R-M)
Residential Senior Community-2 Overlay Zone (RSC-2)
Residential Senior Market Program District
No. R-SM (R-SM)
Residential Senior Community District
No. RSC-3 (RSC-3)
Historic Preservation Zoning District (HP)
Historic Preservation Buffer Zoning District (HPB)
Affordable Housing 3 Residential District (AH-3)
The historic preservation zoning district and the historic preservation buffer
zoning district shall be overlay districts, and for any land located within
them the regulations which pertain to them shall be in addition to the
regulations of the other zoning district or districts within which such land is
located.
The residential senior market overlay district and the residential senior
community districts shall be overlay districts, and for any land located
within them, the regulations which pertain to them shall be in addition to
the other zoning district or districts within which such land is located.
§ T10B-245. Interpretation of District Boundaries. [Ord. No. 856,
§ 2.]
(a) Where boundaries of a zoning district are indicated as approximately
following the center lines of streets, alleys, railroads, waterways or the
boundary lines of parks or other publicly owned land, such lines shall be
construed to be such boundaries.
(b) Where such boundaries are indicated as approximately following the
lines of lots or other parcels of record, such lot or parcel lines shall be
construed to be such boundaries.
(c) Where a district boundary divides a parcel of land, the location of such
boundary, unless such is indicated by fixed points of parcel boundaries
or dimensions shown on the map, shall be determined by the use of the
scale appearing on the zoning map.
(d) In all cases of ambiguity or uncertainty as to a boundary line, the
location of such boundary line may be determined by the board of
adjustment in accordance with Section 10B-327.
§ T10B-244 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-245
BAO:1166
SUBDIVISION 2.2
Schedule of Regulations
§ T10B-246. Regulations included; schedule. [Ord. No. 856, § 2;
Ord. No. 967, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 971, § 2; Ord. No. 983, § 3; Ord. No.
1014, § 3; Ord. No. 1031, § 3; Ord. No. 82-17, § 3; Ord. No. 83-9, § 3;
Ord. No. 83-32, § 3; Ord. No. 84-31, § 3; Ord. No. 86-14, § 3; Ord. No.
86-15, § 2; Ord. No. 88-31, § 1; Ord. No. 88-48, § 2; Ord. No. 89-13,
§ 2; Ord. No. 90-12, § 3; Ord. No. 92-28, § 1; Ord. No. 92-37, § 6; Ord.
No. 93-19, § 2; Ord. No. 2006-35, § 1; Ord. No. 2011-16, § 2; Ord. No.
2015-39 § 2; Ord. No. 2016-42 § 1; Ord. No. 2019-6]
The Schedule of Regulations shows in tabular form the applicable
regulations in each zoning district governing lot sizes and dimensions,
building and parking area setbacks, building heights, floor area ratio and
building setback-height ratio:34
Notes:
(a) But not more than two stories.
(b) Applies to all parking spaces required by this article, and also to
parking spaces in excess of the number so required except as otherwise
provided in note (c).
(c) Applies only to parking spaces in excess of the number required by this
article, but only if such excess spaces utilize this reduced setback and
are screened from the adjacent lot line or lines as provided in section
10B-288.
(d) For purposes of computing F.A.R. and the required off-street parking
under section 10B-282, gross floor area as defined in section 10B-241,
shall not include outside covered pedestrial walkways.
(e) Does not apply in the case of lot lines between lots of the same owner.
(f) But not more than one foot of building height for each three feet of
building setback from nearest district boundary. To the extent that such
district boundary coincides with the boundary between the borough
and township or with the boundary of a service district, it shall not be
considered a district boundary for this purpose. Buildings exceeding
100 feet in height may be allowed as conditional uses in accordance
with section 10B-267.
(g) One hundred fifty feet at district boundary. To the extent that such
district boundary coincides with the boundary between the borough
and township, it shall not be considered a district boundary for this
purpose.
34.Editor's Note: Schedule of Regulations is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ T10B-246 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-246
BAO:1167
(h) This indicates a reduced minimum setback which is permitted, other
than along a district boundary, for all parking that is screened as
provided in section 10B-288. To the extent that a district boundary
coincides with the boundary between the borough and township, it shall
not be considered a district boundary for this purpose.
(i) (Reserved)
(j) Residential clusters meeting the requirements of section 10B-191 et
seq., as modified by article XII required.
(k) Not applicable to developments by the Princeton Township Housing
Fund pursuant to article XII.
(l) Not applicable to attached housing.
(m) Subject to the requirements of Section 10B-268(e), the maximum F.A.R.
shall be 9% if at least 25% of all existing and proposed buildings on the
site are used for laboratory research as defined in Section 10B-241;
10% if at least 33.1/3% of all existing and proposed buildings on the site
are so used; and 11% if at least 40% of all existing and proposed
buildings on the site are so used.
(n) Subject to the requirements of section 10B-268(e), the maximum F.A.R.
shall be 11% if at least 25% of all existing and proposed buildings on the
site are used for laboratory research as defined in section 10B-241;
12% if at least 33 and 1/3 of all existing and proposed buildings on the
site are so used; 13% if at least 40% of all existing and proposed
buildings on the site are so used; and 16% if at least 45% of all existing
and proposed buildings on the site are so used.
(o) Setbacks shall be from the zoning district boundary line and shall be
modified as follows:
(1) Reduced to 60 feet for faculty and staff housing and related
parking; and
(2) Increased for buildings exceeding 30 feet in height to a number
which bears the same ratio to 75 feet as the proposed building
height bears to 30 feet.
(p) Notwithstanding the stated maximum height of 45 feet, no building in
the E-4 district shall exceed three stories.
(q) F.A.R. for purposes of this zoning district shall mean the ratio of the
gross floor area of all buildings in the zoning district to the gross area of
the zoning district, expressed as a percentage.
(r) The side and rear yard parking setback from a lot upon which a water
tower or water tank is located is reduced to 20 feet, provided that such
parking is screened in accordance with Section 10B-288.
§ T10B-246 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-246
BAO:1168
§ T10B-246.1. Maximum permitted residential lot impervious
coverages. [Ord. No. 2005-42, § 2; Ord. No. 2017-30 § 3]
Residential lots shall be subject to the following maximum impervious
coverage limits.
Lot Size
(acres)
Maximum Permitted Impervious
Coverage
Percent
4 and greater 14.0
3 to 3.99 15.0
2 to 2.99 17.0
1.5 to 1.99 19.5
1 to 1.49 22.5
0.75 to 0.99 25.5
0.5 to 0.749 29.0
0.25 to 0.49 36.0
0.1 to 0.249 49.5
Less than 0.1 61.5
§ T10B-246.2. Stormwater runoff on new impervious surfaces. [Ord.
No. 2010-32, § 1]
Any new construction which adds 500 square feet or more of new
impervious surface will be subject to review by the township engineer
to assure that all stormwater runoff created by the additional impervious
surfaces are adequately controlled and that such runoff does not cause an
adverse impact on adjoining property owners.
§ T10B-247. Minimum lot dimensions. [Ord. No. 856 § 2; Ord. No.
2015-39 § 1]
(s) The required setbacks set forth are from lots zoned or used for
residential purposes. The side and rear yard setbacks from lots zoned
for nonresidential purposes upon which a residential use is not located
shall be zero, but in such case the combined side yard requirements
shall be 20 feet.
(t) Use mean prevailing setback as defined in Section 10B-252.1
(a) No lot shall have an area, depth or frontage less than that shown on the
schedule of regulations as being required in the zoning district in which
the lot is located, and no lot shall be less in width as measured through
an existing or proposed building or any part thereof than the minimum
lot width shown on such schedule.
§ T10B-246 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-247
BAO:1169
§ T10B-247.1. Flag lots. [Ord. No. 2010-35, § 1]
(b) In the R1, R2, R3, R4, R5, R6, R7, R8, R9, RA, RB, and RH residence
districts, the minimum lot frontage shall be the same as the lot width,
except that on curved alignments with an outside radius of less than
500 feet, the minimum distance between lot lines, measured at the
street line, shall not be less than 75% of the required minimum lot
width.35
(a) Definition: A flag lot shall be described as containing an area shaped
like a "flag" which is the portion of the lot where all structures are to be
located and an area shaped like a "pole" which is the portion of the lot
where the vehicular access between the flag and its adjoining road shall
be located. Flag lots shall meet the standards found below and shall not
be required to meet lot frontage requirements for the individual zone.
To be considered a flag lot the lot shall have no other frontage except
for the end of the pole portion.
(b) Requirements for flag lots.
(1) Flag lots shall only be permitted in residential zones and only for
residential use.
(2) For a flag lot and one other lot to be created from a lot or a
consolidated lot or lots the area to be subdivided or resubdivided in
the R-9, R-8, R-7, R-6, R-5 and R-4 zones shall be three times the lot
area required for the zone.
(3) For a flag lot and one other lot to be created from a lot or a
consolidated lot or lots the area to be subdivided or resubdivided in
the R-3, R-2, R-1, R-B and R-A Zones shall be two and one-half times
the lot size required for the zone.
(4) An initial concept sketch shall be submitted with all flag lot
applications showing the width of the pole of the flag lot at no less
than 50 feet (40 feet in the R-9 zone). The flag portion of the lot
shall meet the lot area requirement for the zone excluding the pole
portion of the lot. Once this has been demonstrated the applicant
may seek approval for a plan submitted with the application
showing:
a. The width of the pole reduced to no less than 20 feet; and
b. The front lot conforming to all of the requirements for the zone.
(5) For all flag lots:
a. Driveways located within the pole shall be set back at least five
feet from any external property line. Shared driveways are
encouraged where appropriate.
35.Editor's Note: The Schedule of Regulations may be found at the end of Section 10B-246.
§ T10B-247 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-247.1
BAO:1170
§ T10B-248. Building and parking area setbacks. [Ord. No. 856,
§ 2.]
No building or parking area shall have any front, side or combined side, rear
or district boundary setback distance less than that shown on the schedule
of regulations as being required in the zoning district in which the building
or parking area is located.
§ T10B-249. Building height. [Ord. No. 856, § 2.]
No building shall have a height greater than that shown on the schedule of
regulations as being permitted in the zoning district in which the building is
located; except, that buildings used primarily as places of worship shall not
be subject to any height limitation.
§ T10B-250. Floor area ratio. [Ord. No. 856, § 2.]
No lot shall have a floor area ratio greater than that shown in the schedule
of regulations as being permitted in the zoning district in which the lot is
located.
§ T10B-251. Buildings height-setback ratio. [Ord. No. 2018-24 § 7]
All parts of every building shall lie below planes sloping inward and upward
from the lot lines with the vertical to horizontal ratio shown on the schedule
of regulations as applying to the zoning district in which the building is
located; except, that buildings used solely as places of worship shall not
be subject to this regulation nor shall this regulation apply to radio or
television antennas.
b. All setbacks for structures on a flag lot shall be a minimum of
30 feet except one-story accessory structures 100 square feet
or less and less than 14 feet in height may be within five feet of
the property line.
c. Driveways serving the flag lot must provide a twelve-foot wide
paved or stoned cartway with a minimum of a twenty-foot wide
stabilized area capable of supporting a twenty-ton fire truck.
d. The pole portion of a flag lot shall be excluded when
calculating FAR for the flag lot.
e. Flag lots must meet any residential bulk zoning standard not
modified above.
f. The distance between any dwelling and a hydrant shall not
exceed 400 feet when measured along the right-of-way.
(6) Minor subdivision applications to create a flag lot must provide
written notice via regular mail 14 days prior to the scheduled
hearing to all property owners within 200 feet of the subject
property.
§ T10B-247.1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-252
BAO:1171
§ T10B-252. Modification for special developments. [Ord. No. 856,
§ 2; Ord. No. 1020, § 6.]
§ T10B-252.1. Mean prevailing front setback. [Ord. No. 2016-42 § 4]
The mean prevailing front yard setback to be applied to a lot shall be
determined as follows:
§ T10B-252.2. Repealed by Ordinance No. 85-23, § 1.
(a) In the case of residential clusters, the provisions of the schedule of
regulations may be modified in accordance with the provisions of
section 10B-256 and article IX, division 9.
(b) In the case of special office-research developments, the provisions of
the schedule of regulations may be modified in accordance with section
10B-270.
(a) The front yard setback for the principal dwellings on each lot fronting
on the same side of the street within 500 feet in either direction of the
lot for which the prevailing front setback is to be measured and within
the same zoning district shall be determined. The measurement shall
not include the setback from the street for corner lots, where the front
yard of the corner lot is measured from a different street. In calculating
the mean prevailing setback, the largest and smallest setback shall not
be included in the calculation. Setbacks shall be measured to the
nearest part of the house excluding porches and stoops.
(b) If the mean prevailing front setback as calculated for a lot is more than
five feet or less than five feet of the required minimum setback, the
building setback shall be within two feet of the calculated mean
setback.
(c) If the mean prevailing setback as calculated for a lot is not more than
five feet greater or five feet less than the required setback, then the
developer shall comply with the minimum required setback.
(d) If utilization of the mean prevailing setback would limit the
construction of a dwelling to a size which is less than 80% of the
maximum building size permitted in the district, then the mean
prevailing setback shall be adjusted to a setback which permits the
construction of a dwelling which is 80% of the maximum building size
permitted in the district, for a lot with the minimum lot size but not less
than the minimum required front yard setback.
(e) If a street contains three or fewer dwellings then the property owner
shall have the option to match either front yard setback.
§ T10B-252 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-252.2
BAO:1172
SUBDIVISION 2.3
Use Regulations Generally
§ T10B-253. Uses permitted in all districts. [Ord. No. 856, § 2; Ord.
No. 92-37, § 7.]
The following uses are permitted in all districts:
§ T10B-254. Uses prohibited in all districts. [Ord. No. 2014-37; Ord.
No. 856, § 2; Ord. No. 94-2, § 1.]
All uses not expressly permitted in this article are prohibited, including, but
not by way of limitation, the following:
(a) All facilities owned or operated by the township.
(b) Signs conforming to the provisions of this article.
(c) Farming, on a lot or contiguous lots of three acres or more, except a
commercial poultry farm or piggery, provided that nonresidential
structures servicing the farm operation shall not contain gross floor
area exceeding 0.4% of the area being farmed. No such structure shall
have a gross floor area greater than 6,500 square feet unless approved
as a conditional use meeting the conditional use standards of this Code
and demonstrating that the proposed building and location would not
have a negative effect on the landscape. Structures exceeding the gross
floor area limitation set forth herein may be permitted as conditional
uses, provided that they are necessary for the farming operation, do not
disrupt or otherwise have a significant visual impact upon the
landscape, are not for a farm use which utilizes a significant number of
buildings or square footage, and does not have significant off-tract
vehicular or other impacts. Farming shall include the seasonal sale on
the farm of produce thereof; provided, that no use is made of a public
right-of-way for such sale, for display or for customer parking, that no
permanent signs are used and that all buildings used for such sale
conform to the provisions of this article.
(d) Uses allowed elsewhere in this article or conditional uses in the district
in question, but only in accordance with approval of such uses as
provided in division 4 of this article.
(a) Open air commercial amusements, except those in place for one week
or less, for which a permit has been issued by the township committee.
(b) Airports, heliports and helistops, except for the landing of helicopters in
emergency situations including medical emergencies or in drills in
preparation for emergency situations.
(c) Commercial chicken or duck farms and piggeries.
(d) Commercial dog kennels.
(e) Quarrying.
§ T10B-253 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-254
BAO:1173
§ T10B-254.1. Steep slopes development. [Ord. No. 954, § 2; Ord.
No. 1020, § 7; Ord. No. 2015-20]
No development or improvements shall be permitted on that portion of a lot
having slopes of 25% or higher for a single family residential development
or slopes of 15% or higher for any other type of land development permitted
pursuant to this chapter. Slope calculation shall be based on contour
intervals of 10 feet in accordance with standard engineering procedures.
The applicant may utilize the topographic and flood plain maps on file
with the Office of the Princeton Township Engineer or may prepare and
submit at the applicant's expense more detailed land surveys and slope
calculation data. The applicant shall be permitted to calculate the floor area
ratio (F.A.R.) on the gross area of the lot to include that portion of the lot
containing steep slopes as defined herein. A variance from the requirements
of this section may be granted pursuant to Section 10B-13(c) from the strict
application of the requirements set forth herein.
(f) Slaughter houses and all food processing plants.
(g) Trucking terminals.
(h) Manufacturing, other than the manufacture, assembly or treatment of
products in connection with permitted research or product
development in the OR district, or clearly incidental to and solely used
in the conduct of a permitted retail business on premises in business
districts, SC districts or S districts.
(i) Commercial camps, except camps for children which are owned or
operated by tax exempt or eleemosynary organizations and are on lots
of less than 10 acres.
(j) Trailer camps and courts and mobile homes and, except as expressly
permitted elsewhere in this article, the outdoor storage of house
trailers and travel trailers.
(k) Junk yards.
(l) The dumping of garbage, trash, waste or scrap material of any kind,
except clean fill by permit from the development enforcement officer or
the sufferance of such dumping upon any such property by the owner or
occupant thereof.
(m) Topsoil removal, except by permission of the township committee.
(n) Drilling for natural gas, using the drilling technique of hydraulic
fracturing and exploring for natural gas beyond the reconnaissance
phase.36
36.Editor's Note: The provisions of Ordinance No. 2014-37 shall apply to the entire
municipality of Princeton and the "Code of the Borough of Princeton, New Jersey 1974"
shall be deemed amended accordingly.
§ T10B-254 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-254.1
BAO:1174
SUBDIVISION 2.4
Residence Districts
§ T10B-255. Permitted uses. [Ord. No. 856, § 2; Ord. No. 983, § 4;
Ord. No. 1031, § 6; Ord. No. 96-18; Ord. No. 2017-8 § 2]
The following uses are permitted in districts R-A through R-H, in addition
to those permitted by Section 10B-253, provided, that there is no nuisance
factor:
(a) Single-family houses.
(b) It shall be considered a single-family use to provide supportive personal
and health services within a dwelling unit to persons residing in the
dwelling unit.
(c) Accessory uses on the same lot with, and customarily incidental to, the
foregoing permitted use.
(1) As used herein, a permitted accessory use shall include a home
occupation; provided, as follows:
a. Only one such occupation shall be carried on per dwelling unit.
b. Such occupation shall be carried on within the principal
building, and the floor area used for that purpose shall not
exceed the equivalent of 40% of the area of the ground floor or
400 square feet, whichever is less.
c. There shall be at least one additional parking space available
per home occupation, in addition to the required parking for
the district.
d. Such occupation shall be carried on by a resident, with no
regularly employed assistants or associates, except for
residents living on the premises.
e. Articles sold or offered for sale shall be limited to those
produced in the dwelling unit.
f. There shall be no exterior display, no exterior storage of
materials, no exterior sign, and no other exterior indication of
the home occupation or change in residential character of the
principal building.
g. There shall be created no dangerous, injurious, noxious or
otherwise objectionable fire, explosive or other hazard; noise
or vibration; smoke, dust, odor or other form of air pollution;
heat, cold or dampness, electromagnetic or other disturbance;
glare; liquid or solid refuse or other wastes; or other
objectionable substance, condition or element.
§ T10B-255 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-255
BAO:1175
§ T10B-255.1. Residential front porches. [Ord. No. 2016-42 § 2;
Ord. No. 2018-24 § 8]
§ T10B-255.2. Neighborhood Residential Zoning Standards. [Ord.
No. 2018-24 § 1]
Except as otherwise specifically noted in the provisions that follow, the
requirements set forth in this section shall apply to all lots developed or
to be developed with a residential use in the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6,
R-7, R-8, and R-9 zoning districts of the former Township and the R1, R2,
R3, and R4 zoning districts of the former Borough, and in the event of a
(2) As used herein, a permitted accessory use shall include the
installation of solar panels, provided that:
a. Said panels are affixed to an existing roof on an existing
dwelling.
b. Said panels are affixed within the existing footprint of the
existing roof.
c. Said panels do not increase the height of the existing roof by
more than six inches.
Solar panels complying with the requirements herein shall
be exempt from height requirements, setback to height ratio,
height to setback ratios, and required front, side and rear yard
setbacks.
(d) Recreational vehicles and trailers belonging to an occupant of premises
may be stored outdoors on such premises in districts R-A through R-H;
provided, that they shall be located or screened in such a manner that
they cannot be seen from the public right-of-way abutting the lot on
which the items are stored or from the adjoining property along or
below a sight line of six feet above ground level. Screening may be
accomplished by the placement of buildings or fences or by plantings
affording a solid, year-round screen.
(a) These regulations shall apply to all single family and two family homes,
except that in the R-1 through R-9 districts only, the provisions of
Section 10B-255.2 regarding porches and projections into front yards
shall govern.
(1) Porches:
a. Roofed front porches may encroach into the front setback a
maximum of eight feet provided the porch does not exceed 200
square feet and the majority of the structures within 500 feet
in either direction of the lot have roofed porches that encroach
on the front setback area. Porches which encroach into the
front setback may not have a second floor, balcony, deck or be
enclosed on all side.
§ T10B-255 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-255.2
BAO:1176
conflict between the provisions of this section and any other provision of
this Chapter, the provisions of this section shall prevail.
(a) House orientation & access.
(1) Applicability. The provisions of this subsection shall apply to lots 1/
2 acre (21,780 square feet) or less in lot area.
(2) Orientation.
a. The dwelling and front entrance shall be oriented to face
toward and relate to the street (and the public sidewalk, if
present).
(3) Private Walkways. (see Figs. 1 and 2).
a. (A) Private walkways shall be located on a property to facilitate
pedestrian access between the front entrance of the dwelling
(and the public sidewalk, if present), with the following
exceptions:
- Lots with no public sidewalk
- Lots with a front yard setback 75 feet or greater
- Lots with a motor-court garage
- Lots with a U-shaped driveway
b. Width of Walkway: Min. three feet (B).
c. Setback from Driveway (except for portions of the private
walkway providing access between driveway and front
entrance): min 1' (C)
Figure 1
§ T10B-255.2 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-255.2
BAO:1177
Figure 2
(b) Facade articulation - walls facing a street.
(1) Applicability. The provisions of this subsection shall apply to each
wall facing a street.
(2) Street Wall Articulation (see Figs. 3 through 6).
a. (A) The maximum length of any wall facing the street shall be
45 feet.
b. (B) Such wall may extend beyond 45 feet in length by stepping
inward or outward by a minimum offset distance of four feet.
c. (C) The minimum length of any wall facing the street shall be
eight feet.
(3) Street Wall Fenestration.
a. The maximum length of blank wall not containing windows,
doors, garage doors or other openings shall not exceed 15 feet
on each floor.
b. A minimum of 10% of the total area of any wall facing a street
shall consist of windows and doors, except for garage bay
doors.
§ T10B-255.2 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-255.2
BAO:1178
Figure 3
Figure 4.
Figure 5.
§ T10B-255.2 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-255.2
BAO:1179
Figure 6.
(c) Facade articulation - walls not facing a street.
(1) Applicability. Except for in the former Township R-9 zoning district
and the former Borough R4 zoning district, the provisions of this
subsection shall apply to any wall not facing a street or a rear lot
line.
(2) Side Wall Articulation (see Fig. 7).
a. (A) The maximum length of side wall facing the side lot line
shall be 40 feet.
b. (B) Such wall may extend beyond 40 feet in length by stepping
inward or outward by a minimum offset distance of two feet.
c. (C) The minimum length of side wall facing the side lot line
shall be eight feet.
(3) Side Wall Fenestration (see Fig. 8).
a. (D) The maximum length of blank wall not containing windows,
doors, garage doors or other openings, shall not exceed 10 feet
from the front facade and 25 feet elsewhere, as measured on
each floor.
b. (E) A minimum of 5% of the total area of any side wall shall
consist of windows and doors, except for garage bay doors.
§ T10B-255.2 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-255.2
BAO:1180
Figure 7
Figure 8
Note: For the purposes of this subsection, walls shall be
measured vertically from average finished grade to top of
wall and horizontally from edge of framing to edge of
framing. Fascia boards and areas behind a roof shall not be
included. Permitted openings shall be measured by the area
of their rough openings. The above illustration depicts 5%
openings.
(d) Front entry garages (see Figs. 9 through 12)
(1) Location and recess requirements.
a. (A) That portion of a one- or two-bay front entry garage facing
a street that is part of the principal structure shall be recessed
behind the nearest portion of the principal structure's facade
by a minimum distance of 16 feet. Front-entry garages with
more than two bays shall not be permitted.
b. (C) Up to four feet of a one-story roofed porch may count
towards the garage recess requirement, provided that such
porch has the following dimensions:
1. Depth: Min. 6'(D)
2. Width: Min. 12' (E)
§ T10B-255.2 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-255.2
BAO:1181
(2) Width.
a. (B) A one- or two-bay garage that is part of the principal
structure shall not be wider than 50% of the overall width of
the structure or 30 feet, whichever is less.
Figure 9
Figure 10
Figure 11
§ T10B-255.2 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-255.2
BAO:1182
Figure 12
(e) Side- or rear-entry garages (see Figs. 13 and 14).
(1) Location & Recess Requirements.
a. (A) The portion of a garage that is part of the principal
structure and facing the side or rear of the property shall be
recessed behind the nearest portion of the facade by a
minimum distance of eight feet.
(2) Width.
a. (B) A side- or rear-entry garage that is part of the principal
structure shall not be wider than 50% of the overall width of
the structure or 30 feet, whichever is less.
Figure 13
§ T10B-255.2 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-255.2
BAO:1183
Figure 14
(f) Garage on corner lots.
(1) Applicability. The following provisions shall apply to corner lots.
(2) Location & Recess Requirements (see Figs. 15 through 17).
a. (A) A garage shall be located on the side of the dwelling
farthest away from the street intersection.
b. (B) On lots 75 feet or less in width, the garage shall be
accessed by a driveway from the secondary street (not the
primary street), and that portion of the garage facing the street
that is part of the principal structure shall be recessed behind
the nearest portion of the facade of the principal structure by a
minimum distance of eight feet.
Figure 15
§ T10B-255.2 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-255.2
BAO:1184
Figure 16
Figure 17
(g) Garage on narrow lots.
(1) Applicability. The following provisions shall apply to all lots other
than corner lots that are 60 feet wide or less, but only in the R-7,
R-8 and R-9 zoning districts in the former Township, and the R3 and
R4 zoning districts in the former Borough.
(2) Design Provisions (see Figs. 18 and 19).
a. An attached garage, porte-cochere or carport may extend into
the side yard setback as follows:
1. (A) The structure may extend no greater than five feet into
the setback.
2. (B) The structure shall be no closer than five feet from a
property line.
3. (C) The structure shall not be greater than 30 feet in
length within the portion of the structure that extends into
the setback.
4. (D) The structure shall be no greater than one story and a
maximum of 15 feet in height to the peak of the roof,
§ T10B-255.2 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-255.2
BAO:1185
within the portion of the structure that extends into the
setback.
b. (E) Habitable space may be located above the garage, provided
the habitable space is located within the permissible building
envelope and does not extend into the setback.
(3) Screening.
a. Porte-cocheres and carports that extend into the setback shall
be screened from view from the side property line with
evergreen landscaping at least six feet in height along the
entire side of the structure.
Figure 18
Figure 19
(h) Motorcourt garages on large lots.
(1) Applicability. The following provisions shall apply to lots 125 feet or
greater in width, except corner lots.
(2) Design Provisions (see Fig. 20).
a. (A) A motor-court garage may be located in front of the
foremost portion of the dwelling.
§ T10B-255.2 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-255.2
BAO:1186
b. (B) The garage shall be oriented toward the interior of the lot,
and not the street or the side of the property.
c. (C) The garage shall be limited to parking for three vehicles.
d. (D) The garage shall be no higher than one story and a
maximum of 25 feet as measured to the peak of the roof, or the
height of the principal structure, whichever is less.
e. The garage shall not contain habitable space above.
f. (E) The bottom of the roof eave shall be no greater than 12 feet
above average finished grade, as measured along the foremost
portion of the garage facing the street.
Figure 20
(i) Driveway location and design (see Figs. 21 through 23).
(1) Access.
a. Every lot shall have a maximum of one driveway opening
providing access to a street.
b. Where there is a common or shared driveway between two
properties, neither property shall be allowed another driveway
opening.
(2) Setbacks.
a. (A) From intersecting lot lines at street corners: Min. 40 feet.
b. (B) From side lot lines on lots greater than 50 feet in lot width:
Min. five feet.
c. (B) From side lot lines on lots 50 feet or less in lot width: Min.
three feet.
d. (B) From side lot lines with shared driveway with adjoining
lots: None.
§ T10B-255.2 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-255.2
BAO:1187
(3) Width.
a. (C) Min. eight feet, clear of any obstructions to a height of
eight feet.
b. (C) At face of curb: Max. 14 feet.
c. (C) At property line: Max. 10 feet.
d. (D) Within front yard (for first 75 feet only (E)): Max. 22 feet.
(4) Parking Setbacks.
a. The minimum front parking setback shall be equal to the front
yard setback of the dwelling or 25 feet, whichever is less.
b. Parking of vehicles shall be located on a driveway or in a
garage.
Figure 21
Figure 22
§ T10B-255.2 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-255.2
BAO:1188
Figure 23
(j) U-shaped driveway location and design (see Fig. 24).
(1) Applicability. The following additional provisions shall apply to lots
100 feet or greater in width at the street line.
(2) Access.
a. (C) One additional driveway opening shall be permitted for the
purposes of creating a connected or U-shaped driveway in the
front yard.
(3) Setbacks.
a. (A) Between driveway openings on subject lot: Min. 50 feet.
b. (B) From side lines: Min. five feet.
Figure 24
(k) Narrow and non-conforming lot conditions.
(1) Non-conforming lots.
a. Any existing permitted single-family dwelling on a lot that is
non-conforming as to area, frontage, width or depth may be
§ T10B-255.2 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-255.2
BAO:1189
altered or enlarged, provided that all other bulk requirements
of this Chapter are complied with.
(2) Non-conforming yard setbacks.
a. The provisions of this subsection (2) shall apply only to lots
located in the Township R-9 district or the Borough R4 district,
or lots that are no greater than 6,000 square feet in area or 60
feet in width.
b. For those lots defined in subsection (2)a above, a permitted
single-family dwelling with non-conforming yard setbacks may
be altered or enlarged, provided that such alteration or
enlargement does not affect, extend or increase the nonconformity,
except as follows:
1. The alteration or enlargement involves the extension of an
existing exterior side wall with a non-conforming side yard
setback that is a minimum of 50% of the individual side
yard setback requirement for the district in which it is
located. In no case shall an individual side yard setback be
permitted to be less than three feet from a side or rear
property line.
2. The alteration or enlargement involves the extension of an
existing exterior side wall with a non-conforming side yard
setback that is a minimum of 75% of the combined side
yard setback requirement for the district in which it is
located.
3. The alteration or enlargement within the setback area
shall be limited to 15 feet in length and one story in height.
This provision shall not apply to two-story additions or
additions involving the third floor.
4. All other bulk requirements of this Chapter are complied
with.
(3) Non-Conforming Height-to-Setback Ratio Planes.
a. A permitted single-family dwelling with non-conforming
height-to-setback ratio may be altered or enlarged, provided
that such does not affect, extend or increases any nonconforming
height-to-setback ratio, except in the case of the
reconstruction, alteration or enlargement of dormers that
project into the required height-to-setback ratio plane, subject
to the provisions of subsection (1) "Supplementary provisions"
below.
(4) Adjusted Height-to-Setback Ratio for Narrow Lots.
a. On lots 45 feet or less in width, the height-to-setback ratio shall
be 4.5:1.
§ T10B-255.2 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-255.2
BAO:1190
(5) Proportional FAR - alteration and enlargement of structures;
nonconforming lots. See section 17A-373(b) of the "Code of the
Borough of Princeton, New Jersey, 1974" and section 10B-330 of
the "Code of the Township of Princeton, New Jersey, 1968."
(6) Non-Conforming Height.
a. Any permitted single-family or two-family dwelling in existence
prior to December 1, 2018 that is non-conforming as to height
may be altered or enlarged, provided that such alteration or
enlargement does not affect or increase the nonconformity.
(l) Supplementary provisions.
(1) First Floor Finished Floor Elevation.
a. On lots 1/2 acre or less in size, the finished floor elevation
(F.F.E.) of the first floor shall not be raised more than 48 inches
above the average finished grade, as measured along the front
wall closest to the street.
(2) Permitted Projections.
a. Cornices, eaves, chimneys, gutters, downspouts, awnings,
canopies, cantilevered roofs, uncovered balconies and bay
windows may project not more than three feet into any yard
setback and height-to-setback ratio plane.
b. Belt courses, window sills and other similar ornamental
features may project not more than nine inches into any yard
setback.
c. Window wells may project not more than three feet into any
yard setback.
d. Fire escapes may project not more than six feet into a side or
rear yard setback.
e. Non-enclosed one-story porches, porticos, stoops and entrance
platforms leading to the front entrance may project not more
than eight feet into a front yard setback. Such porch, stoop and
entrance platform may have an uncovered balcony directly
above provided it has the same footprint as, and is attached to,
the structure below.
f. Non-enclosed one-story porches, porticos, stoops, entrance
platforms, uncovered decks, and basement entrances may
project not more than four feet into a side or rear yard setback.
g. In no case shall a permitted projection be less than three feet
from a side or rear property line.
§ T10B-255.2 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-255.2
BAO:1191
h. Steps leading to a porch or stoop may project into a yard
setback without limitation, provided that the steps do not
encroach upon the public right-of-way.
(3) Dormers Projecting into Height-to-Setback Ratio Planes (see Fig.
25).
a. Dormers may project into the height-to-setback ratio plane as
follow:
1. (A) The front wall of any dormer shall not project beyond
the wall of the story directly below.
2. (B) In no case shall any dormer project above the ridgeline
of the roof in which the dormer is built.
3. The cumulative width of the front wall(s) of the dormer(s)
shall not exceed 50% of the width of the roof containing
such dormer(s).
4. The side walls of any dormer shall not be closer than 18
inches to the projected plane of the wall below.
Figure 25
(4) A/C Condenser Units, Generators, Transformers, and Above-
Ground Fuel Tanks.
a. A/C condenser units, generators, transformers, above-ground
fuel tanks and other similar devices shall be subject to the
following provisions:
1. No such device shall be located in a front yard. On corner
lots and through lots, such device may be located on the
side of the property fronting on a secondary street
provided it is set back a minimum distance of 10 feet from
the property line along the secondary street.
2. Such devices shall be set back a minimum distance of
three feet from the side and rear lot lines, except
§ T10B-255.2 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-255.2
BAO:1192
§ T10B-256. Residential clusters. [Ord. No. 856, § 2; Ord. No. 983,
§ 5; Ord. No. 996, § 1; Ord. No. 1020, § 8; Ord. No. 82-17, § 7; Ord.
No. 84-31, § 4; Ord. No. 2002-23, § 1.]
Residential clusters are permitted in the following districts: R-A, R-B, R-1,
R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-H (subject to the provisions of section 10B-252.2), E-2,
E-3, OR-1 and OR-2. The standards governing residential clusters are set
forth in Article IX, Division 9
(Sections 10B-189 et seq.), except as modified in Article XII (Sections
10B-332, et seq.).
§ T10B-256.1. Special provisions relating to the R-A and R-B
districts. [Ord. No. 83-32, § 4; Ord. No. 2010-11, § 1.]
generators, which shall be set back a minimum distance of
five feet from the side and rear lot lines.
(a) (1) The township engineer shall retain in his files, available for public
inspection, the following records and documents relied upon by the
township in determining and distinguishing the current R-A and RB
zoning districts:
a. The Rules of Combination of Environmental Factors for
Determining and Distinguishing the R-A and R-B Zoning
Districts, prepared by Wallace, Roberts & Todd.
b. Township topographic maps of the R-A and R-B zoning districts
with five foot contours scaled at one inch equals 200 feet,
dated 1962.
c. Interpretive physiographic map, scaled at one inch equals 200
feet, defining and delineating plateaus and slopes in R-A and RB
districts, prepared by township engineer.
d. Vegetation cover types map, prepared by Wallace, Roberts &
Todd.
e. Composite prepared by Wallace, Roberts & Todd, showing R-A
and R-B districts, of aerial photographs obtained from
Delaware Valley Regional Planning Commission, scaled at one
inch equals 800 feet, dated 1980.
f. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service,
January, 1972, Soils Survey of Mercer County, N.J.
g. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service,
Engineering, Division, January, 1975, Urban Hydrology for
Small Watersheds, Technical Release No. 55.
h. Guide to the Classification and Mapping of Soils, Soil
Conservation Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture.
§ T10B-255.2 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-256.1
BAO:1193
(2) An owner of a tract located in the R-A district may request a
rezoning of that tract to the R-B district where it appears through
evidence developed by him or on his behalf by a reputable soils
scientist consistent with the standards and procedures of the
documents and agencies identified in paragraph (a)(1) that the
tract, through error in mapping and/or designation of soil type, has
been improperly placed on the R-A district and that a rezoning of
the tract to R-B will meet the topographic, soil and vegetative
criteria and conditions requisite for R-B zoning.
(3) A request for rezoning of a tract from R-A to R-B shall be directed to
the township committee and shall be accompanied by such
evidence as the owner has developed pursuant to paragraph (a)(2).
In those cases where the request is based upon erroneous soil
designation or erroneous mapping of soil, the owner shall before
presentation of the request obtain from the U.S. Department of
Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, written confirmation of the
existence of the alleged error and approval for the correction
sought. In all cases, the request and all supporting evidence and
information shall be referred to the township engineer, who shall
review same and the documents described in paragraphs (a)(1)
and, based upon that review and an inspection of the tract if
warranted, shall make a recommendation to the township
committee as to whether or not the requested rezoning is
appropriate.
(4) No request for rezoning from R-A to R-B shall be entertained
where, in advance of such request, an owner of a tract has engaged
in the modification of the topography or soil conditions of that tract,
which modification of the topography or soil conditions of that
tract, which modification would aid in the obtaining of the
requested rezoning.
(b) (1) Any tract of land lying partially within the R-A district and partially
within the R-B district may be subdivided into lots which are also
partially within the R-A and partially within the R-B district,
provided that:
a. Any such lot not complying with the bulk requirements for the
R-A district must comply with the bulk requirements for the RB
district and be more than 50% within the R-B district; and
b. The owner may not plat a number of lots not complying with
the bulk requirements for the R-A district greater than the
number arrived at by dividing the R-B acreage of the tract by
three.
(2) If a tract of land lying partially within the R-A and partially within
the R-B district cannot be subdivided, the zoning regulations of the
zoning district in which more than 50% of the tract is situate shall
govern.
§ T10B-256.1 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-256.1
BAO:1194
§ T10B-256.2. AH-3 Affordable Housing 3 Residential District. [Ord.
No. 2019-10]
(3) Where a tract of land lies partially within the R-A district and
partially within either the R-1 or R-2 district, if said tract is
subdivided, any new lots to be created thereby which comply with
the bulk requirements for the R-A district may include land from
the R-1 and R-2 district; however, any lots to be created thereby
which do not comply with the bulk requirements for the R-A district
may not include land from the R-A district.
(c) Nursing homes and assisted living residences are prohibited in the R-A
or R-B zoning districts.
(a) Purpose. The purpose of the AH-3 Affordable Housing 3 Residential
District is to create a realistic opportunity for the construction of lowand
moderate-income housing in the Municipality of Princeton and
thereby address the municipality's fair share housing obligation
pursuant to the New Jersey Fair Housing Act. The AH-3 District shall be
additionally regulated by the Municipality of Princeton Affordable
Housing Ordinance, applicable state regulations and all Orders of any
Court of competent jurisdiction.
(b) Permitted uses. The principal permitted uses in the AH-3 Residential
District are as follows:
(1) Multi-family affordable housing rental development; family units.
All dwellings constructed in this District shall be credit-worthy
pursuant to the applicable regulations of the New Jersey Council on
Affordable Housing or any successor agency, and shall be deed
restricted affordable housing units with rents established and
restricted in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq., with the
exception of one unit that may be occupied by an on-site manager/
building superintendent and is not required to be a deed restricted
affordable unit.
(2) No market-rate housing shall be constructed in this District, nor
shall any dwelling in this District be occupied except by an income
qualified household as regulated by the Council on Affordable
Housing, or any successor agency and affirmatively marketed
throughout the Princeton housing region, and income certified
consistent with the requirements contained in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et
seq., except as noted in (b)(1) above.
(c) Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses shall include
accessory uses that are customary and incidental to the permitted uses
in the AH-3 Residential District, including but not limited to:
(1) Off-street parking in accordance with Chapter 10B, Article XI
Zoning, Subdivision 3.5, Off-street Parking and Loading.
(2) Decks, balconies and porches.
§ T10B-256.1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-256.2
BAO:1195
(3) Fences and walls, in accordance with the Princeton Fence
Ordinance, Chapter 10B, Article XI Zoning, Subdivision 3.13,
Fences and Garden Walls.
(4) Customary and incidental recreational elements, such as but not
limited to, a swimming pool, tennis courts and other similar uses
that serve the residents and guests of the development and as
regulated by Chapter 10B, including but not necessarily limited to
Chapter 10B, Article XI Zoning, Subdivision 3.11, Sec. 10B-288,
Screening, and Sec. 10B-290, Lighting.
(5) Trash enclosures.
(6) Signs, in accordance with the Princeton Sign Ordinance, Chapter
10B, Article XI Zoning, Subdivision 3.6, Signs. AH-3 Affordable
Housing 3 Residential District shall be bound by the same
restrictions as applicable to "R" zones.
(7) Outdoor lighting, in accordance with the Chapter 10B, Article XI
Zoning, Subdivision 3.5, Off-street Parking and Loading and all
other applicable provisions of Chapter 10B including without
limitation, Chapter 10B, Article XI Zoning, Subdivision 3.12,
Performance Standards 10B-317.1.
(8) Active recreation uses.
(d) Affordable Housing.
(1) Multifamily residential developments constructed in the AH-3
Affordable Housing 3 Residential District shall be permitted with a
maximum of 65 affordable family dwelling units, as this term is
defined in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq., in a 100% affordable housing
development.
(2) All affordable units shall comply with Princeton's Affordable
Housing Ordinance as set forth in Chapter 10B, Article XII
Affordable Housing of the Princeton Code, as may be amended and
supplemented, the Uniform Housing Affordability Controls
("UHAC") 5:80-26.1 et seq.), or any successor regulation, and the
Princeton Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, as may be
amended from time to time. This includes, but is not limited to the
following requirements:
a. Low/Moderate Income Split: A maximum of 50% of the
affordable units shall be moderate-income units, and a
minimum of 50% of the affordable units shall be low-income
units. At least 13% of all restricted rental units shall be very
low-income units, which shall be counted as part of the
required number of low-income units within the development.
b. Bedroom Mix: The following bedroom mix shall apply:
§ T10B-256.2 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-256.2
BAO:1196
1. The combined number of efficiency and one-bedroom units
shall be no greater than 20% of the total low- and
moderate-income units;
2. Minimally 30% of all low- and moderate-income units shall
be two-bedroom units;
3. Minimally 20% of all low- and moderate-income units shall
be three- bedroom units; and,
4. The remaining units may be allocated among two-and
three-bedroom units at the discretion of the developer.
c. Deed Restriction Period: The affordability control period for
restricted rental units shall commence on the first date that a
certified household occupies a unit and shall terminate only at
such time that the Municipality opts to release the unit from
the requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq, but the
affordability control period shall be at least 30 years. A
restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the affordability
controls despite the occurrence of any of the following events:
1. A sale or other voluntary transfer of the ownership of the
unit; or
2. The entry and enforcement of any judgement of
foreclosure.
d. Administrative Agent: All affordable units shall be
administered by a qualified Administrative Agent selected by
the Municipality and paid for by the developer.
e. Other Affordable Housing Unit Requirements: Developers shall
also comply with all the remaining requirements of the
Princeton Affordable Housing Ordinance, including, but not
limited to, (1) affirmative marketing requirements, which shall
include a preference for residents in COAH region IV, and (2)
candidate qualification and screening requirements pursuant
to the Council on Affordable Housing and N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et
seq.
(e) Area and Bulk Requirements. The area and bulk requirements for the
AH-3 Residential District are set forth in § 19B-246.
(1) Development Standards.
a. Building Requirements.
1. Building Design. In order to encourage an attractive and
aesthetically pleasing design, and to avoid a monotonous
repetition of design elements and an undesirable visual
impact, the following design standards shall be utilized:
§ T10B-256.2 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-256.2
BAO:1197
[a] Consistency among building materials and colors with
Princeton's existing residential, historical and
architectural characteristics.
[b] Harmonious relationship with other onsite features
and improvements.
[c] Varying architectural embellishments including such
features as roof elements, dormers, belvederes,
decorative chimneys, parapets brackets and similar
elements, provided that such are architecturally
compatible with the style, materials, colors and details
of the building;
[d] Emphasis on architectural features at entrances,
utilizing where appropriate, cornices, windows and
articulation, provided that such are architecturally
compatible with the style, materials, colors and details
of the building.
[e] Exterior-mounted mechanical and electrical
equipment exposed to the public view shall be
architecturally screened. Roof-mounted equipment
and projections should be painted the same color as
the roof and, where possible, located to the center of
the building, away from public view.
[f] Building construction shall utilize green building or
sustainable building methods to reduce the operating
and maintenance cost burdens of low- and moderateincome
households.
[g] The outside walls of a building shall be of fire resistant
material, such as brick, stone or masonry, as approved
by the Planning Board.
[h] At least one electronic vehicle (EV) charging station.
b. Dwelling Unit Requirements.
1. Minimum floor area. Each dwelling unit shall have a
minimum floor area of 600 square feet.
2. Floors and ceilings and partitions between dwelling units
shall be constructed so as to have a minimum airborne
sound transmission loss classification of 50 decibels. The
Planning Board shall ascertain that reasonable measures
are taken in floor and ceiling construction to avoid
disturbing levels of sound impact.
(2) Off-street parking.
§ T10B-256.2 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-256.2
BAO:1198
a. The minimum number of off-street parking spaces for
multifamily residential housing shall be 1.1 parking spaces per
dwelling unit. All parking areas and pedestrian walkways
between parking facilities and residential buildings shall be
appropriately landscaped, screened and lighted consistent
with adopted standards contained in § 10B-288, § 10B-289 and
§ 19B-290.
b. All parking areas shall be designed in accordance with the
applicable provisions of Article XI Zoning, Subdivision 3.5, Offstreet
Parking and Loading.
c. Adequate fire and emergency access must be provided, subject
to the approval of the Princeton Fire Department.
d. On-site parking shall not be provided for any use or to any
party other than a resident or visitor of the site, nor shall
parking areas be used for any purpose other than parking.
e. Adequate parking facilities for accessibility to people with
mobility impairments shall be provided as required by the
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).
(3) Landscaping and open space.
a. At least 20% of the gross site area shall be devoted to open
space for passive or active recreation, or conservation.
b. There shall be a comprehensive landscape plan prepared by a
New Jersey licensed landscape architect which shall detail the
location, type, size and any planting note for the proposed
landscape materials. This plan shall be subject to the approval
of the Planning Board.
c. A landscape buffer shall be provided where a multifamily
development abuts an adjoining residential use. The buffer
shall be a minimum of 25 feet in width, as measured from the
property line. The buffer shall provide a year-round visual
screen, to the extent practical, and minimize adverse impacts
from the site on adjacent properties. Buffers shall consist of
natural vegetation to the greatest extent practical, and may
consist of fences, planting, berms, mounds, or combinations
thereof to achieve the stated buffer objective.
d. No use or structure, including parking or loading areas, shall
be permitted within the required buffer area, but the Planning
Board may, upon a finding of reasons thereof, permit a portion
of a buffer area to be used for walkways, underground linear
utilities and site access drives, and the Board may also permit a
portion of a buffer area to be used for stormwater detention or
retention basins, provided that the basin is designed as a
landscaping feature, and further provided that the landscaping
§ T10B-256.2 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-256.2
BAO:1199
plan for the buffer area is determined by the Planning Board to
meet the objective of the buffer area.
(4) Recreation Area. A recreation amenity of minimally 1,500 square
feet shall be provided to serve the needs of the residents. This
recreation area shall consist of an active outdoor play space for
children with appropriate playground equipment.
(5) Lighting.
a. Adequate lighting shall be provided for all common areas and
pedestrian walkways.
b. All outdoor lighting, including street lamps and accent lighting,
should comply with "dark sky" standards intended to reduce
light pollution. Dark sky standards require that lighting is
downcast, illuminates only the intended areas, and does not
cause disabling glare that affects driver safety and reduces the
visibility of starry night skies.
c. Lighting for the development must be contained on the
property on which the development is located.
d. LED lighting shall be permitted in addition to all of the
conditions of the land use ordinance standards for lighting.
(6) Miscellaneous.
a. Through-wall air-conditioning units that project beyond the
building wall are not permitted.
b. All trash and garbage shall be stored at all times in airtight
covered containers which shall be kept in a centrally located,
concealed area. If trash and rubbish is stored outside, it shall
be kept in a permanent enclosure matching building design
and color with a latching gate in a centrally located, concealed
area buffered with landscaping as approved by the Planning
Board.
c. Amenities restricted to the use of the residents and their
guests are permitted subject to all applicable local and state
requirements.
d. Swimming pools, restricted to the use of tenants, are permitted
subject to all applicable local and state requirements.
e. Internal walkways shall be provided to provide a pedestrian
connection to any site development amenities, such as a
clubhouse, recreational facilities, pools, parking spaces etc.
f. Internal walkways shall be a minimum of four feet wide and
shall be designed to comply with the requirements of the
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).
§ T10B-256.2 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-256.2
BAO:1200
g. Fences shall be permitted at a maximum height of six feet and
shall be situated and designed in accordance with Chapter
10B, Article XI Zoning, Subdivision 3.13, Fences and Garden
Walls.
§ T10B-256.2 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-256.2
BAO:1201

SUBDIVISION 2.5
Professional Office-Residence Districts
§ T10B-257. Permitted Uses. [Ord. No. 856, § 2; Ord. No. 86-2, § 1;
Ord. No. 95-33, § 1.]
(a) Offices of professionals, limited to accountants, attorneys, medical
doctors, dentists and optometrists, professional planners,
environmental consultants, authors, architects, licensed professional
engineers, psychologists, chiropractors, speech-language pathologists,
and podiatrists; provided that there shall be no external evidence of
such use other than professional nameplates, that such use shall not
occupy more than one floor of a building, the remainder of which shall
be devoted to residential use complying with paragraph (b) or
paragraph (c) and that the professional office portion and the
residential portion shall have separate, independent entrances.
(b) Single-family houses.
(c) Accessory uses on the same lot with, and customarily incidental to, any
of the foregoing permitted uses.
§ T10B-257 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-257
BAO:1203

SUBDIVISION 2.6
Business Districts
§ T10B-258. Permitted Uses. [Ord. No. 856, § 2; Ord. No. 92-11,
§ 1.]
The following uses are permitted in B-1 and B-2 districts or, if so indicated,
in one of those districts, in addition to those permitted by Section 10B-253;
§ T10B-259. Prohibited uses — Generally. [Ord. No. 856, § 2.]
The following uses are prohibited in B-1 and B-2 districts in addition to
those prohibited by section 10B-254, but not by way of limitation:
(a) Retail sales uses not characterized either by heavy trucking or by any
nuisance factors.
(b) Retail stores and shops.
(c) Banks.
(d) Business and professional offices.
(e) Establishments providing services directly to the person (e.g. barber
shop) or to tangible personal property (e.g. shoe repair) of patrons,
except as prohibited by Sections 10B-254, 10B-259, and 10B-260.
(f) Restaurants, provided that table service is provided for all patrons and
that any sale of food intended for consumption off the premises is
incidental to the provision of table service.
(g) Single-family houses; permitted in B-1 district only.
(h) Accessory uses on the same lot with, and customarily incidental to, any
of the foregoing permitted uses.
(a) Hotels and motels.
(b) Automobile, truck or bus sales, service or repairs, storage of trucks or
buses.
(c) Storage warehouses, building material storage yards and lumber or
coal yards.
(d) Industrial, mining or extractive uses of all descriptions.
(e) Drive-in restaurants.
(f) Residential use located in the same structure with nonresidential use,
but this prohibition shall not apply in the B-1 district if the
nonresidential use does not occupy space above the ground floor, the
residential portion has an entrance separate from and independent of
the nonresidential portion and the residential use complies with
subsection 10B-260(g).
§ T10B-258 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-259
BAO:1205
§ T10B-260. Same — District B-2 only. [Ord. No. 856, § 2.]
The following uses are prohibited in B-2 districts in addition to those
prohibited by sections 10B-254 and 10B-259, but not by way of limitation:
(g) Keeping of animals of any kind, except for household pets in connection
with a permitted residential use or in connection with a pet shop.
(a) Theaters.
(b) Restaurants and drive-in restaurants.
(c) Taverns and stores selling alcoholic beverages.
(d) Newspaper offices and printing presses.
(e) Commercial garages and gasoline service stations.
§ T10B-259 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-260
BAO:1206
SUBDIVISION 2.7
Shopping Center Districts
§ T10B-261. Permitted uses. [Ord. No. 856, § 2; Ord. No. 82-20, § 1;
Ord. No. 84-27, § 1.]
The following uses are permitted in SC districts in addition to those
permitted by section 10B-253:
§ T10B-262. Prohibited uses. [Ord. No. 856, § 2.]
The following uses are prohibited in SC districts in addition to those
prohibited by section 10B-254, but not by way of limitation.
(a) Shopping areas of integrated design and development for uses such as
retail shops, personal service establishments, professional and business
offices, banks, post offices, restaurants, outdoor dining in conjunction
with said restaurants provided that tables do not interfere with
pedestrian walkways and the outdoor dining facilities obtain site plan
approval, theaters and auditoriums; provided, that such uses are
housed in enclosed buildings, except for the outdoor dining facilities,
are served by such common facilities as customer parking, pedestrian
walks, loading and unloading space, utility and sanitary facilities and
are connected with covered pedestrian walkways affording sheltered
pedestrian passage between them.
(b) Motor banking installations, designed so that the customer may remain
within his vehicle; provided that any such motor banking structure or
installation contains only uses permitted in SC districts and that any
such structure or installation shall have no direct public street access
and shall be accessible only from the interior drives of the shopping
center; provided further, that such structures or installations shall be
situated so as not to block or obstruct or cause traffic congestion on the
principal interior drives of the shopping center and said installations
shall have no new street access other than the accessways currently
serving the shopping center from Harrison Street north.
(c) No more than one motor banking installation shall be permitted in the
SC district.
(a) All forms of residential use.
(b) Commercial garages and gasoline service stations.
(c) The sale, service or delivery of alcoholic beverages for on-premises
consumption, except in bona fide restaurants in connection with bona
fide meals and only in the public rooms thereof. For this purpose,
"restaurant" means an establishment regularly and principally used for
the purpose of providing meals to the public, having adequate kitchen
and dining room equipment for preparing, cooking and serving food,
and in which no other business, except such as is incidental to such
establishment, is conducted.
§ T10B-261 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-262
BAO:1207
(d) Hotels and motels.
(e) Machine shops with more than three employees.
(f) Motor vehicle body repair shops.
(g) Storage warehouses, building material storage yards and lumber or
coal yards.
(h) Laundries and dyeing and cleaning works employing more than three
persons, but this shall not be construed to prohibit self-service,
automatic laundries commonly known as laundromats or to prohibit
outlets for pick-up and delivery of laundry or dry-cleaning.
§ T10B-262 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-262
BAO:1208
SUBDIVISION 2.8
Educational Districts
§ T10B-263. Permitted uses in the E-1 district. [Ord. No. 856, § 2;
Ord. No. 82-17, § 4.]
The following uses are permitted in the E-1 district:
§ T10B-263.1. Permitted uses in the E-2 district. [Ord. No. 856, § 2;
Ord. No. 82-17, § 5.]
The following uses are permitted in the E-2 district:
(a) The educational activities of any institution of higher learning that is
organized and operated not for pecuniary profit and any activities
customarily incidental thereto; provided, that there is no nuisance
factor other than as occasioned by the incidental light and the noise of
the congregation of people, of passenger traffic and of the delivery of
goods.
(b) Residences exclusively for the faculty, students and staff of any such
institution, including their families, in multifamily houses and
apartments and residences exclusively for students and assigned
supervisory staff, including the families of assigned supervisory staff
and in dormitories.
(c) Single-family houses.
(d) Accessory uses on the same lot with, and customarily incidental to, any
of the foregoing permitted uses.
(a) The educational activities of any institution of higher learning that is
organized and operated not for pecuniary profit and any activities
customarily incidental thereto; provided, that there is no nuisance
factor other than as occasioned by the incidental light and the noise of
the congregation of people, of passenger traffic and of the delivery of
goods.
(b) Residences exclusively for the faculty, students and staff of any such
institution, including their families, in multifamily houses and
apartments and residences exclusively for students and assigned
supervisory staff, including the families of assigned supervisory staff in
dormitories.
(c) Single family houses exclusively for the faculty and staff, including their
families, of any such institution.
(d) Accessory uses on the same lot with, and customarily incidental to, any
of the foregoing permitted uses.
§ T10B-263 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-263.2
BAO:1209
§ T10B-263.2. Permitted uses in the E-4 district.37 [Ord. No. 90-12,
§ 4; Ord. No. 92-37, § 8.]
The following are permitted uses in the E-4 district:
§ T10B-263.3. Uses permitted in the Arts, Education and Transit
(AET) district. [Ord. No. 2011-16, § 2.]
The following uses are permitted in the AET district:
(a) The educational activities of any private elementary and secondary
school that is organized and operated not for pecuniary profit and any
activities customarily incidental thereto.
(b) Single-family structures, two-family structures and townhouse
structures as defined in section 10B-191(b) and (d), respectively,
multifamily structures, and dormitories, provided that:
(1) The aforesaid structures are used exclusively for the students of
the school located in the zoning district and for the faculty and staff
of any such institution and of the Princeton Regional Schools and of
any private elementary and secondary school located within the
township and borough of Princeton, including their families.
(2) The dwelling units, excluding dormitories, shall be restricted by
deed or lease so that occupancy is limited to such persons and their
families, except for short term leases of one year or less.
(3) Such dwelling units shall have a net floor area no greater than
2,800 square feet.
(c) Accessory uses on the same lot with, and customarily incidental to, any
of the foregoing permitted uses.
(a) Educational uses. The educational activities of any institution of higher
learning that is organized and operated not for pecuniary profit and any
activities customarily incidental thereto; provided, that there is no
nuisance factor other than as occasioned by the incidental light and the
noise of the congregation of people, of passenger traffic and of the
delivery of goods, such uses including but not limited to:
(1) Instructional, reference, and classroom uses, excluding laboratory
buildings and uses but including computer facilities.
(2) Office uses.
(3) Library uses.
(4) Theatres, performance halls, lecture halls, practice rooms,
exhibition space and other areas of public assembly.
37.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 92-37, § 7, deleted former section 10B-263.2, Permitted uses
in the E-3 district, which contained portions of Ordinance No. 82-17.
§ T10B-263.2 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-263.3
BAO:1210
(5) Retail stores and uses devoted primarily to the sale of educational
or athletic supplies.
(6) Residences exclusively for the faculty, students, staff and any other
individuals involved in the operation or activities of any such
institution, including their families, in multifamily houses and
apartments and residences exclusively for students and assigned
supervisory staff, including the families of assigned supervisory
staff and in dormitories not to exceed 10,000 square feet in size.
(b) Transit uses.
(1) Rail, light rail, street car, bus, jitney lines, taxis and taxi stands,
innovative and/or alternative modes of transportation, facilities and
stations, buildings and service infrastructure, and public utility
buildings, and rights-of-way. Buildings used as rail stations shall be
opened to the public and be lighted, air conditioned and heated and
shall provide public restrooms during the time when the rail system
is in operation. Such rail stations shall have electronic signage and
audio announcements together with prominently posted schedules.
(2) Bicycle storage, sales, rentals and repairs.
(3) Parking garages, off-street surface parking spaces, and below
grade parking spaces associated with transit uses.
(4) Railroad sidings and other necessary railroad uses.
(c) Retail and other nonresidential uses.
(1) Museums, galleries and studios.
(2) Retail stores, restaurants, cafes, pubs, convenience stores, and
uses devoted to or generally complementary to the uses permitted
in AET district.
(3) Parking garages, provided that they are wrapped on the street side
with retail space, off-street, surface parking spaces, and below
grade parking spaces associated with the retail and other
nonresidential uses permitted in this subsection.
(4) Public utility structures and uses.
(5) Child care facilities.
(6) Parks, playgrounds and public buildings.
(7) All uses in structures in existence at the time this ordinance
becomes effective.
(d) Accessory uses on the same or, in the case of a multi-lot development,
adjoining lots with, and customarily incidental to, restaurants, cafes or
pubs within the AET district, including outdoor restaurant seating and
service, food vending facilities and/or food service carts.
§ T10B-263.3 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-263.4
BAO:1211
§ T10B-263.4. Bulk regulations for the AET zoning district. [Ord.
No. 2011-16, § 2.]
The bulk regulations contained in this section apply to all buildings and land
in AET districts, as follows:
(a) The following bulk regulations shall apply to all multifamily residential
buildings, educational and other nonresidential buildings on lots of less
than one acre in AET districts:
(1) The floor area ratio shall not exceed 0.6.
(2) For purposes of this section, floor area ratio shall mean the number
of square feet of aggregate floor area of all buildings on a lot, or, in
the case of a development made up of more than one lot, all lots,
including noncontiguous lots, that make up the development,
divided by the number of square feet of the lot or lots that make up
the development.
(3) The height shall not exceed 50 feet.
(4) The coverage shall not exceed 30%.
(5) No building shall be erected closer to a street line or front yard lot
line (excluding lot lines technically created by the boundary
between the borough and township separating parcels in common
ownership, or lot lines between lots in common ownership within a
multi-lot project) than 20 feet.
(b) The following bulk regulations shall apply to all multifamily residential
buildings, educational and other nonresidential buildings on lots of one
acre or more in AET districts.
(1) No building shall be erected closer to a street line or front yard lot
line (excluding lot lines technically created by the boundary
between the borough and township separating parcels in common
ownership, or lot lines between lots in common ownership within a
multi-lot project) than 20 feet.
(2) Parking setback shall be 20 feet in a yard fronting on Alexander
Road with a sidewalk and full screening of the parking, including
fixtures such as landscaping, walls, and other architectural and
landscape architectural features provided in the setback area.
(3) The height shall not exceed 60 feet, except that the building height
may be increased to a maximum of 100 feet provided that the
following standards are met:
a. The maximum horizontal dimension of the portion of the
building over 60 feet is no greater than 75 feet, except for a
single performance hall fly tower which may have a horizontal
dimension of 150 feet.
§ T10B-263.4 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-263.4
BAO:1212
b. The minimum distance between the portions of buildings over
60 feet in height is at least 150 feet.
c. The portion of the building exceeding 60 feet in height is set
back from any public street an additional one foot for every two
feet by which the building exceeds 60 feet.
d. The square footage of the footprints of the portions of the
buildings over 60 feet in height is no greater than 8% of the
square footage of the land in the zone owned by the applicant.
(4) Side yard and rear yard setbacks for uses other than single family
residential: (i) shall not be required for lots adjacent to
nonresidential districts or lots; and, (ii) shall be 10 feet for every 25
feet of building height that is adjacent to lots used for single family
residential purposes.
(5) At least 25% of the site shall be devoted to open space. The
following, or the land under the following, shall not be considered
common open space: streets, driveways and parking area. All other
areas, including all undeveloped land, plaza, outdoor recreational
areas and other open areas available for the use shall be
considered open space. Plazas, outdoor recreation areas, pathways
and roadways shall be designed with amenities and signage to
encourage public awareness, access and use. Projects shall provide
pathways and roadways for both pedestrian and vehicular public
access and use of the transit facilities in the district.
(6) The aggregate floor area of nonresidential uses, excluding
education and transit uses, shall not exceed a 0.15 ratio to total
project lot area.
(7) Except as modified herein, the additional bulk regulations
applicable to the AET zoning district shall be contained in section
10B-246, provided that the boundary between the AET district and
any E district or other district adjacent to the AET district in
Princeton Borough, shall not be considered a district boundary for
the purposes of section 10B-246. Section 10B-246 is amended to
add the AET zone district and bulk regulations for lots of one acre
or more as follows:
AET
(Lots of one acre or more)
District
For Permitted Uses
Educational & multifamily
residential
Required Lot Area (Min.Acre) 1.0
Min. Sq. Ft. 43,560
Required Lot Width (Min. Ft.) (na)
§ T10B-263.4 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-263.4
BAO:1213
AET
(Lots of one acre or more)
District
For Permitted Uses
Educational & multifamily
residential
Required Lot Depth (Min. Ft.) (na)
Required Lot Frontage (Min.
Ft.)
(na)
Required Bldg. Setback
Front 20(*)
Side 10(**)
Combined Side (na)
Rear 10(**)
Permitted Bldg. Height (Max.
Ft.)
60/100***
Bldg. Setback Height Ratio ****
Permitted Building F.A.R. for
non-residential uses (excluding
educational and transit uses)
0.15
Required Parking Setback
Front 10
Side 10(s)*****
Rear 10(s)*****
* Subject to the provisions in Section 10B-263.4(b)(i)
** Subject to the provisions in Section 10B-263.4(b)(v)
*** Subject to the provisions in Section 10B-263.4(b)(iii):
Building Height 60 feet, up to 100 feet if the additional
standards are satisfied
**** Subject to the provisions in Section 10B-263.4(b)(iii)
***** Provided that the combined 20 feet setback is not required
in the AET Zone.
(c) Design standards:
(1) Streetscape standards.
a. Road edge landscape - A landscape area between the curb and
any proposed sidewalk shall be provided parallel to the road
edge and should be a minimum of six feet wide (eight feet
preferred) and contain a planting strip with street trees to
provide a roadside shade canopy. Interruption of the tree
§ T10B-263.4 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-263.4
BAO:1214
canopy to invite entrance to the site and buildings and for
architectural effect is encouraged. Where parking is provided
along the road, a two and one-half foot walkway and access
points to the street edge shall be provided in the landscaped
area. Paved access points should be provided across this area
in locations where public access thru the site is encouraged.
b. Sidewalks - Sidewalks that are a minimum of eight feet wide
shall be provided parallel to Alexander Street beyond the road
edge landscape. Road edge landscape and sidewalk placement
may be reversed to preserve existing landscaping or other
existing natural conditions.
c. Building edge landscape - Landscapes of a minimum depth of
four feet including grass, planting beds, and trees where
practicable, shall be provided in a landscaped zone adjacent to
buildings in the AET district. Paved access points should be
provided across this area in locations where public access thru
the site is encouraged. Additionally, paved access providing
major and minor access to building entrances is permitted.
Hardscape areas for seating and recreation are encouraged,
but shall be limited to a 150-foot frontage along Alexander
Street before interruption by at least 20 feet of planting or
other softscape in the building edge landscape area.
(2) Building design guidelines. Creative design, visual interest and
access to open space shall be encouraged by the following design
standards:
a. Building heights shall be varied within the development.
b. Buildings of greater than three stories adjacent to residential
districts shall be of varying size and heights and with varying
setbacks so as to avoid long building lines, which tend to act as
a barrier.
c. The common open space available for public use shall be
designed to include a setting for outdoor cultural or
entertainment activities.
d. The common open space available for public use shall connect
with existing or planned adjacent pedestrian ways, plazas, and
other open space and shall be readily accessible to the public.
Open walkways between building masses to access common
open space shall be encouraged.
e. All building facades shall have full architectural treatment and
architectural elements, equivalent in quality to those on the
facade on the front entrance and landscaping so as to avoid
monotony and enhance their visual appeal. Windows shall be
provided on all sides of the building.
§ T10B-263.4 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-263.5
BAO:1215
§ T10B-263.5. Off-street parking and loading requirements for the
AET zoning district. [Ord. No. 2011-16, § 2.]
In AET districts, accessory off-street parking spaces shall be provided for all
construction and for conversions, and accessory off-street loading berths,
open or enclosed, shall be provided for new permitted nonresidential uses,
in accordance with the regulations set forth and referred to in this part,
except that loading berths are not required for education buildings and
other nonresidential buildings on lots greater than one acre. All such
parking spaces (except higher educational institutions, which shall be
governed by subsection (b) of this section, below) and loading berths shall
be subject to the provisions of section 10B-282, et seq., of this article.
Parking spaces made available to the proposed use whether within the AET
or adjacent zoning districts shall be included in the calculation of parking
spaces provided for a proposed use. In addition, shared use of parking
spaces for different uses, e.g., theater use would use parking spaces in the
evening that would be available to a commuter use during the daytime,
shall be encouraged, and shared parking spaces shall be counted for each
such use in determining compliance with the parking space requirements in
AET districts in accordance with accepted standards and methodologies for
shared parking analysis. These methodologies consist in applying a percent
presence ratio for each critical time period to the respective parking and
zoning ratio of each proposed use. Applicant shall produce a matrix showing
this calculation for each use and each typical critical time period. The total
parking demand for the time period with the highest sum of the parking
demands for each use shall be used as the required parking supply. The
shared parking methodology can also be used for a single proposed use
whereby the applicant can demonstrate that for certain critical time periods
for that use there is a guaranteed supply of available parking spaces in
nearby parking facilities.
Commuter parking shall be provided within the AET Zone in the Township
or E5 Zone in Princeton Borough on parcels held in common ownership
within a multi-lot project or on lots adjacent thereto, and consistent with
any then existing agreements between the property owner and the rail
service operator. Train stations for heavy rail service to/from Princeton
Junction shall have within 1,000 feet thereof a minimum of 180 parking
spaces for monthly permit, daily meter and partial-day users within the
project parcel or lots adjacent thereto, which spaces shall be considered
in the shared parking provisions of this section after 7:00 p.m. and on
weekends. Special provisions shall provide for twenty-four-hour, forty-eighthour,
and seventy-two-hour overnight permits. Parking spaces for kiss and
ride users shall be provided adjacent to the rail station and shall not be used
to satisfy the minimum 180 space requirement.
(a) Educational uses.
(1) Residential uses shall require parking spaces as follows:
a. Detached single-family dwelling: 1.5 spaces per unit.
§ T10B-263.5 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-263.5
BAO:1216
b. Attached or multi-family units: one space per unit.
c. Graduate and undergraduate student housing units: 0.6 spaces
per bedroom.
(2) Nonresidential uses: At the time of any application for a zoning
permit, every higher educational institution shall certify to the
development enforcement officer the number of additional
employees (faculty and staff) and full time enrolled active graduate
students who do not live in university owned housing and are
eligible to park on campus ("eligible graduate students") to be
accommodated in the proposed structure and the aggregate
number of all employees and eligible graduate students by
category, i.e., employees and eligible graduate students projected
to be employed by or enrolled in the educational institution after
the proposed structure is constructed and occupied. The
educational institution shall also certify the percentage of eligible
graduate students. The sum of all faculty and staff employed in the
subject structure and all eligible graduate students assigned to that
structure constitutes the commuting population employed in or
assigned to the structure.
a. For each 1.25 commuting population employed or assigned to
the structure, one parking space shall be provided within the
AET district, or within campus facilities in the adjoining E-1 or
E-2 districts or in adjoining municipalities. Visitor parking is
included in determining this ratio.
b. For places of public assembly, such as lecture halls of over 100
seats, auditoriums, theatres, chapels or gymnasiums, but not
including libraries or dining halls, one space shall be provided
for each five seats. Parking spaces provided for normal daytime
activity for other purposes shall be considered to be available
for such public uses as are normally conducted in the evening
or weekends.
c. At least once a year following approval of a structure, every
educational institution shall certify to the development
enforcement officer the aggregate number of employees
(faculty and staff) and eligible graduate students. Whenever
that number exceeds the number certified at the time of
application, the development enforcement officer shall notify
the board of original jurisdiction, if there was one, and
recommend such additional parking spaces as may be
required. In the case of prior approval by a board of
jurisdiction, such board shall reopen the application, and the
educational institution shall propose such changes to the
approved site plan as are necessary to provide the additional
parking spaces in accordance with the standards as to the
number, location, and design of such spaces set forth in this
article. In the case of prior approval by the development
§ T10B-263.5 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-263.5
BAO:1217
enforcement officer, such officer shall require that the
educational institution provide the additional parking spaces
in accordance with the standards as to the number, location,
and design of such spaces set forth in this article, and the
institution shall promptly do so. With every application for
development, the applicant shall submit an affidavit that it has
submitted all the certifications required by this section for all
property within the township under its ownership or control.
No application for development shall be deemed complete if
the applicant fails to submit such affidavit or if the
certifications required by this section have not been submitted.
(b) Other nonresidential buildings and uses. For at least one separate or
shared parking space for each.
(1) Libraries and other public buildings: 200 square feet of floor area,
but not less than one space for each five seats, where provided.
(2) Restaurants, cafes and pubs: 400 square feet.
(3) Philanthropic institutions, galleries and museums: 820 square feet
of floor area.
(4) Theatres: five seats.
(5) Service/retail: 475 square feet.
(6) Office: 370 square feet.
(7) Child care facilities: six seats or students.
For any other permitted buildings and uses for which no
requirements are set forth above, appropriate and comparable
off-street parking requirements shall be as set forth in section
10B-282, or, if no requirements are set forth there, then, as
determined by the board of jurisdiction, taking into consideration
Institute of Transportation Engineers or other industry statistics
and standards, the likelihood of all day or short term use of parking
spaces, the location and availability of other means of access and
other factors affecting the need for parking.
The total number of parking spaces determined to be required for
the uses set forth in this subsection (c) shall be reduced by the
number of parking spaces provided for those employees of any such
use who are employees of a higher educational institution, who
have been provided parking spaces elsewhere in accordance with
the calculation of parking space requirements pursuant to section
10B-263.3(b), above.
(c) Off-street loading. Accessory loading berths, open or enclosed, shall be
provided for non-residential uses, except churches, as follows:
(1) Educational uses on more than one acre: zero berth.
§ T10B-263.5 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-263.5
BAO:1218
§ T10B-263.6. Signage permitted within the AET zoning district.
[Ord. No. 2011-16, § 2.]
In AET districts section 10B-292 through section 10B-299 shall apply
subject to the exceptions and/or modifications set forth below:
(2) For floor area of 0 to 30,000 square feet: zero berth.
(3) For floor area of 30,000 to 100,000 square feet: one berth.
(4) For each additional 75,000 square feet of floor area or fraction
thereof: one additional berth.
In comprehensive multi-lot development shared and/or common
loading berths may be provided to serve one or more uses,
including off-site loading areas with below ground connection to
one or more uses.
(a) Educational and arts uses.
(1) One facade sign is permitted for each face of each above ground
building mass fronting on a public street. Signs on educational use
buildings that name the building or do not face a public street are
exempt from section 17A-368.
(2) Facade signs on educational use buildings may have an area of not
more than 24 square feet.
(3) Marquee signs, wall mounted program signs, kiosks and temporary
banners for community, theater and arts events are encouraged to
promote an active public sense of place, and may include video and
electronic components providing information and schedules
regarding programs, events, performances and the like. Each
marquee or wall mounted program sign shall not exceed 100
square feet, and, each kiosk shall not exceed a total volume of 800
cubic feet. Banners shall be a minimum of eight feet above finish
grade.
(b) Transportation uses. Transportation facilities may have:
(1) Up to two freestanding signs on Alexander Street.
(2) One facade sign of not more than 24 square feet on each face of a
train station identifying the train station.
(3) Marquee signs, wall mounted program signs, kiosks and temporary
banners for community, theater and arts events are encouraged to
promote an active public sense of place, and may include video and
electronic components providing information and schedules
regarding programs, events, performances and the like. Each
marquee or wall mounted program sign shall not exceed 100
square feet, and, each kiosk shall not exceed a total volume of 800
§ T10B-263.5 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-263.6
BAO:1219
§ T10B-263.7. Public access. [Ord. No. 2011-16, § 2.]
The applicant shall provide an easement in dimensions and at a location
acceptable to the board of jurisdiction permitting public pedestrian access
from University Place to the rail station and pedestrian and vehicular access
from Alexander Road to the rail station, if relocated.
§ T10B-264. Lot and building coverage. [Ord. No. 856, § 2.]
cubic feet. Banners shall be a minimum of eight feet above finish
grade.
(4) Additional facade signs for a retail/commercial use located in a
train station.
(c) Way finding signs. Wayfinding signs are important due to the gateway
nature of Alexander Street and the concentration of arts, educational
and transportation uses. Wayfinding signs for educational and arts uses
shall be permitted consistent with the wayfinding signage throughout
the campus of the educational institution. Wayfinding signs for
transportation uses shall be encouraged at strategic street and
driveway locations, and throughout any train station project site to
guide automobiles, pedestrians and bicyclists to the train station,
parking areas, services, entrances and exits.
(a) No lot in districts E-1 and E-2 shall have a lot coverage exceeding 50%,
nor shall the total area of the plan projections of all buildings on a lot
exceed 20% of the gross area of the lot. For this purpose a plan
projection is a projection to ground level of the largest horizontal cross
section of a building.
(b) For the sole purpose of computing lot coverage within districts E-1 and
E-2, the total land covered by such districts is divided into three
subareas as defined below, each of which shall be considered as a single
lot solely for such purpose:
(1) Subarea A: Bounded by the E-2 district boundary on the north and
south and west, and by Springdale Road on the east.
(2) Subarea B: Bounded by the E-2 district boundary on the north and
south, by Springdale Road on the west, and by the service district
boundary on the east;
(3) Subarea C: Bounded by the E-1 district boundary on the north and
south and east and by the service district boundary on the west.
The beds of Carnegie Lake and Stony Brook shall not be included
in the computation of the areas of the aforesaid lots.
§ T10B-263.6 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-265
BAO:1220
§ T10B-265. Minimum floor area in multifamily student housing.
[Ord. No. 856, § 2; Ord. No. 90-12, § 5.]
Every dwelling unit in a multifamily structure in district E-1, E-2, or E-4
that houses students and their immediate families, if any, shall have the
applicable minimum total net floor area as shown in column (1) of the
following table; except that such total net floor area may be reduced by the
area of related space, but in no event shall such reduced total net floor area
be less than the amount shown in column (2) of such table. For the purpose
of this section, related space means the total area within the multifamily
structure in which the dwelling unit is located, but outside such dwelling
unit, that is actually provided and suitably finished for the common use of
the occupants of such multifamily structure for storage, (except garages
and carports), utilities and laundry, divided by the number of dwelling units
in such multifamily house.
Type of Dwelling
Minimum Total Net
Floor Area
(square feet)
Reduced Total Net
Floor Area For
Related Space
(square feet)
Efficiency apartment 400 400*
1 Bedroom 590 530
2 Bedrooms 725 650
* No reduction allowed for related space.
§ T10B-266. Minimum bedroom space in multifamily married
student housing. [Ord. No. 856, § 2.]
In multifamily houses in districts E-1 and E-2, that house only transient
married students of institutions of higher learning and their immediate
families, the minimum size for a first bedroom in each dwelling unit shall be
120 square feet and for each additional bedroom therein the minimum size
shall be 80 square feet.
§ T10B-267. Buildings over 100 feet in height. [Ord. No. 856, § 2.]
(a) Conditional use approval. Buildings over 100 feet in height in E-1 and
E-2 districts, for the educational activities of any institution of higher
learning that is organized and operated not for pecuniary profit or for
any activities customarily incidental thereto or for the shelter of the
faculty, students and staff of any such institution in multifamily houses,
apartments and dormitories, may be located not less than 300 feet from
the nearest E-1 or E-2 district boundary line, but only by conditional use
approval in accordance with the provisions of division 4 of this article
and only if all regulations of the district, other than height, applicable to
such buildings; are complied with. To the extent that such E-1 or E-2
lines coincide with the boundary between the borough and township or
§ T10B-265 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-267
BAO:1221
with the boundary of a service district, such line shall not be considered
a district boundary line for this purpose. In acting upon applications
for such conditional use approval, the planning board, in addition to
applying the guiding principles set forth in paragraphs (b) and (c) of
section 10B-321, shall take into account the need for such additional
height and the scale of proposed buildings in relationship to the scale of
other buildings and spaces in the zoning district and in areas adjacent
to the zoning district containing an institutional complex of which the
proposed buildings are a part. The planning board shall grant such
conditional use approval only in cases where the scale of proposed
buildings is in harmony with that of the zoning district and such
adjacent areas and where such building is in keeping with the general
character thereof.
§ T10B-267 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-267
BAO:1222
SUBDIVISION 2.9
Office-Research Districts
§ T10B-268. Permitted uses; OR-1 and OR-2. [Ord. No. 856, § 2;
Ord. No. 967, § 4; Ord. No. 1014, § 4; Ord. No. 88-48, § 3; Ord. No.
89-13, §§ 3, 4; Ord. No. 2019-6]
The following uses are permitted in OR-1 and OR-2 districts in addition to
those permitted by section 10B-252.
(a) General, professional or other office uses.
(b) Any uses of a research nature involving scientific investigation,
research or engineering study or related instruction, product
development and similar related uses.
(c) Accessory uses, which may include the feeding of employees and
transient visitors, the lodging of transient visitors and the holding of
conference assemblies; provided, that such lodging is directly related to
the office research activities of the occupant of the site or to the
nonprofit activities of local charitable, civic, political and educational
organizations that are organized not for pecuniary profit and that
facilities shall not exceed sleeping accommodations for 200 persons for
such lodging or auditorium seating capacity of 500 persons for such
conference assemblies on any one lot. There shall be no more than one
installation for such feeding and lodging of transient visitors in any
special office-research development under section 10B-270, nor may
the total auditorium seating capacity of conference assemblies in any
special office research development exceed 500 persons. All such uses,
however, are subject to the following provisos, namely: That all types of
waste that will be discharged into the township sanitary sewer system
shall be subject to periodic inspection for quantity and type by, and shall
have the approval of, the joint sewer operating committee and shall
comply with the rules and regulations of such committee; and that all
uses shall be so conducted as not to produce any nuisance factors other
than as occasioned by the incidental noise of the congregation of
people, of passenger traffic and, during daylight hours, of the delivery
of goods.
(d) (Reserved)
(e) Agreement with township. Before a building permit may be issued for
construction involving a floor area ratio in excess of that permitted by
section 10B-246 based on the provisions of footnotes (m) or (n) (i.e., a
portion of the existing or proposed building being used for laboratory
research) the owner must enter into an agreement with the township in
recordable form, and subject to the approval by the township attorney
including:
(1) A statement of the gross floor area (in square feet) being used for
laboratory research use;
§ T10B-268 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-268
BAO:1223
§ T10B-268.1. Repealed by Ord. No. 86-14, § 4.
§ T10B-268.2. Repealed by Ord. No. 86-14, § 4.
§ T10B-269. Lots which straddle the OR-1 and OR-2 zoning
districts. [Ord. No. 86-15, § 3.]
In the case of lots which are situated in both the OR-1 and OR-2 zoning
districts, the maximum permitted floor area for a structure or structures
thereon shall be calculated by multiplying the square footage of the lot
located within each zoning district by the maximum permitted F.A.R. for
that zoning district and by thereafter adding the two sums so derived.
For purposes of this chapter other than calculating maximum permitted
floor area, the boundary line or the OR-1 or OR-2 zoning districts running
through a lot shall not be considered a district boundary.
§ T10B-270. Special office-research developments. [Ord. No. 856,
§ 2; Ord. No. 971, § 4; Ord. No. 967, § 6; Ord. No. 1014, § 8; Ord. No.
92-28, § 3.]
(2) A statement of the additional amount of gross floor area (in square
feet) permitted on account of such use;
(3) A statement by the owner acknowledging that if the use of the
building is subsequently changed such that the gross floor area is
in excess of what would be allowed to be constructed as of right
under the then existing zoning:
a. He understands that he will not be entitled to a variance
allowing the continued use of the excess floor area; and
b. He agrees that the excess gross floor area will be either left
vacant or razed; and
(4) A provision which makes the agreement a covenant running with
the land.
(a) Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following words and
phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this
subsection:
OFFICE-RESEARCH LOT — A lot within a special office-research
development.
SPECIAL OFFICE-RESEARCH DEVELOPMENT — Any planned
commercial development of permitted uses involving a major
subdivision in the OR 1 and 2 districts, not designed or used for
residential purposes, containing not less than five nor more than 20
acres, employing the reduction in lot area provisions of this section and
approved as a special office-research subdivision under the provisions
of article IX of this chapter, provided that the number of building lots
created as a result of the application of this section does not exceed by
§ T10B-268 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-270
BAO:1224
more than 33 1/3% the number of building lots which could be created
if the lot were subdivided in accordance with section 10B-246 and
other applicable provisions of this chapter 10B; and further provided
that one or more additional open space lots may be created at the
option of the applicant. Such open space lots shall be deed-restricted
against development in perpetuity, and adequate provision for their
maintenance shall be made.
(b) Purpose. The township committee, desiring to foster small-scale as well
as large-scale installations in the OR district and to minimize strip
development and its baneful consequences therein, has determined
that the purpose of this article will be furthered by permitting
reductions in lot area for office and research developments in the OR
district, where such developments are designed pursuant to integrated
plans and are limited as to vehicular access. The township committee
finds that such special office-research developments will promote
flexibility of development design, effectuate more efficient utilization of
land and help satisfy development and service needs of the entire
community.
(c) Vehicular access. Vehicular access to and from special office-research
developments and office-research lots shall be limited as provided in
article IX of this article and approved by the planning board thereunder.
(d) Applicability and modification of schedule of regulations. In the case of
special office-research developments:
(1) The perimeter of a special office-research development shall be
deemed the boundaries of a single lot for the purpose of measuring
lot width, lot frontage, floor area ratio, building setbacks and
parking setbacks, as required by the schedule of regulations.
(2) Except as otherwise required by paragraph (d)(1) of this section,
the following adjustments to the schedule of regulations shall be
permitted with respect to office-research lots:
a. Lot areas may be reduced to not less than 60,000 square feet.
b. No minimum lot widths shall be required.
c. Lot frontages may be reduced to not less than 50 feet.
d. Building front setbacks may be reduced to not less than 25
feet.
e. No building side setbacks or building rear setbacks shall be
required.
f. Parking front setbacks may be reduced to not less than 25 feet.
g. No parking side or parking rear setbacks shall be required.
§ T10B-270 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-270
BAO:1225
§ T10B-270.1. Transfer of development rights within the OR-2
district. [Ord. No. 92-27, § 2.]
An applicant for development within the OR-2 district may transfer floor
area from another lot or lots in the OR-2 district to the lot or lots which are
the subject of the application for development, provided that:
(e) Off-street parking. In the case of special office-research developments,
the following modifications to the off-street parking requirements of
this article shall apply:
(1) Off-street parking areas need not be located on the same lot as the
building they are intended to serve; provided, that such parking
areas are located within the development and are in accordance
with a plan to furnish safe and ready access to office-research lots
within the development; and provided further, that continued
availability of such parking areas to the office-research lots is
assured by documentation approved by the planning board and the
township attorney.
(2) No off-street parking other than temporary visitor parking shall be
permitted between any building and a street that provides the
primary, direct access to the building.
(f) Relationship of buildings to lot lines and to each other. Any building, or
any two or more attached buildings, may straddle lot lines of officeresearch
lots; provided, that no such lot line shall be straddled if it is
also the boundary line of any special office-research development.
There shall be not less than 15 feet between detached buildings.
(a) The lot or lots from which the floor area is proposed to be transferred is
vacant;
(b) The owner of such lot or lots consents to such transfer;
(c) The applicant demonstrates that a development with floor area
equivalent to that proposed to be transferred can be built on the lot or
lots from which the floor area is proposed to be transferred, such
development to conform to all zoning standards except lot size and to
all site plan and subdivision standards;
(d) The zoning, subdivision, and site plan standards which apply to the lot
or lots to which the floor area is proposed to be transferred are met or
variances or waivers therefrom secured, except that the FAR may be
increased from 10% to 12%;
(e) The transfer must achieve a Master Plan or other public goal, such as
the provision of open space at suitable locations;
(f) The lot or lots from which the floor area is proposed to be transferred
shall be offered for dedication to the township or its designee for use for
§ T10B-270 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-270.1
BAO:1226
public purposes and, if the offer if not accepted, shall be deed restricted
against development in perpetuity and maintained by the owner.
Upon a transfer of development rights as provided herein, the lot or
lots from which floor area has been transferred may not be used for the
purpose of effecting further transfers.
§ T10B-270.1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-270.1
BAO:1227

SUBDIVISION 2.10
Service Districts
§ T10B-271. Permitted uses. [Ord. No. 856 § 2; Ord. No. 2017-45
§ 1]
The following uses are permitted in S-1 and S-2 districts or, if so indicated,
in one of those districts, in addition to those permitted by section 10B-253.
(a) Uses conducive to heavy trucking and to bus transportation.
(b) Uses characterized by a moderate amount of dust and noise, such as the
storage, handling, sale and delivery, either retail or wholesale, of
lumber, coal, mason materials, grain and feed, solid and liquid fuels and
similar goods.
(c) Storage of inflammable materials other than explosives.
(d) Storage warehouses.
(e) Public utility structures and uses.
(f) Freight yards, railroad sidings and other necessary railroad uses
(permitted in S-1 districts only).
(g) Commercial garages and gasoline service stations.
(h) Printing establishments and newspaper offices.
(i) Banks and savings institutions.
(j) Retail stores and bakeries.
(k) Hotels and motels.
(l) Business offices.
(l.1) Personal services, including, but not limited to, barbershops, beauty
parlors, tailors, dressmakers and millinery shops, photographic studios,
shoe repair, shoeshine and hat cleaning shops and similar personal
service stores dealing directly with consumers; studios for dancing and
music instruction; private vocational and trade schools and college
preparatory and tutoring services; outlets and pick-up stations for
laundries and cleaning establishments; self-service automatic laundry
and dry cleaning establishments, containing a total of not more than 30
machines for washing, cleaning and drying, and subject to the
prohibition against the use of flammable solvent except for the
incidental removal of spots; electronic repair, locksmith, watch, clock
and jewelry repair, upholstery and furniture repair and other similar
service establishments furnishing services; and crafting or
arrangement of materials resulting in a finished product or commodity
such as apparel, home decoration, jewelry, toys, furniture, leather
goods, flowers, art work or similar products.
§ T10B-271 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-271
BAO:1229
§ T10B-272. Prohibited uses. [Ord. No. 856, § 2.]
The following uses are prohibited in S-1 and S-2 districts or, if so indicated,
in one of those districts, in addition to those prohibited by section 10B-254,
but not by way of limitation:
(m) Accessory uses on the same lot with, and customarily incidental to, any
of the foregoing permitted uses.
(a) Any uses characterized by a nuisance factor, other than those uses
stated in section 10B-271.
(b) Hospitals and nursing or convalescent homes (prohibited in S-1
districts only).
(c) Freight yards, railroad sidings and other necessary railroad uses
(prohibited in S-2 districts only).
(d) Automobile laundries (prohibited in S-2 districts only).
§ T10B-271 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-272
BAO:1230
SUBDIVISION 2.11
Retail-Office District
§ T10B-272.1. Permitted uses. [Ord. No. 83-9, § 4; Ord. No. 2006-35,
§ 2.]
The following uses are permitted in the R-O district in addition to those
permitted by section 10B-253:
§ T10B-272.2. Additional regulations in the R-O district. [Ord. No.
83-9, § 4; Ord. No. 2006-35, § 2.]
(a) Hospitals properly licensed by the state which provide health, medical
and surgical care for sick or injured human beings, including accessory
uses as set forth below.
(b) Dental and medical clinics and pharmacies.
(c) Convalescent and extended care facilities sponsored by or affiliated
with the principal licensed hospital which are located on or adjacent to
the hospital.
(d) Accessory uses:
(1) Laboratories incidental to a permitted use.
(2) Out-patient departments.
(3) Training facilities.
(4) Management and medical/dental staff offices.
(5) Accessory off-street parking spaces.
(6) Accessory signs as permitted in section 10B-293.
(e) Medical professional offices, including laboratories, and x-ray and other
diagnostic equipment incidental thereto.
(f) Business and professional offices.
(g) Retail stores and shops.
(h) Banks.
(i) Restaurants.
(j) Establishments providing services directly to the person (e.g.
barbershop) or to tangible personal property (e.g. shoe repair) of
patrons, except as prohibited by sections 10B-254, 10B-259.
(a) Up to 20% of the permitted building area may be used and occupied by
the permitted uses found in section 10B-272.1(g), (h), (i) and (j).
§ T10B-272.1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-272.2
BAO:1231
§ T10B-272.3. Off-street parking and loading requirements. [Ord.
No. 83-9, § 4; Ord. No. 2006-35, § 2.]
(b) The permitted uses found in section 10B-272.1(g), (h), (i) and (j) shall be
located on the first floor of any building in the R-O district and shall not
front or have any opening on Henry Avenue.
(c) 20% of the site shall be a landscaped area of planted material,
hardscape or a combination thereof.
(d) The bulk requirements in section 10B-246 shall apply.
(a) Accessory off-street parking spaces, open or enclosed, shall be provided
for all new construction and for conversions, and accessory off-street
loading berths, open or enclosed, shall be provided for new permitted
nonresidential uses, in accordance with the regulations set forth and
referred to in this part. All such parking spaces and loading berths shall
be subject to the provisions of division 3, subdivision 3.5 of this article.
(b) The parking requirements for non-hospital related uses may be reduced
from the standards found in section 10B-282 if the development is
submitted as a single entity. The parking requirements for all retail and
office uses shall be one parking space for every 250 square feet of gross
floor area and restaurants shall provide one parking space for every
four seats.
§ T10B-272.2 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-272.3
BAO:1232
SUBDIVISION 2.12
(Reserved)38
§ T10B-272.4. (Reserved)
38.Editor's Note: See Article XIII, Historic Preservation.
§ T10B-272.4 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-272.4
BAO:1233

SUBDIVISION 2.13
(Reserved)
(Reserved by Ord. No. 2014-44)39
§ T10B-272.5. (Reserved)
39.Editor's Note: See Article XIII, Historic Preservation.
§ T10B-272.5 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-272.5
BAO:1235

SUBDIVISION 2.14
Transitional Residential District
§ T10B-272.6. Purposes. [Ord. No. 88-44, § 3; Ord. No. 98-33, § 1]
Township committee has determined that a new zoning district, to be
designated R-T, should be established in the township in order to:
§ T10B-272.7. Establishment. [Ord. No. 88-44, § 3.]
There is hereby established a Transitional Residential (R-T) zoning district,
made up of such land area as shown on the zoning map on file in the office
of the township clerk.
§ T10B-272.8. Permitted uses. [Ord. No. 88-44, § 3; ]
Residential clusters meeting the requirements of this article and of Division
9 (Residential Clusters) of Article IX, except as modified herein, shall be
permitted at a gross density not exceeding 1.8 units per acre. The number
of units permitted when calculated shall be rounded down to the next
whole number. Unit types permitted shall be single-family structures, twofamily
structures, multi-family structures - non-townhouse, and townhouse
structures as defined in section 10B-191
§ T10B-272.9. Additional provisions. [Ord. No. 88-44, § 3; Ord. No.
88-47, § 1; Ord. No. 98-33, § 2.]
(a) Provide a transitional zone between higher intensity and lower intensity
areas by requiring that the kind and intensity of uses in the zone be
arranged in a manner compatible therewith;
(b) Provide for a greater range of housing types than is being developed in
the township by requiring multi-family as well as single-family
residential units;
(c) Impose a maximum floor area ratio as herein provided; limit the
maximum size of single-family detached homes based on gross floor
area; and
(d) Where appropriate, require a portion of the tract to be used for the
construction of affordable housing or ancillary uses necessary for the
construction of affordable housing on adjacent sites.
(a) Residential mix. The number of single-family detached units within a
development shall not exceed one-third of the maximum number of
residential units permitted pursuant to the gross density provisions of
the first sentence of section 10B-272.8.
(b) Entire tract floor area ratio. The floor area ratio for an entire tract
within the R-T zone shall not exceed 12 1/2%.
§ T10B-272.6 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-272.9
BAO:1237
(bb) Unit floor area ratio. No single-family detached unit shall contain gross
floor area in excess of 4,300 square feet, provided, however, that up to
12% of the single-family units constructed in the R-T district may be up
to 6,100 square feet if they are constructed with walk-out basements. A
walk-out basement is space where the ceiling (defined as the bottom of
the structural members of the floor above) is more than four feet above
the average finished grade line along the outside walls of the building
and is more than six feet six inches measured from the finished floor
and where the ceiling of the wall facing the street is less than two feet
above the average grade line along the wall facing the street.
(bbb) Garage orientation. No more than 50% of the single-family detached
homes shall contain a front-entry garage, i.e., a garage in which the
garage doors face the street on which the unit fronts.
(c) Tract size. In lieu of the minimum tract size requirement of section
10B-191.1, all land within each R-T zoning district shall be included in
an application for development and planned in a comprehensive
manner.
(d) Location of units. Units shall be clustered in one or more groups and
located so that single-family detached units are adjacent to tracts zoned
for or developed with single-family detached uses and all other
residential structures shall be adjacent to tracts zoned for or developed
with two-family, multi-family, multi-family structures — nontownhouses,
townhouse structures, and nonresidential uses except for
adjacent uses which are isolated uses inconsistent with the primary
development pattern in that adjacent area; provided that the applicant
may arrange the kind and intensity of such uses in a different manner if
he can demonstrate that the arrangement is at least as beneficial in
terms of furthering the purposes of this subdivision as the arrangement
set forth herein. Clusters shall make maximum use of open space.
(e) Amount and location of open space. In lieu of the requirement in section
10B-194(a) at least 60% of the tract shall be devoted to common open
space and at least 30% of the tract shall be devoted to preserved open
space as defined in section 10B-194(a)(2). Preserved open space shall
include such areas as are set forth in section 10B-194(a)(2) and in
sections 10B-185 and 10B-238. Areas within the Princeton Ridge as
may be determined by the materials and standards set forth in section
10B-256.1 shall also be preserved. Usable open space where feasible
shall consist of a central area bordered by clusters of different unit
types.
(f) Affordable housing sub-zone. The affordable housing sub-zone set forth
on the zoning map shall be utilized for the construction of affordable
housing or for improvements which benefit in whole or in part any
contiguous affordable housing development. The township shall
determine whether the sub-zone shall be utilized for affordable housing
construction, in which case the standards for the RH-8 zoning district
shall apply, or for other purposes, in which case it shall specify the
§ T10B-272.9 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-272.9
BAO:1238
purposes and the standards which shall be applied thereto. Upon final
approval of the development application for the tract, the applicant
shall at the option of the township either convey to the township such
affordable housing sub-zone or enter into an agreement with respect
to such sub-zone with the township and whatsoever third parties have
an interest in the use thereof. Such sub-zone shall be included for the
purposes of determining the total unit yield of the tract.
(g) Lot standards. In lieu of the requirements of section 10B-192, the
following standards shall apply:
(1) Single-family structures. Single-family structures shall have the
following lot area, dimensions, and yard set-back requirements:
a. Minimum width and frontage for non-cul-de-sac building lots.
Minimum width shall not be less than 90 feet nor a building lot
frontage of less than 80 feet;
Minimum width and frontage for cul-de-sac building lots.
Minimum width shall not be less than 90 feet nor a lot frontage
of less than 40 feet.
b. Maximum depth. No building lot shall have a depth more than
two and one-half times its width.
c. Minimum area. No building lot shall have an area of less than
9,500 square feet.
d. Average lot area. The average lot area shall not exceed 12,350
square feet.
e. Front and rear yard setbacks. Each building lot shall have a
combined front and rear yard setback of at least 50 feet, but
neither the front nor the rear yard setback shall be less than 25
feet.
f. Setbacks for corner lots. Corner lots shall observe a setback of
at least 25 feet from each street right-of-way line.
g. Side yard setback. Each lot shall have combined side yard
setbacks of 35 feet, but neither setback shall be less than 10
feet for a side-loaded garage and 15 feet for a front-loaded
garage; provided that side-loaded garages may not face each
other on adjoining lots.
h. Minimum distance between houses. In no case shall there be
less than 35 feet between houses, measured at their closest
point.
(2) Two-family structures. Two-family structures shall have the
following lot area, dimensions, and yard setback requirements:
§ T10B-272.9 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-272.9
BAO:1239
a. Minimum width and frontage. No lot shall have a width of less
than 45 feet, nor a lot frontage of less than 12 feet.
b. Maximum depth. No lot shall have a depth of more than two
and one-half times its width.
c. Minimum area. No lot shall have an area of less than 4,500
square feet.
d. Average lot area. The average lot area shall not exceed 5,000
square feet.
e. Front and rear yard setbacks. Each lot shall have a combined
front and rear yard setback of at least 40 feet, but neither the
front nor rear yard setback shall be less than 20 feet.
f. Setbacks of corner lots. Corner lots shall observe a setback of
at least 20 feet from each street right-of-way line.
g. Side yard setback. Each lot (or pair of lots, if the parcel
containing the two-family structure is divided into two lots)
shall have combined side yard setbacks of at least 40 feet but
neither side yard setback shall be less than 20 feet.
(3) Townhouse units. Townhouse units shall have the following lot
area, dimensions, yard setback, and outdoor living requirements:
a. Minimum width and frontage, lot and building. No lot shall
have a width of less than 22 feet, nor a lot frontage of less than
12 feet. No townhouse unit shall have a width of less than 22
feet.
b. Maximum depth. No lot shall have a depth of more than five
times its width.
c. Minimum area. No lot shall have an area of less than 2,000
square feet.
d. Front and rear yard setbacks. Each lot shall have a combined
front and rear yard setback of at least 35 feet, but neither the
front nor rear yard setback shall be less than 15 feet.
e. Setbacks of corner lots. Corner lots shall observe a setback of
at least 15 feet from each street right-of-way line or common
parking area, whichever is greater.
f. Side yard. There shall be a side yard of not less than 15 feet for
each and every end townhouse unit.
g. Outdoor living space. There should be direct access from each
townhouse unit to outdoor living space having an area of not
less than 330 square feet in size, having no single dimension of
less than 15 feet, which shall be clear of structures and shall be
designed for the recreational use of the occupants of the
§ T10B-272.9 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-272.9
BAO:1240
townhouse unit. The space may be at ground level or elevated
and may be composed of any materials designed to create
a patio or surface or may be a wood deck area, lawn, or
other surface or structure or combination thereof, in whole or
in part. Adequate visual screening from neighboring dwelling
units and their outdoor living space, adjacent parking areas,
and roadways shall be provided which may consist of
plantings, masonry structures, or wood fencing. Architectural
elements, such as masonry walls and fences, shall be
compatible in both style and materials with the dwelling unit
of which it is a part.
(4) Multi-family structures — non-townhouse. Since the dwelling units
in multi-family structures — nontownhouses may contain a variety
of configurations, no specific lot dimensions are prescribed for the
individual units. Each such structure shall conform to the following
requirements:
a. Minimum area. Each structure shall be on a lot having an area
of 2,800 square feet per dwelling unit in the structure.
b. Front and rear yard setbacks. Each structure shall have a
combined front and rear yard setback of at least 35 feet, but
neither the front nor rear yard setback shall be less than 15
feet.
c. Setbacks of corner lots. The portion of a structure at a corner
shall observe a setback of at least 15 feet from each street
right-of-way line or common parking area, whichever is
greater.
d. Side yard. Each structure shall have a side yard of not less than
15 feet.
e. Outdoor living space. Each unit in a structure shall have
outdoor living space comparable to that required from each
townhouse unit, but the planning board may allow those
requirements to be adjusted as may be necessary to
accommodate the different arrangements of units.
(5) Arrangements and height of buildings. The standards set forth in
section 10B-193 as to the arrangement and heights of buildings
shall apply, except as follows:
a. As to subsection (a) thereof, a distance between principal
buildings shall be at least 30 feet on the plane which describes
the buildings as being next to each other and 70 feet on the
plane which describes the buildings and backing or fronting
each other, and the distance between accessory structures
relating to townhouse or multi-family structures shall be at
least 10 feet.
§ T10B-272.9 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-272.9
BAO:1241
b. As to subsection (c) thereof, the buffer area required along
property lines other than public streets shall be at least 65 feet
or such greater distance as the planning board deems
necessary to protect existing neighborhoods or adjoining open
space.
c. As to subsection (d) thereof, townhouse and multifamily
structures shall not exceed 156 feet in length.
(6) Active recreation area. Any project within the R-T zone shall
provide an active recreation area, which shall include at a
minimum a paved hard surfaced area no less than 4,400 square feet
(minimum 50 feet by 88 feet), a regulation basketball court
(minimum of 50 feet by 84 feet and a minimum of 40 feet
unobstructed on all sides), and a regulation sized soccer field
(minimum of 200 by 300 feet with a minimum of 40 feet
unobstructed on three sides and one side with a minimum of 20
feet) with an appropriate underground drainage and fencing. The
active recreation area shall be a minimum of three contiguous
acres.
§ T10B-272.9 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-272.9
BAO:1242
SUBDIVISION 2.15
Residential-Historic Farmland-Woodland District40
§ T10B-272.10. Purposes. [Ord. No. 2004-15, § 1.]
Township committee has determined that a new zoning district, to be
designated R-HF-W, should be established in the township in order to:
§ T10B-272.11. Establishment. [Ord. No. 2004-15, § 1.]
There is hereby established a Residential-Historic Farmland (R-HF-W)
Zoning District including subzones A through F, made up of such land as is
shown on the zoning map on file in the office of the township clerk.
§ T10B-272.12. Permitted uses and restrictions on development in
subzones A through F. [Ord. No. 2004-15, § 1.]
(a) Retain as much of the lands within such zoning district in their present
condition as is practicable in order to preserve:
(1) The wooded portion thereof, commonly known as the Institute and
Quaker Woods, because of their critical importance in the
ecosystem and for recreational use;
(2) As much of the farm fields as is practicable in light of their historic
significance and the need to foster agricultural activities;
(3) The Stony Brook floodplain for environmental purposes; and
(4) The D&R Canal Park buffer in order to respect and protect the
quality of the park.
(5) Preserve existing historic farm structures in their historic setting
including avenues of approach.
(b) Effect such preservation goals by shifting development potential from
the areas preserved by mandating that development be clustered in the
portion of the tract most suitable therefor and with a density consistent
with a capacity of the circulation system.
(a) Subzone A. Subzone A shall be preserved as open space with a semirural
appearance. Only crop farming, livestock, orchard use, sod
farming and nursery-type activity and uses and structures accessory
and incidental thereto shall be permitted, and, if fallow, this subzone
shall be managed so as to prevent woody species, second growth
invasion.
(b) Subzone B. Subzone B shall be maintained in its natural condition. Tree
cutting shall be permitted only for forest management purposes and for
maintenance of existing and creation of new trails.
40.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance No. 92-37.
§ T10B-272.10 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-272.12
BAO:1243
(c) Subzone C. Subzone C shall be preserved as open space with a semirural
appearance. Only crop farming, livestock, orchard use, sod
farming and nursery-type activity and uses and structure accessory and
incidental thereto shall be permitted, and, if fallow this subzone shall be
managed so as to prevent wood species, second growth invasion. No
active recreation use other than playing fields on land leased to or
owned by the township shall be permitted.
(d) Subzones D and E. Subzones D and E shall remain in natural growth,
except that in the portion of Area D presently not wooded the uses set
forth in subsection (b) hereof shall be permitted, and, if fallow, this
portion will be managed so as to prevent woody species, second growth
invasion. No active recreation use other than playing fields on land
leased to or owned by the township shall be permitted in subzone D.
(e) Subzone F. Subzone F is divided into F-1 and F-2. Development in
subzone F that furthers the protection or preservation of existing
historic structure shall be permitted. There shall be no further
subdivision of land within this subzone. Within subzone F, the owner
shall have the right to restore and, to the extent destroyed by natural
causes, replace the main farmhouse and to restore and replace
accessory structures. All pertinent provisions of chapter 10B pertaining
to historic preservation or otherwise shall continue to apply.
(1) No further development shall be permitted in subzone F-1, nor
shall land therein be further subdivided.
(2) Within the F-2 subzone the following uses relating to historic
preservation, history, natural history, archaeology, environmental
studies and research are permitted: offices, meeting rooms,
educational classrooms, storage, display, archaeological
excavations, museum activities including collections management
and access, and other community activities associated with the
permitted uses. One existing structure may be used as a caretakers
residence. Single family residential use is permitted.
No more than 4,500 square feet of new gross floor area shall be
constructed in the F-2 subzone. Any new building or additions
to existing structures shall be designed to be sensitive to the
environmental and the historic significance of the site. New
construction must be designed and located to preserve the historic
integrity of existing structures.
(3) The following bulk standards shall apply in the F-2 subzone.
Maximum impervious coverage: 25%
Building Setback:
Front 280 feet
Side 35 feet
Rear 35 feet
§ T10B-272.12 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-272.12
BAO:1244
§ T10B-272.13. through § T10B-272.19. (Reserved)
Maximum impervious coverage: 25%
Parking Setback:
Front 150 feet
Side 45 feet
Rear 45 feet
§ T10B-272.12 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-272.13
BAO:1245

SUBDIVISION 2.16
Continuing Care Retirement Communities
§ T10B-272.20. Continuing care retirement communities:
Conditional use requirements. [Ord. No. 94-19, § 2.]
(a) A continuing care retirement community (CCRC) approvable as a
conditional use must be age restricted as set forth in the definition of a
CCRC (section 10B-241), must include independent living units in a
single-family, two-family, or multifamily structure, and assisted living
units and nursing care units. The CCRC shall also include facilities and
arrangements for providing continuing care and meals for residents,
with or without common dining facilities, and may include accessory
services customarily incidental to a continuing care retirement
community. For purposes of this subdivision:
(1) An INDEPENDENT LIVING UNIT - Is a dwelling unit in a
continuing care retirement community which is unrestricted except
as to an age requirement for occupancy.
(2) An ASSISTED LIVING UNIT - Is a unit in an assisted living facility
which is licensed by the New Jersey State Department of Health to
provide housing and congregate dining and to assure that assisted
living services are available when needed to adult persons
unrelated to the proprietor. Such units shall offer, at a minimum,
one unfurnished room, a private bathroom, a kitchenette and a
lockable door on the unit entrance. "Assisted living" is a level of
care between nursing care and independent living and includes a
coordinated array of supportive personal and health services,
available 24 hours per day, to residents who have been assessed to
need these services. Assisted living is intended to promote resident
self-direction and participation in decisions that emphasize
independence, individuality, privacy, dignity and homelike
surroundings.
(3) NURSING-CARE UNITS - Are beds in a nursing facility that is
licensed by the New Jersey State Department of Health to provide
health care under medical supervision and continuous nursing care
for 24 or more consecutive hours to patients who do not require the
degree of care and treatment which a hospital provides and who,
because of their physical or mental condition, require continuous
nursing care and services above the level of room and board.
(4) SINGLE-FAMILY STRUCTURES and TWO-FAMILY STRUCTURES -
Shall have the meaning ascribed to them in section 10B-191(a) and
(b).
(5) A MULTIFAMILY STRUCTURE - Is a building containing two or
more dwelling units, with each unit sharing with other unit or units,
one or more vertical or horizontal common walls and with each unit
§ T10B-272.20 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-272.20
BAO:1247
§ T10B-272.21. Number and mix of units. [Ord. No. 94-19, § 2.]
§ T10B-272.22. Accessory structures and uses. [Ord. No. 94-19, § 2.]
The following accessory structures and uses shall be permitted in a
continuing care retirement community: indoor and outdoor recreation
facilities, physical therapy facilities, entertainment facilities, libraries, food
preparation facilities, dining facilities, linen service facilities, nursing
services, housekeeping services, security facilities, administrative offices,
staff facilities, storage and maintenance facilities, chapels, temporary guest
lodging facilities, parking facilities, barber shop and beauty parlors,
having its own separate entrance which may either be an exterior
entrance or an entrance from an interior hallway or common area.
(b) To qualify for conditional use approval, the applicant must demonstrate
that the continuing care retirement community has received or will be
eligible to receive a Certificate of Authority from the State of New
Jersey, Department of Community Affairs, pursuant to the Continuing
Care Retirement Community Regulation and Financial Disclosure Act
(N.J.S.A. 52:27D-330, et seq.).
(c) In its review of whether a site is appropriate for a continuing care
retirement community, the board of jurisdiction shall attempt to achieve
the following:
(1) The integration of the proposed CCRC with the existing
development and existing land uses adjacent to the site;
(2) Assurances that the adjacent streets can efficiently and safely
accommodate the traffic to be generated by the proposed CCRC
without producing an unacceptable level of service;
(3) The availability of public transportation or provision of
transportation at the site; and
(4) Convenient access or means of access to shopping and needed
services, including health care services.
(d) Section 10B-321 shall not apply to an application seeking conditional
use approval for a continuing care retirement community.
(e) The only provisions of the chapter which shall be interpreted as
conditions of the conditional use are subsections (a) and (b) of this
section and section 10B-272.21.
(a) The maximum number of independent living units in a continuing care
retirement community shall not exceed the lesser of: 240 units or five
dwelling units per acre.
(b) The combined number of assisted living units and nursing care units in
a continuing care retirement community shall not be less than 25% nor
more than 40% of the total number of independent living units.
§ T10B-272.20 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-272.22
BAO:1248
facilities for the sale of sundries, personal articles, newspapers, food and
similar convenience products to the residents and such other uses as are
customarily associated with and subordinate to the principal permitted
uses. Except as may otherwise be authorized, all accessory facilities,
functions and services shall be for the use and benefit of the residents of the
facility.
§ T10B-272.23. Bulk regulations for the tract. [Ord. No. 94-19, § 2.]
The following bulk regulations shall be required for the tract on which a
continuing care retirement community is to be located:
§ T10B-272.24. Bulk regulations for units, lots and buildings. [Ord.
No. 94-19, § 2.]
(a) Minimum tract size: 40 acres;
(b) Minimum proposed developable area (an area not within required
setbacks, and 95% of which is not within steep slopes, stream corridors,
wetlands, or flood hazard areas): 25 contiguous compact acres;
(c) Minimum tract width: 800 feet;
(d) Minimum front, rear, and side yard;
Building setback: 100 feet;
Parking setback: 75 feet;
(e) Maximum impervious coverage: 40%;
(f) Maximum lot coverage: 30%;
(g) Screening of the perimeter of the tract: 40 feet;
(h) Perimeter screen buffers shall be installed in accordance with section
10B-304.
(a) No residential unit shall be large than 2,000 square feet, no more than
10% of the units shall be larger than 1,500 square feet, and no more
than 40% of the units shall be larger than 1,250 square feet. For
purposes of this section, the square footage size of the unit shall be the
interior living space within the unit.
(b) The maximum number of independent living units in single-family and
two-family structures in a continuing care retirement community shall
not exceed 18% of the total number of independent living units.
(c) No principal or accessory structure shall have a height greater than 45
feet (not to exceed three stories).
(d) In the application of the following provisions, section 10B-191.3 shall be
applicable.
§ T10B-272.22 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-272.24
BAO:1249
§ T10B-272.25. Parking requirements. [Ord. No. 94-19, § 2.]
No more than the number of off-street parking required to meet the needs
of the residents, employees and guests shall be allowed. The applicant
shall submit a parking study prepared by an expert to justify its need for
the proposed number of spaces. The applicant's proposed number shall
not exceed the number produced by applying the following standards for
determining the number of required parking spaces:
(e) Single-family structures shall have the lot area, dimensions, and yard
setback requirements set forth in section 10B-192.1(a).
(f) Two-family structure shall have the lot area, dimensions, and yard
setback requirements set forth in section 10B-192.1(b).
(g) Each multifamily structure shall conform to the requirements set forth
in section 10B-272.9(g)(4)a to d.
(h) The arrangement of buildings shall conform to the requirements set
forth in section 10B-193(a), (b), and (d).
(a) Independent living units: 1.4 per dwelling unit;
(b) Assisted living units: 0.35 per dwelling unit;
(c) Nursing beds: 0.35 per bed;
(d) Staff positions: 1.0 per staff member on maximum shift; and
(e) Visitors: 5% of otherwise required total.
The additional requirements of section 10B-291.1 shall apply.
§ T10B-272.24 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-272.25
BAO:1250
SUBDIVISION 2.17
Golf Course/Club
§ T10B-272.26. Golf course/club: Conditional use requirement.
[Ord. No. 94-22, § 2.]
(a) A golf course/club approvable as a conditional use must include a
minimum of 18 professional holes located on at least 185 acres and
available for play to the members and their guests. If the 185 acres in
Princeton Township constitutes more than 75% of the combined
contiguous acreage in Princeton Township owned by the applicant, then
the entire acreage shall be deemed part of the golf course/club
development. The golf course/club may include accessory structures for
the maintenance and operation of the course and for the lodging of
members and guests on an occasional overnight basis. Such support
facilities and overnight housing shall, to the extent practicable, be
provided within existing and/or renovated structures, if they exist, and
are to be located on the tract that accommodates the golf course and
accessory facilities. Any new structures built on the tract shall be
directly related to the operation of the golf course/club. The total gross
floor area (new and existing) for residential and overnight
accommodations shall not exceed 60,000 square feet. The total gross
floor area (new and existing) for buildings related to the operation and
maintenance of the course or for accessory facilities shall not exceed
100,000 square feet.
(b) In its review of whether a site is appropriate for a golf course/club, the
board of jurisdiction shall be satisfied that the application achieves the
following:
(1) The integration of the proposed golf course/club with the existing
development and land uses adjacent to the site, including safe
locations for golf holes (tees, holes and greens) and practice areas
as related to adjacent roads, development and other neighboring
site improvements.
(2) Where a golf course/club is adjacent to or within an open space
corridor, including floodplains, open water, waterway corridors,
wooded corridors, flyways and associated buffers, linkages and
conservation areas as shown and otherwise referenced in the
community master plan, the owner shall provide and maintain an
adequately designed walking/trail easement within the property
open to the public in furtherance of the municipal goal of linking
open spaces within the community. The pedestrian easement shall
be located so it does not interfere with play and shall be
appropriately isolated from the general operation of the golf
course/club. In the application approval process, consideration
shall be given to providing access to any required walking/trail
easements.
§ T10B-272.26 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-272.26
BAO:1251
(3) Assurances that the necessary infrastructure and utilities are
available from on-site, municipal or private systems including
sanitary sewer, potable water and irrigation water. The provision of
infrastructure and utilities shall not have a detrimental effect on
groundwater or surface water resources.
(4) The golf course/club shall have two safe and adequate access and
egress points from one or more public roads. One of the two
accesses may be provided only for emergency access. The two
means of access and egress shall be connected internally and this
may be achieved by use of a stabilized surface sufficient to allow
passage by emergency vehicles.
(5) Assurances that during a special event, including a tournament
event approved by the township, adequate provisions will be made
by the golf course/club to handle the crowd generated by such an
event and to satisfactorily mitigate off-site impacts including traffic
management, transportation services, parking, trash removal,
security and safety, sanitary, waste disposal, etc. The golf course/
club shall be required to post a performance guarantee for these
purposes. All local permissions and permits now or hereafter
required for special events shall be obtained prior to the event.
(6) A sufficient buffer shall be maintained between the golf course/club
and accessory uses and the adjacent uses. The centerline of any
golf tee, fairway or green shall be no closer than 125 feet from
property line or 120 feet from the right-of-way of a road. The golf
course shall be designed to minimize the opportunity for golf balls
to be hit outside of the property boundary lines. Any structure
exclusive of those features associated with playing golf (tees,
fairways, greens, cartpaths, practice areas) shall be a minimum of
200 feet from a property line.
(7) The course shall be designed to the extent possible to preserve the
contiguity of existing woodlands and wooded corridors. Clearance
of mature woods shall not exceed 15% of the total acreage of land
within the tract. Any clearing of woods beyond 10% of the tract
acreage shall be replaced elsewhere on the tract by trees and
shrubs similar in composition and comparable in area. In no case
shall the amount of clearing, excluding the area of replacement
planting, exceed 30% of the area of woods as measured from a
vegetation map or aerial photographs prepared or taken at the time
of adoption of this ordinance or, if none is available at that time,
then as shown on the most current maps or photographs available
at the time of adoption of this ordinance.
(8) Improvements related to the golf course/club and accessory
facilities/uses affecting existing steep slope areas shall be subject
to the steep slope restrictions of section 10B-254.1. Areas of play
(tee, greens, bunkers) created for purposes of the golf course and
§ T10B-272.26 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-272.26
BAO:1252
resulting in new areas of steep slope shall be exempt from this
section of the Code.
(9) A vegetative buffer area shall be maintained between any turf area
which is to be chemically treated and any nonintermittent stream
which shall be of sufficient size and design to protect the stream
from chemicals carried by stormwater run-off.
(10) As part of the application for conditional use approval the applicant
shall submit an integrated turf management plan and an integrated
pesticide and pest management plan specific to the operation and
maintenance of the proposed golf course/club. These plans shall be
prepared in accordance with guidelines established by the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) and shall
also take into account guidelines promulgated by the United States
Golf Association. These plans will include best management
practices (BMPs) to prevent or minimize any adverse impacts of
chemical applications on the groundwater and surface water
resources associated with the golf course.
(11) Assurances shall be provided that any adverse impacts on
groundwater or surface water quality resulting from the golf
course/club will be mitigated by the owner. The applicant shall
provide for the monitoring of water quality of the groundwater and
surface water resources associated with the golf course. The
monitoring program, including the timing and the frequency of
testing and the identification of chemical parameters to be tested
shall be established at the time the integrated turf management
plan and integrated pesticide and pest management plan are
approved as part of the conditional use application. The monitoring
program shall be consistent with the guidelines established for
monitoring plans by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection (NJDEP), Bureau of Water Quality Analysis. The results
and findings of any water quality monitoring shall be submitted by
the owner to the township for information purposes.
(12) Exterior lighting shall be provided on safety as related to support
facilities including areas, walkways, access drives and is prohibited
on or adjacent to the golf course and related practice areas.
Netting, mesh or similar devices to restrict areas of play are
prohibited.
(13) Section 10B-321 of the Township of Princeton Land Use Code shall
not apply.
(c) The only provisions of the chapter which shall be interpreted as
conditions of the conditional use are subsection (a) and paragraphs (1),
(3), (4), (5) and (9) of subsection (b) of section 10B-272.26.
§ T10B-272.26 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-272.27
BAO:1253
§ T10B-272.27. Accessory facilities and uses. [Ord. No. 94-22, § 2.]
The following accessory facilities and uses shall be permitted in a golf
course/club:
Club house (including dining rooms, common rooms, pro shop, social rooms,
kitchen, locker rooms, etc.) overnight accommodations (occasional lodging
for members and guests of the golf club), residences for employees engaged
in the maintenance and operation of the golf club facility, putting green,
practice range, cartpaths, parking lot, maintenance facility/garage, cart
storage facility, water supply impoundment/hazards, tennis and paddle
tennis courts, and swimming pools.
§ T10B-272.28. Bulk regulations for tract. [Ord. No. 94-22, § 2.]
The following bulk regulations shall apply to the tract on which the private
golf course is to be located:
§ T10B-272.29. Parking requirements. [Ord. No. 94-22, § 2.]
The number of parking spaces shall be as few as necessary to serve the club
facility. All spaces shall be within the boundary of the golf tract, and the
number shall be determined by a parking needs study to be conducted by
the applicant and filed at the time of the application. To the extent possible,
existing parking spaces on the lot shall be used. New spaces shall be
constructed of pervious material to minimize runoff and detention, except
where the level of use would make such an installation impractical.
(a) Minimum tract size: 185 contiguous acres;
(b) Maximum building height (new construction): 30 feet;
(c) Building setbacks: 75 feet;
(d) Parking setbacks: 75 feet;
(e) Golf course setbacks: see section 10B-272.26(b)(6); and
(f) Gross floor area: see section 10B-272.26(a).
§ T10B-272.27 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-272.29
BAO:1254
SUBDIVISION 2.18
Places of Worship
§ T10B-272.30. Places of worship: conditional use requirements.
[Ord. No. 95-5, § 2.]
§ T10B-272.31. Bulk regulations for the lot. [Ord. No. 95-5, § 2.]
The following bulk regulations shall be required for the lot or lots on which
a place of worship is to be located:
(a) A new or the expansion of an existing place of worship to be approvable
as a conditional use must have its primary vehicular access from an
arterial or major collector or minor collector road as classified in the
Princeton Community Master Plan and shall be subject to the bulk
regulations set forth in section 10B-272.31(a) and (b).
(b) An existing place of worship which does not have frontage on an
arterial or major collector or minor collector road may be expanded
subject to conditional use approval provided that the use as expanded
complies with the bulk regulations set forth in section 10B-272.31(a)
and (b).
(c) The conditional use standards set forth in section 10B-321 shall not
apply.
(a) Minimum lot size two acres.
(b) Maximum floor area ratio (F.A.R.) 12 1/2% or the F.A.R. for the zoning
district where located, if less.
(c) Minimum lot width 200 feet.
(d) Minimum lot depth 200 feet.
(e) Minimum lot frontage 100 feet.
(f) Maximum impervious coverage 50%.
(g) Building setbacks (but not less than a 1.5:1 building setback to building
height ratio):
Front yard 50 feet;
Side yards 50 feet;
Rear yard 50 feet.
(h) Parking setbacks:
Front yard 30 feet;
Side yards 30 feet;
Rear yard 30 feet.
§ T10B-272.30 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-272.31
BAO:1255
§ T10B-272.32. through § T10B-272.39. (Reserved)
(i) Driveways shall be set back at least 30 feet from all property lines
except as may otherwise be necessary for street access.
(j) Maximum height: 30 feet to the building plate, but not to exceed two
stories, except that one ornamental spire may be 100% higher than the
height to the building plate.
(k) Parking: one space per 200 square feet of building floor area, but not
less than one space for each five seats.
(l) Landscaped buffer strips required as per section 10B-304.
§ T10B-272.31 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-272.32
BAO:1256
SUBDIVISION 2.19
Nursing Homes and Assisted Living Residences
§ T10B-272.40. Nursing homes and assisted living residences:
Conditional use requirements. [Ord. No. 96-18; Ord. No. 2010-11,
§ 1.]
(a) A nursing home approvable as a conditional use must be a facility in a
multifamily structure which is licensed by the department of health, in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 8:39, to provide health care under medical
supervision and continuous nursing care for 24 or more consecutive
hours to patients who do not require the degree of care and treatment
which a hospital provides and who, because of their physical or mental
condition, require nursing home-level care. For purposes of this
subdivision:
(1) "Nursing care beds" are the approved beds in a nursing home
which are used or available for patients. The rooms in a nursing
home in which one or two nursing care beds may be located are
designated as "nursing care units."
(2) "Nursing home-level care" means care provided to individuals who
have chronic medical condition(s) resulting in moderate to severe
impairment in physical, behavioral, cognitive, and or psychosocial
functioning. It includes, but is not limited to, partial or total
assistance with activities of daily living, assistance with selfadministering
or administration of medication, and provision of
treatments and periodic reassessments as directed by the patient's
plan of care. It also includes the provision of physiotherapy,
occupational therapy, therapeutic counseling, and other
rehabilitative services as indicated by the patient's medical
condition.
(3) A "multifamily structure" is a building containing 30 or more
nursing care units with each unit sharing with another unit or
units, one or more vertical or horizontal common wall, and with
each unit having its own separate entrance from an interior hallway
or common area.
(b) An assisted living residence approvable as a conditional use must be a
facility in a multifamily structure which is licensed by the department of
health, in accordance with N.J.A.C. 8:36, to provide apartment-style
housing and congregate dining and to assure that assisted living
services are available when needed. Assisted living is intended to
promote resident self-direction and participation in decisions that
emphasize independence, individuality, privacy, dignity, and homelike
surroundings. The assisted living residence shall also include facilities
and arrangements for providing transportation and other accessory
services customarily incidental to an assisted living residence. For
purposes of this subdivision:
§ T10B-272.40 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-272.40
BAO:1257
(1) An "assisted living unit" is a unit in an assisted living residence
designed for one or two residents which offers at a minimum, one
unfurnished room, a private bathroom, a kitchenette, and a
lockable door on the unit entrance. The number of "assisted living
beds" in an assisted living residence shall mean the number of
assisted living units designed for one resident plus two times the
number of assisted living units designed for two residents.
(2) A "multifamily structure" is a building containing 20 or more
assisted living units with each unit sharing with another unit or
units, one or more vertical or horizontal common wall, and with
each unit having its own separate entrance from an interior hallway
or common area.
(c) To qualify for conditional use approval, the applicant must demonstrate
that the nursing home or assisted living residence has received or will
be eligible to receive a license from the State of New Jersey,
Department of Health, pursuant to the provisions of applicable state
statutes and regulations.
(d) A single facility may include both nursing care units and assisted living
units. To the extent that there are different quantitative regulations in
this subdivision for nursing homes and assisted living residences, the
applicable number shall be computed by interpolation based on the
number of nursing care units and the number of assisted living units.
(e) In its design of a site for a nursing home or an assisted living residence,
the applicant shall attempt to achieve the integration of the proposed
nursing home or assisted living residence with the existing and
proposed land uses adjacent to the site.
(f) Section 10B-321 shall not apply to an application seeking conditional
use approval under this subdivision.
(g) The regulation of assisted living units and nursing care units in a
continuing care retirement community shall be pursuant to subdivision
2.16 of chapter 10B, article XI, division 2 of the Princeton Township
Code, "Continuing Care Retirement Communities" and not this
subdivision.
(h) In assisted living residences, at least 5% of the assisted living units
shall qualify as affordable housing units.
(i) As part of its submission, the applicant seeking approval for a nursing
home or assisted living residence shall submit a document describing
its plans for helping people remain at the home or facility after they
have exhausted their own financial resources.
(j) The only provisions of the chapter which shall be interpreted as
conditions of the conditional use are subparagraphs (a) or (b) and (c) of
this section and section 10B-272.41.
§ T10B-272.40 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-272.40
BAO:1258
§ T10B-272.41. Number of units. [Ord. No. 96-18.]
The maximum number of nursing care units in a nursing home shall not
exceed the lesser of 120 nursing care units or 30 nursing care beds per
acre. The maximum number of assisted living units in an assisted living
residence shall not exceed the lesser of 100 assisted living units or 25
assisted living beds per acre. For purposes of this section, nursing homes
and/or assisted living residences constructed on contiguous parcels or on
parcels within 200 feet of each other, shall be aggregated in order to
determine whether the maximum numbers set forth herein have been
violated.
§ T10B-272.42. Accessory uses. [Ord. No. 96-18.]
The following accessory uses shall be permitted in a nursing home or
an assisted living residence: indoor recreation facilities, physical therapy
facilities, entertainment facilities, libraries, food preparation facilities,
dining facilities, linen service facilities, nursing services, housekeeping
services, security facilities, administrative offices, storage and maintenance
facilities, chapels, parking facilities, barber shop and beauty parlors,
facilities for the sale of sundries, personal articles, newspapers, food, and
similar convenience products to the residents, visitor accommodations not
exceeding 5% of the total number of units, and such other uses as are
customarily associated with and subordinate to the principal permitted
uses. Accessory uses in a nursing home may also include all facilities
necessary to provide nursing home-level care and services. Accessory
facilities, functions, and services shall be for the use and benefit of the
patients/residents of the facility and, subject to a plan approved by the
board of jurisdiction, may be made available for use by other persons.
§ T10B-272.43. Bulk regulations. [Ord. No. 96-18.]
The following bulk regulations shall apply to a nursing home or an assisted
living residence:
(k) Nursing homes and assisted living residences shall not be allowed as
permitted or conditional uses in the R-A or R-B zoning districts.
(a) In an R-T or S-2 zoning district:
(1) Minimum tract size: three acres;
(2) Maximum floor area ratio: 30%;
(3) Minimum tract width: 250 feet;
(4) Minimum building setbacks:
Front: 40 feet.
Rear and sides: 30 feet;
§ T10B-272.40 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-272.43
BAO:1259
§ T10B-272.44. Parking requirements. [Ord. No. 96-18.]
No more than the number of off-street parking required to meet the needs
of the residents, employees and guests shall be allowed. The applicant
shall submit a parking study prepared by an expert to justify its need for
the proposed number of spaces. The applicant's proposed number shall
not exceed the number produced by applying the following standards for
determining the number of required parking spaces:
§ T10B-272.45. through § T10B-272.49 (Reserved)
(5) Minimum parking setback: 30 feet, but no parking shall be allowed
in the area between the road and the facade of the building closest
to the road. For a corner lot this shall apply to the setback from
both roads.
(6) Maximum impervious coverage: 40%;
(7) Perimeter screen buffers of 15 feet shall be installed in accordance
with section 10B-304;
(8) Maximum height: 35 feet;
(9) The setback to height ratio for the front, rear, and side yards shall
be no less than 1.5 to 1.
(b) In an OR-1 or OR-2 zoning district, the schedule of regulations set forth
in section 10B-246 for these districts shall apply, except that the
maximum floor area ratio shall be 30% and the maximum impervious
coverage shall be 40%.
(a) 0.30 spaces per nursing care bed or assisted living bed;
(b) 1.0 spaces per staff member on the maximum shift; and
(c) An additional 10% of the sum of (a) and (b) above. The additional
requirement of section 10B-291.1 shall apply.
§ T10B-272.43 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-272.45
BAO:1260
SUBDIVISION 2.20
Personal Wireless Telecommunication Facilities and Equipment
§ T10B-272.50. Preamble. [Ord. No. 98-20, § 1.]
Whereas, the federal government, through the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC), has issued personal wireless telecommunication
licenses for personal telecommunication services and other wireless
technologies; and
Whereas, the FCC requires license holders to provide coverage to areas
where personal wireless telecommunications licenses have been acquired
and this may require that such facilities be constructed in specified
locations and manners determined by engineering standards to achieve
such coverage; and
Whereas, the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 (FTA) preserves
local zoning authority to reasonably regulate personal wireless
telecommunication facilities (PWTFs); but the FTA mandates that localities
may not unreasonably discriminate among FCC license holders and that
localities cannot prohibit or adopt regulations which have the effect of
prohibiting the provision of wireless services, and the FTA gives the FCC
sole jurisdiction over radio frequency emissions of PWTFs so long as PWTFs
meet FCC standards; and
Whereas, it is necessary to reasonably regulate PWTFs and associated
personal wireless telecommunications equipment facilities (PWTEFs) to
minimize potential aesthetic impacts; and
Now therefore, there is a need for new provisions in the Princeton Township
land use code to address the siting of PWTFs and PWTEFs.
§ T10B-272.51. Definitions. [Ord. No. 98-20, § 1; Ord. No. 2004-11,
§ 1.]
ANTENNA — A system of electrical conductors that transmit or receive
radio frequency signals for wireless communications.
ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE — A structure other than a
telecommunications tower which is attached to a building and on which one
or more antennas are located.
COLLOCATION — Use of a common PWTF or a common site by two or more
wireless license holders or by one wireless license holder for more than
one type of communication technology and/or placement of a PWTF on a
structure.
PERSONAL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT
FACILITIES (PWTEFS) — Facilities serving and subordinate in area, extent
and purpose to, and on the same lot as, a telecommunications tower or
antenna location. Such facilities include, but are not limited to, transmission
equipment, equipment cabinets, storage sheds, storage buildings, and
security fencing.
§ T10B-272.50 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-272.51
BAO:1261
PERSONAL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES (PWTFS) —
Facilities for the provision of wireless communications services, including,
but not limited to, antennas, antenna support structure,
telecommunications towers, and related facilities other than PWTEFs.
PRINCETON COMMUNITY — The Township of Princeton and the Borough
of Princeton, in the County of Mercer, and State of New Jersey.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER — A freestanding structure on which
one or more antennas are located, including lattice towers, guyed towers,
monopoles and similar structures.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS — Any personal wireless services as
defined in the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 (FTA) which
includes FCC licensed commercial wireless telecommunications services
including cellular, personal communication services (PCS), specialized
mobile radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobile radio (ESMR), paging,
and similar services that currently exist or that may in the future be
developed. It does not include any amateur radio facility that is owned
and operated by a federally-licensed amateur radio station operator or is
used exclusively for receive only antennas, nor does it include non-cellular
telephone service.
§ T10B-272.52. Purpose and goals. [Ord. No. 98-20, § 1.]
The purpose of this subdivision is to provide sound land use policies,
procedures and regulations for personal wireless telecommunications
facilities to protect the Princeton community from the visual or other
adverse impacts of these facilities, while encouraging their unobtrusive
development to provide comprehensive wireless telecommunications
services in the Princeton community with its benefits to residents and
businesses. The ordinance expresses a preference that antennas be located
on existing buildings and towers, preferably on municipal or other public
property, and not on newly constructed telecommunications towers; and
encourages collocation and site sharing of new and existing PWTFs.
§ T10B-272.53. Development standards. [Ord. No. 98-20, § 1.]
(a) Height standards. Where permitted, PWTFs may exceed the maximum
building height limitations, provided the height has the least visual
impact and is no greater than required to achieve service area
requirements and potential collocation, when visually appropriate.
PWTEFs are limited to 12 feet in height.
(b) Setback standards. All PWTF and PWTEF shall be subject to the
minimum yard requirements of the zoning district in which it is located,
provided the minimum setback may be increased where necessary to
address safety concerns. If PWTEFs are located on the roof of a
building, the area of the PWTEFs and other equipment and structures
shall not occupy more than 25% of the roof area.
§ T10B-272.51 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-272.54
BAO:1262
§ T10B-272.54. Locational priority. [Ord. No. 98-20, § 1; Ord. No.
2004-11, § 2.]
If needed in accordance with an overall comprehensive plan for the
provision of full wireless communications service within the Princeton
community, PWTFs and PWTEFs shall be permitted as a conditional use
in all districts. Proposals on lower priority sites with less visual impact,
assessed under section 10B-272.55, shall take preference over higher
priority sites. Locational priorities shall consist of the following:
§ T10B-272.55. Conditional use standards. [Ord. No. 98-20, § 1;
Ord. No. 2004-11, § 3.]
All PWTFs and PWTEFs shall be located to minimize visual impacts on the
surrounding area in accordance with the following standards. In applying
these standards, locations in a higher priority category under section
10B-272.54 shall be deemed more acceptable than lower priority sites.
(a) The first priority location shall be on lands or structures owned by
Princeton Township if feasible and available;
(b) The second priority location shall be on lands or structures owned by
the Princeton Regional School District if feasible and available;
(c) The third priority location shall be collocation on existing PWTFs (or
existing water tanks) provided that the new installation does not
increase the height by more than 10%;
(d) The fourth priority location shall be existing buildings, steeples, bell
towers, poles or other structures which can be used for PWTEFs and
PWTFs in such a manner as to render the antennas and related
equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible.
(e) The fifth priority location shall be such locations as the applicant proves
are essential to provide required service to the Princeton community.
(a) Sites for PWTFs and PWTEFs must demonstrate that they provide the
least visual impact on residential areas and public way. All potential
visual impacts must be analyzed to illustrate that the selected site
provides the best opportunity to minimize the visual impact of the
proposed facility.
(b) PWTEFs should be located to avoid being visually solitary or prominent
when viewed from residential areas and the public way. The facility
should be obscured by vegetation, tree cover, topographic features and/
or other structures to the maximum extent feasible.
(c) PWTFs and PWTEFs shall be placed to ensure that historically
significant viewscapes, streetscapes, and landscapes are protected. The
views of and vistas from architecturally and/or significant structures
should not be impaired or diminished by the placement of
telecommunication facilities.
§ T10B-272.54 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-272.55
BAO:1263
§ T10B-272.56. Site design standards. [Ord. No. 98-20, § 1; Ord. No.
2004-11, § 4.]
The following design standards shall apply to PWTFs and PWTEFs installed
or constructed pursuant to the terms of this subdivision:
(d) The applicant must document they are using the least visually obtrusive
technology to provide the required service. The applicant must present
to the board of jurisdiction information on the available technologies for
the proposed location and document that the selected technology has
the least visual impact.
(e) The standards set forth in section 10B-321 shall not apply.
(f) The board may waive any of the above standards upon the applicant
showing that enforcement would prevent the applicant from satisfying
its license requirements.
(a) Collocation. Ordinance limitation on the number of structures on a lot
(e.g., section 10B-276 and 10B-276.1 of the Township Code) shall not
apply when PWTFs and PWTEFs are located on a lot with buildings or
structures already on it. See also section 10B-272.57.
(b) Fencing and Other Safety Devices. PWTFs and PWTEFs shall be
surrounded by security features such as a fence which prevent
unauthorized access. Other safety measures such as anti-climbing
devices may be considered by the board in accordance with applicable
federal U.S. Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health
Administration standards and state building code requirements.
(c) Landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided along the perimeter of the
security fence to provide a visual screen or buffer for adjoining private
properties and the public right-of-way. Required front yard setback
areas shall be landscaped. All PWTEFs shall be screened by an
evergreen hedge eight to 10 feet in height at planting time and/or a
solid fence eight feet in height.
(d) Signs. Signs shall not be permitted except for signs displaying owner
contact information, warnings, equipment information and safety
instructions. Such signs shall not exceed two square feet in area. No
commercial advertising shall be permitted on any PWTF or PWTEF.
(e) Color. PWTFs and PWTEFs shall be of a color appropriate to the
locational context and to make them as unobtrusive as possible, unless
otherwise required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).
(f) Activity and Access. All equipment shall be designed and automated to
the greatest extent possible in order to reduce the need for onsite
maintenance and thereby to minimize the need for vehicular trips to
and from the site. Access shall be from established site access points
whenever possible. Minimal off-street parking shall be permitted as
needed and as approved by the planning board.
§ T10B-272.55 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-272.56
BAO:1264
§ T10B-272.57. Collocation policy. [Ord. No. 98-20, § 1; Ord. No.
2004-11, § 5.]
It is the policy of the Township of Princeton to minimize the number of
PWTFs and to encourage the collocation of antenna arrays of more than one
(g) Dish Antennas. Dish antennas shall be colored, camouflaged or
screened to make them as unobtrusive as possible and in no case shall
the diameter of a dish antenna exceed 18 inches.
(h) Lighting. No lighting is permitted except as follows:
(1) PWTEFs enclosing electronic equipment may have security and
safety lighting at the entrance or point of enclosure, provided that
the light is attached to the facility, is focused downward and is on
timing devices and/or sensors so that the light is turned off when
not needed for safety or security purposes; and
(2) No lighting is permitted on a PWTF except lighting that specifically
is required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), and any
such required lighting shall be focused and shielded to the greatest
extent possible so as not to project towards adjacent and nearby
properties.
(i) Monopole. Any proposed new telecommunications tower shall be a
"monopole" unless the applicant can demonstrate, that a different type
pole is necessary for the collocation of additional antennas on the
tower. Such towers may employ camouflage technology.
(j) Noise. No equipment shall be operated so as to produce noise in excess
of the limits set by the local noise ordinance, except for in emergency
situations requiring the use of a backup generator.
(k) Radio Frequency Emissions. The FTA gives the FCC sole jurisdiction of
the field of regulation of radio frequency (RF) emission and PWTFs
which meet the FCC standards shall not be conditioned or denied on the
basis of RF impacts. Applicants shall provide current FCC information
concerning PWTFs and Radio Frequency emission standards. PWTFS
shall be required to provide information on the projected power density
of the proposed facility and how this meets the FCC standards.
(l) Structural Integrity. PWTFs must be constructed to the Electronics
Industries Association/Telecommunications Industries Association (EIA/
TIA) 222 Revision F Standard entitled "Structural Standards for Steel
Antenna Towers and Antenna Supporting Structures" (or equivalent),
as it may be updated or amended.
(m) Maintenance. PWTFs shall be maintained to assure their continued
structural integrity. The owner of the PWTF shall also perform such
other maintenance of the structure and of the site as to assure that it
does not create a visual nuisance.
§ T10B-272.56 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-272.57
BAO:1265
wireless telecommunications service provider on a single support tower. In
furtherance of this policy:
(a) The municipal engineer shall maintain an inventory of existing PWTF
locations within or near the Princeton community.
(b) An applicant proposing a PWTF at a new location shall demonstrate
that it made a reasonable attempt to find a collocation site that is
technically feasible and that none was practically or economically
feasible. The applicant shall include in its design the opportunity for
collocation by others or explain why collocation is not feasible.
Applications within the fourth locational priority are exempt from this
requirement.
(c) Each application for a PWTF shall be accompanied by a plan which shall
reference all existing PWTF locations in the applicant's Princeton
community inventory, any such facilities in the abutting towns which
provide service to areas within the Princeton community, any changes
proposed within the following twelve-month period, including plans for
new locations and the discontinuance or relocation of existing facilities.
(d) Each applicant shall include a site location alternative analysis
describing the location of other sites considered, the availability of
those sites, the extent to which other sites do or do not meet the
provider's service or engineering needs, and the reason why the subject
site was chosen. The analysis shall address the following issues:
(1) How the proposed location of the PWTF relates to the objective of
providing full wireless communication services within the
Princeton community at the time full service is provided by the
applicant throughout the Princeton community;
(2) How the proposed location of the proposed PWTF relates to the
location of any existing antennas within and near the Princeton
community;
(3) How the proposed location of the proposed PWTF relates to the
anticipated need for additional antennas within and near the
Princeton community by the applicant and, to the extent known, by
other providers of wireless communication services within the
Princeton community;
(4) How the proposed location of the proposed PWTF relates to the
objective of collocating the antennas of many different providers of
wireless communication services on the same PWTF. Applications
within the fourth locational priority are exempt from this
requirement; and
(5) How its plan specifically relates to and is coordinated with the
needs of all other providers, to the extent known, of wireless
communication services within the Princeton community.
§ T10B-272.57 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-272.57
BAO:1266
§ T10B-272.58. Removal of abandoned PWTFs. [Ord. No. 98-20,
§ 1.]
Any PWTF that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall
be considered abandoned. If there are two or more users of a single PWTF,
then the abandonment shall not become effective until all users cease using
the PWTF for a continuous period of 12 months. The owner of such PWTF
shall remove same within 90 days of notice from the zoning officer that
the PWTF is abandoned. If such PWTF is not removed within said 90 days,
the municipality may remove such PWTF at the owner's expense. If the
facility is to be retained, the provider(s) shall establish that the facility will
be reused within one year of such discontinuance. If a facility is not reused
within one year, a demolition permit shall be obtained and the facility
removed. At the discretion of the zoning officer, upon good cause shown,
the one year reuse period may be extended for a period not to exceed one
additional year.
§ T10B-272.59. Nonconforming PWTFs. [Ord. No. 98-20, § 1.]
PWTFs in existence on the date of the adoption of this subdivision, which
do not comply with the requirements of this subdivision (nonconforming
PWTFs) are subject to the following provisions.
(e) The Planning Board may retain technical consultants as it deems
necessary to provide assistance in the review of the site location
alternatives analysis. The service provider shall bear the reasonable
cost associated with such consultation, which cost shall be deposited in
accordance with Princeton's escrow provisions.
(a) Nonconforming PWTFs may continue in use for the purpose now used,
but may not be expanded without complying with this subdivision.
(b) Nonconforming PWTFs which are partially damaged or destroyed due
to any reason or cause may be repaired and restored to their former
use, location and physical dimensions subject to obtaining a building
permit therefor, but without otherwise complying with this subdivision.
If this destruction is greater than partial, then repair or restoration will
require compliance with this subdivision.
(c) The owner of any nonconforming PWTF may repair, rebuild and/or
upgrade (but not expand such PWTF or increase its height or reduce its
setbacks), in order to improve the structural integrity of the facility, to
allow the facility to accommodate collocated antennas or facilities, or to
upgrade the facilities to current engineering, technological or
communications standards, without having to conform to the provisions
of this subdivision.
§ T10B-272.57 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-272.60
BAO:1267
§ T10B-272.60. Additional site plan submission requirements. [Ord.
No. 98-20, § 1.]
In addition to the applicable documentation and items of information
required for site plan approval the following additional documentation and
items of information are required to be submitted to the planning board for
review and approval as part of the site plan submission:
(a) Documentation by a qualified expert regarding the capacity of any
proposed PWTF for the number and type of antennas;
(b) Documentation by a qualified expert that any proposed PWTF will have
sufficient structural integrity to support the proposed antennas and the
anticipated future collocated antennas and that the structural
standards developed for antennas by the Electronic Industries
Association (EIA) and/or the Telecommunication Industry Association
(TIA) have been met;
(c) A letter of intent by the applicant, in a form which is reviewed and
approved by the Township Attorney, indicating that the applicant will
share the use of any PWTF with other approved providers of wireless
communication services; and
(d) A visual impact study, graphically simulating through models,
computer-enhanced graphics, or similar techniques, the appearance of
any proposed tower and indicating its view from at least the five
locations around and within one mile of the proposed PWTF where the
PWTF will be most visible. Aerial photographs of the impact area shall
also be submitted.
§ T10B-272.60 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-272.60
BAO:1268
SUBDIVISION 2.21
Residential Senior Community-2 Overlay Zone (RSC-2) District41
§ T10B-272.61. Permitted uses; RSC-2 zone. [Ord. No. 2001-29, § 3;
Ord. No. 2008-1, § 1; Ord. No. 2010-12, § 1; Ord. No. 2011-18; Ord.
No. 2014-43 § 3]
The following uses or any combination thereof are permitted in the RSC-2
overlay zone:
§ T10B-272.62. Permitted gross density; RSC-2 zone. [Ord. No.
2001-29, § 3; Ord. No. 2008-1, § 1; Ord. No. 2010-12, § 1; Ord. No.
2014-43 § 3]
The permitted gross density in the RSC-2 shall be seven dwelling units per
acre. Affordable housing units as defined in section 10B-333 of this code
(a) Age restricted housing complying with all of the provisions of the
Federal Fair Housing Act, 42 U.S.C. 3601 et seq., and of the provisions
of the Federal Housing For Older Persons Act of 1995, 42 U.S.C.
3607(b)(2)(c), so that at least 80% of the occupied units within a project
developed within the RSC-2 overlay zone are occupied by at least one
person who is 55 years of age or older after 25% of the units within the
development are occupied; or
(b) During the initial full lease up of any development constructed within
the RSC-2 overlay zone, if the development leases less than an average
of 10 units per month over a period of two consecutive months, then:
(1) The developer may market and lease, for one year terms only, to
persons who are under 55 years of age provided that when an
average of 10 units per month are rented (including both units to
those who are under 55 and to those who are over 55) for two
consecutive months, then the developer shall market only to
tenants who have at least one occupant age 55 years or older. If
after initial full lease up, the occupancy within the development
constructed within the RSC-2 overlay zone drops below 90% or any
units remain available for a period of two consecutive months, then
units may be marketed and leased to persons under 55 years of age
for one year terms. When a development constructed within the
RSC-2 overlay zone reaches full occupancy, the developer will
again give first preference to persons 55 years of age or older. The
developer shall also maintain two separate waiting lists for units
within the development. One list will be for potential occupants
who are 55 years of age or older and one list will be for potential
occupants less than 55 years old. The list of those 55 years of age or
older shall always have priority for units within the development.
41.Editor's Note: Prior material regarding the Residential Senior Community-1 Overlay Zone
(RSC-1) District as codified in Sec. 10B-272.61 through Sec. 10B-272.64 was deleted by
Ord. No. 2014-43.
§ T10B-272.61 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-272.62
BAO:1269
shall be excluded from the gross density calculation provided that the total
number of dwelling units (market rate and affordable) do not exceed 153
units.
§ T10B-272.63. Mandatory set aside for affordable housing; RSC-2
zone. [Ord. No. 2001-29, § 3; Ord. No. 2008-1, § 1; Ord. No. 2010-12,
§ 1; Ord. No. 2014-43 § 3]
(a) Subdivision and site plan approvals for developments within the district
may only be approved if 12 of the sale units are age restricted
affordable housing units meeting the standards in section 10B-332 and
section 10B-350 as follows: eight moderate-income units and four lowincome
units.
(b) Additionally, any developer shall enter into a developer's agreement
with the township which may provide for the donation of land to the
township or to a recognized New Jersey nonprofit conservation
organization while reserving the right for the improvements as
provided for hereinbelow in subsection (c) to an existing detention
basin contiguous to the developer's tract to accommodate adjacent
affordable housing units and stormwater runoff from the remainder of
the lands to be developed provided that the sizing of any piping for
stormwater runoff will be minimized as shall be determined necessary
by the township engineer in consultation with professional hydrologists
in accordance with section 10B-272.64(o) and shall be field located
within an existing right-of-way (ROW), where one exists, and then
within the tract to be donated so as to avoid the removal of any trees to
the fullest extent feasible with any disturbance to be replanted with
native and non-invasive species. A cash contribution shall be made to
the Princeton Township Affordable Housing Trust Fund as required by
the township's affordable housing ordinance in effect at the time the
developer receives its first construction permit for the project crediting
to the developer the value of the 12 affordable housing units
constructed on the property as well as the cost of improvements to the
detention basin, if any, referenced in paragraph (c) below. Finally, if
stormwater piping is necessary, the pipe shall run from Bunn Drive
south down the existing sewer easement as far as possible before
turning east towards the existing detention basin at a point where there
will be the shortest clear straight run to the detention basin by a line in
which no trees, to the fullest extent feasible, will be affected and where,
in terms of grade, a minimum pitch of 1% can be maintained for proper
drainage. The goal is to get the pipe to the detention basins with a
minimal crossing of Block 4401, Lot 1, Princeton Township Tax Map and
with no removal of trees.
(c) Any improvements to the detention basin contiguous to the developer's
tract shall permit the deepening of said basin but any lateral
improvements to the basin shall be kept to a minimum as determined by
the township engineer so as not to unduly disturb the dam surrounding
§ T10B-272.62 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-272.63
BAO:1270
§ T10B-272.64. Development rights; RSC-2 zone. [Ord. No. 2001-29,
§ 3; Ord. No. 2002-6, § 2; Ord. No. 2003-5, § 5; Ord. No. 2008-01, § 1;
Ord. No. 2010-12, § 1; Ord. No. 2014-43 § 3]
It is not the intent of this division to prescribe the form of ownership for
the dwelling units in a residential development and the ownership may
be fee simple, condominium or cooperative or any combination thereof.
However for the purposes of regulating the location of buildings within the
development it is necessary to prescribe lot sizes, dimensions and setback
standards. In zero lot line developments (i.e. where the dwelling units are
not to be located on individually owned separate fee simple title lots) each
dwelling unit or structure shall be located so that it would comply with
prescribed lot standards if imaginary lot lines were superimposed on the
development.
the basin and shall not disturb the area externally adjacent to the dam
unless additional expansion is required by local or state regulations.
(a) The following standards shall apply to all tracts to be developed in the
RSC-2 overlay district:
(1) Minimum building setback from tract line abutting a park: 100 feet.
(2) Minimum building setback from tract line abutting a residential
use:42 250 feet.
(3) Minimum building setback from tract line abutting a nonresidential
use: 200 feet.
(4) Minimum building setback to height ratio abutting a residential
use: 2.0 to 1.
(5) Minimum building setback to height ratio abutting a park or
nonresidential use: 1.0 to 1.
(6) Maximum impervious coverage: 18% (All aboveground surface
areas including but not limited to roadways, parking areas, utility
areas, walkways, fire-buffer zones, nonstructural stormwater
measures and patios shall be constructed with pervious materials
to the maximum extent practicable.)
(7) Minimum preserved open space: 81%.
(For purposes of this section, "preserved open space" shall include
preserved open space as defined by section 10B-194(a)(2) of this
Code as well as shall mean areas permanently preserved as a
natural forest area with no active recreational amenities or
facilities except areas for a natural trail system designed in
consultation with a recognized New Jersey nonprofit conservation
organization.
42.All setbacks shall include the existing vegetation, which shall remain in its natural state.
§ T10B-272.63 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-272.64
BAO:1271
(8) Maximum floor area ratio:43 30%.
(9) Total new site disturbance (including buildings, driveways,
parking, utilities and construction buffer but excluding any areas
disturbed to pipe stormwater as provided for in section
10B-272.63(b); excluding any areas disturbed in order to provide
emergency ingress and egress to a tract within this zone and
excluding any areas required to detain stormwater either
underground or adjacent to the driveway or residential road access
to the tract as well as the Transco Pipeline and excluding pathways:
19%.
(10) All parking except for visitor and delivery parking shall be
underground. There shall be no parking on any driveway or
residential access roads. There shall be no banked parking.
(b) Nothing in this section shall preclude the developer of a tract within the
zone from donating, granting or transferring a conservation easement
or fee title to preserved open space as defined in section 10B-194(a)(2)
of this Code and as modified for the zone at subsection (h) hereinbelow
to a recognized New Jersey nonprofit conservation organization.
(c) The following are the standards for each residential unit type permitted
in the RSC-2 overlay district:
(1) Single-family.
a. Minimum lot area: 5,000 square feet.
b. Minimum lot width: 50 feet.
c. Minimum lot depth: 90 feet.
d. Minimum lot frontage: 30 feet.
e. Minimum building setback.
1. Front: 15 feet.
2. Side: 10 feet.
3. Combined side: 25 feet.
4. Rear: 20 feet.
f. Maximum building height: 35 feet.
(2) Two-family.
a. Minimum lot area: 6,000 square feet.
b. Minimum lot width: 60 feet.
43.Underground parking shall be excluded from any floor area ratio calculation.
§ T10B-272.64 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-272.64
BAO:1272
c. Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
d. Minimum lot frontage: 40 feet.
e. Minimum building setback.
1. Front: 15 feet.
2. Side: 10 feet.
3. Combined side: 25 feet.
4. Rear: 20 feet.
f. Maximum building height: 35 feet.
(3) Townhouse.
a. Minimum lot width: 20 feet.
b. Minimum lot depth: 90 feet.
c. Minimum lot frontage: 20 feet.
d. Minimum building setback.
1. Front: 15 feet.
2. Side: 10 feet (end units).
3. Rear: 15 feet.
e. Maximum building height: 35 feet.
(4) Quadraplex.
a. Minimum lot width: 30 feet per unit.
b. Minimum lot depth: 40 feet.
c. Minimum lot frontage: 30 feet.
d. Minimum building setback.
1. Front: 15 feet.
2. Side: 10 feet (end units).
3. Rear: 15 feet.
(5) Multifamily.
a. Minimum building setback from internal street/driveway.
1. Front: 10 feet.
2. Side: 15 feet.
§ T10B-272.64 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-272.64
BAO:1273
3. Rear: 20 feet.
b. Minimum setback distance between multifamily buildings.
1. Front: 20 feet.
2. Side: 20 feet.
3. Rear: 20 feet.
c. Maximum number of stories: three.
(Except a 4th story may be added to any buildings(s)
constructed within 300 feet of a public park.)
d. Maximum height to the building plate: 55 feet.
Building plate is defined as the uppermost horizontal wall
structural timber supporting a roof. The building plate shall be
measured in the same way as building height is measured.
e. Maximum building height: 62 feet.
Maximum height of building shall be measured pursuant to
section 10B-241, except that if underground parking facilities
are proposed, the measurement shall be made from preexisting
grade.
(d) (Reserved)
(e) Off-street parking:
(1) Parking requirements: The following parking standards shall apply
for all units.
1 bedroom 1.2 parking spaces
2 bedroom 1.5 parking spaces
3 bedroom 1.8 parking spaces
Visitor and delivery parking: Aboveground parking for up to
21 visitor's vehicles or delivery
vehicles shall be provided.
(2) The provisions of sections 10B-286 through 289 regarding parking
lot design shall apply except in such cases where the side or sides
of the parking lot borders on a permanent, natural forest area, in
which case no additional screening shall be required. If any such
lot(s) border a natural gas pipeline or other open area, then any
trees or shrubs installed as a buffer shall have native and noninvasive
species as approved by the township arborist.
(3) Underground or structure parking shall be excluded from any floor
area ratio calculation pursuant to subsection (a)(8) footnote 2
hereinabove.
§ T10B-272.64 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-272.64
BAO:1274
(4) Public streets shall not be determined to make land noncontiguous
for the purposes of this Ordinance.
(f) Arrangement of buildings:
(1) The following standards shall govern the location and arrangement
of buildings:
a. Structures shall be located on the least environmentally
vulnerable land on the tract as determined with reference to
section 10B-233(h) and shall be sited in one or more clusters in
a manner most appropriate to the natural features and critical
areas of the tract.
b. Each dwelling unit shall be located so that it is accessible by
police, firefighting and emergency vehicles. Buffers around
perimeters of residential buildings that are meant for safety
and fire access shall be constructed of reinforced turf; no
impervious or pervious asphalt (or comparable) surfacing shall
be used. Width of the buffers shall be 20 feet. The need for
such buffers shall be eliminated in such cases where any
building exposure (or "side") shall be deemed already
accessible to fire and safety vehicles or where the existence of
a sprinkler system within the residential uses shall be deemed
by the township fire marshal to be sufficient protection in itself,
without the presence of a fire buffer. An emergency access
road shall be allowed on the northerly portion of the tract on an
existing easement and shall be constructed of reinforced turf
and have a width not greater than 20 feet.
c. Each dwelling unit location shall be reasonably related to the
appurtenant parking areas.
(2) Multifamily, quadraplex and townhouse structures shall be no
closer to each other or to single-family or two-family structures
than 25 feet on the plane which describes the buildings as backing
or fronting each other. Garages for adjacent townhouse or
quadraplex units may be attached to each other.
(3) Townhouse, multifamily or quadraplex structures shall not have a
length in excess of 180 feet, excluding connecting hallways and
shall be designed with offsets or other architectural features so as
to provide breaks in the linear plane.
(4) Multifamily structures shall provide for variety in roof height and
avoid the appearance of one continuous structure. Developers are
encouraged to include buildings which have both two and three
story portions.
(g) Screening of uses:
(1) Sections 10B-304 through 306 shall not apply.
§ T10B-272.64 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-272.64
BAO:1275
(2) Section 10B-307 shall be modified to require a forty-foot wide
buffer strip along all property lines in the RSC-2 overlay zone
consisting of natural, undisturbed vegetation.
(h) Preserved open space:
(1) At least 81% of the tract or 16.9 of an acre shall be devoted to
preserved open space as defined in section 10B-272.64(a)(7)
hereinabove.
(i) Community space:
(1) All developments in the RSC-2 zone may include community space
for the use of residents including, but not limited to, space for
dining rooms, laundry rooms, nurses' offices, other staff offices,
meeting rooms, and game rooms. The community space shall not
constitute gross floor area for purposes of the limitation on the
floor area ratio up to 2% of the total gross floor area of the
development.
(j) All buildings constructed within the zone shall be to silver Leadership
and Energy and Environmental Design standard ("LEED") or to an
energy and environmental design standard for a sustainable building by
a similar reputable certified organization.
(k) All units subject to the barrier free subcode of the Uniform
Construction Code must be handicapped adaptable pursuant to the
provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:23-7 which shall mean that the dwelling unit has
an accessible entrance; an accessible interior route into and throughout
the dwelling unit, including maneuvering space at doors; and required
clear floor spaces and reach ranges in all rooms. The dwelling unit shall
have either the adaptable features in the kitchen and bathroom or a
fully accessible kitchen and bathroom.
(l) All market rate units constructed within the zone shall be marketed
with an equal preference as follows:
(1) To current residents of the township and Borough of Princeton; and
(2) To parents and children of current residents of the township and
Borough of Princeton; and
(3) To persons who were either residents of the township or Borough of
Princeton within the past five years of the date of the adoption of
this ordinance; and
(4) Current, active emergency service volunteers of the fire
department and the first aid and rescue squads; and
(5) Current employees of the township, Borough of Princeton,
Princeton Public Library, Princeton Regional Board of Education or
employees of any of the joint Township and Borough of Princeton
municipal agencies.
§ T10B-272.64 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-272.64
BAO:1276
This preference for the sale of market rate units shall take place
through the date the developer issues its final construction
documents and receives it first construction permit for the
development.
In providing this preference for the sale of market rate units, the
developer shall maintain two reservation lists. One list shall contain
those qualifying for the above-referenced preference. A second
list shall be maintained for all others expressing an interest in
purchasing a unit from the developer. While the aforementioned
preference is in effect, the developer may only offer binding
contracts of sale and reservation agreements to those qualifying
for the preference. After the preference period has expired, the
developer then may offer binding contracts of sale and reservation
agreements to any potential purchaser without preference.
(m) Of the market rate units on the tract, at least 24 of said units shall be
affirmatively marketed to middle income households who have a
preference to purchase as defined in paragraph (k) above. For purposes
of this article, middle income households are defined as households
with a gross household income equal to 200% of the median gross
household income for households of the same size within the Council on
Affordable Housing ("COAH") Housing Region #4 or equivalent area
wherein the township is located. Any developer of market rate units
within the zone shall market 24 of said units as middle income units
through the date that the developer issues its final construction
documents and receives its first construction permits. During this time
frame, the developer may only offer binding contracts and reservation
agreements to those who have a preference to purchase and who
qualify for the middle income units. Thereafter, binding contracts and
reservation agreements may be offered to any of the potential
purchasers of the market rate units.
(n) All development in the RSC-2 zone must submit a scaled, graphic plan
for review and approval by the board of jurisdiction, which clearly
delineates building areas, paving and road, associated construction
buffers and undisturbed areas. Construction fencing, in a form
acceptable to the township engineer shall be identified on the plan and
provided to separate areas of disturbance from areas not to be
disturbed. All trees to be preserved shall be fenced to protect them
during construction in a form and at distances acceptable to the
township arborist. During construction, all tree protection and
management shall comply with the provisions of the township's Tree
Removal, Preservation and Loss Mitigation Zoning Ordinance in effect
at the time a developer receives final site plan approval for the
development.
(o) All development on any tract within the RSC-2 zone shall satisfy all of
the requirements of the Township's Stormwater Management
Ordinance (Section 10B-227 et seq.) and the hydrologic requirements
set forth for design and performance standards for stormwater
§ T10B-272.64 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-272.64
BAO:1277
management as they appear at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.1 et seq. as determined
by the township engineer to be applicable to the soils within the tract
proposed for development:
(1) Stormwater management measures shall be utilized to the
maximum extent possible within the limits of disturbance
stipulated in section 10B-272.64(a)(9) of this Ordinance, and all
stormwater measures shall minimize tree-destruction to the
maximum extent practicable. All stormwater resulting from any
development is to be managed in accordance with codes and
regulations of Princeton Township and the State of New Jersey
provided for herein.
(2) Any developer shall have recourse to the piping of stormwater to an
off-site detention basin if required to satisfy section 10B-227 et seq.
and applicable NJDEP regulations. Piping may be permitted only if
the applicant has satisfactorily demonstrated that all other
alternatives are not feasible. Additionally, piping shall be allowed
only if structural measures are deemed necessary in written
reports by the township engineer, in consultation with professional
hydrologists, as he or she deems advisable. The diameter of any
piping shall be the minimum required for conveyance of
stormwater.
(3) For the purposes of this section, all hydrological calculations of
stormwater management measures required to handle stormwater
runoff shall be based on N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.4.a.3.i, if practicable, and
N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.4.a.3.iii shall apply only if it is not practicable to
achieve compliance with N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.4.a.3.i.
(4) Structures required for stormwater measures shall be installed
within the limit of disturbance as defined hereinabove and in
accordance with the developer's scaled, graphic plan. Such
measures may include "green" roofs on buildings designed for a
water infiltration capacity of not less than one-half inches per hour,
piping systems to direct stormwater to cisterns, mini-detention
basins serving exterior parking and roadway areas, cuts in curbs
for runoff, as well as stormwater measures installed in the middle
of a driveway entrance or access road.
(5) Nonstructural measures for stormwater management onsite may
include reducing impervious coverage and disconnecting
impervious surfaces, earthen berms (particularly along the
Transco-Williams gas pipeline easement), native and non-invasive
vegetation to secure the berms, rain gardens (small bioretention or
infiltration basins), vegetated channels in small drainage areas,
earthen berms to direct stormwater into existing drains and
detention basins along access roads and the planting of native and
non-invasive species in the center of any driveway entrance or
access road. Such nonstructural measures shall be placed as close
to the source of runoff as possible.
§ T10B-272.64 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-272.64
BAO:1278
(6) Only if such on-site structural and non-structural management
measures located within the limit of disturbance as referenced
hereinabove are demonstrated by hydrological analysis to the
satisfaction of the township engineer, in consultation with his or
her stormwater management consultant, to be insufficient to
handle stormwater, then the following off-site stormwater
management measures shall be permitted:
a. A stormwater pipe may be installed first within an existing
right-of-way and then through a portion of a tract to an existing
detention basin adjacent to said tract and any storm drainage
line shall be field located to avoid destruction of any trees to
the maximum extent feasible.
b. The point at which the stormwater pipe makes an easterly turn
to cross a part of the tract, shall be such that the shortest
length of pipe possible shall be used in accordance with section
10B-272.63(b) hereinabove.
c. The diameter of pipe to be installed shall be the smallest
possible to handle excess stormwater as demonstrated by
hydrological analysis to the satisfaction of the Princeton
Township Engineer. The alignment shall minimize disturbance
to vegetation. Any and all increments in the diameter of
stormwater pipe shall be justified by hydrological analysis,
from six inches to 12 inches to 15 inches to 18 inches to 24
inches to 30 inches. Hydrological analysis shall mean the
demonstrated need for a specific diameter of pipe in relation to
all stormwater measures already installed or deployed, or
meant to be installed or deployed.
d. All disturbance of forest and forest-floor vegetation caused by
the installation of structural stormwater measures shall be
replanted with vegetation that is both native and non-invasive,
unless prevented by safety or access easement requirements.
e. If stormwater piping across a portion of a tract is required,
then such structure(s) shall be maintained to provide for its
efficient operation, but only allowing the most minimal land
disturbance possible.
(p) The private street providing vehicular ingress and egress to the
development shall be a residential access road or rural street of
pervious material to the maximum extent practicable and where
technically effective, and the width shall be a minimum to achieve
proper hydrology and vehicular safety. The street shall have a walkway
on one side only; the walkway shall have maximum width of four feet
and any greenway between the walkway and the residential access road
shall be planted with bioretention materials to the maximum extent
practicable. The other side of the street shall have a minimum shoulder
width. There shall be no grading to road-level. The turning radius of the
§ T10B-272.64 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-272.64
BAO:1279
turn around area shall be the minimum necessary to achieve proper
hydrology and vehicular safety.
§ T10B-272.64 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-272.64
BAO:1280
SUBDIVISION 2.22
Environmental Education, Land Preservation and Educational Uses
§ T10B-272.65. Environmental education, land preservation and
educational uses: conditional use requirements. [Ord. No. 2002-8,
§ 1; Ord. No. 2014-43 § 3]
The following uses shall be permitted as conditional uses in the R-2AH zone:
Existing structures or those expanded in accordance with section
10B-272.66(a) herein below may be used for offices, meetings, educational
seminars, classrooms, accessory storage, environmental display areas and
other community activities related to environmental education, land
preservation and education purposes.
§ T10B-272.66. Conditional use standards for lots and buildings
permitted pursuant to section 10B-272.65. [Ord. No. 2002-8, § 2;
Ord. No. 2014-43 § 3]
The following conditions shall apply to lots or structures which are devoted
to environmental education land preservation or educational uses permitted
as a conditional use pursuant to section 10B-272.65 hereinabove:
(a) The footprint of existing structures within the R-2AH zone which are
proposed to be used for environmental education, land preservation or
educational purposes may be expanded by not greater than 10% of the
structures existing footprint. Nothing in this section shall be
interpreted to prohibit the conversion and upgrade of existing
uninhabitable building areas within said structures to habitable
building areas.
(b) Maximum tract size shall be not greater than three and five-tenths
acres.
(c) Minimum building setback line from any lot line shall be 16 feet.
(d) Minimum adjacent preserved open space shall be a minimum of 50
acres.
(e) Minimum frontage along one side of preserved open space shall be 260
feet.
(f) Environmental education or land preservation offices must occupy at
least 45% of the total habitable area of the structure.
(g) Parking space requirement: two spaces for every 1,000 square feet of
occupied space within the structure.
§ T10B-272.65 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-272.66
BAO:1281

SUBDIVISION 2.23
G-1 Overlay Zone
§ T10B-272.67. Permitted uses; G-1 overlay zone. [Ord. No.
2006-35, § 5; Ord. No. 2014-43 § 3]
The following uses or combination thereof are permitted in the G-1 overlay
zone:
§ T10B-272.68. Development rights: G-1 overlay zone. [Ord. No.
2006-35, § 5; Ord. No. 2007-4, § 2; Ord. No. 2014-43 § 3]
(a) Parking garages.
(b) Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to a parking
garage.
(a) A 740 to 780 space parking garage is permitted provided that the
footprint of the existing parking garage does not change.
(b) The underlying FAR shall not apply.
(c) The setback requirements found in the R-O zone shall apply to any new
construction in this zone.
(d) Block 7101, Lot 11, Princeton Township Text Map shall remain as an
open space (the current area on the corner of Henry Avenue and Harris
Street).
(e) The parking garage lighting fixtures shall be designed to incorporate a
timer system to permit the lighting on the top story of the parking
structure to be controlled independently of the other parking structure
floors.
(f) The existing generator and mechanical equipment including any
ventilating fans shall be baffled to reduce noise in accordance with the
township Code.
(g) The garage shall use techniques such as signs, mirrors and notices to
restrict large vehicle and van parking, or markings on the garage floors,
in order to promote traffic safety at points where traffic converges
within the garage.
(h) If construction takes place to the garage structure, there shall be no
storing, parking or placing construction equipment or supplies on any
Township or Borough streets including Henry Avenue and Harris Road.
(i) Notwithstanding, any prior land use approvals to the contrary, Lots 8, 9
and 10, Block 7101, Princeton Township Tax Map shall remain
residential except for those portions of said lots referred to in Section 1
hereinabove which currently contain a portion of the garage structure.
These lots shall not be consolidated in order to ensure their residential
character.44
§ T10B-272.67 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-272.69
BAO:1283
§ T10B-272.69. Emergency services provider facility. [Ord. No.
2012-20 § 1; Ord. No. 2014-43 § 3]
(a) A new or the expansion of an existing volunteer or paid emergency
service provider facility shall be a conditional use in the R-7 zone
provided the following conditions are met:
(1) One means of access must be provided from a secondary arterial or
major collector roadway as classified in the Princeton Community
Master Plan.
(2) A minimum lot size of 30,000 square feet must be provided.
(3) The FAR may not exceed 70%.
(4) All setbacks shall be a minimum of 25 feet unless the property
abuts:
a. A residentially zoned property or use in which case the setback
shall be 35 feet.
b. A nonresidential zone property or use in which case the
setback may be reduced to five feet.
(5) Building height is limited to 35 feet.
(6) Where a residential use abuts an emergency service provider a
landscape buffer of at least 10 feet must be provided. This buffer
shall include a six-foot high fence and evergreen plantings to
screen the use.
(7) Up to four supportive housing units may be provided for emergency
service volunteers not including any bunk space devoted to on-duty
personnel.
(8) One parking space shall be provided for each supportive housing
unit and two parking spaces for each ambulance. If parking is
provided off-site it shall be within 200 feet of the site and a copy of
any lease, easement or license agreement for such parking shall be
submitted at the time of any application.
44.Editor's Note: Section 1 of Ordinance No. 2007-4 included a part of Lots 8, 9, 10, Block
7101 of the Princeton Township Tax Map as property located in the G-1 overlay zoning
district.
§ T10B-272.69 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-272.69
BAO:1284
DIVISION 3
Miscellaneous Regulations
BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-272.69
BAO:1285

SUBDIVISION 3.1
Occupancy of Single-Family and Semi-detached Houses
§ T10B-273. Roomers. [Ord. No. 856, § 2.]
In any single-family house or semi-detached house, one or more rooms may
be occupied by roomers under the following terms and conditions:
§ T10B-274. Flats. [Ord. No. 856, § 2; Ord. No. 899, §§ 1, 2.]
Any single-family house or semi-detached house may contain not more than
one flat and such flat may be occupied under the following terms and
conditions:
(a) The owner of the house shall reside therein;
(b) Such occupancy shall be for a rent or other valuable consideration paid
to such owner;
(c) The number of roomers shall not exceed two.
(d) The room or rooms shall be furnished but shall not contain any cooking
facilities.
(e) A bathroom containing a flush toilet, wash basin and bathtub or shower
shall be provided for the use of every roomer and it shall be accessible
to a room occupied by such roomer without having to pass through a
room, other than a common hall, not occupied by the roomer.
(f) No bathroom assigned for the use of a roomer shall be assigned for use
or used by more than five persons in all.
(g) Off-street parking shall be provided as required by section 10B-282.
(h) Occupancy shall be authorized by a valid and subsisting certificate
issued by the health officer in accordance with chapter 10 of this Code
and upon the health officer's determination that such occupancy
complies with paragraphs (a) through (g) of this section.
(a) The flat shall have living and sleeping space, cooking facilities, a
kitchen sink and complete sanitary facilities for the exclusive use of its
occupants. It shall consist of not less than two rooms, one of which shall
be a bathroom containing a flush toilet, wash basin and bathtub or
shower. All rooms shall have access to one another within the flat.
(b) The flat shall have direct access to the outdoors or to a hall from which
there is direct access to the outdoors. If the flat is located above the
second floor, there shall be at least two such means of access to the
outdoors and they shall be approved by the building inspector. No flat
shall be located above the third floor.
(c) The net floor area of the flat shall be at least 400 square feet. The sizes
of bedrooms in the flat shall comply with the standards of the "New
§ T10B-273 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-274
BAO:1287
Jersey State Housing Code," adopted in section 10-2 of this Code, but
no bedroom shall have a net floor area of less than 80 square feet.
The net floor area of the flat shall not exceed the following percentage
of the area of the single family house in which the flat is located, or the
following fixed amount, as the case may be:
If the area of the house is:
The net floor area of the flat
shall not exceed:
Under 2,000 square feet 50%
2,000 or more but less than 3,000
square feet
40%, or 1,000 square feet,
whichever is greater
3,000 or more but less than 5,000
square feet
30%, or 1,200 square feet,
whichever is greater
Over 5,000 square feet 20%, or 1,500 square feet,
whichever is greater
For the purposes of this subsection, the area of the single family
house shall be the total area of all of the stories of the house,
measured from the outside faces of the exterior walls, including the
areas of enclosures and additions to the house that are proposed to
be made for the purpose of a flat. It shall also include the area of
basements. The area of the single family house shall not include
roofed but unenclosed areas, such as porches and carports.
Also for the purposes of this subsection, the net floor area of the flat
shall not include any hall providing the flat with access to the
outdoors, as set forth in subsection (b) of this section.
(d) Off-street parking shall be provided as required by section 10B-282.
(e) No flat shall be occupied unless the owner of the house at all times shall
reside in the flat or in the other part of the house or have the right to
immediate possession thereof. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
premises so reserved for the owner's residency may be occupied by a
tenant of the owner for a continuous term not exceeding 18 months.
However, no such tenancy shall commence within three years after the
termination of the preceding such tenancy nor shall the first such
tenancy as to any owner commence until the owner shall have resided
in the house or shall have had the right to immediate possession thereof
for a continuous period of at least three years.
(f) No flat shall be constructed or established in any existing or future
house unless first authorized by a permit issued to the owner by the
development enforcement officer upon the owner's submitting an
application containing such information as will enable the development
enforcement officer to determine whether the proposed flat complies
with the provisions of subsections (a) through (d) of this section. As
used above in this subsection (f), "owner" means:
§ T10B-274 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-274
BAO:1288
§ T10B-275. Domestic employees. [Ord. No. 856, § 2.]
Occupancy by fulltime domestic employees, who are employed on the
premises, is permitted in single-family houses and semi-detached houses.
(1) The owner of an existing house who resides therein, or
(2) The owner of the property upon which a house is proposed to be
constructed who intends to reside in such house immediately upon
completion thereof.
No such permit shall be issued for any house that is proposed to be
built by, or through direct or indirect arrangement with, the owner,
subdivider or developer of the subdivision or site plan in which the
house is to be located.
Nothing in this subsection (f) shall affect, change or enlarge the
rights of the owner, subdivider or developer of any subdivision
or site plan that was the subject of a development application
specifically involving flats that was pending before the planning
board or board of adjustment on or before January 18, 1978, as said
rights existed under the provisions of this section 10B-274 on said
date.
(g) No flat shall be occupied unless such occupancy is authorized by a valid
and subsisting certificate issued to and upon application of the owner of
the house containing the flat, by the health officer, in accordance with
chapter 10 of this Code, and upon the health officer's determination
that such occupancy complies with subsection (e) of this section.
§ T10B-274 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-275
BAO:1289

SUBDIVISION 3.2
Number of Dwellings Per Lot
§ T10B-276. More than one dwelling per lot prohibited; exceptions.
[Ord. No. 856, § 2; Ord. No. 1020, § 9.]
No dwelling shall be put on the same lot with the main dwelling; except,
that tenant houses, guest houses, separate structures for employees and
similar structures susceptible to human occupancy and auxiliary to a singlefamily
house may be put on the same lot as a single-family house; provided,
that each structure is properly placed on its separate zoning lot. Farm
buildings such as chicken houses and stables and barns, and educational
buildings such as classrooms and laboratories which are difficult to convert
to dwellings may be so placed without zoning lots. This section shall not
apply to residential clusters.
§ T10B-276.1. More than one principal nonresidential structure per
lot prohibited. [Ord. No. 92-28, § 2.]
No more than one principal nonresidential structure shall be permitted on
any lot.
§ T10B-276 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-276.1
BAO:1291

SUBDIVISION 3.3
Required Floor Area for Dwelling Units
§ T10B-277. Single-family houses. [Ord. No. 856, § 2.]
Every dwelling unit in a single-family house shall have the following
minimum total net floor area:
Dwelling unit in single family
house with:
Minimum total net floor area
required:
1 bedroom 750 square feet
2 bedrooms 1,000 square feet
3 bedrooms 1,150 square feet
4 bedrooms 1,400 square feet
5 bedrooms 1,550 square feet
6 bedrooms 1,800 square feet
7 bedrooms 2,000 square feet
For each additional bedroom +200 square feet
§ T10B-278. Multifamily houses. [Ord. No. 856, § 2.]
Every dwelling unit in a multifamily house shall have the following minimum
total net floor area, except as otherwise provided in districts E-1 and E-2:
Dwelling unit in multifamily
house with:
Minimum total net floor area
required:
0 bedroom (i.e., an efficiency) 400 square feet
1 bedroom 675 square feet
2 bedrooms 900 square feet
3 bedrooms 1,035 square feet
4 bedrooms 1,260 square feet
5 bedrooms 1,395 square feet
6 bedrooms 1,620 square feet
7 bedrooms 1,800 square feet
For each additional bedroom +180 square feet
§ T10B-279. Bedrooms. [Ord. No. 856, § 2.]
Bedrooms within a dwelling unit shall have the following minimum total net
floor area, regardless of the kind of structure, except as otherwise provided
in districts E-1 and E-2, and every single-family house shall have at least
one bedroom:
§ T10B-277 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-279
BAO:1293
First bedroom 150 square feet
Second bedrooms 100 square feet
Each additional bedroom +80 square feet
§ T10B-279 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-279
BAO:1294
SUBDIVISION 3.4
Windows, Light and Air
§ T10B-280. Required window area. [Ord. No. 856, § 2.]
Every living room and sleeping room in a residence shall have window area
equal to at least 10% of the floor area of such room.
§ T10B-281. Light and air; diagram.
Such required window area shall be provided with natural light and air as
follows: Considering the center of the window sill as the center of a 180°
arc swung outward from the plane face of the wall, there shall not be within
the middle 60° of such 180° arc, any structure or part thereof (including the
same or another building), that is higher above the window sill than onehalf
its horizontal distance from the window sill. These provisions shall not
apply to overhanging eaves or canopies on the same wall as the window nor
shall they apply to more than one window in any room or to any window
area in excess of the amount required by section 10B-280. In the event that
it is not possible to meet these requirements precisely, any deficiency may
be compensated by proportional additional window area over that required.
§ T10B-280 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-281
BAO:1295

SUBDIVISION 3.5
Off-Street Parking and Loading
§ T10B-282. Off-street parking required; schedule. [Ord. No. 856,
§ 2; Ord. No. 1020, § 10; Ord. No. 85-11, § 5; Ord. No. 89-14, § 1;
Ord. No. 2017-45 § 2]
No building shall be erected, enlarged by an increase of floor area or
converted to a new use classification in any district, unless off-street
parking spaces are provided in amounts as set forth in the following
schedule. In addition to the number of parking spaces set forth in the
schedule, there shall also be provided sufficient passageways and driveways
giving access to the parking spaces to allow cars to enter and to leave the
lot and to turn within it in a safe and orderly manner and without disrupting
traffic in any public right-of-way.
Building Type (I) One Parking Space for Each
Academic and administrative
buildings for educational
institutions, other than places of
public assembly
1.5 persons of rated occupancy (3)
(5)
Auditoriums, stadiums, theaters,
courts of law and all other places of
assembly providing seats for
audiences, including places of
worship and funeral parlors
4 seats (2)
Clubs 200 square feet of gross floor area
(4)
Commercial garages and gasoline
service
1/2 gasoline pump and each 400
square feet of ground area devoted
to repair facilities (this to be in
addition to any other space that may
be allocated for normal storage of
motor vehicles)
Dormitories 4 persons of rated capacity
Dwellings 2/3 dwelling unit for unit(3)
containing 1 or fewer bedrooms and
1/2 dwelling unit for units
containing 2 or more bedrooms;
provided that a flat shall be
considered a dwelling for this
purpose
Elementary and junior high schools 1/3 classroom
Hospitals, convalescent and nursing
homes
1/3 bed and each employee
Hotels, motels and tourist homes 1 guest unit
§ T10B-282 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-282
BAO:1297
Building Type (I) One Parking Space for Each
Hotels with restaurants As required for either, whichever is
greater
Laboratory research in the OR-1 and
OR-2 districts
500 square feet of gross floor (4)
Personal Services 200 square feet of gross floor area
(4)
Professional offices and general
offices
200 square feet of gross floor area
(4)
Restaurants 3 seats
Retail stores, supermarkets and
shopping centers
175 square feet of gross floor area
(4)
Rooming house 1/2 dwelling unit and each roomeroccupied
bedroom
School with auditoriums As required for either, whichever is
greater
Senior high schools and similar
institutions
1/5 classroom
Notes:
(1) Other building types which do not fit into 1 of the above categories
shall be referred to the planning board for determination of the
appropriate parking space requirements
(2) Institutional parking spaces of educational institutions that are
provided for normal daytime activity for other purposes shall be
considered to be available for such public uses as are normally
conducted in the evening or on weekends in lecture halls,
auditoriums, stadiums, theaters and gymnasiums of such institutions
(3) At the time of application for a building permit, the institution shall
certify to the development enforcement officer the rated capacity or
rated occupancy of the building
(4) For this purpose, "gross floor area" means the total area of all the
stories of all the structures on a lot, measured from the outside faces
of the exterior walls, or from the exterior roof edges where a
structure has no walls, and including the following, although not by
way of limitation: Interior balconies and mezzanines, roofed areas
such as porches and carports and basement space, but excluding
rooftop, roofed or enclosed area that is used for parking spaces
(5) Where the building is for an institution that prohibits the operation
of automobiles by students or that restricts the parking of student
automobiles to designate institutional parking areas, such students
need not be included in the calculation of rated capacity
§ T10B-282 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-282
BAO:1298
(6) The number of off-street parking spaces to be initially installed may
be reduced pursuant to the provisions of section 10B-291
§ T10B-283. Off-street loading required. [Ord. No. 856, § 2.]
Off-street loading spaces shall be provided as needed for all nonresidential
buildings; except, that in the S-1 and S-2 districts there shall be not less
than one space for each 10,000 square feet of gross floor area or fraction
thereof over 8,000 square feet. Sufficient off-street passageways and
driveways shall be provided to allow vehicles to enter and leave the loading
space without restricting traffic on any public right-of-way.
§ T10B-284. Parking and loading space dimensions. [Ord. No. 856,
§ 2.]
Required parking and loading areas shall not be encroached upon, reduced
in any manner or devoted to any other use. Each parking space shall have
minimum dimensions of nine feet by 19 feet, and each loading space shall
have minimum dimensions of 15 feet by 25 feet by 14 feet in height.
§ T10B-285. Computations involving fractional space requirements.
[Ord. No. 856, § 2.]
When the computation to determine the number of required parking spaces
or loading spaces results in a requirement of a fractional space, any fraction
up to and including one-half shall be disregarded and fractions over one-half
shall require one space.
§ T10B-286. Area surfacing. [Ord. 856, § 2.]
All off-street parking and loading areas shall be maintained with graded,
dust-free surfaces that are well drained, such as gravel or stone for light
residential use and blacktop, in accordance with specifications contained in
the pamphlet entitled "Asphalt Pavements for Parking Lots and Driveways,"
The Asphalt Institute, Information Series No. 91 (IS-91), August 1965,
or better, as approved by the township engineer, for all other use. All
such off-street parking and loading space, and necessary passageways and
driveways giving access thereto, shall be maintained in a state of good
repair, and the surface thereof shall be kept clear of ruts, potholes,
protrusions, debris and other vehicular or pedestrian hazards.
§ T10B-287. Location of areas. [Ord. No. 856, § 2; Ord. No. 1020,
§ 11.]
Except as otherwise provided in section 10B-291.1, all of the required offstreet
parking areas shall be located on the same lot as the building which
they are intended to serve and shall be readily accessible to it. Where it is
impracticable to locate all the required parking areas on the same lot, they
may be located, in whole or in part, on a nearby lot; provided, that:
§ T10B-282 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-287
BAO:1299
§ T10B-288. Screening required. [Ord. No. 856, § 2; Ord. No. 9-38,
§ 1; Ord. No. 93-19, § 3.]
(a) A conditional use approval is obtained in accordance with the
provisions of division 4 of this article; except, that a conditional use
approval need not be obtained for parking appurtenant to a singlefamily
house.
(b) Such parking areas shall be located within a reasonable distance of, and
shall afford safe access to, the buildings they are intended to serve.
(c) No parking area shall be so situated as to create a traffic hazard for
either pedestrians or vehicles.
(d) Legal assurance, acceptance to the township attorney and, except for
single-family houses, to the planning board, shall be provided by the
applicant that the required parking areas will be continuously available.
(a) All off-street loading areas and all off-street on-grade parking areas
which provide more than 10 parking spaces shall be located or
screened in the manner specified in subsection (c) from adjacent uses
not separated by a public right-of-way.
(b) Such loading and parking areas shall be separated from the adjacent
public right-of-way and buffered by a landscaped area to effectuate
screening where appropriate or shading and visual relief. Such
screening or other landscaping shall be consistent with the nature of
the uses served by the loading or parking area, the topography, the
nature of the public right-of-way, and the nature of the uses on the other
side of the public right-of-way. When the required screening cannot be
installed in a manner consistent with sight triangle or other traffic
safety requirements, the maximum amount of screening consistent with
such requirements shall be put in place.
(c) Screening from adjacent uses not separated by a public right-of-way
shall be accomplished by the installation and maintenance of evergreen
and deciduous trees and shrubs of such species and size as will within
two growing seasons produce solid screening at several appropriate
heights, taking into account the natural topography and any berming,
and the location and size of the adjacent uses from which the parking or
loading areas are to be screened. Such screening shall also conform to
the applicable provisions of subdivision 3.11 of this chapter. Instead of
screening only by the installation of planting materials, suitable walls,
fences or berms acceptable to the board of jurisdiction shall be
substituted in whole or in part if the board of jurisdiction determines
that plantings are impractical or that alternatives to plantings better
achieve these site design standards. Where there is more than one ongrade
parking area on the lot and the aggregate number of parking
spaces is more than 10, the requirements of this section shall apply
except where the board determines that the size and separation are
such that one or more of the lots may be treated as a separate off-street
§ T10B-287 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-288
BAO:1300
§ T10B-289. Shade trees and landscaping. [Ord. No. 856, § 2; Ord.
No. 1020, § 12; Ord. No. 90-38, § 2.]
on-grade parking area of 10 or less parking spaces. Where there is
an approved joint parking plan for contiguous properties, the
requirements of this section may be modified by the board of
jurisdiction for the screening along the common lot line.
(a) Shade trees. All off-street on-grade parking areas which provide more
than 10 parking spaces shall have shade trees planted and maintained
to the extent of at least one tree for each three and four-tenths parking
spaces or fraction thereof in an arrangement which assures that all the
spaces are shaded to the extent possible and in accordance with
subsection (c) hereof. Such trees shall be large, spreading-type trees
acceptable to the planning board and shall at the time of planting have
a caliper of at least 2 1/2 inches. They shall be properly maintained, and
all dead or dying trees shall be replaced as soon as is practicable by the
property owner.
(b) Other plantings. In addition to any landscape screening required by
section 10B-288, all on-grade parking areas which provide more than
10 parking spaces shall have an area equivalent to one parking space
for every 25 spaces landscaped in evergreen or other ground cover or
shrubs no higher than three feet. Such landscaped areas shall be
distributed throughout the parking area to intermix landscaped areas
within the paved areas. If appropriately landscaped and distributed, the
area within islands required by subsection (c) may be counted toward
this requirement.
(c) Islands. All off-street on-grade parking areas which provide more than
10 parking spaces shall be designed and constructed with unpaved
islands which are arranged so there are no more than 20 parking
spaces in a row unbroken by such an island and to accommodate
required shade trees or landscaping as follows:
(1) An island strip at least five feet wide between facing rows of
parking spaces;
(2) An island terminus at least nine feet wide and coterminus with the
length of the parking spaces which it abuts at the end of each row
of parking spaces; and
(3) Mid-row islands in rows of parking spaces at least nine feet wide
and equal in length to the parking spaces which it abuts.
Island areas which are not planted with trees, shrubs, ground
cover, or other landscaping shall be treated in an attractive manner
and so as not to impair driving visibility subject to the approval of
the review board of jurisdiction.
(d) Other provisions. Landscaped areas and islands shall be designed and
constructed to protect the plantings from the automobiles using
§ T10B-288 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-289
BAO:1301
§ T10B-289.1. Applicability of screening, shade tree and
landscaping requirements. [Ord. No. 90-38, § 3.]
The requirements of sections 10B-288 and 10B-289 shall apply to any
development application approved after the effective date of these sections.
If the application involves a pre-existing on-site parking area and involves
an expanded or substantially renovated structure, the above requirements
shall be applied as follows:
§ T10B-290. Lighting of areas. [Ord. No. 856, § 2; Ord. No. 1020,
§ 13.]
All parking areas shall be adequately lighted. All such lighting shall be so
arranged or shielded to reduce glare and to direct light away from adjoining
residences, adjacent properties and public rights-of-way. Such lighting shall
conform to the provisions of section 10B-317.
adjacent parking spaces. Where determined necessary or useful for
pedestrian circulation, the board of jurisdiction shall require the
applicant to demarcate pathways through the paved parking areas,
the islands, and other landscaped areas as may be appropriate for
improved safety. The board of jurisdiction may approve and authorize
variations from the design standards of subsections (a), (b), and (c)
of this section provided it finds that the objectives of this section are
substantially achieved.
(a) The size of the parking area which would be required for the expanded
structure and the portion of the existing structure being substantially
renovated shall be determined;
(b) A parking area of the size determined under subsection (a) shall be
installed in accordance with the requirements which would apply for a
new development; and
(c) The requirements of this section shall apply even if the development
application requires no additional parking spaces or where the parking
spaces are not adjacent to the expanded or renovated structure, in
which case the requirements shall be satisfied by the applicant
upgrading such equivalent portions of the existing or nonadjacent
parking area as the board of jurisdiction shall designate in the manner
required for a new development.
If the application involves a change of use which otherwise requires
site plan approval and the intensity of use, in general or at particular
times, is increased, the requirements of this section shall be applied to
the extent necessary to abate the adverse impacts resulting from the
change of use.
§ T10B-289 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-291
BAO:1302
§ T10B-291. Conditional use approval for reduction in initial space
requirement. [Ord. No. 856, § 2.]
The number of off-street parking spaces to be initially installed as required
by the schedule in section 10B-281 for building types other than dwellings
may be reduced; provided, that:
(a) A conditional use approval is obtained in accordance with the
provisions of division 4 of this article and this section.
(b) The reduced number of off-street parking spaces to be initially installed
shall not be less than one-half of the number required by the foregoing
schedule. Such reduced number shall be found by the planning board to
constitute not less than the minimum number needed adequately to
serve the use or prospective use of the building in the light of the
occupancy thereof, traffic in connection therewith and such other
factors as are relevant to parking generated thereby.
(c) An off-street parking layout providing for not less than the number of
parking spaces required by the schedule in section 10B-282 shall be
submitted and, if approved, shall become part of any conditional use
approval. That part of such layout that represents parking spaces in
excess of the reduced number approved as a conditional use, which
excess is not to be initially installed, shall not be encroached upon, shall
remain readily available for future construction and installation of offstreet
parking and shall be maintained in its natural state or with such
landscaping as shall be required by the planning board.
(d) The applicant shall enter into a written agreement with the township to
construct and install all or any part of such excess off-street parking at
any time or times if the planning board, upon the complaint of the
development enforcement officer or any interested person, shall by
resolution determine to require such construction and installation and
shall so notify the owner of the premises. The agreement shall also
provide that the owner shall maintain the area covered by the excess
parking space in the manner required by the planning board, pursuant
to subsection (c) of this section, and that if the owner shall fail so to
maintain such area, or to construct and install off-street parking after
notice to do so, the township shall have the right by its agents, servants,
employees and contractors to enter upon the premises and to cause
such maintenance to be performed or such off-street parking to be
constructed and installed therein. In such case, the cost of such
maintenance, construction or installation shall, after confirmation
thereof by the township committee after notice to the owner, be
certified to the township tax collector, whereupon the amount so
certified shall become and be a lien on the premises and shall bear
interest and be enforceable and collectible in the same manner as
assessments and liens for local taxes. The agreement shall be in
recordable form and shall otherwise be subject to the approval of the
township attorney as to form. The agreement shall become part of any
conditional use approval. The failure of the owner so to maintain the
§ T10B-291 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-291
BAO:1303
§ T10B-291.1. Additional conditions and requirements in
residential cluster developments. [Ord. No. 1020, § 14.]
area covered by the excess parking space or to construct and install
off-street parking after notice to do so shall also constitute a violation
of conditional use approval, which violation may be prosecuted and
penalties imposed as for other violations of this article notwithstanding
that the township shall resort or shall have resorted to its right to cause
such maintenance to be performed or such construction and installation
to be accomplished as provided in the agreement.
(a) Parking for single family structures and two family structures shall be
provided on the individual lot.
(b) Parking for townhouse units and for multi-family structures may be
provided either on the individual lots or in common parking areas, or
partly in each.
(c) All common parking facilities shall be located within a reasonable
distance of, and shall afford safe access to, the dwelling units or
common facilities they are intended to serve.
(d) If parking structures are provided, they shall be designed to be in
harmony with and complementary to the design of nearby structures in
terms of size, materials, color and architectural design.
(e) All parking areas shall be located or screened in such a manner to
substantially reduce their visibility from public rights-of-way properties
adjoining the residential cluster tract, and from any portions of on-tract
dwelling units along or below a sight line six feet above ground level.
Screening shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of
section 10B-288.
(f) No single open parking lot shall contain more than 30 parking spaces.
In addition to the requirements of section 10B-289, no more than 10
parking spaces shall be permitted in a continuous row without being
interrupted by landscaping.
(g) Parking areas shall be arranged so as to prevent through traffic to other
parking areas.
(h) When appropriate, space for the storage of recreational vehicles and
trailers shall be provided either in special parking areas or in a special
facility designed for this purpose. If provided in a common parking
area, the recreational vehicle and trailer spaces shall be contiguous to
each other and separated from the remainder of the parking area. The
parking area for recreational vehicles and trailers shall be screened
from dwelling units, adjacent properties, and public rights-of-way.
§ T10B-291 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-291.1
BAO:1304
SUBDIVISION 3.6
Signs
§ T10B-292. Intent. [Ord. No. 89-15, § 1.]
It is the intent of this subdivision to prescribe measurable criteria and a
procedure for review of signs which will:
§ T10B-293. Prohibited sign features. [Ord. No. 89-15, § 1.]
No sign shall contain features which:
(a) Control the size, location, character and other pertinent features of all
exterior signs.
(b) Bring quality and control to the signs located throughout the township,
assuring the continuation of its high level of attractiveness and historic
character, and thereby protecting property values.
(c) Promote signs which are:
(1) Compatible with surroundings and expressive of the identity of
individual proprietors and of the character of the community;
(2) Orderly, readable and appropriate to the activity to which they
pertain;
(3) Nondistracting to motorists so as to contribute to traffic safety;
(4) Safely constructed and maintained;
(5) Properly located; and
(6) Aesthetically pleasing.
(d) Allow for the expression of protected speech subject only to narrowly
drawn standards which further the substantial governmental interests
articulated in paragraphs (b) and (c) above.
(e) Provide a regulatory system designed for ease of administration —
having a range of categories of signs with varying degrees of review in
accordance with their expected community impact.
(a) Bear or contain statements, words or pictures which are offensive to the
community's standards.
(b) Purport to be or resemble official traffic signs or signals or which bear
the words "stop," "go slow," "caution," "danger," "warning," or similar
words; or which by reason of size, location, movement, content,
coloring or manner of illumination may be confused with or construed
as a traffic control device; or which obstruct from view any pedestrian
or vehicular traffic or any street sign or signal.
§ T10B-292 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-293
BAO:1305
§ T10B-294. Exempt signs not requiring a permit. [Ord. No. 89-15,
§ 1; Ord. No. 89-29, §§ 1, 2.]
The following signs do not require a permit if they do not violate the criteria
set forth in section 10B-293 and comply with the standards of section
10B-298 and with all other relevant sections of the township code:
(c) Except as provided in section 10B-294, advertise or publicize an
activity, use, business, product, real estate, or service not located or
conducted on the premises upon which such signs are located.
(d) Contain electronic, flashing, glowing or moving devices (except time
and temperature devices) or emit smoke, visible vapor, particles, sound
or odor, or use exposed incandescent bulbs, or neon tubes, or use
mirrors or other similar reflecting devices.
(e) Are located in a public right-of-way, except with the approval of the
zoning officer based on a finding that the particular type of sign is
customarily located within the right-of-way (such as, but not limited to,
no hunting signs, farm produce signs, names on roadside mailboxes,
entrance/exit signs, etc.) and that the interrelationship among the
right-of-way line, the information to be conveyed by the sign, and the
particular characteristics of the property (including its topography,
vegetation, and structures) requires the sign to be located within the
right-of-way. No sign shall be located so as to cause a visual obstruction
within an approved sight easement.
(f) Consist of banners (except grand opening banners), posters, flags
(except U.S. flags), pennants, ribbons, streamers, strings of light bulbs
(except seasonal decorations) and spinners.
(g) Are portable or temporary, except as permitted in section 10B-294,
such as sandwich boards or signs fixed on a movable stand, not
permanently embedded in the ground or supported by other objects,
mounted on wheels or on a movable vehicle or temporary structure.
(h) Are located, painted or affixed on benches, water towers, storage tanks,
smokestacks, utility poles or other similar structures, or on trees, rocks
or other natural features.
(i) Are placed on a flat roof or above the roof peak of a building or
structure, project from the facade of a structure (other than as
permitted for a facade sign), or appear on awnings or canopies (other
than on the valance).
(j) Are attached to or placed on merchandise or materials stored or
displayed outdoors and visible from a public street or other public area.
(k) Contain changeable copy (except theater marquee signs, business
directories, church and museum signs and gas price signs).
(a) Permanent signs.
§ T10B-293 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-294
BAO:1306
(1) Non-illuminated memorial or historical signs, corner stones and
tablets indicating the name and/or date of erection of the building
on which they are located, which do not exceed two square feet in
surface area, and which are part of the wall of the building which is
identified.
(2) Non-illuminated residential nameplates with an area of less than
two square feet, which may include the name of the owner or
resident and the address of the property.
One sign for each access drive may be permitted provided the signs
meet the above requirements. Sign background for house numbers
shall not be counted as part of the sign area.
(3) Seasonal decorations for display purposes provided that such
decorations are safely maintained.
(4) Grave markers.
(5) Private "no trespassing" and "no hunting" signs placed on private
property, provided that each sign does not exceed one square foot.
(6) Directional signs not exceeding 30 inches in height and located
within a site, provided that the following criteria are met.
a. Entrance and exit signs may contain the name of an accessory
use conducted on the property, such as loading zones, service
areas, and service truck routes.
b. Entrance and exit signs not exceeding three square feet in
area, and located at a minimum setback distance of five feet
from a public right-of-way.
c. Signs related to emergency medical care not exceeding an
area of 12 square feet.
(7) One ground sign identifying the name of a multi-family complex not
to exceed 10 square feet may be erected at the primary entrance to
the complex. The sign shall be located at a minimum setback of 15
feet from the public right-of-way and shall not exceed seven feet in
height.
(8) One ground sign identifying the name of a single-family
development and not exceeding 10 square feet may be erected at
the primary entrance to a residential development having a
homeowner's association provided that the association or the
developer agrees to maintain the sign. The sign shall be located at
a minimum setback or 25 feet from the public right-of-way and shall
not exceed seven feet in height.
(9) Directory signs erected as part of a municipally sponsored
program, at a location and of a size approved by the zoning officer.
§ T10B-294 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-294
BAO:1307
(10) All signs and signals owned or operated by the township, the
county, the state or the United States of America.
(b) Temporary signs. Signs may be erected for a limited period of time and
for a specific purpose which:
(1) Advertise the sale or rental of the premises on which they are
located, provided that:
a. The size of any sale or rental sign for a single dwelling shall not
exceed eight square feet. Not more than one sign may be
placed upon any property and such signs shall be promptly
removed when premises are sold or rented, except that a sign
with the words "sold" or "rented" may be continued for an
additional two weeks.
b. Developments with four or more homes for sale may advertise
the development on each frontage, if the development fronts
on more than one street. All signs advertising the development
shall be removed when 75% of the lots have been initially sold
or initially rented, or within 15 months, whichever is less. Each
sign shall not exceed 12 square feet.
(2) Advertise the future construction or location of a nonresidential
use, provided that:
a. The sign does not exceed 24 square feet in area.
b. The sign may also identify public or private lenders providing
the construction financing and identifying architects,
engineers, contractors, tradesmen, or others engaged or to be
engaged in construction work.
Such signs shall not be erected until final subdivision or final
site plan approval has been granted, including approval of the
proposed temporary sign, and shall be removed as soon as the
work ceases or is completed, in any event not to exceed a twoyear
period.
(3) Advertise farm products grown on site, provided that the sign does
not exceed 10 square feet. It may be erected at the entrance of an
active farm stand advertising the sale of farm products when such
sale is conducted in accordance with the provisions of this code.
Such sign shall be displayed only when the products are on sale.
The sign shall be located at a minimum setback of 10 feet from the
public right-of-way. The sign may be a wall or a ground sign not to
exceed six feet in height.
(4) Warn of construction, excavation or similar hazards for as long as
the hazard exists.
(5) Advertise the sale of merchandise, if they are located in a window
and do not exceed four square feet, or 15% of the window area of
§ T10B-294 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-294
BAO:1308
each facade, whichever is greater. For windows which are more
than 25 feet from the public right-of-way, such signs shall not
exceed 25% of such window area.
(6) Advertise a garage or yard sale, provided the sign does not exceed
four square feet and is displayed for no more than seven days. Offpremises
signs may be permitted upon the approval of the zoning
officer.
(7) Consist of directional signs that concern particular transitory
purposes or occasions shall be permitted, provided that:
a. Such signs shall be removed as soon as the purpose of occasion
has passed or been served, and, in any event, the sign shall not
be erected more than 10 days prior to the event nor remain
more than one week after posting, unless an extension of time
is granted by the zoning officer.
b. The advertising area of the sign shall not exceed three square
feet and shall not be more than three feet in height.
c. Signs may be located elsewhere than on the lot to which they
refer, as permitted, by the zoning officer. In no event shall more
than one directional sign for the same event be independently
posted at an intersecting street.
(8) Consist of on-premises grand opening banners attached to the
building in which the new activity is being established. These may
remain in place for three weeks from the date of opening of the
activity.
(9) Consist of celebration bunting with no lettering on state holidays
and days of public celebration. Bunting shall be removed within
seven days of celebration.
(10) Publicize special public issues or events, including elections and
the events of fraternal, charitable or religious organizations,
provided that:
a. The sign is removed within five days after the event takes
place.
b. The sign does not exceed six square feet.
c. The sign shall not remain in place more than four weeks.
Signs publicizing special public issues or events, including
elections, may be located elsewhere than on the lot to which
they refer, as permitted by the zoning officer.
(11) Consist of federal, state or local government signs and notices
issued by any court, person or officer in performance of a public
duty.
§ T10B-294 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-294
BAO:1309
§ T10B-295. Permits. [Ord. No. 89-15, § 1.]
Except for the exempt signs described in section 10B-294, no sign shall
be erected, altered, or moved without a permit issued pursuant to the
provisions of this subdivision.
Applications for a sign permit shall be filed with the zoning officer. To obtain
a permit, the proposed sign must meet the dimensional standards set forth
in Table A (free standing signs) or Table B (facade signs) contained at
section 10B-297. Signs shall be classified by the zoning officer as being in
one of the three review categories specified in section 10B-296. Signs in the
SC zoning district shall be consistent with the general signage plan for the
district. If the zoning officer determines that a proposed sign in such district
is not consistent with such plan, he shall refer the application to the site
plan review advisory board, which may approve same only if it determines
that the proposed sign is consistent with the plan and that the criteria set
forth in section 10B-296(c) have been met.
§ T10B-296. Review categories and criteria. [Ord. No. 89-15, § 1;
Ord. No. 89-29, § 3.]
Unless otherwise restricted, temporary signs may be erected not
more than two weeks prior and shall, unless a longer period is
permitted, be removed within three days after termination of the
event advertised by the sign.
(a) "As of Right" signs. If the proposed sign does not contain any of the
prohibited features set forth in section 10B-293 and meets the size,
height, and location standards for this category as set forth in Table A
or Table B and the illumination standards of section 10B-298(h), the
Zoning Officer shall issue a permit. Site plan review pursuant to section
10B-205 shall not be required for "as of right" signs.
(b) "Restricted" signs. If the proposed sign does not contain any of the
prohibited features set forth in section 10B-293 and meets the size,
height, and location standards for this category as set forth in Table A
or Table B, the zoning officer shall issue a permit. Site plan review
pursuant to section 10B-205 shall not be required for "restricted signs,"
provided that:
(1) The information on the sign is limited to the name, address and a
brief description of the business; and if a business logo is also to
appear on the sign, the logo may not exceed 10% of the area of the
sign. Alternatively, directory signs shall be limited in content to the
address of the property and may contain the names of the several
on-site businesses or professional users and shall be designed to
meet the standards of section 10B-296(c)(8).
(2) A maximum of three colors (including black and white) may appear
on the sign.
§ T10B-294 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-296
BAO:1310
(c) "Design Review" signs. Signs in this category are to be reviewed by the
zoning officer for conformity with the requirements set forth in Table A
or Table B. Signs for conditional uses shall be classified as "design
review" signs. Unless waived by the zoning officer as unnecessary,
concept plans and sample field mock up signs shall accompany the
permit application for all signs in this category. The review and
approval process shall be as in the case of a classification applicable for
minor site plan approval. The site plan review advisory board shall
review the application based on the following review criteria:
(1) Lettering styles shall be clear and visible under normal viewing
conditions in the area where the sign is to be located.
(2) Sign content shall comply with the following:
a. The name of the business shall appear only once.
b. A brief description of the nature of the business may be on the
sign.
c. The street name and number may be given, if useful to avoid
confusion, but numbers shall be no smaller than the largest
letter on the sign, but in no event smaller than three inches in
height.
d. If a logo is used, it may not exceed 10% of the sign area.
e. Such other content as the reviewing agency may in its
discretion allow, provided that all other standards below are
met.
(3) The sign shall be designed to take into account the relative scale
and proportions of the building or surface to which it is related or
on which it is mounted.
(4) The sign shall have a logical relationship to the building to which it
is related and in the case of facade signs shall be integrated into
the existing architecture.
(5) The construction materials of the sign shall be chosen to
complement the architecture and building materials of the building
on which it is located, or to which it is related, as well as the
surrounding buildings.
(6) If more than one sign is permitted on a site or building, the signs
shall be compatible with each other and with the character of the
site and should not obscure other signs or architectural features.
(7) Messages on signs shall be brief, the layout simple, and the range
of colors limited. The use of product trademarks is discouraged.
(8) Signs setting forth a listing of multiple on-site businesses or
professional services shall be designed as a unified and internally
§ T10B-296 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-296
BAO:1311
§ T10B-297. Standards of size, setback and height. [Ord. No. 89-15,
§ 1; Ord. No. 89-29, § 4.]
§ T10B-298. General sign requirements. [Ord. No. 89-15, § 1; Ord.
No. 89-29, § 5.]
All signs are subject to the following general requirements:
compatible single sign with all listings being of a relatively uniform
size.
(a) The size, setback, and height of permanent signs, both free-standing
(Table A) and facade mounted (Table B), shall be regulated by applying
the following standards to each zone district:
Editor's Note: Table A and Table B are included as attachments to this
chapter.
(b) Signs aligned with the outer facing of a covered passageway shall have
a minimum height of nine feet and a maximum height of 12 feet.
(c) Signs at right angles to building facade under covered passways shall
have a minimum height of 9 1/2 feet and a maximum height of 12 feet,
except that if the covered passageway is less than 10 feet in height, the
minimum height shall be 7 1/2 feet.
(a) Conformance with construction code. All signs shall conform to the
requirements of the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code.
(b) Maintenance. All signs, including official signs, together with all their
supports, braces, hooks, guys and anchors, shall be of substantial and
sturdy construction, shall be kept in good repair, and shall be painted or
cleaned as often as necessary to maintain a clean, neat, legible, safe
and orderly appearance. When lighting is provided, all lighting
elements shall be kept in good working order. The area surrounding
ground signs must be kept neat and clean. The owner of the property
upon which a sign is located shall be responsible for maintaining the
sign and the condition of the surrounding area.
(c) Obstruction to doors, windows or fire escapes or lanes. No sign shall be
erected, relocated or maintained so as to prevent ingress or egress
from any door, window, fire escape, or fire lane.
(d) Obstruction of architectural features. No sign shall be erected,
relocated or maintained in such a manner as to cover or intrude upon
any special architectural features of a building, such as windows,
columns, moldings, railings or any major decorative or structural
feature.
(e) Signs not to constitute traffic hazards. In order to promote reasonable
traffic safety, no sign shall be erected or maintained in such a manner
as to obstruct free and clear vision or distract the attention of the driver
§ T10B-296 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-298
BAO:1312
of any vehicle by reason of the position, shape, color, reflection, or
illumination.
(f) Signs in historic district. Signs within a historic district or historic
buffer district shall be complimentary to the character of the historic
district in terms of the choice of materials, colors and lettering style.
(g) Number of signs per lot. In all zones except as otherwise specified in
sections 10B-293 through § T10B-297, the number of signs permitted
on a lot is one freestanding and one facade sign per lot frontage in the
case of "as of right" or "restricted" signs. In the case of "design review"
signs, one facade or one freestanding sign is permitted per lot frontage;
except that the site plan review advisory board may permit both a
freestanding and a facade sign when the proximity of the building to the
street, the size of the building, the visibility of the building and/or
freestanding sign, or the speed of traffic on the street on which the
building is located dictates a need for both signs.
(h) Lighting of signs. It is the intent of this subdivision to minimize the use
of illuminated signs. The exterior source of light shall be arranged so as
to prevent glare on the street or adjacent properties. Sign lighting shall
comply to the standards of section 10B-317. Internally illuminated signs
shall be permitted only in the S-2 district and subject to the following:
at least 66 1/3% of the sign area must be opaque; the non-opaque
portion must be white or off-white; the light source must be fluorescent
and of no more than 40 watts for "as of right" signs, 80 watts for
"restricted" signs, and 160 watts for "design review" signs.
(i) Nonconforming sign. Any nonconforming permanent sign which can be
shown to have lawfully existed on the date of enactment of this
subdivision may be continued and, except as provided in paragraph (k)
below, may be restored.
(j) Removal of damaged signs. Any sign damaged, destroyed or
deteriorated in any manner whatsoever to the extent of more than 50%
of its replacement value shall be removed or reconstructed in
accordance with the provisions of this division and thereafter utilized
only in such a manner as to conform to all provisions of this subdivision.
(k) Abandoned signs. Signs shall be removed by the owner at the owner's
expense within 90 days following written notification by the zoning
officer from any location where the sign no longer relates to an activity
conducted on the site. In the event the sign is not removed within this
time period, the township may remove the sign at the expense of the
property owner and for this purpose the township shall have a lien in
the amount of the removal cost.
(l) Measurement of area of a sign.
(1) The square footage of a free-standing sign consists of the space
within a single continuous perimeter enclosing the limits of such
sign. Such perimeter shall not include any structural framing
§ T10B-298 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-298
BAO:1313
§ T10B-299. Penalties. [Ord. No. 89-15, § 1; Ord. No. 2015-20]
Any violation of any provision of this article or of any rule, regulation or
order made under the authority of this article may result in the removal
of the offending sign and shall be punishable under section 10B-107 of the
township code.
elements lying outside the limits of such sign and not forming an
integral part of the display.
(2) Cutout letters or numbers supported independently on a facade
sign shall be measured by the smallest rectangle which
encompasses all of the letters and numbers.
(3) Freestanding, hanging, or window signs which have no background
shall be measured by the smallest rectangle which encompasses
the total display, exclusive of any supporting members used solely
for such purpose.
(4) Freestanding signs consisting of opaque or translucent
backgrounds and having cutout displays shall be measured by the
outside dimensions of the background.
(5) Freestanding signs carrying the same message on two sides shall
be considered a single sign, provided that the two sides are parallel
and of the same size. In the case of multi-faceted signs, the area
shall cumulatively include all the faces of the sign.
§ T10B-298 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-299
BAO:1314
SUBDIVISION 3.7
Display of Merchandise
§ T10B-300. Location of display. [Ord. No. 856, § 10B-300.)
The display of merchandise for sale in the open shall not be permitted
within the required minimum parking setback distances, as described in
the schedule of regulations. The term "merchandise" shall include, but not
by way of limitation, items such as automobiles and automotive equipment,
furniture and garden equipment.
§ T10B-300 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-300
BAO:1315

SUBDIVISION 3.8
Garages and Service Stations
§ T10B-301. Location of activities. [Ord. No. 856, § 2.]
Garages and service stations shall be so constructed that:
(a) No sales or service takes place on the public right-of-way,
(b) Vehicles may be turned around on the lot and,
(c) Repairs (as distinguished from service, which includes gas, oil, air,
water and changing of tires) are carried on in an enclosed building or
are carefully shielded from view from the public right-of-way and
adjacent property.
§ T10B-301 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-301
BAO:1317

SUBDIVISION 3.9
Sight Lines at Intersections
§ T10B-302. Interruptions prohibited. [Ord. No. 856, § 2.]
Sight lines 30 inches above paving at street centerlines shall not be
interrupted by plantings or structures within a triangle formed by the point
of a street intersection and points on each of the intersecting street lines 30
feet from such intersection.
§ T10B-302 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-302
BAO:1319

SUBDIVISION 3.10
Swimming Pools
§ T10B-303. Generally. [Ord. No. 856, § 2.]
For the purpose of this article, open private swimming pools are considered
structures; except, that they shall not be counted as floor area in computing
floor area ratio (F.A.R.). They shall not be located in any required setback
area.
§ T10B-303 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-303
BAO:1321

SUBDIVISION 3.11
Screening of Uses
§ T10B-304. Landscaped buffer strips — Required. [Ord. No. 856,
§ 3; Ord. No. 90-38, § 5; Ord. No. 93-19, § 4; Ord. No. 94-19, § 3.]
The side or rear lot line of a lot, other than a lot having street frontage, shall
be screened by a landscaped buffer strip designed in accordance with this
subdivision 3.11 and section 10B-288(c) wherever the lot is proposed to be
improved with a:
§ T10B-305. Same — Screen planting generally. [Ord. No. 856, § 2;
Ord. No. 93-19, § 4.]
Within required buffer areas, a solid and continuous landscape screen
shall be planted and maintained, and the remaining area of the buffer
shall be appropriately planted. Such landscaping shall consist of a mixture
of evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs of such species and size
as will produce a screen at least five feet in height within two growing
seasons, so as continually to restrict a clear view beyond such buffer strip.
The plantings shall be not arranged in a straight row. In addition, an
adequate number of shade trees not in the visual barrier shall be provided.
The planning board shall adopt and maintain on file a list of appropriate
plantings.
§ T10B-306. Same — Height of planting. [Ord. No. 856, § 2; Ord. No.
93-19, § 4.]
The required height of the screen shall be measured from the elevation of
the edge of the adjacent area to be screened. In cases where the elevation of
the planting location is less than the elevation of the edge of adjacent area,
the required height of the screen shall be increased in an amount equal to
(a) Nonresidential use and the lot line borders a residential use or district;
(b) Residential use on a lot which is part of a proposed residential
development of three or more dwelling units and the lot line borders a
multifamily or nonresidential use to the extent that there is insufficient
screening on the contiguous lot or lots to screen the residential use
from the nonresidential use or district; and
(c) Multifamily use including a continuing care residential community and
the lot line borders a single-family and two-family use or district.
The buffer strip requirements of this section shall apply to any
development application approved after the effective date of this
section. If the application involves a pre-existing development, the
board of jurisdiction may lessen the requirements to a level
commensurate with the nature of the application taking into account
the extent to which the application modifies the pre-existing
development.
§ T10B-304 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-306
BAO:1323
such difference in elevation. In cases where the elevation of the planting
location is greater than that at the edge of the adjacent area, the required
height of the screen may be reduced in an amount equal to such difference
in elevation; provided, that in no case shall the required height be reduced
more than two feet.
§ T10B-307. Same — Width; maintenance. [Ord. No. 856, § 2; Ord.
No. 90-38, § 6; Ord. No. 93-19, § 4.]
Any required buffer strip shall be at least 50 feet in width at all points,
except that, if a service use abuts another nonresidential use or
nonresidentially-zoned lot, the buffer strip shall be five feet in width at all
points if there is a buffer along the lot line on the adjacent lot and 10 feet
if there is no such buffer. The board of jurisdiction may increase the buffer
strip width, up to but not more than 75 feet, if the nature of the uses to be
buffered and the existing or proposed site layout require the installation of
a wider buffer strip in order to mitigate visual, noise, and light impacts and
there is sufficient room for a wider buffer. It shall be maintained and kept
clean of all debris and rubbish.
§ T10B-308. Same — Replacement of dead plantings. [Ord. No. 856,
§ 2; Ord. No. 93-19, § 4.]
Required buffer plantings shall be replaced from time to time as they die
and within one year after they die.
§ T10B-309. Installation of plantings or performance guarantee
prerequisite for certificate of occupancy. [Ord. No. 856, § 2; Ord. No.
93-19, § 4.]
No development certificate of occupancy for premises upon which such
screening is required shall be issued until such time as the landscaping
requirements as set forth in this subdivision are installed, or, in the event
that the season is not appropriate for such installation, until a performance
guarantee is posted with the township in an amount equal to the estimated
cost of such landscaping installation.
§ T10B-310. Substitution of fence or wall for plantings. [Ord. No.
856, § 2; Ord. No. 93-19, § 4.]
In required buffer areas where a natural buffer strip is deemed
impracticable or inappropriate by the planning board, a suitable screening
wall or fence may be substituted, as approved by the planning board.
§ T10B-306 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-310
BAO:1324
SUBDIVISION 3.12
Performance Standards
§ T10B-311. Fire protection plan. [Ord. No. 89-30, § 4.]
Each application for development seeking a variance shall submit a fire
protection plan in accordance with the requirements of division 14 of article
IV of this code.
§ T10B-312. Vibration. [Ord. No. 856, § 2.]
Any industrial operation or activity which shall cause at any time and at any
point along the nearest adjacent lot line, earthborne vibrations in excess
of the limits set forth in column (1) of the following table is prohibited.
In addition, any industrial operation or activity which shall cause, at any
time and at any point along any residence district boundary line, earthborne
vibrations in excess of the limits set forth in column (2) of such table is
prohibited. Vibration shall be expressed as displacement in inches and shall
be measured with a standard three-component measuring system. A threecomponent
measuring system is a device for recording the intensity of any
vibration in three mutually perpendicular directions.
Frequency
(cycles per second
(1) Displacement
(inches)
(3) Displacement
(inches)
1 to 10 .0003 .0004
10 to 20 .0005 .0002
20 to 30 .0002 .0001
30 to 40 .0002 .0001
40 and over .0001 .0001
§ T10B-313. Smoke and particulate matter. [Ord. No. 856, § 2.]
The emission from any operation of smoke or particulate matter in such
manner or quantity as to be detrimental to or as to endanger the public
health, safety, comfort or welfare is hereby declared to be a public nuisance
and shall henceforth be unlawful.
For the purpose of grading the density of smoke, the Ringelman Chart,
published and used by the United States Bureau of Mines, "Bureau of Mines
Information Circular 6888," shall be employed. The emission of smoke or
particulate matter of a density greater than No. 2 on the Ringelman Chart is
prohibited at all times, the emission, from all sources within any lot area, of
particulate matter containing more than 10% by weight of particles having
a particle diameter larger than 44 microns is prohibited.
Dust and other types of air pollution borne by the wind from such sources
as storage areas, yards, roads and so forth, within lot boundaries, shall
§ T10B-311 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-313
BAO:1325
be kept to a minimum by appropriate landscaping, paving, oiling or other
acceptable means.
§ T10B-314. Odors. [Ord. No. 856, § 10B-314.]
No use shall be operated so as to produce the emission of objectionable
or offensive odors in such concentrations as to be readily perceptible at
any point at or beyond the lot line of the property on which the use
is located. Table 111, Chapter 5, "Air Pollution Abatement Manual" of
the Manufacturing Chemists' Association, Inc., Washington, D.C., is hereby
adopted as a guide in determining the quantities of offensive odors, as are
the guides and standards contained in the prohibitions against air pollution
of the "Regulations for the Control of Air Pollution."
§ T10B-315. Toxic or noxious matter. [Ord. No. 856, § 2.]
No use shall, for any period of time, discharge across the boundaries of
a lot on which it is located, toxic or noxious matter in such concentration
as to be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, comfort or
general welfare, cause injury or damage to persons, property or the use of
property or land or render unclean the waters of the state to the extent of
being harmful or inimical to the public health, to animal or aquatic life or
to the use of such waters for domestic water supply, industrial purposes,
recreation or other legitimate and necessary uses.
§ T10B-316. Fire and explosive hazards. [Ord. No. 856, § 2.]
Any operation involving the storage, utilization or manufacture of
flammable or explosive materials shall be permitted only in accordance with
applicable statutes, state codes and ordinances.
§ T10B-317. Glare, humidity and heat. [Ord. No. 856, § 2.]
Exposed sources of light, including bare bulbs and tubes and immediately
adjacent reflecting surfaces shall be shielded so as not to create a nuisance
across lot lines.
The light intensity from illumination of any kind, shall not exceed fifty footlamberts
at any point along the line of the lot containing the light source.
Any operation producing excessive humidity in the form of steam or moist
air or producing intense glare or heat shall be performed within an
enclosure and in such a manner as not to be perceptible at or beyond any lot
line. Exterior illumination, except that required for safety and security, shall
be extinguished at 11:00 p.m. for the duration of the hours of darkness.
§ T10B-317.1. Lighting. [Ord. No. 97-23, § 2; Ord. No. 2008-28, § 1.]
(a) Purpose. Regulation of outdoor lighting including recreational/sports
facility lighting is necessary to prevent the cause of unnecessary sky
glow, to prevent light trespass and to reduce unnecessary glare caused
§ T10B-313 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-317.1
BAO:1326
by inappropriate or misaligned light fixtures and/or the inappropriate
location of light poles. These standards are intended to promote energy
efficiency, preserve and protect adjacent residential neighborhoods
from unnecessary lighting impacts and discourage overlighting
consistent with public safety.
(b) Definitions.
AUTOMATIC TIME DEVICE — A switching device, a part of which is
a clock, set to the prevailing time (Eastern Standard Time or Daylight
Savings Time), that will control the period of illuminating outdoor light
fixtures and outdoor signs.
FOOT-CANDLE — The measurement of light on a surface of one square
foot in area on which there is uniformly distributed a light flux of one
lumen.
GLARE — The sensation produced by luminance within the visual field
that is sufficiently greater than the luminance to which the eyes are
adapted to cause annoyance, discomfort, or loss in visual performance
and visibility.
ILLUMINATING ENGINEERING SOCIETY OF NORTH AMERICA
(IESNA) — An organization that establishes standards for the lighting
industry.
LIGHT TRESPASS — Any form of artificial illumination emanating from
a light fixture or illuminated sign on a property that penetrates across
the property line or lines into another property.
MOTION SENSOR DEVICE — A device that will sense motion
electronically and switch on security lighting during the activity and for
a brief duration thereafter.
OBJECTIONABLE DIRECT LIGHT EMISSIONS — Direct light emissions
visible above a height of five feet at the subject property line. A bulb,
a reflective device, a refractive lens device, a globe, or diffuse panels,
shall be considered a direct light emission source.
OUTDOOR LIGHT FIXTURE — An electrically powered illuminating
device containing a total light source of more than 1,800 initial lumens
per fixture (this is greater than a single 100 watt incandescent, or
two, 75 watt reflectorized incandescent bulbs), which is permanently
installed outdoors, including but not limited to, devices used to
illuminate any site, architectural structure, or sign.
SHIELDED LIGHT FIXTURE — A light fixture with cutoff optics that
allows no direct light emissions above a vertical cutoff angle of 90°
for street lighting and 80° for all other lighting, through the light
fixture's lowest light emitting part. Any structural part of the light
fixture providing this cutoff angle must be permanently affixed.
(c) Standards. All outdoor light fixtures installed and thereafter
maintained, other than those serving one- and two-family dwellings,
shall comply with the following requirements:
§ T10B-317.1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-317.1
BAO:1327
(1) Only shielded light fixtures shall be used. Any fixture mounted
above 10 feet shall have not more than 10% of its light distribution
at a vertical angle of 80° above nadir and 2.05% at an angle of 90°
above nadir.
(2) Where used for commercial, educational/institutional purposes or
for sports or recreational facilities, all light fixtures shall be
equipped with automatic timing devices set to be turned off during
nonoperating hours or when not necessary for safety and security
purposes.
(3) Light fixtures used to illuminate flags, statues or other objects
mounted on a pole, pedestal or platform shall use a narrow column
beam of light that will not extend beyond the maximum extension of
the illuminated object.
(4) Other upward directed architectural, landscape or decorative
direct-light emission shall have at least 90% of their total
distribution pattern within the profile of the illuminated structure.
(5) Lighting for freestanding signs, shall use shielded light fixtures or
other device(s) to shield the light source.
(6) All outdoor lighting shall be metal halide, light emitting diodes
(LED), induction lamps, compact fluorescent or incandescent,
unless otherwise approved by the board of jurisdiction.
(7) When not necessary for safety and security purposes all outdoor
lighting during non-operating hours of the business or use, shall be
turned off by 11:00 p.m. or limited to parking areas essential for
night use. The use of lights activated by motion-sensor devices is
permissible in all parking lots or walking paths.
(8) All lighting shall be designed to prevent misdirected or excessive
artificial light and to be energy efficient.
(9) All light fixtures shall be designed, installed and maintained to
prevent light trespass.
(10) Illumination levels shall not exceed those recommended in the
IESNA Lighting Handbook, 8th Edition, and IESNA publication
RP6-88, Sports Lighting.
(11) Except for lights located along public or private streets, the
maximum height of freestanding lights shall not exceed the height
of the principal building, or 14 feet, whichever is less in residential
zones, historic districts or properties adjacent to residential zones
or uses. In nonresidential zones where the light will not be seen
from a residential use a height of up to 20 feet shall be permitted
for freestanding lights.
(12) The style of the light and light standards shall be consistent with
the architectural style of the principal building or surrounding
§ T10B-317.1 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-317.1
BAO:1328
area. Nonresidential uses constructed in residential areas shall
maintain a residential character in the type and style of lighting
installed. In historic districts the style of the light and light
standards shall comply with the district requirements.
(13) Floodlight-type fixtures attached to buildings shall be prohibited
unless other lighting is not suitable for its intended use.
(14) Freestanding lights shall be so located and protected to avoid
being damaged by vehicles.
(15) All wiring shall be underground.
(16) Where allowed to be used for sports or recreational facilities, all
lighting fixtures shall comply with the following:
a. For field sports such as football, soccer, baseball and track and
field, a maximum pole height of 40 feet, but a higher pole
height may be approved by a waiver granted by the board of
jurisdiction upon a showing of necessity, together with
restrictions on use which limit the adverse impacts on
surrounding properties.
b. The minimum distance of the pole to any property line shall be
twice the height of the pole. For example, a forty-foot pole must
be a minimum of 80 feet from any property line.
c. Light trespass shall not be more than one-tenth foot-candle at
any adjacent residential property line measured at grade.
d. A berm, landscape buffer, where feasible, shall be required to
screen the source of light and the lit object from any adjacent
residences.
e. When not in use or not later than 10:30 p.m., all lighting shall
be turned off unless specifically permitted by the board of
jurisdiction.
(d) Illuminance requirements.
(1) Street lighting. Average maintained illuminances shall not exceed
IESNA recommendations listed below and be consistent with safety
standards. IESNA average to minimum illuminance uniformity
ratios are to be used as a guide for designing safe and adequate
roadway lighting. Lighting fixtures shall be chosen to blend into the
existing character of the area.
Average Maintained Illuminance
Arterial roadway nonresidential
area
1.2 to 1.7 foot-candles
Arterial roadway residential
area
0.6 to 0.9 foot-candles
§ T10B-317.1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-317.1
BAO:1329
Average Maintained Illuminance
Collector roadway
nonresidential area
1.2 to 0.8 foot-candles
Collector roadway residential
area
1.6 to 0.4 foot-candles
Local roadway nonresidential
area
0.9 to 0.6 foot-candles
Local roadway residential area 0.4 to 0.3 foot-candles
(2) Open parking facilities. Lighting fixture shall be chosen to blend
into the existing character of the area. Illuminance requirements
shall be determined by the location, type of uses, safety and activity
levels indicated below. Average illuminance shall not be exceeded.
Minimum illuminance shall not be less.
a. Some examples of levels of activity may include: High activity
area:
Regional shopping centers containing retail space of 200,000
square feet or greater;
Low activity area:
Neighborhood shopping area near residential neighborhoods
School parking lot
Church or place of worship parking
b. Maintained horizontal illuminance for open parking facilities
based on level of activity.
Level of Activity
General Parking
and Pedestrian
Traffic Foot-
Candles*
(minimum on
pavement)
Vehicle Use Area
Only Foot-
Candles**
(average on
pavement)
High 0.5 1.0
Medium 0.3 0.5
Low 0.2 0.5
* General parking and pedestrian area is defined as one
where pedestrian conflicts with vehicles are likely to
occur.
** A vehicle use area only is defined as one where conflicts
with pedestrians are not likely to occur (service areas or
access roads).
§ T10B-317.1 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-317.1
BAO:1330
(3) Covered parking facilities. Covered parking facilities require
lighting both day and night subject to the standards set forth in
subsection (c)(7). The standards for roof area lighting of parking
garages shall be similar to open parking facilities. Listed below are
the recommended maintained horizontal illuminance for covered
parking facilities.
Areas
Day Time Foot-
Candles
(average on
pavement)*
Night Time Foot-
Candles
(average on
pavement)
General parking and
pedestrian areas
5.0 5.0
Ramps and corners 10.0 5.0
Entrance areas 50.0 5.0
* Sum of electric lighting and daylight.
(4) Walkways. Minimum average foot-candles shall be as follows:
a. Sidewalks (roadside):
[1] Commercial areas: 0.5.
[2] Residential areas: 0.2.
b. Walkways, stairways and bikeways (distance from roadways:
0.2.
c. Entrances and stairways should maintain a minimum average
foot-candle of 0.5.
(e) Light trespass. All lights fixtures, except street lighting and those used
on one or two family dwellings, shall be designed, installed, and
maintained to prevent light trespass, as specified below.
(1) At the property line of subject property, illumination from light
fixtures shall not exceed 0.1 foot-candles on residentially used
property or 0.5 foot-candles on non-residential used property, in a
vertical plane.
(2) Outdoor light fixtures properly installed and thereafter maintained
shall be directed so that there will be no objectionable direct light
emissions.
(3) Where a nonresidential use abuts a residential use, the side(s) of
the nonresidential building which fronts a residential use must
demonstrate that there is adequate screening to buffer the
building's interior lights from the residential use or provide interior
light opaque window shading.
§ T10B-317.1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-317.1
BAO:1331
(4) Interior lights in nonresidential buildings not necessary for safety
or security purposes shall be turned off after normal business
hours.
(f) Site plan applications and major subdivision applications. Plans for all
lighting other than street lighting shall be submitted in accordance with
the following:
(1) Description of outdoor lighting fixtures including component
specifications such as lamps, reflectors, optics, angle of cutoff,
supports, poles, color of lighting and include manufacturers'
catalog cuts.
(2) Location and description of every outdoor light fixture and hours of
operation.
(3) Maintained horizontal illuminance shown as foot-candles (after
depreciation).
a. Maximum.
b. Minimum.
c. Average, during operating and nonoperating hours.
d. Maximum to minimum ratio.
e. Average to minimum ratio.
(4) Computer generated photometric grid showing foot-candle
readings every 10 feet, and the average foot-candles. Small areas
may require the average to be computed from positions no greater
than five feet apart.
(5) Foundation details for light poles.
(6) When using IES recommendations, submit supporting
documentation.
(g) Applicability of lighting standards. The requirements of this section
shall apply to any development application approved after the effective
date of this section.
(1) If the development application is for a developed site and:
a. If the existing parking area is being expanded to accommodate
30% or more of the existing number of spaces (but at least five
or more spaces); or
b. If the square footage of the structure is to be expanded by 30%
or more (but at least 1,000 square feet); or
c. If more than 40% of the structure or parking area (but at least
1,000 square feet of new structure or five parking spaces) is
being substantially renovated, then the new requirements shall
§ T10B-317.1 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-317.1
BAO:1332
§ T10B-318. Radiation. [Ord. No. 856, § 2.]
Any operation involving radiation, i.e., the use of gamma rays, x-rays,
alpha and beta particles, high speed electrons, neutrons, protons and other
atomic or nuclear particles, shall be permitted only in accordance with
chapter 116 of the Laws of 1958 (N.J.S.A. 26:2D-1 et seq.) and the codes,
rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, as such may be from time
to time amended or supplemented.
§ T10B-319. Electromagnetic radiation. [Ord. No. 856, § 2.]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to operate or
cause to be operated for any purpose, any planned or unplanned source
of electromagnetic radiation which does not comply with the current
regulations of the Federal Communications Commission regarding such
sources of electro-magnetic radiation.
apply both to the new and to the existing development on the
site.
(2) If the development is less than the above, but involves an expansion
or renovation project meeting at least 50% of any of the above
standards, then the applicant may be required to upgrade its site
by expending 50% of the cost of full compliance to be allocated to
such elements of the lighting as the board of jurisdiction shall
determine.
(3) The provisions of section 10B-317 shall continue to apply to all uses
which exist as of the date of this new section 10B-317.1 and which
are not affected by subsequently filed development applications.
§ T10B-317.1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-319
BAO:1333

SUBDIVISION 3.13
Fences and Garden Walls
§ T10B-319.1. Regulations for fences and garden walls in all zones.
[Ord. No. 94-10, § 4; Ord. No. 2015-20]
All fences and garden walls erected in any township zoning district shall be
subject to the following requirements:
(a) A fence permit and a building permit shall be required for all fences and
garden walls six feet or higher from grade. Building permits are issued
by the construction official and fence permits are issued by the zoning
officer.
(b) Fences and garden walls higher than six feet, six inches from grade and
farm fences in excess of eight feet from grade are "structures" and must
meet applicable zoning standards including yard setbacks and heightto-
setback ratio requirements. The maximum permitted height for a
fence or garden wall erected within the front, rear or side yard setbacks
is six feet, six inches from grade, except that a farm fence shall have a
maximum permitted height of eight feet.
(c) If no more than 20% of the length of the fence or garden wall or farm
fence exceeds the maximum permitted height because of grade
variations, then the fence or garden wall or farm fence shall be deemed
to not exceed maximum permitted height from grade.
(d) The corner and line posts of fences located within the front, side, and
rear yard setback areas may extend three inches above the height of
the panel if uncapped or if not decoratively capped, or up to 12 inches
above the panels if capped with decorative and historic finials; and
decorative gateways in fences located in such setback areas shall be no
higher than eight feet.
(e) Fences and garden walls shall be erected in a manner so as to permit
the flow of natural drainage and shall not cause surface water to be
blocked or dammed to create ponding.
(f) Garden walls shall be designed to resist the pressure of the retained
material, including both dead and live load surcharges to which such
walls are subjected, and to insure stability against overturning, sliding,
excessive foundation pressure and water uplift. Garden wall
foundations shall be constructed at a minimum depth of three feet
below finish grade level.
(g) Garden walls shall be constructed with stone, brick, or railroad ties.
Garden walls may be constructed of masonry block or concrete if
treated with facing such as stucco. All masonry garden walls, other than
reinforced concrete walls, shall be protected with an approved coping.
(h) There shall be a fence, not less than four feet in height from grade,
completely enclosing any below-ground swimming pool. Said fence
§ T10B-319.1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-319.1
BAO:1335
shall have a self-closing and self-latching gate capable of being locked
when not in use.
(i) Chain link fences shall be painted or vinyl-clad, black, green, or dark
brown. Chain link fences shall not be permitted in the area between the
street line and a line which is located 15 feet back from the facade of
the principal building on the lot. If there is no principal building on the
lot, the portion of the lot where a chain link fence is prohibited shall be
defined as 15 feet back from the place where a building facade could be
located closest to the street without violating the setback requirement.
(j) The following fences and fencing materials are prohibited: barbed wire,
razor wire, or similar type fences except where the zoning officer issues
a fence permit confirming that such fencing is necessary for safety
purposes and where required during construction; canvas and cloth
fences; spikes; and non-fencing materials. Temporary fences using
canvas and cloth may be permitted during construction.
(k) Fences shall be erected perpendicular to the ground and shall not have
non-perpendicular elements such as ledges.
(l) No fence permit shall be issued by the zoning officer until the applicant
provides a set of plans or description of the proposed fence or garden
wall and a sketch or survey showing its proposed location. The
proposed fence or garden wall shall be constructed in conformity with
the plans or description and shall be located as shown on the sketch or
survey. If the zoning officer, upon inspection, determines that any fence
or garden wall has not been constructed in conformity with the plans or
description or has not been located as shown on the sketch or survey,
the owner of said fence or garden wall shall be so notified in writing.
The zoning officer shall order such fence or garden wall to be
constructed in accordance with the plans and description or order the
fence or garden wall to be located as shown on the sketch or survey. The
owner shall either remove the fence or garden wall or comply with the
order of the zoning officer within 10 days of the date of receipt of said
order. Each day the owner fails to obey the order referred to above shall
constitute a separate and continuing violation of this ordinance subject
to the penalties as set forth in section 10B-107 of this Code.
(m) Fences shall not be permitted in any nonresidential zoning district
other than service districts (S-1 and S-2), the hospital district (H-2), the
education districts (E-1, E-2, E-3, and E-4), and the professional officeresidence
district (POR), except that in the POR district, a fence shall be
located no closer to the street line than the facade of the principal
building on the lot, or if there is no such building, then within the area
which is 15 feet back from the point where the facade of a principal
building could be located without violating the setback requirements.
In addition, fences may be permitted in other nonresidential districts
for purposes of screening storage or trash areas, provided that the
fence is not visible from the public way, or if visible, is less offensive
than the storage or trash areas which it screens. Fences may also be
§ T10B-319.1 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-319.1
BAO:1336
§ T10B-319.2. Severability. [Ord. No. 94-10, § 4.]
If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause or provision of this subdivision
shall be adjudged to be invalid, such adjudication shall apply only to the
section, paragraph, subdivision, clause or provision so adjudged, and the
remainder of the subdivision shall be deemed valid and effective.
permitted to accomplish screening from adjacent uses if permitted
or required by the board of jurisdiction in accordance with section
10B-288(c).
§ T10B-319.1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-319.2
BAO:1337

DIVISION 4
Conditional Uses
§ T10B-320. Table of conditional uses allowed by approval of
planning board. [Ord. 2012-20 § 2; Ord. No. 856, § 2; Ord. No. 893,
§ 6; Ord. No. 1031, §§ 7, 8; Ord. No. 82-17, § 9; Ord. No. 84-31, § 5;
Ord. No. 86-14, § 5; Ord. No. 90-12, § 6; Ord. No. 92-37, § 10; Ord.
No. 94-19, § 4; Ord. No. 94-22, § 3; Ord. No. 95-5, § 3; Ord. No.
95-26, § 1; Ord. No. 96-18; Ord. No. 98-20, § 2; Ord. No. 2002-8, § 3;
Ord. No. 2006-11, § 2 declared invalid and removed; Ord. No.
2010-11, § 3; Ord. No. 2012-20; Ord. No. 2017-8 § 3; Ord. No.
2017-51 § 1]
In the following table, the uses listed are permitted as conditional uses
in those districts that are indicated by an asterisk, but only by approval
granted by the planning board in accordance with the provisions of this
division, and only if all the regulations applicable to the district, except
as hereinafter modified, are complied with. The conditional uses listed in
the table are in addition to uses allowed as conditional uses elsewhere in
this article. The absence of an asterisk (*) for any district in the table does
not necessarily mean that the conditional use is prohibited in that district.
Reference should be made to other parts of this article that are applicable.
Conditional Uses Table
(a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (f) (g) (h) (i)
S-2 * * * * * *
S-1 * *
OR-1 * * * * * *
OR-2 * * * * * * *
E-1 &
2
* * * * * * * *
E-3
E-4 * * *
SC * *
B-2 * *
B-1 * * * *
POR * * *
R-A to
R-M
* * * * * * * *
R-HFW
(Subzone
A)
*
R-T *
§ T10B-320 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-320
BAO:1339
Conditional Uses Table
(a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (f) (g) (h) (i)
R-A/
AH
(a) All facilities owned and operated by the municipality, the county, the
state or the United States of America, including parks and playgrounds.
(b) Railroad and public utility buildings, installations and rights-of-way
needed to serve the general welfare of all or a significant part of the
community, including, but not limited to, pumping stations, electrical
substations, transformers, and high tension towers and wires; provided,
that the planning board determines that no other reasonable location in
a less restricted district can be used for the purpose contemplated.
PWTFs and PWTEFs shall not be deemed a public utility.
(c) Farming on a lot of less than three acres.
(d) Public and private day schools not for pecuniary profit which give
instructions in any grades from pre-kindergarten to grade 12, both
inclusive, and uses customarily accessory thereto; provided, that the
school sites conform to the standards set forth in section 300 of the
"Guide for School-House Planning and Construction, 1969," adopted by
the State Board of Education.
(e) Child day care facilities, adult day care facilities, and nursery schools,
including pre-schools.
(f) Nonprofit membership clubs for outdoor sports, including swim clubs,
having no nuisance factors.
(g) Places of worship permitted in all zones in accordance with section
10B-272.30 et seq.
(h) Nursing homes and assisted living residences in accordance with
section 10B-272.40 et seq. Nursing homes and assisted living facilities
are not permitted as a conditional use in any portion of the R-A or R-B
zoning districts or in any portion of the R-T zoning district which is
designated as R-SMO.
(i) Cemeteries.
(j) (k) (l) (m) (n) (o) (p) (q)
S-2 *
S-1 * *
OR-1 *
OR-2 *
E-1 &
2
* * *
§ T10B-320 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-320
BAO:1340
(j) (k) (l) (m) (n) (o) (p) (q)
E-3
E-4
SC
B-2 *
B-1 *
POR *
R-A to
R-M
* * *
R-HFW
(Subzone
A)
R-T *
R-A/
AH
* *
R-2AH *
(j) Camps for children owned or operated by tax exempt eleemosynary
organizations, such as the YMCA, YWCA and the Boy Scouts and Girl
Scouts. Such camps shall be on lots of not less than 10 acres.
(k) Repealed by Ord. No. 2017-8.
(l) Volunteer first aid and rescue squad units and volunteer fire companies.
Nonprofit first aid and rescue squad facility with supportive housing for
emergency service volunteers are permitted in the R-7 zone only in
accordance with Section 10B-272.72 and volunteer fire companies are
permitted in the other zones indicated by an * (asterisk).
(m) Car washes.
(n) Continuing care retirement communities in accordance with section
10B-272.20, et seq. Continuing care retirement communities are
designated as conditional uses in the following zoning districts R-A, RB,
R-1, R-2, R-3, R-T, R-1/AH, OR-1, and OR-2, but not in an HP or HPB
overlay district.
(o) Golf course/club in accordance with section 10B-272.26 et seq. Golf
course/clubs are designated as conditional uses in the following: R-A, RB,
R-1, R-1/AH, and E-2.
(p) PWTFs and PWTEFs in accordance with sections 10B-272.50 et seq.
(q) Environmental education, land preservation and educational uses as
permitted in section 10B-272.69.
§ T10B-320 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-321
BAO:1341
§ T10B-321. Principles considered in board's decision. [Ord. No.
856, § 2.]
In making its decision on an application for approval of a conditional use,
the planning board shall take no action which will substantially impair
the intent or purpose of this article. The board may attach such terms
and conditions to an approval of such application as in its judgment will
preserve such public good or such intent or purpose, and shall be guided by
the following principles:
(a) The local need for the proposed facilities and whether or not the same is
adequately served by existing facilities within feasible distance of the
area to be served.
(b) The existence of nuisance factors, and whether or not adequate
shielding by way of landscaping or distance from the nearest property
line is provided to minimize any such factors.
(c) The effect of the amount of traffic which the proposed use may
reasonably generate upon existing streets, the safety of nearby uses
such as schools or other places of congregation or public service, the
peace and quiet of nearby property and the use of public right-of-way
for parking, service or any other purpose.
§ T10B-321 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-321
BAO:1342
DIVISION 5
Administration
§ T10B-322. Generally. [Ord. No. 856, § 2.]
Appeals from decisions or refusals of a municipal official based on or made
in the enforcement of this article, and requests for interpretation of the
zoning map or this article or for decisions upon other special questions
upon which the board of adjustment or planning board is authorized to pass
by this article, and applications for approval of conditional uses permitted
by this article, and applications for variances from the provisions of this
article shall be administered, processed and enforced in accordance with
this division and with the other applicable provisions of this chapter.
§ T10B-323. Zoning permits required; construction permit as
alternative. [Ord. No. 856, § 2.]
Zoning permits shall be secured from the development enforcement officer,
in cases not involving approvals by the board of adjustment of applications
for development, prior to the erection, construction or alteration of any
structure or part of a structure or of any parking lot. A duly issued
construction permit shall satisfy the purposes of a zoning permit; provided,
that it conforms to all further conditions and requirements set forth in this
article that are applicable to zoning permits.
§ T10B-324. Application — Form and contents generally. [Ord. No.
856, § 2.]
Requests for zoning permits shall be made in writing by the owner or his
authorized agent, shall include a statement of the use or proposed use
of the structure or parking lot and shall be accompanied by a plan of
the plot showing the exact size, shape and location of all proposed and
existing structures and parking lots and such other information as may
be necessary to enable the development enforcement officer to determine
whether or not the proposed use and structure or parking lot complies with
the provisions of this article, other applicable provisions of this chapter and
other ordinances of the municipality.
§ T10B-325. Issuance or denial. [Ord. No. 856, § 2.]
The development enforcement officer, after receiving a complete and
properly prepared request, shall issue a zoning permit if he finds that the
proposed use and structure or parking lot complies with the provisions of
this article and with other applicable provisions of this chapter and other
ordinances of the municipality. Otherwise he shall deny the request.
§ T10B-326. Zoning certificate of occupancy. [Ord. No. 856, § 2.]
In any case in which a zoning permit is required no building or parking lot
or land shall be occupied or used, except land used for permitted farming
hereunder, for other than a permitted use in existence at the time of the
§ T10B-322 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-326
BAO:1343
passage of this article, nor shall the occupancy or use of such building
or parking lot or land be changed to any other occupancy or use which
has different requirements under this chapter, until a zoning certificate of
occupancy has been issued by the development enforcement officer upon
written request of the owner or his authorized agent. Such request shall
include a statement of the proposed use of the building or parking lot or
land, and be accompanied by a plan of the plot showing the exact size,
shape and location of all proposed and existing buildings or parking lots
and such other information as may be necessary to enable the development
enforcement officer to determine whether or not the proposed occupancy
or use complies with the provisions of this article and other applicable
provisions of this chapter and other ordinances of the municipality. No
zoning certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless the proposed
occupancy and use does so comply.
§ T10B-327. Guiding principles. [Ord. No. 856, § 2.]
Subject to the foregoing, the board of adjustment or planning board may, in
exercising its powers, interpret this article in its application to a particular
case when the regulations are couched in general terms only, and determine
by close examination the true location of any district boundary line, and
vary the application of the provisions hereof in harmony with their general
intent and purpose so as to avoid practical difficulties or unnecessary
hardship and secure the public health, safety and general welfare, but each
appeal or application for a variance shall be considered on its own merits,
and no variance shall be granted upon the basis of financial hardship or
hardship resulting from an act of the appellant or applicant subsequent to
the passage of this article whether in violation hereof or not, nor shall any
variance be granted unless:
§ T10B-328. Time limits on variances; extensions. [Ord. No. 856,
§ 2.]
In cases of variances that involve the issuance of construction permits,
the variance shall terminate one year after the granting of the variance
(a) There are special and strictly unique circumstances or conditions, fully
described in the findings of the board, which are peculiar to the
particular parcel or land or building for which the variance is sought,
and which do not apply generally to land or buildings in the
neighborhood, and such circumstances or conditions are such that the
strict application of the provisions of this article would deprive the
applicant of the reasonable use of such land or buildings; and
(b) For reasons fully set forth in the findings of the board, the variance is
the minimum that will accomplish this purpose; and
(c) The granting of the variance will be in harmony with the general
purposes and intent of this article, will not change the character of the
district and will not be injurious to the neighborhood or otherwise
detrimental to the public welfare.
§ T10B-326 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-328
BAO:1344
unless a construction permit is applied for within such one-year period or
within such greater time limit as the board of adjustment shall grant upon a
showing of good cause made by the applicant.
Time limitations that have been fixed in accordance with the foregoing may
thereafter be extended upon application to the board of adjustment, with
notice as required for variance hearings; provided, that the application shall
be made prior to the expiration of the time limitation sought to be extended.
Upon a showing of good cause made by the applicant before the board of
adjustment, the board may extend the time limitation by resolution.
§ T10B-328.1. Payment of taxes and assessments. [Ord. No. 90-23,
§ 4.]
A condition of each zoning approval granted under this chapter is that all
taxes and assessments for local improvements on the property for which
zoning relief is sought shall be paid in full.
§ T10B-328 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-328.1
BAO:1345

DIVISION 6
Nonconforming Structures and Uses
§ T10B-329. Continuation; effect of abandonment. [Ord. No. 856,
§ 2.]
Any nonconforming structure or use may be continued upon the land or in
the structure so occupied or used, and any nonconforming structure may be
restored or repaired in the event of partial destruction thereof, but no such
structure or use which is abandoned shall be reinstated. Cessation of a use
for a continuous period of one year shall create a rebuttable presumption
that such has been abandoned.
§ T10B-330. Alteration and enlargement of structures:
nonconforming lots. [Ord. No. 856 § 2; Ord. No. 88-43, § 1; Ord. No.
97-2, § 2.]
A nonconforming structure or a conforming structure on a nonconforming
lot may be altered or enlarged provided that such alteration or enlargement
neither increases existing nonconformity nor creates a new violation;
except, the gross floor area of a single-family house that occupies a lot that
is smaller than the required lot area for the district in which the house is
located may be increased proportionately by using the following formula for
determining the adjusted F.A.R. that may be applied to the existing area (in
square feet) of the nonconforming lot:
[1+ [(required lot area - Existing lot area)/required lot area]] x FAR for the
district = adjusted F.A.R
For purposes of this calculation:
1. Subtract the existing lot area from the required lot area.
2. Divide the result by the required lot area.
3. Add 1 to the result.
4. Multiply the result by the district F.A.R. expressed as a decimal to
determine the adjusted F.A.R.
5. To obtain the maximum gross floor area for the existing lot, multiply the
adjusted F.A.R. by the existing lot area.
By way of an example, on a 32, 670 square foot lot in the R-3 zoning districts
where the required lot area is 43,560 square feet and the maximum F.A.R.
is 15% the adjusted F.A.R. stated as a decimal is .1875 (i.e., 1.25 x .15) and
the permitted gross floor area is 6,126 square feet (i.e., 32,670 x .1875).
If such single-family house is in a zoning district in which residential use
is not permitted, the district referred to in the first paragraph shall be the
residence district nearest to such house.
If a variance is granted to allow a single-family house to be constructed
on a vacant lot that is smaller than the required lot area for the district in
§ T10B-329 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-330
BAO:1347
which the house is to be located, then the above formula shall also apply in
determining the permitted gross floor area.
§ T10B-331. Change or enlargement of use. [Ord. No. 856, § 2.]
A nonconforming use shall not be enlarged in area or substantially changed
in character to other than a conforming use.
1.
§ T10B-330 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-331
BAO:1348
ARTICLE XII
Affordable Housing
DIVISION 1
General
§ T10B-332. Purposes. [Ord. No. 84-31, § 6; Ord. No. 97-10, § 1.]
Applicability. This section establishes regulations applicable to those
designated low and moderate income housing units which will be created
in the township subsequent to a grant of Substantive Certification by COAH
and which will be credited toward the township's compliance with its
1993-1999 affordable housing obligation or toward an as yet undetermined
future affordable housing obligation. This section shall not apply to any
units created subsequent to the grant of Substantive Certification for which
credits or reductions in the 1993-1999 fair share obligation have been
granted by COAH in recognition of a previous housing compliance program
and which are regulated under existing township ordinances and Housing
Board Rules. The units which shall be subject to the regulations of this
section may include family or senior citizens' housing construction, rentals
of vacant rehabilitation units, and alternative living arrangements. This
section is intended to be consistent with the provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:93 et
seq., effective June 6, 1994 and the Fair Housing Act of 1985.
The Township committee to implement the goals and objectives of the
Princeton Community Master Plan has determined that an affordable
housing program should be established in the township in order to:
(a) Provide housing opportunities for lower income families in order to
meet the existing and anticipated housing needs of such persons,
maintain a socio-economic mix in the community, provide a range of
housing types dispersed throughout the community in a suitable living
environment, and satisfy the community's obligation to provide a fair
share of the region's housing needs;
(b) Assure that the lower income units constructed under this program
continue to remain available to lower income households through
controls on rental and resale prices to be exercised by the Princeton
Township Housing Board.
(c) Provide for housing opportunities for those who work in Princeton and
provide the community with essential services but who cannot currently
afford to live in the community; and
(d) Provide that developments which create additional affordable housing
demand within Princeton share in the burden of providing such
affordable housing, including commercial and institutional
developments.
§ T10B-332 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-333
BAO:1349
§ T10B-333. Definitions. [Ord. No. 84-31, § 6.]
AFFORDABLE — With respect to living accommodations, a dwelling unit
for which a household pays, with regard to a unit for sale, not more than
28% of gross income for mortgage payments, property taxes, insurance, and
homeowners' association fees, if any, and, with regard to a rental unit, not
more than 30% of gross income for all shelter costs including utilities.
LOW INCOME HOUSEHOLD — Shall mean a household earning between
zero and 50% of the median income established by the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development for the geographic area in
which Princeton Township is located, as adjusted by that Department for
household size.
LOW INCOME UNIT — Shall mean a dwelling unit affordable to a low
income household.
LOWER INCOME HOUSEHOLD — Shall mean a low income-unit or a
moderate-income unit.
LOWER INCOME UNIT — Shall mean a low-income unit or moderateincome
unit.
MIDDLE INCOME HOUSEHOLD — Shall mean a household earning
between 80% and 150% of the median income established by the United
States Department of Housing and Urban Development for the geographic
area in which Princeton Township is located, as adjusted by that
Department for household size, or any comparable standard adopted by a
court of competent jurisdiction for this purpose.
MIDDLE INCOME UNIT — Shall mean a dwelling unit affordable to a
middle income household.
MODERATE INCOME HOUSEHOLD — Shall mean a household earning
between 50% and 8% of the median income established by the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development for the geographic area
in which Princeton Township is located, as adjusted by that Department
for household size, or any comparable standard adopted by a court of
competent jurisdiction for this purpose.
MODERATE-INCOME UNIT — Shall mean a dwelling unit affordable to a
moderate-income household.
RESIDENTIAL SPACE — Shall mean: (1) all areas defined as habitable
under the BOCA Basic National Building Code, 1984; and (2) bathrooms,
toilet compartments, closets, halls, and garages.
§ T10B-333.1. Affordable housing violations. [Ord. No. 2007-20, § 1;
Ord. No. 2009-9, § 1]
(a) Any owner, developer or tenant who violates any terms, conditions or
requirements of the Princeton Township Affordable Housing Program
as set forth in this article, as amended from time to time; violates any of
the terms, conditions or requirements of the New Jersey Fair Housing
Act, N.J.S.A. 52-27D-301 et seq., as may be amended from time to time;
§ T10B-333 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-333.1
BAO:1350
violates any of the terms, conditions or requirements of the Substantive
and Procedural Rules of the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing
("COAH") which appear at N.J.A.C. 5:96-1 et seq. and N.J.A.C. 5:97-1
et seq. as amended from time to time or violates the Uniform Housing
Affordability Controls, terms, conditions or requirements as issued by
the New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency appearing at
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq., as amended from time to time, shall be
subject to punishment in accordance with the general penalty
provisions of this Code as they appear at section 1-6 of the Princeton
Borough Code.
(b) Additionally, upon the occurrence of a breach of any of the regulations
governing the affordable unit by an owner, developer or tenant the
township shall have all remedies provided at law or equity, including
but not limited to foreclosure, tenant eviction, a requirement for
household recertification, acceleration of all sums due under a
mortgage, recoupment of any funds from a sale in the violation of the
regulations, injunctive relief to prevent further violation of the
regulations, entry on the premises, and specific performance.
(c) After providing written notice of a violation to an owner, developer or
tenant of a low- or moderate-income unit and advising the owner,
developer or tenant of the penalties for such violations, the township
may take the following action against the owner, developer or tenant for
any violation that remains uncured for a period of 60 days after service
of the written notice in addition to issuing a Summons and Complaint
pursuant to paragraph (a) hereinabove:
(1) The township may file a court action pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:58-11
alleging a violation or violations of the regulations governing the
affordable housing unit. If the owner, developer or tenant is found
by the court to have violated any provision of the regulations
governing affordable housing units the owner, developer or tenant
shall be subject to one or more of the following penalties, at the
discretion of the court:
a. A fine of not more than $2,000 or imprisonment for a period
not to exceed 90 days, or both. Each and every day that the
violation continues or exists shall be considered a separate and
specific violation of these provisions and not as a continuing
offense;
b. In the case of an owner who has rented his or her low-or
moderate-income unit in violation of the regulations governing
affordable housing units, payment into the Princeton Township
Affordable Housing Trust Fund of the gross amount of rent
illegally collected;
c. In the case of an owner who has rented his or her low-or
moderate-income unit in violation of the regulations governing
§ T10B-333.1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-333.1
BAO:1351
affordable housing units, payment of an innocent tenant's
reasonable relocation costs, as determined by the court.
(2) The township may file a court action in the Superior Court seeking
a judgment, which would result in the termination of the owner's
equity or other interest in the unit, in the nature of a mortgage
foreclosure. Any judgment shall be enforceable as if the same were
a judgment of default of the first purchase money mortgage and
shall constitute a lien against the low- and moderate-income unit.
a. Such judgment shall be enforceable, at the option of the
township, by means of an execution sale by the sheriff, at which
time the low- and moderate-income unit of the violating owner
shall be sold at a sale price which is not less than the amount
necessary to fully satisfy and pay off any first purchase money
mortgage and prior liens and the costs of the enforcement
proceedings incurred by the township, including attorney's
fees. The violating owner shall have his right to possession
terminated as well as his title conveyed pursuant to the
sheriff's sale.
b. The proceeds of the sheriff's sale shall first be applied to satisfy
the first purchase money mortgage lien and any prior liens
upon the low- and moderate-income unit. The excess, if any,
shall be applied to reimburse the township for any and all costs
and expenses incurred in connection with either the court
action resulting in the judgment of violation or the sheriff's
sale. In the event that the proceeds from the sheriff's sale are
insufficient to reimburse the township in full as aforesaid, the
violating owner shall be personally responsible for and to the
extent of such deficiency, in addition to any and all costs
incurred by the township in connection with collecting such
deficiency. In the event that a surplus remains after satisfying
all of the above, such surplus, if any, shall be placed in escrow
by the township for the owner and shall be held in such escrow
for a maximum period of two years or until such earlier time as
the owner shall make a claim with the township for such.
Failure of the owner to claim such balance within the two-year
period shall automatically result in a forfeiture of such balance
to the township. Any interest accrued or earned on such
balance while being held in escrow shall belong to and shall be
paid to the township, whether such balance shall be paid to the
owner or forfeited to the township.
c. Foreclosure by the township due to a violation of the
regulations governing affordable housing units shall not
extinguish the restrictions of the regulations governing
affordable housing units as the same apply to the low- and
moderate-income unit. Title shall be conveyed to the purchaser
at the sheriff's sale, subject to the restrictions and provisions of
the regulations governing the affordable housing unit. The
§ T10B-333.1 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-333.1
BAO:1352
owner determined to be in violation of the provisions of this
plan and from whom title and possession were taken by means
of the sheriff's sale shall not be entitled to any right of
redemption.
d. If there are no bidders at the sheriff's sale or if insufficient
amounts are bid to satisfy the first purchase money mortgage
and any prior liens, the township may acquire title to the lowand
moderate-income unit by satisfying the first purchase
money mortgage and any prior liens and crediting the violating
owner with an amount equal to the difference between the first
purchase money mortgage and any prior liens and costs of the
enforcement proceedings, including legal fees and the
maximum resale price for which the low- and moderate-income
unit could have been sold under the terms of the regulations
governing affordable housing units. This excess shall be
treated in the same manner as the excess which would have
been realized from an actual sale as previously described.
e. Failure of the low- and moderate-income unit to be either sold
at the sheriff's sale or acquired by the township shall obligate
the owner to accept an offer to purchase from any qualified
purchaser which may be referred to the owner by the
township, with such offer to purchase being equal to the
maximum resale price of the low- and moderate-income unit as
permitted by the regulations governing affordable housing
units.
f. The owner shall remain fully obligated, responsible and liable
for complying with the terms and restrictions of governing
affordable housing units until such time as title is conveyed
from the owner.
§ T10B-333.1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-333.1
BAO:1353

DIVISION 2
Residential Market Program (R-M) District
§ T10B-334. Establishment. [Ord. No. 84-31, § 6.]
§ T10B-335. Permitted uses. [Ord. No. 84-31, § 6.]
Residential clusters meeting the requirements of this article and of division
9 (Residential Clusters) of article IX, except as modified herein, shall be
permitted at a gross density not exceeding 3.25 units per acre.
§ T10B-336. Mandatory set-asides/comprehensive development
required. [Ord. No. 84-31, § 6.]
§ T10B-337. Provisions applicable to lower income units. [Ord. No.
84-31, § 6; Ord. No. 97-10, § 2; Ord. No. 97-16, § 1.]
The following provisions shall apply to lower income units provided
pursuant to this article:
(a) There is hereby established a Residential Market Program (R-M)
Zoning District, made up of such land area as shown on the zoning map
on file in the office of the township clerk, such map being entitled:
"Zoning Map, Princeton Township, Mercer County, New Jersey,"
prepared by the Princeton Township Engineering Department, as
revised through October 15, 1984.
(a) Subdivision and site plan approval for developments within the R-M
district shall be denied, unless the developer complies with the
obligation to provide affordable housing pursuant to this article, except
that improvements to agricultural operations shall be exempt from the
provisions of this article.
(b) At least 22% of the units in each development shall be set aside to be
sold or rented at prices qualifying the units as lower income units and
pursuant to section 10B-337 of this division.
(c) Each R-M zoning district shall be developed pursuant to a
comprehensive development plan for no less than the entire district,
and no approval shall be granted for any preliminary development
application for less than the entire district.
(d) No lot within an R-M zoning district may be subdivided even if no
improvements are proposed thereto, unless a declaration of covenants
and restrictions showing how the entire district will be developed in
compliance with the requirements of this article is approved by the
planning board and filed with the county clerk. All owners of the
subdivided lots shall be bound by such declaration unless they jointly
submit a development application covering the entire district and
complying with the requirements of this article.
§ T10B-334 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-337
BAO:1355
(a) Compliance with requirements pertaining to the lower income units;
applicant's agreement with respect to compliance. The applicant shall
offer lower-income units for sale or rental in the manner prescribed in
this article and in the implementing regulations of the Princeton
Township Housing Board and to otherwise comply with the
requirements of this article and shall include in the written agreement
required by section 10B-346(a) its agreements to comply with such
requirements.
(b) Minimum percentage of low income units required. Except for
inclusionary developments constructed pursuant to low income tax
credit regulations:
1. At least half of the lower income units provided by each applicant
shall be low income units.
2. At least half of all rental units shall be affordable to low income
households.
3. At least one-third of all units in each bedroom distribution pursuant
to N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.3 shall be affordable to low income households.
The planning board, upon recommendation of the Princeton
Township Housing Board, may modify this requirement when
financial or other factors make this infeasible.
(c) Siting of the lower income units. In cluster developments, the lower
income units shall be situated so as not to be in less desirable locations
than the other units in the cluster and shall be no less accessible to the
common open space, public facilities, public transportation, and
shopping facilities than the other units.
(d) Number of bedrooms in the lower income units.
1. Inclusionary developments that are not restricted to senior citizens
shall be structured in conjunction with realistic market demands so
that:
a. The combination of efficiency and one bedroom units is at least
10% and no greater than 20% of the total low and moderate
income units.
b. At least 30% of all low and moderate income units are two
bedroom units.
c. At least 20% of all low and moderate income units are three
bedroom units.
2. Low and moderate income units restricted to senior citizens may
utilize a modified bedroom distribution such that, as a minimum,
the total number of bedrooms provided in senior citizen units
equals the number of senior citizen low and moderate income
housing units within the inclusionary developments.
§ T10B-337 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-337
BAO:1356
The planning board, upon recommendation by the Princeton
Township Housing Board, may modify this requirement in light of
the location and nature of the development, the existing need, and
the bedroom mix of other lower income units in the township.
(e) Minimum floor areas of the lower-income units. The design of lower
income units shall meet or exceed the Minimum Property Standards,
published by the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development. In addition, minimum floor area for lower income units
shall be as follows:
Efficiency units 425 square feet
1 bedroom units 550 square feet
2 bedroom units 700 square feet
3 bedroom units 900 square feet
further provided, however, that the planning board may reduce the
minimum floor area required if the unit design can be shown to meet or
exceed reasonable habitability and health standards. These standards
shall supersede any other floor area requirements contained within the
Princeton Township Land Use Ordinance.
(f) Housing for senior citizens and the disabled. The applicant shall not
design for and market to households in which one primary wage earner
is 62 years old or older a greater percentage of the lower income units
than represents the percentage of such households in the lower income
population of the region. The planning board, upon the
recommendation of the Princeton Township Housing Board, may modify
this requirement in light of the location and nature of the development
and the existing need for housing for senior citizens, disabled and for
families. In the event that the Princeton Township Housing Board
determines that the number of housing units for senior citizens already
approved is likely to provide for an adequate percentage of such
housing relative to regional needs, future applications under this
subsection containing age-restricted lower income housing shall not be
approved. No age restrictions other than those set forth in this section
may be imposed.
(g) Provision of the lower income units when developed in stages. The
lower income units, including units to be built off-tract, shall be
constructed in tandem with the market units according to the following
schedule:
Market unit Percentage
completed
Lower-income unit Percentage
completed
25% 0% (none required)
25% plus one unit 10%
50% 50%
§ T10B-337 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-337
BAO:1357
§ T10B-338. Alternate sites for lower income housing. [Ord. No.
84-31, § 6; Ord. No. 85-11, § 6; Ord. No. 85-23, § 2; Ord. No. 87-3,
§ 1.]
The applicant may construct the lower income units for which he is
responsible pursuant to section 10B-336 on an alternative site, provided the
following conditions are met:
Market unit Percentage
completed
Lower-income unit Percentage
completed
75% 75%
90% 100%
The schedule shall refer to the issuance of the certificates of
occupancy by the township building officer.
A design of inclusionary developments that integrates low and
moderate income units with market units is encouraged, per N.J.A.C.
5:93-5.6(e).
(h) Calculation of number or units. If the number of lower income units to
be provided includes a fraction, the number shall be rounded up. If the
number of market units permitted includes a fraction, the number shall
be rounded down.
(a) The alternate site is zoned R-H.
(b) The number of lower income units that the applicant is responsible to
build shall be increased by 36%; so that, on a tract of 100 acres where
the total number of units permitted is the maximum permitted or 325,
and the lower income units, if built on-site, is (3.25 x .22) = 72, the
number that must be provided off-site must be (72 x 1.36 =) 98.
(c) The number of non-lower income units permitted on the R-M site that is
the subject of the application shall not exceed the sum of the non-lower
income units permitted if the lower income units were built on-site, plus
the number of lower income units that would have been built on-site
multiplied by .65; so that, on the same 100 acre tract as illustrated
above, the number of non-lower income units permitted shall not
exceed (325 - 72) = 253 + (72 x .65) = 253 + 47 = 300.
(d) If the site is owned by the Township of Princeton, the Princeton
Township Housing Board shall recommend to township committee the
fair market value to be paid by the applicant to the township, such value
not to be unreasonable in light of market conditions and the
enhancement of the applicant's land value in the R-M zone resulting
from the operation of this article of the land necessary to accommodate
his lower income units, to pay for his pro-rata share of on-site and
offsite improvements, and to develop in accordance with a site plan for
the entire site prepared by the Princeton Township Housing Board and
approved by the planning board and enters into a contract with the
§ T10B-337 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-338
BAO:1358
Princeton Township Housing Board which provides that he will meet
his obligations as contained herein and sets forth the manner in which
comprehensive development of the site will proceed.
(e) If the site is owned by the applicant, he agrees to develop in accordance
with a site plan for the entire site approved by the planning board, and
enters into an agreement with the Princeton Township Housing Board
ensuring compliance with all of the provisions of this section governing
lower-income housing, and ensuring that comprehensive development
of the entire site takes place in a timely manner.
(f) Any applicant electing to utilize the provisions of this section and
construct lower-income units on an alternate site may not construct any
of the market-rate units required on such alternate site, except
pursuant to a further agreement with the Princeton Township Housing
Board ensuring that any financial benefits associated with the sale of
such units inure to the benefit of the affordable housing program of the
municipality, and not to the benefit of the applicant.
(g) The site plan, including the mix of unit types and location of the lower
and market-rate units, meets with the approval of the planning board.
(h) The planning board determines that with these additional units
relocated into the R-H district there will still be sufficient land area
remaining in said district to accommodate the remaining fair share
obligation as determined by a court of competent jurisdiction (or, if no
such determination is made, as set forth in the Master Plan).
(i) All of the provisions of division 3 of this article shall apply.
(j) Any application approved under this section shall contain a plan for
simultaneous phasing of development of non-lower income units on the
applicant's R-M site and lower income units on the R-H site generally
consistent with the language of section 10B-337(g).
(k) The Princeton Township Housing Board may recommend in lieu of
constructing the lower-income units for which the applicant is
responsible on an alternate site, that the applicant seek to take
advantage of the provisions of this section by paying a fee to the
township for use exclusively in connection with the provision of lowerincome
housing within the township, by making a donation of land to
the township to be used exclusively for the development of lowerincome
housing as set forth in this section, or some combination of the
two. Payment of a fee or donation of land in lieu of constructing units
shall only be permitted where the Princeton Township Housing Board,
at its sole discretion, has made a finding that such a fee or donation will
better effectuate the purpose of this ordinance than would adherence to
the provisions otherwise set forth in this section, and said finding has
been confirmed by resolution of township committee. Any such
recommendation to township committee shall be accompanied by
specific findings setting forth the reasons for said recommendation.
§ T10B-338 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-338
BAO:1359
(l) In the event that the board and township committee agree to accept
such payment or donation in lieu of constructing units, the board will
establish the value of the payment or donation, to bear a reasonable
relationship to the cost of constructing the number of lower-income
units that would otherwise be required by section 10B-338(b), and the
schedule on which the payments or donations shall be made, which
shall provide that all payments or donations of land shall be made, in
reasonable installments, by such time as certificates of occupancy have
been issued for no more than 50% of the market-rate units in the
development. Where such an agreement is in effect, no more than 50%
of the certificates of occupancy for the market-rate units shall be issued
until the board has certified to the township building official that all
payments or donations pursuant to such agreement have been made.
(m) Donation of land in lieu of all or part of constructing units shall be
further governed by the following provisions:
(1) Where such a donation represents a change in the location of sites
for affordable housing, they shall be reviewed by the planning
board and shall be accepted by said board only if the land is at least
comparable to that part of the R-M site on which the lower-income
units would have been constructed in terms of physical suitability
for development, access to community facilities and services, and
socioeconomic impact on the community.
(2) The credit for the land, against the total contribution requirement
set, shall be the lesser of the following:
a. The appraised value of the land, as determined by an appraisal
commissioned by the board, at the expense of the applicant; or
b. The value determined as follows: the planning director shall
determine the number of units that can reasonably be
accommodated on the site to be donated, and shall determine
what percentage that number of units represents as a
percentage of the total number of units that the applicant must
build under section 10B-338(b). The planning director shall
then multiply that percentage by the total dollar value of the
contribution requirement set by the board according to section
10B-338(1) to determine the amount of credit to be allowed.
§ T10B-338 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-338
BAO:1360
DIVISION 3
Developments Including Lower-Income Housing in The R-H District
§ T10B-339. Modifications permitted in the R-H district for
developments including lower income housing. [Ord. No. 84-31, § 6;
Ord. No. 85-11, §§ 7, 8; Ord. No. 85-23, § 3; Ord. No. 87-3, § 2; Ord.
No. 87-31, § 2.]
(a) Development of residential clusters pursuant to division 9 of article IX
shall be permitted in the RH-8 zoning district at a gross density not
exceeding eight units per acre and in the RH-12 zoning district at a
gross density not exceeding 12 units per acre, provided that one half of
the units are lower income. If the number of units built is uneven, the
extra unit shall be a market-rate unit.
(b) No development, except for that undertaken by the Princeton Township
Housing Fund, under the provisions of this section shall receive final
approval by the planning board except upon submission of an executed
agreement between the applicant and the Housing Board ensuring
compliance with all of the provisions of this section governing lowerincome
housing.
(c) The provisions of section 10B-337 shall apply to any lower income units
constructed under the provisions of this section.
(d) The provisions of sections 10B-336(c) and 10B-336(d) pertaining to
development in the R-M district shall apply to the development under
this section; provided that the planning board shall waive this
requirement upon making a finding that that part of the district not
included in a development application can still feasibly and reasonably
be developed under the provisions of this section separately in the
future.
§ T10B-339 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-339
BAO:1361

DIVISION 4
Development Fee and Affordable Housing Contribution45
§ T10B-340. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2010-4, § 1.]
§ T10B-340.1. Basic requirements. [Ord. No. 2010-4, § 1.]
§ T10B-340.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2010-4, § 1.]
The following terms, as used in this section, shall have the following
meanings:
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean a development
included in the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and includes, but
is not limited to, an inclusionary development, a municipal construction
project or a 100% affordable development.
(a) In Holmdel Builder's Association V. Holmdel Township, 121 N.J. 550
(1990), the New Jersey Supreme Court determined that mandatory
development fees are authorized by the Fair Housing Act of 1985 (the
Act), N.J.S.A. 52:27d-301 et seq., and the State Constitution, subject to
the Council on Affordable Housing's (COAH's) adoption of rules.
(b) Pursuant to P.L. 2008, c.46 section 8 (C. 52:27D-329.2) and the
Statewide Non-Residential Development Fee Act (C. 40:55D-8.1
through 8.7), COAH is authorized to adopt and promulgate regulations
necessary for the establishment, implementation, review, monitoring
and enforcement of municipal affordable housing trust funds and
corresponding spending plans. Municipalities that are under the
jurisdiction of the Council or court of competent jurisdiction and have a
COAH-approved spending plan may retain fees collected from
nonresidential development.
(c) This division establishes standards for the collection, maintenance, and
expenditure of development fees pursuant to COAH's regulations and in
accordance P.L. 2008, c.46, sections 8 and 32-38. Fees collected
pursuant to this division shall be used for the sole purpose of providing
low- and moderate-income housing. This division shall be interpreted
within the framework of COAH's rules on development fees, codified at
N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.
(a) This division shall not be effective until approved by COAH pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:96-5.1.
(b) The township shall not spend development fees until COAH has
approved a plan for spending such fees in conformance with N.J.A.C.
5:97-8.10 and N.J.A.C. 5:96-5.3.
45.Editor's Note: Prior ordinances codified herein include portions of Ordinance Nos. 84-31,
85-23, 86-5, 87-26, 88-8, 88-16, 93-10, 93-16, 95-23, 96-12 and 2005-6.
§ T10B-340 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-340.2
BAO:1363
COAH OR THE COUNCIL — Shall mean the New Jersey Council on
Affordable Housing established under the Act which has primary
jurisdiction for the administration of housing obligations in accordance with
sound regional planning consideration in the state.
DEVELOPER — Shall mean the legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot
or of any land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT FEE — Shall mean money paid by a developer for the
improvement of property as permitted in N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.3.
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — Shall mean the assessed value of a
property divided by the current average ratio of assessed to true value
for the municipality in which the property is situated, as determined in
accordance with sections 1, 5, and 6 of P.L. 1973, c.123 (C.54:1-35a through
C.54:1-35c).
GREEN BUILDING STRATEGIES — Shall mean those strategies that
minimize the impact of development on the environment, and enhance
the health, safety and well-being of residents by producing durable, lowmaintenance,
resource-efficient housing while making optimum use of
existing infrastructure and community services.
TOWNSHIP — Shall mean the Township of Princeton, Mercer County, New
Jersey.
§ T10B-340.3. Residential development fees. [Ord. No. 2010-4, § 1;
Ord. No. 2015-12]
(a) Imposed fees.
(1) Residential development fees shall be paid in the amount of 1.5% of
the equalized assessed value (EAV) of any proposed residential
development.
(2) When an increase in residential density pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d(5) (known as a "d" variance) has been permitted,
developers may be required to pay a development fee of 6% of the
equalized assessed value for each additional unit that may be
realized. However, if the zoning on a site has changed during the
two-year period preceding the filing of such a variance application,
the base density for the purposes of calculating the bonus
development fee shall be the highest density permitted by right
during the two-year period preceding the filing of the variance
application.
(b) Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for residential
development.
(1) Affordable housing developments, developments where the
developer is providing for the construction of affordable units
elsewhere in the municipality, and developments where the
§ T10B-340.2 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-340.3
BAO:1364
§ T10B-340.4. Nonresidential development fees. [Ord. No. 2010-4,
§ 1; Ord. No. 2015-12]
developer has made a payment in lieu of on-site construction of
affordable units shall be exempt from development fees.
(2) Developments that have received preliminary or final site plan
approval prior to the adoption of a municipal development fee
ordinance shall be exempt from development fees, unless the
developer seeks a substantial change in the approval. Where a site
plan approval does not apply, a zoning and/or building permit shall
be synonymous with preliminary or final site plan approval for this
purpose. The fee percentage shall be vested on the date that the
building permit is issued.
(3) Owner-occupied residential structures demolished as a result of a
fire, flood, or natural disaster and replaced with a substantially
similar residence shall be exempt from paying a development fee. If
the new owner-occupied residential structure, is not substantially
similar to the prior, demolished structure, then the owner shall pay
a development fee for the net increase in equalized assessed value.
(4) Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an existing
structure undergoes a change to a more intense use, is demolished
and replaced, or is expanded, if the expansion is not otherwise
exempt from the development fee requirement. The development
fee shall be calculated on the increase in the equalized assessed
value of the improved structure.
(5) Residential development by an educational/nonprofit institution
that is not constructed for new or additional full-time or equivalent
employees of said institution shall be exempt from paying
development fees. Examples of this type of construction would be
dormitories and other types of student housing.
(a) Imposed fees.
(1) Payment of nonresidential development fees shall be in the amount
of 2.5% of the equalized assessed value (EAV) of any nonresidential
development.
(2) Nonresidential developers, except for developers of the types of
development specifically exempted, shall also pay a fee equal to
2 1/2% of the increase in equalized assessed value resulting from
any additions to existing structures to be used for nonresidential
purposes.
(3) Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an existing
structure is demolished and replaced. The development fee of 2 1/2
shall be calculated on the difference between the equalized
assessed value of the preexisting land and improvement and the
equalized assessed value of the newly improved structure, i.e. land
§ T10B-340.3 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-340.4
BAO:1365
§ T10B-340.5. Collection procedures. [Ord. No. 2010-4, § 1.]
and improvement, at the time final certificate of occupancy is
issued. If the calculation required under this section results in a
negative number, the nonresidential development fee shall be zero.
(b) Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for
nonresidential development.
(1) The nonresidential portion of a mixed-use inclusionary or market
rate development shall be subject to the 2 1/2% development fee,
unless otherwise exempted below.
(2) 2 1/2% fee shall not apply to an increase in equalized assessed
value resulting from alterations, change in use within existing
footprint, reconstruction, renovations and repairs.
(3) Nonresidential developments shall be exempt from the payment of
nonresidential development fees in accordance with the
exemptions required pursuant to P.L. 2008, c.46, as specified in the
Form N-RDF "State of New Jersey Non-Residential Development
Certification/Exemption" Form. Any exemption claimed by a
developer shall be substantiated by that developer.
(4) A developer of a nonresidential development exempted from the
nonresidential development fee pursuant to P.L. 2008, c.46 shall be
subject to it at such time the basis for the exemption no longer
applies, and shall make the payment of the nonresidential
development fee, in that event, within three years after that event
or after the issuance of the final certificate of occupancy of the
nonresidential development, whichever is later.
(5) If a property which was exempted from the collection of a
nonresidential development fee thereafter ceases to be exempt
from property taxation, the owner of the property shall remit the
fees required pursuant to this section within 45 days of the
termination of the property tax exemption. Unpaid nonresidential
development fees under these circumstances may be enforceable
by the township as a lien against the real property of the owner.
(a) Upon the granting of a preliminary, final or other applicable approval,
for a development, the applicable approving authority shall direct its
staff to notify the construction official responsible for the issuance of a
building permit.
(b) For nonresidential developments only, the developer shall also be
provided with a copy of Form N-RDF "State of New Jersey Non-
Residential Development Certification/Exemption" to be completed as
per the instructions provided. The developer of a nonresidential
development shall complete Form N-RDF as per the instructions
provided. The construction official shall verify the information
submitted by the nonresidential developer as per the instructions
§ T10B-340.4 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-340.5
BAO:1366
provided in the Form N-RDF. The tax assessor shall verify exemptions
and prepare estimated and final assessments as per the instructions
provided in Form N-RDF.
(c) The construction official responsible for the issuance of a building
permit shall notify the local tax assessor of the issuance of the first
building permit for a development which is subject to a development
fee.
(d) Within 90 days of receipt of that notice, the municipal tax assessor,
based on the plans filed, shall provide an estimate of the equalized
assessed value of the development.
(e) The construction official responsible for the issuance of a final
certificate of occupancy notifies the local assessor of any and all
requests for the scheduling of a final inspection on property which is
subject to a development fee.
(f) Within 10 business days of a request for the scheduling of a final
inspection, the municipal assessor shall confirm or modify the
previously estimated equalized assessed value of the improvements of
the development; calculate the development fee; and thereafter notify
the developer of the amount of the fee.
(g) Should the township fail to determine or notify the developer of the
amount of the development fee within 10 business days of the request
for final inspection, the developer may estimate the amount due and
pay that estimated amount consistent with the dispute process set forth
in subsection b of section 37 of P.L. 2008, c.46 (C.40:55D-8.6).
(h) 50% of the development fee shall be collected at the time of issuance of
the building permit. The remaining portion shall be collected at the
issuance of the certificate of occupancy. The developer shall be
responsible for paying the difference between the fee calculated at
building permit and that determined at issuance of certificate of
occupancy.
(i) Appeal of development fees.
(1) A developer may challenge residential development fees imposed
by filing a challenge with the County Board of Taxation. Pending a
review and determination by the Board, collected fees shall be
placed in an interest bearing escrow account by the township.
Appeals from a determination of the Board may be made to the tax
court in accordance with the provisions of the State Tax Uniform
Procedure Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1 et seq., within 90 days after the
date of such determination. Interest earned on amounts escrowed
shall be credited to the prevailing party.
(2) A developer may challenge nonresidential development fees
imposed by filing a challenge with the Director of the Division of
Taxation. Pending a review and determination by the Director,
§ T10B-340.5 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-340.5
BAO:1367
§ T10B-340.6. Affordable housing trust fund. [Ord. No. 2010-4, § 1.]
§ T10B-340.7. Use of funds. [Ord. No. 2010-4, § 1.]
which shall be made within 45 days of receipt of the challenge,
collected fees shall be placed in an interest bearing escrow account
by the township. Appeals from a determination of the Director may
be made to the tax court in accordance with the provisions of the
State Tax Uniform Procedure Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1 et seq., within
90 days after the date of such determination. Interest earned on
amounts escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing party.
(a) There is hereby created a separate, interest-bearing housing trust fund
to be maintained by the chief financial officer for the purpose of
depositing development fees collected from residential and
nonresidential developers and proceeds from the sale of units with
extinguished controls.
(b) The following additional funds shall be deposited in the affordable
housing trust fund and shall at all times be identifiable by source and
amount:
(1) Payments in lieu of on-site construction of affordable units;
(2) Developer contributed funds to make 10% of the adaptable
entrances in a townhouse or other multistory attached
development accessible;
(3) Rental income from municipally operated units;
(4) Repayments from affordable housing program loans;
(5) Recapture funds;
(6) Proceeds from the sale of affordable units; and
(7) Any other funds collected in connection with the township's
affordable housing program.
(c) Within seven days from the opening of the trust fund account, the
township shall provide COAH with written authorization, in the form of
a three-party escrow agreement between the municipality, the bank,
and COAH to permit COAH to direct the disbursement of the funds as
provided for in N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.13(b).
(d) All interest accrued in the housing trust fund shall only be used on
eligible affordable housing activities approved by COAH.
(a) The expenditure of all funds shall conform to a spending plan approved
by COAH. Funds deposited in the housing trust fund may be used for
any activity approved by COAH to address the township's fair share
obligation and may be set up as a grant or revolving loan program. Such
activities include, but are not limited to: preservation or purchase of
§ T10B-340.5 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-340.7
BAO:1368
housing for the purpose of maintaining or implementing affordability
controls, rehabilitation, new construction of affordable housing units
and related costs, accessory apartment, market to affordable, or
regional housing partnership programs, conversion of existing
nonresidential buildings to create new affordable units, green building
strategies designed to be cost saving and in accordance with accepted
national or state standards, purchase of land for affordable housing,
improvement of land to be used for affordable housing, extensions or
improvements of roads and infrastructure to affordable housing sites,
financial assistance designed to increase affordability, administration
necessary for implementation of the Housing Element and Fair Share
Plan, or any other activity as permitted pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.7
through 8.9 and specified in the approved spending plan.
(b) Funds shall not be expended to reimburse the township for past
housing activities.
(c) At least 30% of all development fees collected and interest earned shall
be used to provide affordability assistance to low- and moderate-income
households in affordable units included in the municipal Fair Share
Plan. One-third of the affordability assistance portion of development
fees collected shall be used to provide affordability assistance to those
households earning 30% or less of median income by region.
(1) Affordability assistance programs may include down payment
assistance, security deposit assistance, low interest loans, rental
assistance, assistance with homeowners association or
condominium fees and special assessments, and assistance with
emergency repairs.
(2) Affordability assistance to households earning 30% or less of
median income may include buying down the cost of low- or
moderate-income units in the municipal Fair Share Plan to make
them affordable to households earning 30% or less of median
income.
(3) Payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site and funds
from the sale of units with extinguished controls shall be exempt
from the affordability assistance requirement.
(d) The Township may contract with a private or public entity to administer
any part of its Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, including the
requirement for affordability assistance, in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:96-18.
(e) No more than 20% of all revenues collected from development fees,
may be expended on administration, including, but not limited to,
salaries and benefits for municipal employees or consultant fees
necessary to develop or implement a new construction program, a
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and/or an affirmative marketing
program. In the case of a rehabilitation program, no more than 20% of
the revenues collected from development fees shall be expended for
§ T10B-340.7 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-340.7
BAO:1369
§ T10B-340.8. Monitoring. [Ord. No. 2010-4, § 1.]
§ T10B-340.9. Ongoing collection of fees. [Ord. No. 2010-4, § 1.]
§ T10B-340.10. Nonresidential development fee provisions. [Ord.
No. 2010-4, § 2.]
This division and the provisions set forth in sections 10B-340-10B-340.9
above are being adopted in accordance with the policies, procedures and
requirements of the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing. Pursuant
to COAH's requirements for approval of a municipal development fee
ordinance and the model ordinance promulgated by COAH, the township is
required to, and has, included provisions for the assessment and collection
of nonresidential development fees. Notwithstanding the inclusion of such
such administrative expenses. Administrative funds may be used for
income qualification of households, monitoring the turnover of sale and
rental units, and compliance with COAH's monitoring requirements.
Legal or other fees related to litigation opposing affordable housing
sites or objecting to the Council's regulations and/or action are not
eligible uses of the affordable housing trust fund.
(a) The township shall complete and return to COAH all monitoring forms
included in monitoring requirements related to the collection of
development fees from residential and non-residential developers,
payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site, funds from the
sale of units with extinguished controls, barrier free escrow funds,
rental income, repayments from affordable housing program loans, and
any other funds collected in connection with the township's housing
program, as well as to the expenditure of revenues and implementation
of the plan certified by COAH. All monitoring reports shall be completed
on forms designed by COAH.
(a) The ability of the township to impose, collect and expend development
fees shall expire with its substantive certification unless the township
has filed an adopted Housing Element and Fair Share Plan with COAH,
has petitioned for substantive certification, and has received COAH's
approval of its development fee ordinance. If the Township fails to
renew its ability to impose and collect development fees prior to the
expiration of substantive certification, it may be subject to forfeiture of
any or all funds remaining within its municipal trust fund. Any funds so
forfeited shall be deposited into the "New Jersey Affordable Housing
Trust Fund" established pursuant to section 20 of P.L. 1985, c.222
(C.52:27D-320). The township shall not impose a residential
development fee on a development that receives preliminary or final
site plan approval after the expiration of its substantive certification or
judgment of compliance, nor shall the township retroactively impose a
development fee on such a development. The township shall not expend
development fees after the expiration of its substantive certification or
judgment of compliance.
§ T10B-340.7 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-340.10
BAO:1370
provisions as required by COAH, the township notes and acknowledges
that recently there have been legislative enactments impacting upon the
collection of non-residential development fees, including but not limited
to, sections 32 through 38 of P.L. 2008, c. 46 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.1 through
40:55D-8.7), known as the "Statewide Non-residential Development Fee
Act," and sections 36 through 41 of P.L. 2009, c. 90, known as the "Economic
Stimulus Act of 2009." The township shall continue to assess and collect,
if possible, any nonresidential development fees in accordance with
applicable law.
§ T10B-341. Revocation and withholding of permits. [Ord. No.
93-10. § 1.]
In the event that the applicant does not construct and sell or rent the
lower income units in accordance with its approved development plan
and the terms of the agreement set forth in section 10B-337(a) and the
provisions of this article, the development enforcement officer shall revoke
the development permit or development certificates of occupancy and
withhold the issuance of subsequent development certificates of occupancy
until the development is brought into compliance.
§ T10B-340.10 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-341
BAO:1371

DIVISION 5
Modification of Requirements for Lower Income Housing
§ T10B-342. Residential cluster requirements for the R-M district.
[Ord. No. 84-31, § 6; Ord. No. 85-11, § 9.]
All of the provisions of division 9 of article IX of this chapter applicable
to residential cluster shall apply to residential clusters permitted in the
Residential Market Program Zoning District pursuant to section 10B-335
with the following modifications:
(a) Sections 10B-185, 10B-191.1(a), 10B-191.2, 10B-192(c)(2),
10B-192(d)(1), 10B-192(d)(5), 10B-193(b)(4), 10B-288, and
10B-291.1(e) shall not apply.
(b) Section 10B-191(c) shall be modified in its entirety to read as follows:
multi-family structures/non-townhouses; defined as free-standing
buildings containing up to 24 units per structure with each unit sharing
with another unit, or units, one or more vertical or horizontal common
walls; provided, however, that a larger number of units that may be
contained within a multi-family structure created as a result of adaptive
reuse of an existing non-residential structure on a site within the R-M
district, with the approval of the planning board. This provision shall
not be construed to modify density or any other provision governing
this zone.
(c) In lieu of the twenty-foot lot width required by section 10B-192(c)(1), a
15 foot standard shall apply.
(d) In lieu of the 2,000 square foot lot area required by section
10B-192(c)(3), a 1,200 square foot standard shall apply.
(e) In lieu of the fifteen-foot setback standard required by sections
10B-192(c)(5) and 10B-192(d)(3), a ten-foot standard shall apply with
regard to common parking areas.
(f) In lieu of the forty and 100-foot distances between principal buildings
required by section 10B-193(a), minimum distances of 30 and 75 feet,
respectively, shall apply. The provisions of 10B-193(a) shall not apply to
single family detached or two family units.
(g) In lieu of the forty-foot buffer standard set forth in section 10B-193(c), a
sixty-five foot standard shall apply.
(h) In lieu of the requirements for common open space, set forth in the first
sentence of section 10B-194(a), 50% of the tract shall be devoted to
common open space for the benefit of the residents of the residential
cluster.
(i) In lieu of the lot standards for single-family and two-family structures,
set forth in section 10B-192(a) and (b) respectively, the following shall
apply:
§ T10B-342 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-342
BAO:1373
§ T10B-343. Residential cluster requirements for developments
including lower income housing in the R-H district. [Ord. No. 84-31,
§ 6; Ord. No. 85-11, § 10.]
All of the provisions of division 9 of article IX of this chapter shall apply to
residential cluster developments including lower income housing permitted
in the R-H district pursuant to sections 10B-338 and 10B-339 of this article
with the following modifications:
R-M
Required Lot Area (Min. Acre) 5,000 (single-family)
(Min. Sq. Ft.) 8,500 (two-family)
Required Lot Width 40 (single-family)
(Min. Ft.) 50 (two-family)
Required Lot Depth 80 (single-family)
(Min. Ft.) 120 (two-family)
Required Lot Frontage (Min. Ft.) 30 (both)
Required Bldg. Setback
Front (Min. Ft.) 15 (both)
Side (Min. Ft.) 5 (both)
Combined Side (Min. Ft.) (na)
Rear (Min. Ft.) 15 (both)
Permitted Bldg. Height (Max. Ft.) 30 (both)
Bldg. Setback-Height ratio (na)
Permitted Bldg. F.A.R. 30 (single-family)
(Max. %) 40 (two-family)
Required Parking Setback
Front (Min. Ft.) 25 (both)
Side (Min. Ft.) 25 (both)
Rear (Min. Ft.) 25 (both)
(j) The parking requirements of section 10B-195(c) shall apply except for
purposes of section 10B-282 only one parking space need be provided
for each lower income unit.
(k) The minimum floor area requirements of sections 10B-277, 10B-278
and 10B-279 shall not apply to lower income units.
(a) Section 10B-191(c) shall be modified in its entirety to read as follows:
multi-family structures/non-townhouses; defined as free-standing
buildings containing up to 24 units per structure with each unit sharing
with another unit, or units, one or more vertical or horizontal common
§ T10B-342 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-343
BAO:1374
walls; provided, however, that a larger number of units that may be
contained within a multi-family structure created as a result of adaptive
reuse of an existing nonresidential structure on a site within the R-M
district, with the approval of the planning board. This provision shall
not be construed to modify density or any other provisions governing
this zone.
(b) Sections 10B-185, 10B-191(d), 10B-191.1, 10B-191.2, 10B-192(c)(1),
10B-192(c)(2), 10B-192(d)(1), 10B-192(d)(5), 10B-193(b)(4),
10B-193(d) and (3), 10B-288 and 10B-219.1(e) shall not apply.
(c) In lieu of the 2,000 square foot lot area required by section
10B-192(c)(3), a 1,200 square foot standard shall apply.
(d) In lieu of the fifteen-foot setback standard required by sections
10B-192(c)(5) and 10B-192(d)(3) a ten foot standard shall apply with
regard to common parking areas.
(e) In lieu of the forty and 100-foot distances between principal buildings
required by section 10B-193(a) minimum distances of 30 and 75 feet,
respectively, shall apply.
The provisions of 10B-193(a) shall not apply to single family detached
or two family units.
(f) In lieu of the lot standards for single-family and two-family structures
set forth in sections 10B-192(a) and (b) respectively, the following shall
apply:
R — H
Required Lot Area (Min. Acre) 5,000 (single-family)
(Min. Sq. Ft.) 8,500 (two-family)
Required Lot Width 40 (single-family)
(Min. Ft.) 50 (two-family)
Required Lot Depth 80 (single-family)
(Min. Ft.) 120 (two-family)
Required Lot Frontage (Min. Ft.) 30 (both)
Required Bldg. Setback
Front (Min. Ft.) 15 (both)
Side (Min. Ft.) 5 (both)
Combined Side (Min. Ft.) (na)
Rear (Min. Ft.) 15 (both)
Permitted Bldg. Height (Max. Ft.) 30 (both)
Bldg. Setback-Height ratio (na)
Permitted Bldg. F.A.R. 30 (single-family)
§ T10B-343 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-343
BAO:1375
§ T10B-344. Modification of subdivision and site plan standards for
R-M developments and for developments including lower income
housing in the R-H district. [Ord. No. 84-31, § 6; Ord. No. 85-11,
§ 11; Ord. No. 87-31, § 4.]
R — H
(Max. %) 40 (two-family)
Required Parking Setback
Front (Min. Ft.) 25 (both)
Side (Min. Ft.) 25 (both)
Rear (Min. Ft.) 25 (both)
(g) In lieu of the requirement for common open space set forth in the first
sentence of section 10B-194(a), a minimum of 25% of the tract shall be
devoted to common open space for the benefit of the residents of the
residential cluster.
(h) The parking requirements of section 10B-195(c) shall apply except for
purposes of section 10B-282 only one parking space need be provided
for each lower income unit.
(i) The minimum floor areas set forth in section 10B-337(e) governing
lower income units in the R-M district shall apply to all development in
the R-H district, and shall supersede any other minimum floor area
standards in the Princeton Township Land Use Ordinance.
(a) The planning board, when acting upon an application pursuant to
divisions 2 and 3 of this article, shall modify applicable subdivision and
site plan standards as follows:
Swales may be substituted for piped stormwater systems, except in
situations where swales are likely to cause erosion or impede
pedestrian circulation. In those portions of the development where
design densities are greater than five units/acre, piped storm drain
systems may still be required. If used, swales shall have a bottom
elevation that will allow any water from the sub-base of the roadway or
parking lot to seep freely into the swale, have side slopes not steeper
than three horizontal to one vertical, have a flat bottom at a minimum
of two feet in width, have capacity for the computed runoff, be sloped
to handle the rate of runoff and lined with rock if soil characteristics
or the grade require it, and allow a design flow of at least 0.5 feet per
second, but not more than two feet per second. Intersections shall be
crowned to assure positive drainage into the swales. Where pipes are
installed at road or driveway crossings or other required locations, the
pipes shall be continuations of the swales. There shall be no waiver of
the standards set forth in section 10B-227 (surface water drainage).
(b) Street and other lighting shall be required only in locations where
needed to meet overall public safety considerations such as
§ T10B-343 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-344
BAO:1376
§ T10B-345. Applications for preliminary approval. [Ord. No. 84-31,
§ 6; Ord. No. 85-23, § 5.]
In addition to the requirements of sections 10B-190 and 10B-190.1, the
following information shall be shown on or shall accompany the application
for preliminary approval of a residential cluster pursuant to divisions 2 and
3 of this article.
intersections, public parking areas, walkways, and other potentially
hazardous locations. Where installed, lighting shall meet the
requirements and/or objectives of sections 10B-290 and 10B-317.
(c) Off-street parking designs shall not be required to include curbing
around all parking lots. Curbing will be required, however, where
drainage control is needed and where erosion potential cannot
adequately be addressed by alternate methods.
(d) Landscaping requirements shall be limited to that necessary to address
shade, buffering, and other landscaping needs in an efficient and costeffective
manner.
(e) Sidewalks shall be installed only in locations determined by the
planning board to be in the interest of public safety and adequate
pedestrian circulation. Sidewalks need not follow all streets and in
some instances may be better to follow open space corridors. The
determination of whether sidewalks are needed and where they are
best located shall be based on public safety factors considering the
intensity of development, the probable volume of pedestrian traffic, the
adjoining street classification where sidewalks parallel streets, access
to school bus stops and public transportation, recreation areas, and the
general type of improvement intended. Sidewalks shall not be required
on both sides of any street completely internal to the development.
Where required, sidewalks shall meet the requirements of section
10B-160(i), except that macadam sidewalks may be substituted in areas
characterized by low density of development, low intensity of
anticipated use, and where such sidewalks will be maintained by a
homeowners association.
(a) If the development is to include lower-income units, data on or
accompanying the preliminary plat showing which dwellings are to be
low-income units and which are to be moderate-income units,
identifying whether such units will be sale units or rental units if known
at the time of the application; and describing the location, floor area,
and layout of the lower-income units and of the other units.
(b) In the case of a development which contemplates construction in
phases, a staging plan setting forth the applicant's plan for phasing the
development.
§ T10B-344 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-345
BAO:1377
§ T10B-346. Applications for final approval. [Ord. No. 84-31, § 6.]
In addition to the requirements of sections 10B-190 and 10B-190.2, the
following information shall be shown or shall accompany the application for
final approval of a residential cluster pursuant to divisions 2 and 3 of this
article:
§ T10B-347. Expedited hearings before the planning board. [Ord.
No. 84-31, § 6; Ord. No. 85-23, § 6.]
When hearing development applications, the planning board shall give
priority to the following classes of applications, in the order set forth, over
(c) Such other information as may be required by the planning board for
purposes of determining the applicant's compliance with the
requirements of this article.
(a) A written agreement approved by the township attorney in which the
applicant agrees to construct no less than the number of lower income
units required by the terms of the preliminary approval and to comply
with the provisions of this article pertaining to such units.
The agreement shall specify the number, type, floor area, number of
bedrooms, and location of any lower income units. It shall also contain
a detailed plan for staging construction of all dwelling units in the
development. The agreement shall be in recordable form and shall be
signed by the applicant and by any other persons whose signatures
or consents are required in order to impose these obligations as an
affirmative covenant running with the land. The agreement shall be
recorded in the office of the county clerk and a copy of the recorded
agreement certified by the county clerk shall be furnished to the
township by and at the cost and expense of the applicant after the
approval of the final plat. The terms of the agreement may not be
modified except with the approval of the planning board granted after
a public hearing.
(b) A declaration of covenants and restrictions, duly executed in final and
recordable form, subject to and accompanied by the approval of the
township attorney, all in accordance with the terms of the preliminary
approval, including provisions to assure that any lower income units
will be initially sold or rented in accordance with the requirements of
the division as implemented by the Princeton Township Housing Board
and imposing covenants and restrictions running with those units to
assure that subsequent resales or rental will also be subject to the
requirements of this article as implemented by the board. The
declaration shall also specify by reference of the final plat and, if
applicable, the master deed the units or lots which are to be subject to
these restrictions. The declaration shall be recorded in the office of the
county clerk and a copy of the recorded declaration certified by the
county clerk shall be furnished to the township by and at the cost and
expense of the applicant after the approval of the final plat.
§ T10B-345 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-347
BAO:1378
applications not made under this article unless the time limits for hearing
applications imposed by the Municipal Land Use Law make such priorities
impossible to effect; applications for developments including lower-income
housing in the R-H zone; applications otherwise including lower-income
units. In no event, however, shall the planning board decide applications
which include lower-income housing more than 45 days after they are
deemed complete and decide applications under division 2 of this article
more than 65 days after they are deemed complete.
§ T10B-347 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-347
BAO:1379

DIVISION 6
Princeton Township Housing Board — Princeton Township Housing
Fund
§ T10B-348. Princeton Township Housing Board. [Ord. No. 84-31,
§ 6; Ord. No. 89-17, § 1; Ord. No. 96-1, § 1.]
(a) Formation; composition; terms, vacancies; compensation.
(1) There is hereby created the Princeton Township Housing Board,
which shall consist of seven regular and up to two alternate
members appointed by the township committee. At least one
regular member shall be a member of the township committee and
may be the mayor.
(2) The term of the member of township committee shall correspond to
his or her official tenure. The terms of the remaining regular and
alternate members shall be four years, computed from the first day
of January of the year of appointment, provided that the terms of
such members are staggered so that no more than two terms expire
each year. If a vacancy occurs among such members, it shall be
filled for the unexpired term only. Members shall serve after the
expiration of their terms until their successors have been appointed
and qualified.
Alternate members shall be designated at the time of appointment
by the township committee as "alternate number 1" and "alternate
number 2". Alternate members may participate in discussions of
the proceedings involving the board but may not vote except in the
absence or disqualification of a regular member. Alternates shall be
counted for purposes of establishing a quorum for the board. In the
event that a choice must be made as to which alternate member is
to vote, alternate number 1 shall vote.
(3) All members shall serve without salary, but may be paid expenses
incurred in the performance of duties.
(b) Officers. The Princeton Township Housing Board shall elect a chairman
and a vice-chairman from among its members. Their terms of office
shall be one year, and they shall be eligible for re-election. The board
shall also elect a secretary, who may but need not be a member of the
board, and it may create and fill such other offices as it shall determine.
(c) Staff and consultants. The Princeton Township Housing Board may
employ or contract for and fix the compensation of such experts and
other staff and services as it deems necessary. Obligations for the
foregoing shall not exceed, exclusive of gifts and grants, the amounts
agreed upon and appropriated for the board's use. The Princeton
Township Housing Board may retain staff and consultants jointly with
the Princeton Township Housing Fund, or utilize as appropriate staff
and consultants retained by the Fund.
§ T10B-348 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-348
BAO:1381
§ T10B-349. Princeton Township Housing Fund. [Ord. No. 84-31,
§ 6; Ord. No. 85-23, § 7; Ord. No. 87-3, § 3.]
§ T10B-350. Operation of the lower income housing program. [Ord.
No. 84-31, § 6; Ord. No. 85-11, § 12; Ord. No. 87-3, § 4; Ord. No.
93-11, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 97-10, § 2; Ord. No. 99-5, § 1.]
The following regulations shall apply to the lower income units produced
pursuant to this article to the extent not inconsistent with the laws
regulating them:
(d) Powers and duties. The Princeton Township Housing Board shall have
the powers and duties established by this article.
(e) Budget. The Princeton Township Housing Board shall prepare annually
and present to township committee a proposed budget with respect to
its activities for the ensuing calendar year. Such budget shall clearly
reflect the anticipated expenses of the board and shall contain such
itemization and be in such form as township committee shall prescribe.
It shall be submitted at such time as township committee shall specify,
so as to be timely for adequate consideration by township committee in
connection with the municipal budgets. Township committee shall have
the power to approve the budget so submitted in whole or in part or to
modify the same, and the budget as finally agreed upon and approved
by them shall constitute the budget for the board for the budget year.
(a) Formation and composition. The Princeton Township Committee shall
establish as a separate and independent legal entity under Title 15A a
nonprofit corporation to be called the "Princeton Township Housing
Fund", which shall be composed of seven trustees. Three trustees shall
be members of the Princeton Township Housing Board, said members
to be designated by the board with the approval of township committee.
The remaining four members shall be appointed by township
committee. The fund shall be granted such powers as are necessary for
it to provide lower and middle income units through construction,
renovation, purchase, or whatever other techniques are appropriate
and to otherwise serve the purposes of and functions set forth for it in
this section. It shall be available to provide the services set forth herein
on a contractual basis with the township.
(a) Affordability standards.
(1) In conjunction with realistic market information, the following
housing size criteria shall be used in determining maximum rents
and sales prices:
a. Efficiency units shall be affordable to one person households.
b. One bedroom units shall be affordable to 1.5 person
households.
§ T10B-348 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-350
BAO:1382
c. Two bedroom units shall be affordable to three person
households.
d. Three bedroom units shall be affordable to 4.5 person
households.
(2) Median income by household size shall be established by a regional
weighted average of the uncapped Section 8 income limits
published by HUD as per N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.4(b).
(3) The maximum average rent and price of low and moderate income
units within each inclusionary development shall be affordable to
households earning 57.5% of median income.
(4) For both owner-occupied and rental units, the low and moderate
income units shall utilize the same heating source as the market
units within an inclusionary development.
(5) Low income units shall be reserved for households with a gross
household income less than or equal to 50% of the median income
approved by COAH; moderate income units shall be reserved for
households with a gross household income less than 80% of the
median income approved by COAH.
(6) The regulations outlined in N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.15 and 5:93-9.16 shall
be applicable for purchased and rental units.
(7) Master deeds for inclusionary developments shall regulate
condominium or homeowner fees or special assessments of low and
moderate income purchasers at 80% of those paid by market
purchasers for the moderate income units and 50% of those paid by
market purchasers for the low income units. These percentages are
consistent with the requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.4(e). Once
established within the master deed, these percentages shall not be
amended without prior approval from COAH.
(8) The Township of Princeton shall follow the general provisions
concerning uniform deed restrictions, liens and enforcement
through certificates of occupancy or reoccupancy on sale set forth
at N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.3.
(9) Princeton Township shall require a certificate of reoccupancy for
any occupancy of a low or moderate income sales unit resulting
from a resale, per N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.3(c).
(10) Municipal, state, nonprofit and seller options regarding sale units
shall be consistent with N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.8. Municipal rejection of
repayment options for sales units shall be consistent with N.J.A.C.
5:93-9.9.
(11) The continued application of options to create, rehabilitate or
maintain low and moderate income sale units shall be consistent
with N.J.A.C. 9.10.
§ T10B-350 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-350
BAO:1383
(12) Eligible capital improvements prior to the expiration of controls on
sales units shall be consistent with N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.11.
(13) The regulations detailed in N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.12-9.14 shall be
applicable to low and moderate income sales units.
(b) Sales prices and rental levels.
(1) a. The initial price of a low and moderate income owner occupied
single family housing unit shall be established so that after a
down payment of 5%, the monthly principal, interest,
homeowner's insurance, property taxes (based on the
restricted value of the low and moderate income unit) and
condominium or homeowner fee do not exceed 28% of the
eligible gross monthly income. No separate parking fee (other
than for trailers and mobile homes) shall be charged, and any
fees for use of recreational facilities shall be no greater than
those charged owners or renters of the non-income units.
b. Gross rents, including an allowance for utilities, shall be
established so as not to exceed 30% of the gross monthly
income of the appropriate household size, per N.J.A.C.
5:93-74(a). The utility allowance shall be consistent with the
utility allowance approved by HUD for use in New Jersey.
(2) a. The Princeton Township Housing Board shall establish and
periodically revise sales prices and rental levels for the lower
income units in order that such units are affordable to lower
income households and may vary the sales prices and rents on
the basis of the type of structure, the floor area of, number of
bedrooms in and location of the unit, whether or not utilities
are borne by the tenant, and other relevant factors.
b. The sales prices and rent levels shall be set so that units shall
be affordable not only by households at the ceiling income for
low income households and moderate households respectively,
but by a reasonable cross-section of households within each
category.
c. For purpose of relating affordability to household size,
households of varying size shall be assumed to occupy units in
accordance with written regulations of the Princeton Township
Housing Board.
(3) When establishing rent levels for re-rentals to the same tenant, the
Princeton Township Housing Board shall not approve rent
increases which would no longer make the unit affordable to such
tenant.
(4) When establishing sales prices for resale of the lower income units,
the Princeton Township Housing Board shall assure that the units
remain affordable to low income households, if they initially were
§ T10B-350 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-350
BAO:1384
low income units, and moderate income households, if they initially
were moderate income units, and shall limit price increases to the
percentage increase in the median household income in the region
in which Princeton is located or in such other manner as will assure
continued availability of the units to lower income households and
a fair return to the homeowner. In addition, the board shall by
regulation provide for the manner and extent to which out-ofpocket
costs of closing and the value of reasonable improvements
are recoverable to the homeowner upon sale and the manner in
which needed repairs are made or paid for by the owner. It may
establish procedures whereby homeowners can secure certification
of improvements in advance of their construction, in which case the
homeowner shall recover the value of same at the time of sale.
(5) The Princeton Township Housing Board may grant exceptions to
the sales and rent ceilings established by this section when
peculiar circumstances associated with a lower income unit make
such ceilings impracticable or otherwise inappropriate.
(c) Eligibility.
(1) The lower income units shall be sold or rented only to persons who
meet the eligibility standards established by written regulation of
the Princeton Township Housing Board for ownership or rental of
such units and who are certified by the board as eligible.
(2) The Princeton Township Housing Board shall establish and
periodically revise eligibility standards for the lower income units
in order that only lower income households are eligible therefor
and shall establish standards relating to maximum level of assets.
(3) Renters whose incomes increase during the term of their leases to
a level higher than the maximum income permitted by regulation of
the Princeton Township Housing Board shall pay rent equal to 30%
of their gross income. The owner or manager of the development
shall forward the amount which is in excess of the maximum rent
chargeable to a household at the maximum income to the Board,
less such amount that the board may determine should
appropriately be retained by the owner of the development.
(d) Sales and rental procedures and standards.
(1) The Princeton Township Housing Board shall by regulation
establish:
a. Procedures providing for notification to it and to eligible
households in the order and manner as it sees fit where lower
income units become available for sale or rental;
b. Procedures to assure that the lower income units are rented or
sold only to persons eligible therefor in light of applicable
§ T10B-350 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-350
BAO:1385
eligibility standards and that the board is notified of the
persons to whom the units are rented or sold; and
c. Such other procedures and policies pertaining to sales and
rentals which it deems necessary to fulfill the purposes of this
article.
(2) In no event shall an owner be required to offer a lower income unit
for rental or sale through the Princeton Township Housing Board
for more than 20 days in the case of rental and 90 days in the case
of sale from the date it becomes available for rental and occupancy
or for purchase, as the case may be. If during such time period an
eligible household does not make an officer to rent or purchase
meeting the terms upon which the offer to rent or sell was made,
the owner may rent or sell the unit as any household meeting the
eligibility standards established by the Board, and the sales and
rent controls established herein shall continue to apply.
(3) All rentals must be effected by written lease, and the lease shall be
filed with the Princeton Township Housing Board.
(e) Right of first refusal of the Princeton Township Committee. The
Princeton Township Committee shall have an assignable right of first
refusal to purchase any lower income unit being offered for sale,
exercisable within 90 days after the unit is first offered for sale. If the
owner is deceased, the committee's right of first refusal shall continue
for 21 years from the date of the death of the last survivor of the
members of the Princeton Township Committee and their issue alive
when the owner purchased the unit.
(f) Restrictions on use.
(1) Every purchaser or tenant of a lower-income unit shall use it for his
own primary residence and shall certify on a form prescribed by the
Princeton Housing Board that he is acquiring or leasing the unit as
his or his family's primary place of residence. Purchasers or
tenants may lease or sublet such units only to persons eligible
therefor and at rent levels not exceeding those established by the
board and only with the written approval of the board.
(2) No owner of an owner-occupied, lower-income unit may place a
mortgage(s) as a lien against said unit in a total amount that would
exceed said owner's equity in the calculated resale price as
established by the township housing board at the time the owner
proposes giving said mortgage(s). This restriction on the amount of
mortgage financing permitted as liens on owner-occupied, lowerincome
units shall be included as deed restriction with regard to
said unit. Additionally, any owner of an owner-occupied, lowerincome
unit wishing to place mortgage loan(s) on said unit other
than the first purchase money mortgage given by said owner to
assist with the initial purchase of said unit shall provide written
notice to the Housing Board, c/o 369 Witherspoon Street,
§ T10B-350 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-350
BAO:1386
Princeton, New Jersey 08540, at least 30 days prior to the date
said owner intends to give said mortgage loan or place any form of
lien on the owner-occupied, lower-income unit so that the board's
staff can verify compliance with this section. As referenced herein,
the term "mortgage" shall include but not be limited to a first
mortgage, second mortgage, home equity loan or any type of loan
financing that will result in a lien being placed against the title of
the lower-income unit for any purpose.
(g) Affordability Controls.
(1) To provide assurance that low and moderate income units are
created with controls on affordability over time and that low and
moderate income households will occupy and continue to occupy
these units, the township's housing board is designated as the
authority with the responsibility of ensuring the affordability of
sales and rental units over time. The housing board shall be
responsible for those activities detailed in N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.1(a). The
housing board may contract with an outside agency or consultant
to administer some or all of the provisions of this section.
(2) In addition, the housing board shall be responsible for utilizing the
verification and certification procedures outlined in N.J.A.C.
5:93-9.1(b) in placing households in low and moderate income
units.
(3) Newly constructed low and moderate income sales units shall
remain affordable to low and moderate income households for at
least 30 years. The housing board shall require all conveyances of
newly constructed units to contain the deed restriction and
mortgage lien adopted by COAH and referred to as Appendix E at
N.J.A.C. 5:93.
(4) Housing units created through the conversion of a nonresidential
structure shall be considered new housing units and shall be
subject to thirty-year controls on affordability. The housing board
shall require an appropriate deed restriction and mortgage lien
subject to COAH's approval.
(5) Rehabilitated owner-occupied single family housing unit that are
improved to code standard shall be subject to affordability controls
for at least six years.
(6) Rehabilitated renter-occupied housing units that are improved to
code standard shall be subject to affordability controls for at least
10 years.
(7) Newly constructed low and moderate income rental units shall
remain affordable to low and moderate income households for at
least 30 years. The housing board shall require an appropriate
deed restriction and mortgage lien subject to COAH's approval.
§ T10B-350 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-350
BAO:1387
(8) Affordability controls in accessory apartments shall be for a period
of at least 10 years, except if the apartment is to receive a rental
bonus credit pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.13, then the controls on
affordability shall extend for 30 years.
(9) Alternative living arrangements shall be controlled in a manner
suitable to COAH, that provides assurances that such a facility will
house low and moderate income households for at least 10 years
except that if the alternative living arrangement is to receive a
rental bonus credit pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.13, then the controls
on affordability shall extend for 30 years.
(h) Impact of foreclosure. A judgement of foreclosure or a deed in lieu of
foreclosure to a financial institution regulated by state and/or federal
law or to a lender on the secondary mortgage market (including, but not
limited to, the Federal National Mortgage Association, the Home Loan
Mortgage Corporation, the Government National Mortgage Association
or an entity acting on their behalf) for a first purchase money mortgage
shall extinguish controls on affordable housing units provided that
excess proceeds from the foreclosure shall be paid to the housing
board. Notice of foreclosure shall allow the township, the department of
community affairs, or a nonprofit entity to purchase the affordable
housing unit at the maximum permitted sale price and maintain it as an
affordable unit for the balance of the intended period of controls.
Failure to purchase the affordable housing unit shall result in COAH
adding that unit to the township's present and prospective fair share
obligation. In the event of a foreclosure sale, the owner of the
affordable housing unit shall be personally obligated to pay to the
township any surplus funds to the extent that such surplus funds exceed
the difference between the maximum price permitted at the time of
foreclosure and the amount necessary to redeem the debt to the
financial institution, including costs of foreclosure.
(i) Affirmative marketing.
(1) All newly created low and moderate income units shall be marketed
in accordance with the township's Affirmative Marketing Plan
Ordinance.
(2) The housing rehabilitation program shall be marketed in
accordance with the marketing plan outlined in the township's
adopted Housing Rehabilitation Program.
(j) Rehabilitation program.
(1) A housing rehabilitation program shall be undertaken in
accordance with the adopted Housing Rehabilitation Program.
(k) Regional contribution agreement. A regional contribution agreement
shall be entered into with the City of Trenton, subject to approval by the
Council on Affordable Housing.
§ T10B-350 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-350A
BAO:1388
§ T10B-350A. Affirmative Marketing Plan. [Ord. No. 97-10, § 2.]
(a) Applicability.
(1) This section shall apply to all low and moderate income housing
units created in the township, including those in the developments
listed below and any low and moderate income housing units that
may be developed in the future:
a. Rentals of vacant rehabilitated rental units.
b. Griggs Farm.
c. West Drive (Princeton Housing Authority).
(2) An affirmative marketing plan is a regional strategy designed to
attract buyers and/or renters of all majority and minority groups
within the housing region, regardless of sex, age or number of
children, to housing units which are being marketed by a
developer/sponsor, the municipality and/or a designated
administrative agency of affordable housing within the township.
The plan prohibits discrimination in the sale, rental, financing or
other services related to such housing on the basis of race, color,
sex, religion, handicap, age (except for designated senior citizens'
units), familial status, family size or national origin.
(3) The Township of Princeton is located in the East Central Housing
region of the state (Region 4) which includes Mercer, Monmouth
and Ocean Counties.
(b) Required outreach.
(1) Daily newspapers/publications.
a. All newspaper articles, advertisements, announcements and
requests for applications pertaining to low and moderate
income housing units shall appear in the following daily
regional newspapers/publications:
1. Trenton Times (Trenton)
2. The Trentonian (Trenton)
3. Asbury Park Press (Neptune)
4. Ocean County Observer (Toms River)
b. The primary marketing shall take the form of at least one press
release sent to the above publications and a paid display
advertisement (at least four column inches) in each of the
above newspapers. Additional advertising and publicity shall
be on a "as needed" basis.
c. The advertisement shall include a description of the:
§ T10B-350A BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-350A
BAO:1389
1. Street address(es) of the units;
2. Directions to the housing units;
3. Number of units currently available;
4. Anticipated dates of future available units;
5. Numbers of bedrooms per available unit;
6. Range of sales prices and monthly rents available;
7. Sizes of available units;
8. Income limit information;
9. Where and how applications may be obtained, including
business hours at each location; and
10. Name, telephone number and location of the housing
board or its designated agent's office.
(2) Weekly newspapers/publications/newsletters.
a. All newspaper articles, advertisements, announcements and
requests for applications pertaining to low and moderate
income housing units shall appear in at least the following
neighborhood-oriented weekly newspapers, religious
publications and organizational newsletters within the region:
1. Princeton Packet (Princeton)
2. Town Topics (Princeton)
3. The Coaster (Asbury Park)
4. The Herald (Farmingdale)
5. The Beacon (Manahawkin)
6. Ocean County Review (Seaside Heights)
b. The advertisement shall include all of the information set forth
in subsection (b)(1)c above.
(3) Radio/TV. Press releases will also be sent to the following radio
stations:
a. 101.5 FM.
b. WHWH (1350 AM).
c. WJLK (1310 AM).
d. WOBM (1160 AM).
(4) Applications/information.
§ T10B-350A PRINCETON CODE § T10B-350A
BAO:1390
a. The following are the locations where applications and
information packets to be used as part of the affirmative
marketing plan shall be available:
1. Princeton Township Municipal Building.
2. Princeton Public Library.
3. Mercer County Library (all branches)
4. Monmouth County Library (all branches)
5. Ocean County Library (all branches)
6. Developer's sales office(s)
7. Major employers in the region, including but not limited to
the following:
ETS (Princeton)
The State of New Jersey
Princeton Medical Center
Princeton University
Princeton Theological Seminary
Westminster Choir College of Rider University
ATT Holmdel
8. Major churches in the area, including but not limited to:
The First Baptist Church, Princeton
St. Paul's Catholic Church, Princeton
The Witherspoon Street Presbyterian Church, Princeton
b. Quarterly flyers and copies of applications and information
packets shall be sent to the following community contact
organizations, agencies, officials and departments:
1. Mercer County Director of Social Services.
2. Monmouth County Director of Social Services.
3. Ocean County Director of Social Services.
4. Mercer County Office on Aging.
5. Monmouth County Office on Aging.
6. Ocean County Office on Aging.
7. Princeton Commission on Aging.
8. Mercer County Rental Assistance Office (local DCA office)
§ T10B-350A BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-350A
BAO:1391
9. Monmouth County Rental Assistance Office (local DCA
office)
10. Ocean County Rental Assistance Office (local DCA office)
11. Mercer County Housing Agency.
12. Monmouth County Housing Agency.
13. Ocean County Housing Agency.
14. Mercer County Board of Realtors.
15. Monmouth County Board of Realtors.
16. Ocean County Board of Realtors.
17. Mercer County Community Development Office.
18. Monmouth County Community Development Office.
19. Ocean County Community Development Office.
20. Mercer County Department of Human Services.
21. Monmouth County Department of Human Services.
22. Ocean County Department of Human Services.
23. Salvation Army, Trenton Office.
c. The following is a listing of community contact person(s) and/
or organization(s) in Mercer, Monmouth, and Ocean Counties
that will aid in the affirmative marketing program:
1. Welfare Director, Princeton Township.
2. Witherspoon-Jackson Development Corporation.
3. Princeton Community Housing, Inc.
4. K.M. Light Management, Inc.
5. Princeton Housing Authority.
6. Mercer County Director of Social Services.
7. Monmouth County Director of Social Services.
8. Ocean County Director of Social Services.
(c) Administration.
(1) The Princeton Township Housing Board will have the responsibility
to income qualify low and moderate income households; to provide
for the initial occupancy of low and moderate income units with
income qualified households; to continue to qualify households for
§ T10B-350A PRINCETON CODE § T10B-350A
BAO:1392
reoccupancy of units as they become vacant during the period of
affordability controls; to assist with advertising and outreach to
low and moderate income households; and to enforce the terms of
the deed restriction and mortgage lien, per N.J.A.C. 5:93-91.1. The
housing board may contract with an outside consultant for some or
all of these services.
(2) The housing board shall offer counseling services to low and
moderate income applicants on subjects such as budgeting, credit
issues, mortgage qualification, rental lease requirements and
landlord/tenant law. The following service providers shall be
retained to fulfill those requirements:
a. Princeton Housing Authority.
b. K.M. Light Management, Inc.
(3) Owners of low and moderate income housing units shall be
required to assist in the marketing of their affordable units.
(4) The Township of Princeton shall comply with the monitoring and
reporting requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:93-11.6 and 12.1. The housing
board shall submit the appropriate documentation to the township
so that the monitoring and reporting requirements can be fulfilled.
(d) Prequalification and selection.
(1) Households that apply for low and moderate income housing shall
be pre-screened by the housing board (or its designee) for income
eligibility by comparing their total income to the current low and
moderate income limits adopted by COAH. Applicants will be
notified as to their eligibility status.
(2) In order to ensure a sufficient supply of qualified applicants, the
advertising process shall continue until at least 10 income-eligible
applicants have applied for each low and moderate income unit
available or until all of the available low and moderate income units
within the township have been rented, whichever occurs first.
(3) Having pre-screened applicants for income eligibility, the housing
board (or its designee) shall analyze the income and household size
of each applicant to determine which of the available low and
moderate income housing units the applicant is qualified to occupy.
(4) The housing board (or its designee) shall interview each applicant
to verify the applicant's income and review the applicant's credit
history. Applicants shall be required to submit income verification
for each household member 18 years or older. This process shall be
utilized in establishing the final certified applicant group.
(5) If there is more than one certified applicant for an available low and
moderate income unit, placement shall be made on a first come/
§ T10B-350A BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-350A
BAO:1393
§ T10B-351. Other functions of the Princeton Township Housing
Board. [Ord. No. 84-31, § 6; Ord. No. 97-10, § 2; Ord. No. 2006-6,
§ 1.]
In addition to exercising the powers set forth hereinabove, the Princeton
Township Housing Board:
first served basis, considering the date the application was first
received by the housing board.
(6) The process described above shall begin at least 120 days before
the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for an affordable dwelling
unit in the affordable housing compliance program and shall
continue until all low and moderate income units are occupied and
for as long as there are deed-restricted affordable units within the
municipality.
(7) A waiting list shall be maintained by the township for the purpose
of facilitating the initial rentals and any rerentals after all of the
low and moderate income units have been initially occupied. The
housing board shall update the waiting list annually by contacting
prospective applicants and determining their continuing eligibility
for and interest in the program.
(8) Households who live or work within the housing region shall be
given preference over households from outside of the housing
region for the first 30 days that a unit becomes available. If no
qualified households from within the housing region can be found
within 30 days, the unit may be rented to a household from outside
the housing region.
(9) Households shall generally be referred to available units using the
following standards for occupancy:
a. A maximum of two persons per bedroom;
b. Children of same sex in same bedroom;
c. Unrelated adults or persons of the opposite sex other than
husband and wife in separate bedrooms; and
d. Children not in same bedroom with parents.
Households may be considered for units other than as set forth
herein except that in no case shall a household be referred to a
unit that provides for more than one additional bedroom over
the number required by the application of (d)(9)a through d
above.
(a) May adopt regulations governing provision of financial assistance and
design and other technical assistance to small lot program applicants
and provide such assistance;
§ T10B-350A PRINCETON CODE § T10B-351
BAO:1394
(b) May adopt regulations governing provision of financial assistance,
including but not limited to down payment and rent assistance, to
purchasers and tenants of the lower income units and provide such
assistance;
(c) May provide financial and technical assistance to nonprofit
organizations organized to provide lower income housing in the
township;
(d) May solicit and receive loans, grants, and contributions from all sources
to further the purposes of this article;
(e) May recommend to township committee and the planning board
modifications of this chapter to increase the workability of this article;
(f) Shall report annually to township committee and the planning board on
the operation of the affordable housing program established by this
article;
(g) Shall monitor applicants' activities for compliance with the agreements
submitted as part of final approval and with this division and
regulations issued hereunder;
(h) Shall take such other steps as will maximize the production of lower
and middle income housing pursuant to this article;
(i) Shall oversee and operate or oversee the operation as administered by
a paid professional of the township's rehabilitation program in order to
provide lower income housing in the township;
(j) In accordance with subsection (e), above, in the event of an actual or
threatened breach by an owner of an affordable unit of any of the
affordable housing requirements contained in this article, the New
Jersey Fair Housing Act, the rules of the New Jersey Council on
Affordable Housing and Uniform Housing Affordability Controls,
including but not limited to affordable housing deed restrictions, the
Princeton Township Housing Board Rules and Regulations, and any
other local or state laws or regulations governing affordable housing in
New Jersey, as all of the foregoing may now exist or may hereafter be
amended, the housing board may recommend to the township
committee that the township committee authorize that action be taken
to enforce the subject provisions in municipal court or superior court,
including but not limited to seeking injunctive relief or specific
performance. If the township committee accepts the housing board's
recommendation to bring an action for enforcement in municipal court,
the housing board shall be empowered to seek all legal and equitable
remedies available in municipal court. If the township committee
accepts the housing board's recommendation to bring an action in
superior court, the township committee shall seek all legal and
equitable remedies available in superior court.
§ T10B-351 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-351
BAO:1395
§ T10B-352. Mandatory program revaluation. [Ord. No. 84-31, § 6.]
If after the effective date of the adoption of this article, there is legislation
or judicial decisions which revise the requirement for municipalities to
provide for affordable housing, including the phasing of same, then the
provisions of this article shall be forthwith reviewed by the Princeton
Regional Planning Board and township committee to ensure that the
provisions of this article comply with the 10 current legal requirements with
regard to affordable housing.
§ T10B-353. Executive regulations. [Ord. No. 84-31, § 6.]
The Princeton Township Housing Board shall, from time to time, issue such
written regulations as may be necessary to implement and administer the
provisions of this article.
§ T10B-354. Severability. [Ord. No. 84-31, § 6.]
Every section or provision of this article shall be deemed a separate
provision to the extent that if any portion shall be declared invalid, such
determination shall not affect the remaining parts of this article, which shall
remain in full force and effect to the extent severable.
The board may contract for services from and delegate functions to the
Princeton Township Housing Fund, except that it may not delegate its
owner to adopt regulations pursuant to this article.
§ T10B-351 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-354
BAO:1396
DIVISION 7
R-1/AH AND R-2/AH Zoning Districts
§ T10B-355. Establishment. [Ord. No. 87-31, § 3.]
§ T10B-356. Permitted uses and computation of permitted number
of units. [Ord. No. 87-31, § 3.]
§ T10B-357. Mandatory provisions governing development. [Ord.
No. 87-31, § 3; Ord. No. 88-8, § 2.]
(a) There are hereby established the R-1/AH and R-2/AH zoning districts,
made up of such land area as shown on the zoning map on file in the
office of the township clerk.
(a) Residential clusters meeting the requirements of this article and of
division 9 (Residential Clusters) of article IX, except as modified herein,
shall be permitted and shall contain no more units than the maximum
number determined in the manner provided in section 10B-356(b)
below.
(b) The maximum number of units permitted on any parcel in a R-1/AH or
R-2/AH zoning district, exclusive of the number that may be permitted
on that part of the parcel designated RH-8, shall be determined by
multiplying the base density by 1.25 times the number of acres in the
entire parcel. For purposes of this computation, the parcel shall be
deemed to include that part, if any, designated RH-8. The base density
for any parcel zoned R-1/AH shall be 0.5 units per acre. The base
density for any parcel zoned R-2/AH shall be 0.67 units per acre.
(a) Within each parcel in the R-1/AH and R-2/AH zoning districts, a part of
the parcel has been designated RH-8 and is so shown on the zoning map
of the Township of Princeton. Upon final subdivision or site plan
approval for any development other than improvements to agricultural
operations, any applicant for development approval of a parcel in the
R-1/AH or R-2/AH district shall convey that part of the parcel
designated RH-8 to Princeton Township or to a nonprofit or public
entity either designated by the Princeton Township Housing Board or
acceptable to the board for use for affordable housing or shall enter into
a development agreement pursuant to section 10B-357(b) with respect
to that part of the parcel, unless this requirement is waived and a
contribution required as set for in section 10B-357(c).
(b) In the event that the applicant chooses not to convey that part of the
parcel designated RH-8, he shall execute a development agreement
with the township to ensure that that part of the parcel is developed for
affordable housing pursuant to division 3 hereof, but only at such time
as the township committee in its sole discretion determines that such
units are needed in Princeton Township. He shall in addition post a
bond in the same amount as the contribution alternative set forth in
section 10B-357(c) and prepare such documents as will ensure that,
§ T10B-355 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-357
BAO:1397
should the township take possession of the R-H portion of the parcel
pursuant to the following, his ownership interest will be conveyed to
the township and such additional legal documents as the township may
determine to be necessary to ensure production of affordable housing
on the site. In the event that, at such time as the township committee
determines it is desirable to construct such housing, the developer
is unavailable or unwilling to construct such housing, the bond shall
be forfeited and the township or its designee shall take possession of
the R-H portion of the parcel for the purpose of developing affordable
housing pursuant to division 3 hereof; provided, however, that upon
completion of said development, the township shall return to the
developer any part of the bond that it has determined is not needed
to ensure the affordability of the lower income units and the long-term
economic viability of the development.
(c) Township committee in its sole discretion may, upon recommendation
by the housing board and planning board, require that the applicant in
lieu of conveyance or development of the R-H portion of the tract
pursuant to section 10B-357(a) and (b) make a contribution to the
township for use in its affordable housing program. Such discretion
shall be exercised on the basis of evaluation by township committee of
the relative effect of a financial contribution or the donation of land on
the success of the affordable housing program. In such event, the
amount of the contribution shall be the lesser of the following:
(1) The product of multiplying the acreage in that part of the parcel
designated RH-8 by 4, or the number of units permitted on the
balance of the parcel by .37, whichever is less, and multiplying the
product rounded up to the next whole number by the average
subsidy to create a lower income housing unit as most recently
determined by the Princeton Township Housing Board pursuant to
section 10B-340(b) (2) (e).
(2) 15% of the average selling price of the units in the development
multiplied by the number of bonus units permitted on the site as
determined pursuant to section 10B-356(b) but in no event less
than 75% of the amount required under subsection (c) (1) above.
25% of the contribution required under paragraph (c) (1) above
shall be paid upon receipt of final subdivision or site plan approval
on all or any part of the tract, 50% upon receipt of the first building
permit for development on any part of the tract, and 25% upon
receipt of the first certificate of occupancy. If, upon completion of
sale of all units on the tract, the applicant can demonstrate that the
required contribution under paragraph (c) (2) would have less than
the amount actually paid, the township shall refund to the applicant
the difference on the basis of adequate documentation provided by
the applicant.
(d) Each R-1/AH and R-2/AH zoning district, including the portion thereof
designated RH-8 unless the applicant conveys such portion pursuant to
§ T10B-357 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-357
BAO:1398
§ T10B-358. Residential cluster requirements for the R-1/AH and
R-2/AH districts. [Ord. No. 87-31, § 3.]
All of the provisions of division 9 of article IX of this chapter applicable
to residential clusters shall apply to residential clusters permitted in the
R-1/AH and R-2/AH districts pursuant to section 10B-356 with the following
modifications:
section 10B-357(a) or enters into a developer's agreement pursuant to
section 10B-357(b), shall be developed pursuant to a comprehensive
development plan, and no approval shall be granted for any preliminary
development application for less than such area.
(e) No lot within a R-1/AH or R-2/AH zoning district may be subdivided
even if no improvements are proposed thereto, unless a declaration of
convenants and restrictions showing how the entire district will be
developed in compliance with the requirements of this article is
approved by the planning board and filed with the county clerk. All
owners of the subdivided lots shall be bound by such declaration unless
they jointly submit a development application covering the entire
district and complying with the requirements of this article.
(a) In lieu of the requirements for common open space set forth in the first
sentence of section 10B-194(a), 50% of any tract in a R-1/AH or R-2/AH
zoning district exclusive of that part designated RH on the zoning map
shall be devoted to common open space for the benefit of the residents
of the residential cluster. In the event that the township committee
elects to substitute a financial contribution as provided in section
10B-357(c), 50% of the entire tract shall be devoted to common open
space. The area to be devoted to common open space shall include all
those lands designated "Natural Resource and Other Areas for Open
Space Preservation" on the Zoning Map of the Township of Princeton.
(b) In lieu of the lot standards for single-family and two-family structures,
set forth in section 10B-192(a) and (b) respectively, the following shall
apply:
R-1/AH and R-2/AH
Required Lot Area (Min. Acre) 5,000 (single-family)
(Min. Sq. Ft.) 8,500 (two-family)
Required Lot Width 40 (single-family)
(Min. Ft.) 50 (two-family)
Required Lot Depth 80 (single-family)
(Min. Ft.) 120 (two-family)
Required Lot Frontage (Min. Ft.) 30 (both)
Required Bldg. Setback
Front (Min. Ft.) 15 (both)
§ T10B-357 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-358
BAO:1399
§ T10B-359. (Reserved)
R-1/AH and R-2/AH
Side (Min. Ft.) 5 (both)
Combined Side (Min. Ft.) (na)
Rear (Min. Ft.) 15 (both)
Permitted Bldg. Height (Max. Ft.) 30 (both)
Building Setback-Height Ratio (na)
Permitted Bldg. F.A.R. 30 (single-family)
(Max. %) 40 (two-family)
Required Parking Setback
Front (Min. Ft.) 25 (both)
Side (Min. Ft.) 25 (both)
Rear (Min. Ft.) 25 (both)
§ T10B-358 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-359
BAO:1400
DIVISION 8
Residential Senior Market (R-SM) Program
§ T10B-360. Establishments. [Ord. No. 96-19.]
There is hereby established a residential senior market (R-SM) zoning
district, made up of such land area as shown on the zoning map on file
in the office of the township clerk, such map being entitled, "Zoning Map,
Princeton Township, Mercer County, New Jersey," prepared by the
Princeton Township Engineering Department, as revised through June 29,
1993.
§ T10B-361. Permitted uses. [Ord. No. 96-19.]
Residential clusters meeting the requirements of this article and division 9
(Residential Clusters) of article IX, as modified herein, shall be permitted at
a gross density not exceeding 11 units per acre with occupancy restricted
to persons who are 62 years of age or older.
§ T10B-362. Mandatory set-side/comprehensive development. [Ord.
No. 96-19.]
§ T10B-363. Provisions applicable to moderate income units. [Ord.
No. 96-19.]
§ T10B-364. Residential cluster requirements for developments
including moderate income housing in the R-SM district. [Ord. No.
96-19.]
All of the provisions of division 9 of article IX of this chapter (Residential
Clusters) shall apply to developments in the R-SM district (including the
moderate housing unit), with the following modifications:
(a) Subdivision and site plan approvals for developments within the R-SM
district shall be denied, unless the development complies with the
obligation to provide affordable housing pursuant to this article.
(b) At least 20% of the for sale units and 15% of the rental units shall be set
aside to be sold or rented at prices qualifying the units as moderate
income units pursuant to section 10B-337 of this article. No
development fees shall be due under the provisions of division 4 of this
article.
(a) The provisions of section 10B-337 shall apply to the moderate income
units, except that the provisions of sections 10B-337(b) and 337(f) shall
not apply.
(b) The provisions of section 10B-338 shall not apply.
(c) The provisions of section 10B-341 shall apply.
§ T10B-360 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-364
BAO:1401
(a) The provisions of subsections (a) through (g) and (i) of section 10B-343
shall apply with the following modifications:
(1) In lieu of the text of section 10B-343(a), the following shall be
substituted:
Section 10B-191(c) shall be modified in its entirety to read as
follows: Multifamily structures/non-townhouses; defined as one or
more freestanding buildings with each residential unit sharing with
another unit, or units, one or more vertical or horizontal common
walls.
(2) Sections 10B-193(e) and 195(c) shall not apply.
(3) The provisions of section 10B-343(i) shall apply, except that the
cross-reference to the R-H district is changed to the R-SM district.
(b) The provisions of section 10B-344 shall apply.
(c) The provisions of section 10B-345 shall apply.
(d) The provisions of section 10B-346 shall apply.
(e) The provisions of section 10B-347 shall apply.
(f) The following additional regulations shall apply:
(1) Minimum tract size: four acres.
(2) Maximum floor area ratio: 25%;
(3) Minimum tract width, depth, and frontage: 100 feet;
(4) Minimum building setbacks: 20 feet, except that the minimum
setback shall be 50 feet for yards abutting a single family zoning
district;
(5) Minimum parking setback: 20 feet, but no parking shall be allowed
in the area between the road and the facade of the building closest
to the road. For a corner lot this shall apply to the setback from
both roads.
(6) Maximum impervious coverage: 40%;
(7) Perimeter screen buffers of 20 feet shall be installed in accordance
with section 10B-304, except that this may be reduced to five feet
for yards abutting the SC district;
(8) Maximum height: 35 feet, with flat roofs discouraged;
(9) The setback to height ratio for front, rear, and side yards shall be
no less than 1.5 to 1, except for yards abutting to SC district.
(g) The parking requirement shall be the number of off-street parking
required to meet the needs of the residents, employees and guests. The
§ T10B-364 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-364
BAO:1402
applicant shall submit a parking study prepared by an expert to justify
its need for the proposed number of spaces. The applicant's proposed
number shall not be less than 1.25 spaces per unit.
(h) All developments in the R-SM district shall include community space for
the use of residents including, but not limited to, space for dining
rooms, laundry rooms, nurses offices, other staff offices, meeting
rooms, and game rooms. The community space shall not constitute
gross floor area for purposes of the limitation on the floor area ratio to
the extent of 5% of the total gross floor area of the development,
excluding this community space.
§ T10B-364 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-364
BAO:1403

DIVISION 9
Residential Senior Community Zoned 3 (RSC-3)
§ T10B-365. Establishment. [Ord. No. 96-20; Ord. No. 2003-2, § 2.]
There is hereby established a Residential Senior Community No. 3 (RSC-3)
Zoning District, made up of such land area as shown on the zoning map
on file in the office of the township clerk, such map being entitled, "Zoning
Map, Princeton Township, Mercer County, New Jersey," prepared by the
Princeton Township Engineering Department, as revised through January
13, 2003.
§ T10B-366. Regulations. [Ord. No. 96-19; Ord. No. 2003-2, § 3.]
(a) Permitted uses. Within the RSC-3 zoning district the following uses
shall be permitted.
(1) Principal permitted uses: Buildings may be erected or used and the
tract may be used for age-restricted low and moderate income
multi-family housing restricted to persons 62 years of age and older
and a manager's dwelling unit that need not be age-restricted.
"Multi-family housing" is defined as a building containing at least
three dwelling units, each unit sharing with another unit or units
one or more vertical or horizontal common walls.
(2) Accessory uses: Multi-family housing management office, common
rooms, kitchen and dining facilities, laundry rooms, maintenance
and storage areas, congregate services for residents, off-street
parking, recreation facilities, street furniture, home occupations,
fences and walls, signs, satellite dishes, stormwater management
facilities, greenways, open space, and other customary uses which
are clearly incidental to the principal use and buildings.
(b) Gross density. The permitted gross density in the RSC-3 zoning district
shall be six dwelling units per acre. Density shall be calculated using
the entire tract size irrespective of lot lines within the RSC-3 zoning
district.
(c) Minimum tract size. The minimum tract size shall be the RSC-3 zoning
district as designated on the amended Zoning Map of the Township of
Princeton.
(d) Mandatory set aside for affordable housing. Subdivision and site plan
approvals for developments within the RSC-3 zoning district may only
be approved if all of the dwelling units, with the exception of a
manager's dwelling unit, are age-restricted affordable units as defined
in this article.
(e) Development requirements. For the purposes of determining
compliance with this section, individual interior lot lines within the zone
designation shall not be considered when determining setbacks. All
measurements shall be taken from the boundary of the tract.
§ T10B-365 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-366
BAO:1405
(1) Maximum floor area ratio: 0.20.
(2) Minimum building and parking setback:
From property zoned R-1 50 feet
From property zoned R-2 50 feet
From property zoned R-5 0 feet
From Princeton Borough 0 feet
(3) Maximum impervious coverage: 25%.
(4) Setback to height ratio:
From property zoned R-1 1.0:1.0
From property zoned R-2 1.0:1.0
From property zoned R-5 1.0:1.0
From property in Princeton
Borough
0
(5) Maximum building height: 45 feet or three stories, whichever is
less.
(6) Maximum building length on a single plane: 190 feet.
(7) Parking requirement: 0.5 parking spaces per unit.
(8) Perimeter screen buffers Section 10B-304 does not apply.
(9) Minimum open space: four acres.
(f) Site improvements. Streets, parking, water supply, sanitary sewers,
stormwater management facilities and other site improvements shall be
subject to the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs,
Residential Site Improvement Standards ("RSIS") as set forth in N.J.A.C.
5:21. An alternative off-street parking standard pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:21-4.14(c), which shall be 0.5 parking spaces per unit, will be used
due to the demonstrated reduced need for off-street parking by
residents of age-restricted low and moderate income housing.
(g) Unnecessary cost generating features. In order to eliminate
unnecessary cost generating features for affordable housing
developments, as required by the Fair Housing Act, N.J.S.A.
52:27D-314.b, any development in the RSC-3 zoning district shall be
entitled to the rights and relief provided in the rules of the New Jersey
Council on Affordable Housing for inclusionary development and as set
forth in N.J.A.C. 5:93-10.1(b). Any development, however, shall pay the
township professional costs associated with the review of the
development pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53 et seq. as well as required
inspection fees.
§ T10B-366 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-366
BAO:1406
ARTICLE XIIA
Municipal Housing Liaison For The Purpose Of Administering The
Affordable Housing Program
§ T10B-367. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2006-16, § 1.]
The purpose of this article is to create the administrative mechanisms
needed for the execution of the township's responsibility to assist in the
provision of affordable housing pursuant to the Fair Housing Act of 1985.
§ T10B-368. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — The entity responsible for administering the
affordability controls of some or all units in the affordable housing program
for the township to ensure that the restricted units under administration are
affirmatively marketed and sold or rented, as applicable, only to low- and
moderate-income households.
MUNICIPAL HOUSING LIAISON — The employee charged by the township
committee with the responsibility for oversight and administration of the
affordable housing program for the township.
§ T10B-369. Establishment of municipal housing liaison position
and compensation; powers and duties. [Ord. No. 2006-16, § 1.]
(a) Establishment of position of municipal housing liaison. There is hereby
established the position of municipal housing liaison for the township.
(b) Subject to the approval of the Council on Affordable Housing ("COAH"),
the municipal housing liaison shall be appointed by the township
committee and may be a full or part-time municipal employee.
(c) The municipal housing liaison shall be responsible for oversight and
administration of the affordable housing program for the township,
including the following responsibilities which may not be contracted
out:
(1) Serving as the township's primary point of contact for all inquiries
from the state, affordable housing providers, administrative agents,
and interested households;
(2) Monitoring the status of all restricted units in the township's fair
share plan;
(3) Compiling, verifying, and submitting annual reporting as required
by COAH;
(4) Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and
administrative agents, as applicable;
§ T10B-367 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-369
BAO:1407
(5) Attending continuing education programs as may be required by
COAH;
(6) If applicable, serving as the administrative agent for some or all of
the restricted units in the township as described in subsection (f)
below.
(d) Subject to approval by COAH, the township may contract with or
authorize a consultant, authority, government or any agency charged by
the township committee, which entity shall have the responsibility of
administering the affordable housing program of the township. If the
township contracts with another entity to administer all or any part of
the affordable housing program, including the affordability controls and
affirmative marketing plan, the municipal housing liaison shall
supervise the contracting administrative agent.
(e) Compensation. Compensation shall be fixed by the township committee
at the time of the appointment of the municipal housing liaison.
(f) Administrative powers and duties assigned to the municipal housing
liaison:
(1) Affirmative marketing.
a. Conducting an outreach process to ensure affirmative
marketing of affordable housing units in accordance with the
affirmative marketing plan of the township and the provisions
of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15.
(2) Household certification.
a. Soliciting, scheduling, conducting and following up on
interviews with interested households;
b. Conducting interviews and obtaining sufficient documentation
of gross income and assets upon which to base a determination
of income eligibility for a low- or moderate-income unit;
c. Providing written notification to each applicant as to the
determination of eligibility or noneligibility;
d. Requiring that all certified applicants for restricted units
execute a certificate substantially in the form, as applicable, of
either the ownership or rental certificates set forth in
Appendices J and K of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.;
e. Creating and maintaining a referral list of eligible applicant
households living in the housing region and eligible applicant
households with members working in the housing region
where the units are located; and
§ T10B-369 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-369
BAO:1408
f. Employing the random selection process as provided in the
affirmative marketing plan of the township when referring
households for certification to affordable units.
(3) Affordability controls.
a. Furnishing to attorneys or closing agents forms of deed
restrictions and mortgages for recording at the time of
conveyance of title of each restricted unit;
b. Creating and maintaining a file on each restricted unit for its
control period, including the recorded deed with restrictions,
recorded mortgage and note, as appropriate;
c. Ensuring that the removal of the deed restrictions and
cancellation of the mortgage note are effectuated and properly
filed with the appropriate county's register of deeds or county
clerk's office after the termination of the affordability controls
for each restricted unit;
d. Communicating with lenders regarding foreclosure; and
e. Ensuring the issuance of continuing certificates of occupancy
or certifications pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.10.
(4) Resale and rental.
a. Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information between owners and the
administrative agent regarding the availability of restricted
units for resale or rental; and
b. Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information to low- and moderate-income
households regarding the availability of restricted units for
resale or rerental.
(5) Communicating with unit owners.
a. Reviewing and approving requests from owners of restricted
units who wish to take out home equity loans or refinance
during the term of their ownership;
b. Reviewing and approving requests to increase sales prices
from owners of restricted units who wish to make capital
improvements to the units that would affect the selling price,
such authorizations to be limited to those improvements
resulting in additional bedrooms or bathrooms and the cost of
central air conditioning systems; and
c. Processing requests and making determinations on requests
by owners of restricted units for hardship waivers.
(6) Enforcement.
§ T10B-369 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-369
BAO:1409
§ T10B-370. Severability. [Ord. No. 2006-16, § 1.]
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or other part of this article
is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid, such judgment shall not affect or
invalidate the remainder of this article, but shall be confined in its effect
to the section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or other part of this article
directly involved in the controversy in which said judgment shall have been
rendered and all other provisions of this article shall remain in full force and
effect.
a. Ensure that all restricted units are identified as affordable
within the tax assessors' office and any municipal utility
authority ("MUA") and upon notification to the administrative
agent of change in billing address, payment delinquency of two
consecutive billing cycles, transfer of title, or institution of a
writ of foreclosure on all affordable units, notifying all such
owners that they must either move back to their unit or sell it;
b. Securing from all developers and sponsors of restricted units,
at the earliest point of contact in the processing of the project
or development, written acknowledgment of the requirement
that no restricted unit can be offered, or in any other way
committed to any person, other than a household duly certified
to the unit by the administrative agent;
c. The posting annually in all rental properties, including twofamily
homes, of a notice as to the maximum permitted rent
together with the telephone number of the administrative
agent where complaints of excess rent can be made;
d. Sending annual mailings to all owners of affordable dwelling
units, reminding them of the notices and requirements outlined
in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.18(d)4;
e. Establishing a program for diverting unlawful rent payments to
the municipality's affordable housing trust fund or other
appropriate municipal fund approved by the DCA;
f. Establishing a rent-to-equity program;
g. Creating and publishing a written operating manual, as
approved by COAH, setting forth procedures for administering
such affordability controls; and
h. Proving annual reports to COAH as required.
(7) The administrative agent shall have authority to take all actions
necessary and appropriate to carry out its responsibilities
hereunder.
§ T10B-369 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-371
BAO:1410
§ T10B-371. Inconsistent ordinances repealed. [Ord. No. 2006-16,
§ 1.]
All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent with the
provisions of this article are hereby repealed, but only to the extent of such
inconsistencies.
§ T10B-372. Effective date. [Ord. No. 2006-16, § 1.]
This article shall take effect immediately upon final adoption and
publication in the manner prescribed by law.
§ T10B-371 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-372
BAO:1411

ARTICLE XIII
Historic Preservation46
DIVISION 1
Generally
§ T10B-373. Legislative findings and purposes. [Ord. No. 2014-44
§ 10]
Princeton Council finds and declares that Princeton contains numerous
buildings, archaeological sites, and areas of special character and special
historic and architectural value; that these buildings, archaeological sites,
and areas of Princeton reflect elements of the cultural, social, economic,
and architectural history of the community; and that preservation and
enhancement of such elements are required in the interest of the health,
prosperity, and welfare of the municipality as well as the surrounding
region. The purposes of the regulations set forth in this article are to:
(1) Preserve, enhance, and safeguard the heritage of Princeton by
preserving the resources within the community that reflect elements of
its historical significance;
(2) Promote the conservation of historic sites and districts, open space,
energy resources through the preservation of historic structures,
features, and sites, and valuable natural resources and to facilitate
their appropriate use or reuse in Princeton;
(3) Maintain and develop harmonious settings within historic sites and
historic preservation districts for structures and archaeological sites;
(4) Foster civic pride in the history, architecture, cultural landscapes and
resources, and landscape architecture of Princeton;
(5) Identify, designate, regulate, and promote the appreciation of historic
preservation districts and sites;
(6) Encourage improvements and private investment in historic
preservation districts and sites and surrounding properties;
(7) Manage change of historic sites and historic preservation districts by
encouraging sensitive alteration and/or new construction;
(8) Discourage the unnecessary demolition of historic resources;
(9) Protect and enhance the community's attractions to visitors;
(10) Encourage the adaptive reuse of historic structures when appropriate.
46.Editor's Note: The Format Numeration Of Ord. No. 2014-44 Has Been Retained In Article
XIII.
§ T10B-373 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-373
BAO:1413

DIVISION 2
Organization and Powers of Historic Preservation Commission
§ T10B-374. Historic Preservation Commission established. [Ord.
No. 2014-44 § 10]
An agency to be known as the Historic Preservation Commission is hereby
established. The Commission shall consist of seven regular members and
two alternate members who shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the Princeton Council. A majority of the Commission
members shall be residents of Princeton.
(1) At least one member of the Historic Preservation Commission shall
belong to each of the following classes:
CLASS A: a person who is knowledgeable in building design and
construction or architectural history and who may reside outside the
municipality.
CLASS B: at least one person who is knowledgeable about or with a
demonstrated interest in local history and who may reside outside the
municipality.
CLASS C: Those regular members who are not designated as Class A
or B. Class C members shall be citizens of the municipality who hold
no other office, position, or employment in the municipality except for
membership on the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment. If possible,
Class C members shall be knowledgeable about local history, history of
landscape design, archaeology, architectural history, or building design.
At least one of the regular members shall, if possible, be an owner
occupying his or her residence within a historic preservation district.
At least one of the Class A or B members shall, if possible, be a member
of the Site Plan Review Advisory Board.
(2) Alternate members shall meet the qualifications of Class C members.
The Mayor with the advice of the Princeton Council shall designate at
the time of appointment the regular members by class and the alternate
members as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2." Of the regular
members first appointed on January 1, 2013, one shall have a term of
one year, one shall have a term of two years, one shall have a term of
three years, and four shall have a term of four years. In the case of
alternate members, Alternate No. 2 shall have a term of one year and
Alternate No. 1 shall have a term of two years. Thereafter, the term of a
regular member shall be four years, and the term of an alternate
member shall be two years. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by
expiration of the member's term shall be filled only for the unexpired
term in the same manner as the initial appointment subject to the
continuing requirements concerning the appointment of members.
Notwithstanding any other provision herein, the term of any member
common to the Historic Preservation Commission and the Planning
§ T10B-374 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-374
BAO:1415
§ T10B-375. Expenses and costs. [Ord. No. 2014-44 § 10]
The Historic Preservation Commission may employ, contract for, and fix
the compensation of experts and other staff and services as it shall deem
necessary. The Commission shall obtain its legal counsel from the municipal
attorney at the rate of compensation determined by the Princeton Council,
unless Council, by appropriation, provides for separate legal counsel for
the Commission. Expenditures pursuant to this subsection shall not exceed,
exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by the Princeton
Council for the Commission's use.
§ T10B-376. Historic Preservation Commission powers and
functions. [Ord. No. 2014-44 § 10]
Board shall be for the terms of membership on the Planning Board,
and the term of any member common to the Historic Preservation
Commission and the Board of Adjustment shall be for the term of
membership on the Board of Adjustment.
(3) The Historic Preservation Commission shall elect a chair and vice chair
from its members and select a municipal employee as secretary.
(4) Alternate members may participate in discussions of the proceedings,
but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular
member. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular member
may vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a choice
must be made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1
shall vote.
(5) No member shall be permitted to act on any matter in which he or she
has, either directly or indirectly, any personal or financial interest.
(6) A member may be removed by the Princeton Council for cause
including but not limited to failure to attend regular Commission
meetings. The member is entitled to a public hearing.
(7) Members shall serve without compensation, but may, within budgetary
limitations, be reimbursed for authorized expenses incurred.
(8) The Princeton Council shall appoint annually one of its members as
liaison to the Commission. Said liaison shall not be considered a
member of the Commission and shall not vote on Commission matters.
(1) The Historic Preservation Commission shall:
(a) Advise the Planning Board and Board of Adjustment on applications
for development for which preservation plan approval is necessary.
When advising and assisting the Planning Board and Board of
Adjustment in reviewing such applications, the Historic
Preservation Commission along with the Site Plan Review Advisory
Board shall exercise their review functions pursuant to this section
when the application being reviewed has been classified as a major
§ T10B-374 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-376
BAO:1416
§ T10B-377. Rules and procedures. [Ord. No. 2014-44 § 10]
The Historic Preservation Commission shall adopt rules governing the form
and content of preservation plans and related applications and more
detailed procedures for review of the plans and applications. Such rules
shall to the extent practicable expedite and simplify the review process and
minimize cost and inconvenience to property owners and shall be otherwise
consistent with the provisions of this article.
application. When the application being reviewed has been
classified as a minor application, the Historic Preservation
Commission shall substitute for and exercise exclusively all of the
functions of the Site Plan Review Advisory Board. When reviewing
minor applications, the Historic Preservation Commission shall
have the same powers and shall use and comply with the same
procedures and its decisions shall have the same effect as
prescribed for the Site Plan Review Advisory Board.
(b) Provide written reports pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-111 on the
application of the zoning ordinance provisions concerning historic
preservation.
(c) Advise the board of jurisdiction in written form. Members or staff
shall testify at the hearing on the application and explain the
Commission's written report. The recommendations of the
Commission shall not be disregarded by the board of jurisdiction
except for reasons stated on the record.
(d) Make recommendations to the Planning Board, on the historic
preservation element of the Princeton Master Plan and on the
implications for preservation of historic sites of any other master
plan elements.
(e) Advise the Planning Board and Princeton Council on the inclusion
of historic sites or districts in the recommended capital
improvements program.
(f) Adopt or amend guidelines pertaining to the substantive standards
set forth in section 10B-386 to 10B-388 and 10B-390 and to
determinations pursuant to section 10B-380 as to whether work
pursuant to a preservation plan will have a significant impact.
(g) Prepare a survey of historic sites of Princeton pursuant to criteria
identified in the survey report and to identify and maintain a survey
of all buildings, structures, sites, objects, improvements, and
districts of historical significance.
(h) Carry out such other advisory, educational, and informational
functions as will promote historic preservation in Princeton.
(i) Hold regular meetings at least four times annually.
§ T10B-376 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-377
BAO:1417

DIVISION 3
Covered Acts
§ T10B-378. Acts for which preservation plan approval is required.
[Ord. No. 2014-44 § 10]
No person within a historic preservation zoning district or historic
preservation buffer zoning district shall construct, alter, move, demolish,
or elevate a structure, or take any action requiring site plan review, or
subdivide land, or make any other improvements to land including
landscaping other than landscaping that in the judgment of the Historic
Preservation Officer is not subject to the standards set forth in section
10B-386(4) if the results thereof or, in the case of a subdivision, the new
lots are, in a Historic District Type 1, visible from a public way or place or
another property in the historic preservation zoning district or, in a Historic
District Type 2, visible from a public way except in conformance with a
preservation plan approved pursuant to Section 10B-379 or 10B-380.
§ T10B-378 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-378
BAO:1419

DIVISION 4
Applications Seeking Preservation Plan Approval and Review
Thereof
§ T10B-379. Applications for development. [Ord. No. 2014-44 § 10;
Ord. No. 2015-20]
(1) Every application for development in a historic preservation zoning
district or historic preservation buffer zoning district for which a
preservation plan is required pursuant to section 10B-378 shall upon
filing be forwarded to the Historic Preservation Commission for action
as follows. The application for preservation plan approval shall be on
such forms as the Historic Preservation Commission adopts. The
documentation must be sufficient to demonstrate how the proposed
improvement will appear in context. The submission shall include at
least the following:
(a) Photographs of the property in question and surrounding
properties.
(b) Product specifications, where appropriate.
(c) Elevations and details to propose new construction.
(d) Floor plans.
(e) Documentation sufficient to demonstrate how the proposed
improvements appear in context.
(f) Delineated historic preservation area or pre-mapped historic
preservation area.
(g) When available, historic photographs, maps, plot plans, and other
historic site documentation.
(2) The Historic Preservation Commission shall review the preservation
plan and provide its recommendations to the board of jurisdiction,
including the Subdivision Committee of the Planning Board, in writing
and through one or more of its members or staff who shall testify at the
hearing on the application and explain the historic preservation
Commission's written report. The advice of the Historic Preservation
Commission shall not be disregarded by the board of jurisdiction except
for reasons stated on the record.
(3) If the application for development involves a historic structure and the
applicant intends to produce testimony either before the Commission or
board of jurisdiction alleging structural unsoundness of any portion of
said structure as a reason for the demolition or alteration of the
structure or any part thereof, the Commission or board of jurisdiction
may employ at the applicant's expense pursuant to section 10B-32 a
structural engineer or other professionals to examine independently
said structure or part thereof and to report their findings to the
§ T10B-379 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-379
BAO:1421
§ T10B-380. Applications for preservation plan approval which are
not part of applications for development. [Ord. No. 2014-44 § 10]
Commission or board of jurisdiction before any final action is taken by
the board of jurisdiction. The applicant shall be required to provide
reasonable access for the structural engineer and other professionals to
conduct an examination of said structure or any part thereof, as well as
to provide to the structural engineer or other professionals any material
that the applicant intends to rely upon in support of its arguments as to
the structural unsoundness of the structure in support of its request to
alter or to demolish same.
(4) For major site plans and subdivisions, an archaeological and historic
sites protocol made up of at least the following shall be included:
(a) An archaeological and historic sites survey giving a history of the
site and identifying all known historic features. Sites identified in
such survey shall be registered by the archaeologist in the New
Jersey State Museum Site Registration Program; and
(b) A proposal as to how archaeological sites and historical sites shall
be preserved, recorded, or a combination of both and who during
construction shall be responsible therefor.
(1) Determination of completeness and significant impact. Every
application for preservation plan approval which is not part of an
application for development shall be deemed complete or incomplete by
the Historic Preservation Officer within 15 days of filing. If the
application is deemed incomplete, the applicant shall be advised in
writing within such period. If it is deemed complete, the application
shall be forwarded forthwith to the Historic Preservation Commission,
unless the Officer determines pursuant to subsection (2) that the
application will not have a significant impact. If the Historic
Preservation Officer fails to act within the required time, the
application shall be deemed complete. The application shall be on such
form as the Historic Preservation Commission adopts. The
documentation must be sufficient to demonstrate how the proposed
improvement will appear in context. The submission shall include at
least the following:
(a) Photographs of the property in question and surrounding
properties
(b) Product specifications, where appropriate.
(c) Elevations and details for propose new construction.
(d) Floor plans.
(e) Delineated historic preservation area or pre-mapped historic
preservation area.
§ T10B-379 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-380
BAO:1422
(f) When available, historic photographs, maps, plot plans, and other
historic site documentation.
(2) Decision by Chair of no significant impact. If the Historic Preservation
Officer or the designee thereof determines that the preservation plan
conforms to the requirements of sections 10B-386 to 10B-388 and
10B-390 and will not have a significant impact, the Officer or designee
shall forward such plan and application to the chair of the Historic
Preservation Commission or the chair's designee on the Commission,
who shall approve such application without further review if the chair
or his or her designee concurs with the Historic Preservation Officer's
determination. However, if the Historic Preservation Officer or chair or
chair's designee finds lack of such conformity or that there is a
significant impact, the Historic Preservation Officer shall prepare a
report on the plan and application and shall forward same to the
Historic Preservation Commission.
(3) Notice of significant impact determination to applicant. The Historic
Preservation Officer shall make the determination required by
subsection (2) of this section and shall communicate such
determination in writing to the applicant within 30 days of receipt of a
complete preservation plan. For purposes of this paragraph, the date of
written communication with the applicant shall be the date on which
the writing, addressed to the applicant, is deposited in the mail or is
hand delivered to the applicant or left at his or her residence or place of
business.
(4) Hearings on applications. The Historic Preservation Commission shall
(a) conduct a hearing on all preservations plans not approved pursuant
to subsection (2) within 45 days of the Historic Preservation Officer's
referral of the application to the Historic Preservation Commission.
(5) Notice of hearings.
(a) Generally. At least 10 days before the date set for hearing, the
secretary of the Historic Preservation Commission shall give the
applicant written notice of the hearing date and shall post in a
prominent place in the Princeton Municipal Building notice of the
application and date, time, and place of the hearing.
(b) Notice by applicant when demolition proposed. In the case of
demolition or moving of a structure, the applicant shall at least 10
days prior to the hearing date notify, by personal service or
ordinary mail, all owners of property located within 200 feet of the
lot that is the subject of the hearing of the application and of the
date, time and place of the hearing with a brief description of the
work for which approval is sought.
(6) Availability of materials for inspection; timing and form of hearing and
decisions. The application and accompanying materials shall be on file
and available for public inspection at the board of jurisdiction at least
10 days before the date set for the hearing. The hearing shall be
§ T10B-380 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-380
BAO:1423
§ T10B-381. Emergency review. [Ord. No. 2014-44 § 10]
If the Historic Preservation Officer determines that an application for which
a preservation plan approval is required and that the application requires
an emergency review and adjudication by the Commission on an
accelerated basis, the Historic Preservation Officer shall contact the
conducted in accordance with the applicable procedures for
applications for development. At the conclusion of the hearing, the
Historic Preservation Commission shall recommend to the Historic
Preservation Officer approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the
application and shall report such decision to the Historic Preservation
Officer, who shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the
application in accordance with the Historic Preservation Commission's
recommendations. The Historic Preservation Officer shall notify the
applicant and any interested party who requested notification of the
decision in writing within five days after the hearing. In no event
shall the Historic Preservation Commission report to the Historic
Preservation Officer be made more than 45 days after the Historic
Preservation Officer's referral of the application to the Historic
Preservation Commission except as such time may be extended with the
consent of the applicant. If the Historic Preservation Commission fails
to act within the prescribed time period, the applicant shall be treated
as having been granted approval without conditions.
(7) Appeals to Planning Board. Any interested party may appeal the
decision of the Historic Preservation Commission to the Planning
Board. Each appeal shall be made by filing a notice thereof with the
Secretary of the Board within 10 days of receiving notice of the decision
from the Historic Preservation Officer. At least 10 days before the date
set for the hearing, the Secretary of the Board shall give the party who
filed the appeal and the applicant if the applicant is not the party who
filed the appeal written notice of the hearing date and shall post in a
prominent place in the Princeton Municipal Building notice of the
appeal and the date, time, and place of the hearing thereon. In the case
of an appeal from a decision involving the demolition or moving of a
structure, the party who filed the appeal shall at least 10 days prior to
the hearing date notify, by personal service or ordinary mail, all owners
of property located within 200 feet of the lot that is the subject of the
appeal and the date, time, and place of the appeal. The hearing shall be
conducted in accordance with the applicable procedures for
applications for development. At such hearing, the party who filed the
appeal and any other interested party may provide such testimony and
exhibits as he or she deems appropriate, and one or more members or
staff of the Historic Preservation Commission shall testify on its report
to the Historic Preservation Officer, which report shall be forwarded to
and be part of the record of the Planning Board, and its reasons
therefor. The Board decision shall be based upon the record before it.
All appeals from decisions of the Board shall be made to a court of
competent jurisdiction.
§ T10B-380 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-381
BAO:1424
chairperson or vice chairperson of the Commission and schedule a special
meeting of the Commission to consider the application. If a special meeting
is scheduled for an emergency review, then the time frame for the review as
provided for in sections 10B-379 and 10B-380, the time frame to authorize
emergency repairs as a part of a stabilization plan under section 10B-389,
and the time frame to consider a demolition permit pursuant to section
10B-390 shall be accelerated in accordance with a schedule to be
established by said chairperson.
§ T10B-382. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2014-44 § 10]
(1) Generally. The Historic Preservation Officer shall be authorized to
enforce any provision of this article. Enforcement shall include, but not
be limited to, the institution of any appropriate action or proceeding to
prevent the unlawful alteration, demolition, moving, or elevating of a
structure or unlawful or new construction requiring approval by the
Historic Preservation Commission as is more fully set forth in
subsection (3) hereof.
(2) Inspections; cease and desist orders. All work performed pursuant to an
approved preservation plan shall conform to the application and
accompanying documents except as otherwise conditioned by the
approval. The Historic Preservation Officer shall from time to time
inspect any work performed to assure such compliance and shall have
the right to enter upon the premises at any reasonable time and upon
reasonable notice for the purpose of making inspections. In the event
work is not being performed in accordance with the approval or that
work for which preservation plan approval is required is being
performed without such approval, the Historic Preservation Officer
shall issue a cease and desist order and serve it forthwith upon the
owner of the property or the person performing such work. Upon
receipt of such order the owner of the property or the person
performing such work shall forthwith cease from performing any
further work. The Historic Preservation Officer's authority to inspect
and to issue cease and desist orders shall terminate upon the issuance
of a certificate of occupancy for the work.
(3) Injunctive relief. In case any work is undertaken in violation of this
section or in case such violation is threatened or in case a property
owner or the person performing such work fails to obey a case and
desist order, the Historic Preservation Officer or the Princeton Council
in addition to the other remedies set forth in this section may institute
an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to restrain correct or
abate such violation or to prevent any illegal act conduct or work. Any
interested party may also bring such an action.
§ T10B-381 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-383
BAO:1425
§ T10B-383. Informal concept review of proposed preservation
plans. [Ord. No. 2014-44 § 10]
Parties who intend to apply for preservation plan approval are strongly
encouraged to secure informal concept review of the proposed work by the
Commission as early in the design of the project as is possible. The purpose
of such review is to minimize design fees for the applicant, to facilitate
discussion between the potential applicant and Commission at a public
meeting about the potential applicant's proposed work, and to secure the
Commission's comments early in the design process. The potential applicant
may secure informal concept review by filing a request with the Historic
Preservation Officer on such forms as shall be provided for this purpose,
together with whatever documentation the potential applicant deems would
best illustrate his or her concept of the proposed work. As part of the
informal concept review, the Commission may determine that the proposed
work is not a covered act and shall advise the applicant that preservation
plan approval is not required. Except when such a determination is made,
the potential applicant shall not be bound by the documentation submitted,
and the Commission shall not be bound by any comments made thereon.
The Commission meeting on the application for informal concept review
shall be held within 60 days after the request for such review is filed.
§ T10B-384. Exemption for previously approved improvements.
[Ord. No. 2014-44 § 10]
No preservation plan need be approved for any improvements for which a
development application was approved or building permit issued prior to
December 7, 1987 in Type 1 Districts and April 23, 1985 in Type 2 Districts.
§ T10B-385. Effective life of approved preservation plan. [Ord. No.
2014-44 § 10]
Work pursuant to an approved preservation plan for which a development
application was not required shall commence within 24 months of the date
of approval thereof unless the time is extended by the approving authority.
§ T10B-383 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-385
BAO:1426
DIVISION 5
Standards Governing Preservation Plans
§ T10B-386. Criteria for preservation plan approval. [Ord. No.
2014-44 § 10]
It is not the intent of this article to discourage contemporary architectural
expression or to encourage new construction that emulates existing
buildings of historic or architectural interest or of a certain period or
architectural style, but to preserve the integrity and authenticity of the
historic preservation districts and to insure the compatibility of new
structures therein.
(1) Criteria applicable to all preservation plan applications. A preservation
plan shall be approved only if the proposed action, as may be modified
by conditions imposed by the reviewing municipal agency:
(a) Is appropriate to and compatible with the existing structures and
landscape of the historic preservation district;
(b) Would not adversely affect the ambiance, character, and
appearance of the historic preservation district and the
relationships among structures and between structures and public
ways in the district;
(c) Would not adversely affect the exterior architectural features and
setting of the structure and its historical and architectural
character; and
(d) Is consistent with the additional criteria of this section.
(2) Additional criteria applicable to new structures and additions and
alterations to structures not considered historic structures. A
preservation plan for the construction of new structures, additions to
existing structures, or alterations of structures not considered historic
structures shall be granted only if the proposed action, as may be
modified by the reviewing municipal agency, is visually compatible with
the structures and places within the district to which it is visually
related, and acts as a backdrop to and does not visually intrude upon
such structures and places.
(a) The height of the proposed structure shall be visually compatible
with structures within the district;
(b) The relationship of the width of the structure to the height of the
front elevation shall be visually compatible with the structures
within the district to which it is visually related;
(c) The relationship of the width of windows to the height of windows
in a structure shall be visually compatible with the structures
within the district to which it is visually related.
§ T10B-386 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-386
BAO:1427
(d) The relationship of solids to voids in the front facade of a structure
shall be visually compatible with the structures within the district
to which it is visually related;
(e) The relationship of the structure to the open space between it and
adjoining structures shall be visually compatible with the
structures and places within the district to which it is visually
related;
(f) The relationship of entrance and porch projections shall be visually
compatible with the structures and places within the district to
which it is visually related;
(g) The relationship of materials, texture, and color of the facade and
roof of a structure shall be visually compatible with the
predominant materials used in the structures within the district to
which it is visually related, and such materials, texture, and color
shall act as a backdrop to and shall not intrude visually upon the
structures and places within the district to which the structure is
related.
(h) The roof shape of a structure shall be visually compatible with
structures within the district to which it is visually related;
(i) Appurtenances such as walls and fencing shall be visually
compatible with the historic walls and fencing within the district to
which they are visually related;
(j) The size of the structure, the mass of a structure in relation to open
spaces, and the windows, door openings, porches, and balconies
shall be visually compatible with the structures and places within
the district to which they are visually related;
(k) A structure shall be visually compatible with structures and places
within the district to which it is visually related in its directional
character, whether this be vertical character, horizontal character,
or non-directional character;
(l) The pattern and variety of plantings shall be visually compatible
with the historic landscape and streetscape within the district to
which they are visually related;
(m) Parking areas shall be screened from the view from the public
right-of-way and from the structures within the district; and
(n) To the extent possible, views from structures or places within the
district shall not be blocked or impeded.
(3) Additional criteria applicable to historic structures. A preservation plan
for the alteration of or additions to historic structures shall be granted
only if the proposed action, as may be modified by the reviewing
municipal agency:
§ T10B-386 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-386
BAO:1428
(a) Preserves or enhances the historical or architectural value and
character of the structure; and
(b) Seeks to restore the structure, or the part covered by the
application, to the known or reasonably conceived appearance
(including design elements, architectural details, and textures) it
had when it was first constructed or when it was remodeled, except
that modifications necessary or beneficial to contemporary living,
including improvements for accessibility, consistent with the
architectural design and character of the structure may be
considered. In determining whether the applicant is proposing
work which will restore the authenticity of the structure, as hereby
required, the following principles, among other appropriate
factors, shall when feasible be followed:
(i) Existing materials, if they are the original materials of the
original structure or remodeling which is being restored,
should be maintained and repaired rather than replaced.
(ii) Architectural details of the original construction or remodeling
which is being restored or altered should be retained. This
includes, but is not limited to, cornices and their brackets,
window trim such as molded lintels, porch elements such as
posts, balustrades, and spindles, shutters, and windows,
particularly the number and size of the individual panes.
(iii) If an element must be replaced rather than repaired, a copy of
the original is preferable to a similar or conjectural piece.
(iv) If a copy of a missing piece cannot be obtained, similar items
are preferable to none at all.
(v) The original siding and roofing material should be maintained
or repaired, and, if replacement is needed, it should be of the
same material and size. If the same material is not available, a
substitute material should be of the same shape and size.
(vi) Storm windows and doors are not prohibited, but should be as
unobtrusive as possible.
(4) Landscape, fencing, and walls criteria.
(a) Plant materials shall not be installed in yards fronting on public
rights-of-way when such materials at maturity would change the
open character of the streetscape or obstruct the view of
structures. Re-creation of historic landscapes is permitted and
encouraged.
(b) Fencing and walls that diminish the open streetscape or obstruct
the view of structures shall not be permitted. Any fencing that is
permitted shall be appropriate for the historic preservation district
and principal structure on the lot.
§ T10B-386 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-386
BAO:1429
(c) No human-made or natural objects of any other kind shall change
the open streetscape or obstruct the view of structures.
(d) The historic and natural character of the landscape shall be
preserved, insofar as practicable and environmentally desirable, by
minimizing tree and soil removal. If development of the site
necessitates the removal of established trees, special attention
shall be given to the planting of replacements or to other landscape
treatment. Any grade changes shall be in keeping with the general
appearance of neighboring developed areas. In historic
preservation districts and historic preservation buffer districts,
landscaping shall be in keeping with the historic character of the
district.
(e) Landscaping, including trees, may be modified to restore the
landscape to its known or reasonably conceived appearance, when
it was originally installed or modified as part of a building
remodeling or to protect the structure.
(5) Sign criteria.
(a) Signs shall comply with the following standards:
(i) Size, placement and illumination shall conform to the
municipal sign requirements.
(ii) Colors of backgrounds and letters shall be appropriate to and
visually compatible with colors used on the building and in the
surrounding context.
(iii) General design, lettering, and scale shall be appropriate to and
visually compatible with the building to which it is affixed and
with neighboring structures.
(iv) Lettering may be flat, raised, or incised.
(v) Placement shall be appropriate to and visually compatible with
architectural elements.
(vi) Logos shall not be more than 150% of the height of the
lettering or 35% of the width of the lettering.
(vii) In the area bounded by John Street on the west, Hulfish Street
on the north, Palmer Square West on the east and Nassau
Street on the south, any sign on the fascia board or its
equivalent above a shop window shall use black or white
letters and the style of lettering on any such sign or on any
awning or canopy shall be restricted to the particular variant of
Caslon old style italic upper case as historically used in this
block of Palmer Square, subject to minor variations approved
by the municipal agency.
§ T10B-386 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-386
BAO:1430
§ T10B-387. Preservation Areas. [Ord. No. 2014-44 § 10]
Development applications shall:
(b) Upon a finding that the style of lettering used on any existing sign
on a property in the historic preservation district is of unique
historic or architectural significance, consistent with the purposes
of historic preservation set forth in section 10B-373 the reviewing
municipal agency may require preservation of such style lettering
in any proposed new or modified sign.
(6) Additional criteria for site plan applications and new dwelling units in
historic preservation buffer zoning districts. Any improvement in a
historic preservation buffer zoning district for which an application for
development must be approved or which otherwise involves the
construction of new dwelling units shall comply with the following.
(a) As to the location and orientation of dwelling units and other
improvements:
(i) Section 10B-387(1)(a) and (b) shall apply;
(ii) Such improvements shall.
(aa) Respect the historic pattern of use of the historic property;
(bb) Respect the interrelationship of historic features of the
property;
(cc) Provide for an adequate visual buffer for the principal
structure or structures and, where appropriate, for an
adequate visual buffer for the other historic features of the
site;
(dd) As to the design of dwelling units, outbuildings or
nonresidential construction, sections 10B-387(1)(a) and
(b) and (2) shall apply;
(ee) Landscaping shall be sufficient to provide an adequate
visual screen between the new construction and the
historic preservation district with which the historic
preservation buffer district is contiguous.
(7) Sustainability. All improvements shall address sustainability best
practices and shall address the principles set forth in the Green
Practices Checklist retained on file with the Office of Planning. The
Commission shall formulate sustainability guidelines that include
sustainability elements for use by property owners required to secure
preservation plan approval.
(a) Preservation plans for properties located in historic preservation
zoning districts that include a "Preservation Area" as delineated on the
"Map of Preservation Areas" shall be designed so that the preservation
§ T10B-386 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-387
BAO:1431
area is not disturbed (except for minimal provision for essential utility
corridors).
(b) Preservation plans for properties located in historic preservation
districts that do not include preservation areas shall establish a
preservation area in which the land is not disturbed (except for minimal
provision for essential utility corridors). The preservation area shall be
delineated so that improvements respect the historic pattern of use of
the historic property; respect the interrelationship of historic features
of the property; and provide for an adequate visual buffer for the
principal structure or structures and, where appropriate, for an
adequate visual buffer for the other historic features of the site by use
of open areas and appropriate plantings and, in implementation of
these standards, create protection areas around the historic features on
the property. Proposed preservation areas shall be specified in any
approved development application. The area shall include the principal
structure and all of the other historic features on the property except
when the distance of an historic feature from the principal structure
and other features makes it impracticable to be included in the
proposed preservation area. The area shall also be of a size and
configuration sufficient to maintain the historic setting and historic
character of the property. When it is not feasible to include an historic
feature in the preservation area which includes the principal structure,
such historic feature shall be included in a separate historic
preservation area, which shall also include the intrinsic links between
such feature and the other historic features on the site. Such links shall
be visually preserved in order to maintain the sense of the historic
setting.
(c) Preservation areas shown on the approved plans shall be included in
one or more lots that do not include any proposed improvements other
than those accessory to the principal use or uses in the preservation
areas. Such lots shall:
(i) Not be further subdivided so as to create additional building lots
and be deed restricted in a manner acceptable to the attorney of
the board of jurisdiction so as to prohibit further development on
vacant land within such areas except for uses accessory to the
principal uses within the areas. The board of jurisdiction may
require such additional deed restrictions as it deems desirable to
protect the historic features of the property. All development
applications shall show all proposed improvements within the
historic preservation district, which shall be developed in
accordance with a comprehensive plan, except that, in the case of
historic preservation districts containing tracts in different
ownership, tracts therein under common ownership shall be
developed in accordance with a comprehensive plan.
§ T10B-387 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-388
BAO:1432
§ T10B-388. Archaeological and historic sites protocol. [Ord. No.
2014-44 § 10]
The board of jurisdiction may approve a major site plan or subdivision only
if the plan as proposed or conditioned adequately specifies how historic
sites, structures, and features and archaeological sites on the parcel are
to be treated and if the plan is appropriate given the nature of such
sites, structures, or features. The applicant shall monitor construction to
assure that all provisions of the approved plan as to the identification,
preservation, or removal of historic features and historic or archaeological
artifacts are complied with and shall appoint an individual in the field with
the responsibility therefor and retain a person with the necessary expertise
in connection therewith. In the case of accidental finds, the applicant shall
report the same forthwith to the Historic Preservation Officer and cease all
construction activity at that location for two working days (Monday through
Friday excluding holidays). The Commission or, in the absence of a quorum,
the chair or, in the chair's absence, the vice-chair, may within such time
order that the artifacts discovered be documented and removed under the
supervision of the expert identified in the approval and at the expense of
the applicant. In the case of extraordinary finds, the Council, Commission,
chair, or vice-chair may order that the work cease and that the plans be
modified to reflect the find. Such order shall remain in effect only until
the next meeting of Princeton Council unless the Princeton Council at such
meeting continues the order, with or without modifications.
§ T10B-389. Stabilization plans. [Ord. No. 2014-44 § 10]
(a) The board of jurisdiction when approving a development application in
an historic preservation district or the Historic Preservation
Commission when approving a preservation plan may require a
stabilization plan that satisfies the following when the record before the
board or the Commission demonstrates that the stability or protection
of the historic structure is at risk:
(i) Any historic structure on the property be made secure against theft
and vandalism;
(ii) No inflammable materials be stored therein except in a manner
approved by the fire marshal;
(iii) Emergency repairs sufficient to protect against deterioration of the
structure be undertaken and proof of inspection for insect and
vermin infestations and of appropriate remedial work be
submitted;
(iv) The structure be made structurally sound and its basic electrical,
plumbing, and heating systems be in adequate working order and
free of hazards to ensure structural and architectural integrity or
the winterization of the historic structure so as to protect against
damage be done.
§ T10B-388 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-389
BAO:1433
§ T10B-390. Demolition and moving of structures. [Ord. No.
2014-44 § 10]
(v) Existing landscaping be documented by photographs and
preserved when appropriate and further landscaping, as installed,
shall be historically appropriate.
(b) The board of jurisdiction when approving a development application in
an historic preservation zoning district or the Historic Preservation
Commission when approving a preservation plan may, when
circumstances warrant for historic structures, require that the
following additional requirements be included in the stabilization plan.
Such requirements may be imposed only if the record before the board
or the Commission demonstrates that the matters set forth below
should be addressed.
(i) Interior features of historic significance such as moldings, fireplace
mantels, doors, and fixtures not be removed except for
preservation purposes and that any such features that are removed
be put back in place;
(ii) The interior not be damaged and any damage be repaired;
(iii) The exterior of the structure be restored in a manner consistent
with the criteria set forth in section 10B-386.
The board of jurisdiction may condition the filing of a subdivision
plat upon the above obligations being met. The board of jurisdiction
or Commission may establish a phasing plan setting forth when
any repair work shall be completed and when the other obligations
set forth herein are to be met and may require that the repair
and restoration work be subject to the approval of the Historic
Preservation Officer.
(1) Demolition or moving of a structure in an historic preservation zoning
district shall be approved only if the structure cannot be put to a
reasonable use and its preservation will impose a financial hardship on
the applicant. Structures may be moved only within Princeton unless
doing so is not feasible. The structure shall be moved only to an
appropriate setting. Any demolition or moving, if approved, shall be
undertaken only upon receipt of a demolition or moving permit which
shall be issued by the Historic Preservation Officer and by the
construction code official after:
(a) Conclusion of all appeals opposing the approval or expiration of the
time provided for the filing of such appeals without an appeal being
filed; and
(b) The applicant has demonstrated compliance with the procedures
set forth herein. For the entire period beginning with the filing of a
completed application for approval of demolition or moving and
ending with the issuance of a demolition or moving permit, or with
§ T10B-389 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-390
BAO:1434
§ T10B-391. Elevation of structures. [Ord. No. 2014-44 § 10]
denial of the application, notice of the proposed demolition or
moving shall be posted on the lot or structure in a location making
it clearly readable from the street. In addition, the applicant shall
publish notice in an official newspaper of the municipality as
follows:
(i) Within 10 days of the filing of an application for approval of
demolition or moving and once a week for the next three weeks
thereafter.
(ii) Unless covered by the above publications, no less than 10 nor
more than 15 days prior to the meeting of the Historic
Preservation Commission on which the application has been
placed on its agenda for action.
(iii) The applicant shall at least 10 days prior to the hearing date
notify, by personal service or ordinary mail, all owners of
property located within 200 feet of the lot that is the subject of
the hearing of the date, time and place of the hearing with a
brief description of the work for which approval is sought. The
accompanying materials shall be on file and available for
public inspection at least 10 days before the date set for the
hearing.
(1) A structure in a historic preservation zoning district may be elevated
only if necessary to prevent significant damage to the structure caused
by flooding or unstable soil conditions and only to the extent necessary
to protect it from further significant damage. The elevation shall be
undertaken in a manner that maximizes to the extent practicable a
harmonious relationship with the other structures and features in the
district.
(2) If a structure must be elevated to such an extent that it is substantially
out of character with the historic preservation district within which it is
located and will have a substantial negative impact upon the district,
the Historic Preservation Commission may deny a preservation plan
application seeking approval for elevating the structure and
recommend that the structure instead be moved.
§ T10B-390 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-391
BAO:1435

DIVISION 6
Recommendations by Members of Public for Historic Sites,
Structures, Features, Preservation Districts, and Buffer Districts;
Criteria for Designating Historic Sites, Structures, and Features
and Historic Preservation Districts or Buffer Districts
§ T10B-392. Procedures for recommending designation of a historic
site, structure, or feature, historic preservation district, or historic
preservation buffer district. [Ord. No. 2014-44 § 10]
The purpose of the historic designation is to preserve the unique historic
character of Princeton for the enjoyment of members of the public.
Therefore, wherever possible, boundaries of historic preservation districts
will be configured to provide views of the major historic features of the
district from the public way. The land within a historic preservation district
or historic preservation buffer district need not be contiguous.
(1) Procedures for designation. The party proposing a property for
designation under this section shall prepare and submit to the Historic
Preservation Commission a nomination report for each proposed
structure, site, feature, or historic preservation district or historic
preservation buffer district. The report shall include the following:
(a) Photographs of the building or buildings,
(b) The tax lot and block number of the property or properties as
designated on the official tax map of the municipality.
(c) A site plan of the property delineating the proposed district.
(d) The present zoning of the proposed district.
(e) A recommendation of whether the proposed districts should be
designated Type 1 or 2 or other type enacted subsequent to the
adoption of this ordinance.
(f) Nomination report and physical description and statement
addressing the following:
(i) The significance in American history, architecture,
archaeology, culture, and engineering that is present in the
proposed district, site, feature, or structure and objects within
them that possess integrity of design, setting, materials,
workmanship, and association and that:
[a] Are associated with events that have made a significant
contribution to the broad patterns of our past, or
[b] Are associated with the lives of persons significant in our
past, or
[c] Embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or
method of construction or that represent the work of a
§ T10B-392 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-392
BAO:1437
master or that possess high artistic values or that
represent a significant and distinguishable entity whose
components may lack individual distinction, or
[d] Have yielded or may be likely to yield information
important in prehistory or history.
(2) For districts, sites, structures, or features already listed on the State
and National Registers of Historic Places, the Statement of Significance
on the National Register Inventory-Nomination Form shall be
considered in addition to such other documentation as is required. A
New Jersey State Historic Preservation Office declaration of eligibility
for the State and National Register shall also be considered. While it
contains basic information, such declaration must, however, be
supplemental by a more thorough evaluation of the documentary
evidence. If the application for such a district, site, structure, or feature
is denied, the Commission shall indicate on the record in a manner it
deems appropriate why such district, site, structure, or feature is not
recommended to be designated.
(3) When the Historic Preservation Commission chooses for study a
potential historic preservation district, historic buffer district, historic
structure, historic feature, or historic site either as reflected in the
Princeton Master Plan or as otherwise recommended for study, it shall
mail a letter by regular mail to the property owners in the area that is
being studied or, in the case of a proposed historic structure or site, the
owners thereof and all property owners within 200 feet of the potential
historic preservation district or buffer district or the lot on which the
historic site or structure is located. The letter shall outline the following
information:
(a) The Commission is researching the area for historic data, the land
is being considered for such designation, and the reasons thereof.
(b) An architectural survey will be performed by the Commission or a
Commission consultant who may make an on-site reconnaissance
study of the area.
(c) A request to the property owner soliciting information about any
historical facts pertaining to the proposed district or the names and
addresses of any individuals who may have information concerning
the historical background of the proposed district.
(d) Notice to the owner of record of the ordinance regulations
governing such designation and of the rights of the owner of record
to contest such designation under the provisions of this division.
(4) The Commission or its consultant will thereafter perform a survey of the
proposed historic preservation district. The boundaries of the district
will be delineated. After the survey is completed, the Commission shall
provide a reasonable opportunity for public comment on the
§ T10B-392 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-392
BAO:1438
§ T10B-393. Informal concept review of proposed historic
preservation districts, historic preservation buffer districts, and
historic sites, structures, and features. [Ord. No. 2014-44 § 10]
Parties who intend to apply for a new historic preservation district or
buffer district designation or a designation of an historic site, structure or
feature are strongly encouraged to secure informal concept review of the
proposal by the Commission. The purpose of such review is to facilitate
discussion between the potential applicant and Commission at a public
meeting and secure the Commission's comments with respect thereto. The
Commission's proposed recommendation for the designation of an
historic preservation district. The Commission shall:
(a) Cause to be published a notice in a newspaper of general
circulation within the municipality setting forth the date, time, and
place of a public hearing on the Commission's proposed
recommendations for an historic preservation district, buffer
district, site, or structure. Said publication shall take place at least
10 days prior to the Commission's public hearing on the proposed
recommendation to same. A copy of the nomination report shall
also be made available for public inspection in the office of the
Princeton clerk at least 10 days prior to the hearing.
(b) Send via regular mail to each owner of property within the
proposed district as set forth on a certified owners' list prepared by
the municipality a letter stating:
(i) The date, time and location of the hearing concerning the
proposed designation of the site, structure, or district; and
At said public hearing, the Commission shall review the
nomination report and accompanying documents and receive
comments from all interested parties on the proposed
nomination for designation. Following the conclusion of said
public hearing, the Commission shall deliberate and shall, after
review of the proposed site, structure, feature, or district,
prepare a concise report, including a list and map of its
recommendations with respect to the sites or districts to be
nominated and make its final recommendations to the Planning
Board for designation of sites, structures, and features to be
formally listed as such in the Master Plan and to Princeton
Council as to historic preservation districts and historic
preservation buffer districts. The Princeton Council shall hold
a hearing before acting on the designation of an historic site
or structure, historic preservation district, or historic buffer
district. Notice of such hearing shall be given by the municipal
clerk as per N.J.S.A. 40:55D-62.1. The Planning Board shall
hold a meeting on any recommended sites, structures, and
features and, if it thereafter deems advisable, hold a noticed
Master Plan hearing thereon.
§ T10B-392 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-393
BAO:1439
potential applicant may secure informal concept review by filing a request
with the Historic Preservation Officer on such forms as shall be provided for
this purpose, together with whatever documentation the potential applicant
deems would best demonstrate why a district or structure, site, or feature
should be designated. The potential applicant shall not be bound by the
documentation submitted, and the Commission shall not be bound by any
comments made thereon. The Commission meeting on the application for
informal concept review shall be held within 60 days after the request for
such review is filed.
§ T10B-394. Criteria for designating historic sites, structures, and
features and historic preservation districts or buffer districts. [Ord.
No. 2014-44 § 10]
(1) The Historic Preservation Commission may make recommendations to
the Planning Board and Princeton Council concerning the designation
of individual historic sites, structures, features, historic preservation
districts, and historic preservation buffer districts. Such
recommendation shall be based upon the following:
(a) The designated site, structure, feature or district must be
significant on the national, state, or local level in terms of history,
architecture, archaeology, culture, or engineering. It must possess
integrity of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, and
association (i.e., a high degree of character-defining features) from
the period during which it earned its significance. Recommended
districts, sites, structures, or features must be:
A. Associated with events that have made a significant
contribution to the broad patterns of the cultural, political,
economic, architectural, or social history of the locality, region,
state, or nation; or
B. Associated with the lives of persons significant to our past; or
C. Embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or
method of construction, represent the work of a master,
possess high artistic values, or represent a significant and
distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual
distinction; or
D. Have yielded or may be likely to yield information important in
prehistory or history.
(2) The following factors shall also be considered when delineating historic
preservation district boundaries:
(a) The relationship of the physical aspects of the site, structure,
features, or district to the significance for which it was designated.
This should include:
(i) The extent of the resource at the time it achieved significance.
§ T10B-393 PRINCETON CODE § T10B-394
BAO:1440
(ii) The amount of the resource surviving in relatively unaltered
condition.
(iii) The amount of the resource needed to convey a sense of the
past.
(b) Visual qualities of the site, structure, or area, including the
surroundings of the property or district and the view from it.
(c) Natural boundaries and features such as rivers or other bodies of
water, changes in contour, and distinctive changes in soils or
vegetation.
(d) Human-made boundaries, such as highways, walls and fences, tree
lines, and hedgerows.
(e) Political divisions and property lines.
(f) Difference in land use.
(g) Multiple resources and thematic combinations.
(3) In recommending the designation of historic preservation districts and
their boundaries, property achieving significance within the past 50
years may be designated if it is of exceptional importance.
(4) In recommending the establishment of a historic buffer district, the
Commission shall include intervening or surrounding properties
significantly affected by the quality and character of existing or
potential historic site or sites. An historic preservation buffer district
serves as a buffer zone to historic preservation districts. By virtue of
their location, historic preservation buffer districts serve as gateway for
transitions to existing historic preservation districts and changes to its
streetscape, landscape, or buildings visually affect the historic
preservation district to which it connects. Additionally, current property
boundaries often do not encompass land historically related to
designated sites. As a consequence, development on adjacent
properties could have an adverse impact on the setting of historic sites
and buildings.
§ T10B-394 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-394
BAO:1441

DIVISION 7
Overlay District Designation of Historic Preservation Districts and
Historic Preservation Buffer Districts
§ T10B-395. Historic preservation districts and historic
preservation buffer districts as overlay districts. [Ord. No. 2014-44
§ 10]
The historic preservation districts and the historic preservation buffer
districts shall be overlay districts, and for any land located within them the
regulations that pertain to them shall be in addition to the regulations of the
zoning district or districts within which such land is located.
§ T10B-395 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10B-395
BAO:1443
Chapter T10C
LANDSCAPING — REGISTRATION
Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history: Ordinance No. 2005-13
§ T10C-1. Registration requirement for landscapers for hire;
purpose. [Ord. No. 2014-21]
No person shall landscape or engage in any landscaping on any public or
private property within the municipality for hire without first registering
with the department of infrastructure and operations, on forms to be
supplied by said department.
The purpose of this chapter requiring landscaper registration is to ensure
that persons defined in section 10C-2 are cognizant of Princeton's
regulations concerning the leaf, branch and log collection program, Federal
and New Jersey State wage and hour laws and the New Jersey State
workers' compensation laws.
Nothing in this chapter shall relieve any owner, lessee or tenant of his or her
responsibility to comply with the requirements of Princeton's leaf, branch
and log collection program set forth elsewhere in this Code.
§ T10C-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter the following words and phrases shall have the
following meaning:
FOR HIRE — Shall mean to demand and/or accept payment or
compensation for completion of services.
HEDGES, TREES AND SHRUBS — Shall have the same meaning as may be
defined in chapter 22 of this Code, "Trees and Shrubs."
LANDSCAPE AND LANDSCAPING — Shall mean to be in the business,
occupation or trade of adorning or improving any property or portion of
property by trimming or cutting grass or shrubs; by planting, installing or
removing leaves, branches, logs, grass, flowers, mulch, hedges or shrubs;
or by planting or installing trees. As used in this chapter, landscape and
landscaping shall also refer to solicitation of the above-referenced services.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual or entity whose existence is
recognized by law, including, but not limited to, any partnership,
corporation (for-profit, nonprofit, or municipal and its agencies), firm,
association, or any combination of the foregoing.
WAGE THEFT — Shall mean having been found guilty, liable or responsible
in any judicial or administrative proceeding of committing a violation of the
Federal Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938, 29 U.S.C.A. § 201 et seq., the
New Jersey Wage and Hour Law, N.J.S.A. 34:11-56a. et seq., the New Jersey
State Wage Payment Law, N.J.S.A. 34:11-4.1 et seq. or N.J.S.A. 2C:40A-2
(violation of contract to pay employees).
§ T10B-395 PRINCETON CODE § T10C-3
BAO:1444
§ T10C-3. Applications for registration; registration fee; suspension
or revocation of registration; disclaimer. [Ord. No. 2014-21]
(a) An application for registration shall be made upon forms provided by
Princeton and shall be filed with the director of infrastructure and
operations or his designee. Approved applications for registration shall
be public records.
(b) At the time of registration, applicants shall acknowledge that they have
received (or been offered, at no cost) a copy of the provisions of the
municipality's ordinance regulating its leaf, branch and log collection
program. In addition, applicants shall acknowledge that they have
received (or been offered, at no cost) a copy of the Federal and New
Jersey State wage and hour laws and New Jersey State workers'
compensation insurance laws.
(c) Every registration shall be issued and renewed on an annual basis,
effective March 1 of each year, upon payment of an annual fee to the
municipality in the amount of $10.
(d) No registration shall be required of any owner, lessee or tenant of real
property who shall personally perform activities otherwise requiring a
registration; except that all such work must otherwise comply with the
municipality's ordinance.
(e) The mayor and council may, upon recommendation of the director of
infrastructure and operations, or his designee, after notice and an
opportunity for a hearing, suspend or revoke any registration for
violation of law, including but not limited to wage theft laws, or related
Princeton ordinances, or for good cause, which is shown to be
prejudicial to the public health, safety or welfare. In addition, the
director of infrastructure and operations or his designee may
temporarily suspend any registration for a period not to exceed one
week or until the mayor and council can be convened to consider said
suspension, when:
(1) The director of infrastructure and operations, or his designee, has
reasonable cause or belief that an emergency affecting the public
health, safety or welfare so requires; or
(2) The director of infrastructure and operations, or his designee,
receives sufficient information to establish that the registrant has
committed wage theft which has not been cured by the registrant
by compliance with the order or decision of the governmental
entity determining the same.
(f) Princeton makes no guarantee or representation regarding the fitness,
knowledge or qualification of any person that is registered by Princeton
to engage in landscaping for hire.
§ T10C-3 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T10C-4
BAO:1445
§ T10C-4. Off-site disposal and composting encouraged. [Ord. No.
2014-21]
Owners, lessees and tenants, and their registered landscapers, are
encouraged, but not required, to either compost leaves, branches and logs
themselves on their own property, such as in wooded areas if practicable,
or bring leaves, branches and logs to the Lawrence Township Ecological
Facility ("Facility"), or such other ecological facility that may be designated
by the municipality for disposal. At the time of taking branches and logs
to the Facility for disposal, such persons shall provide their name and
registration number, along with the property owner, lessee or tenant's
name, address and signature, to the Facility on forms for such purpose
available in the office of the director of infrastructure and operations, or
from his designee.
§ T10C-5. Exemption of home improvement contractors; additional
exemptions. [Ord. No. 2014-21]
§ T10C-6. Violations; penalties. [Ord. No. 2014-21]
For each violation of this chapter, the violator shall be subject to such fines
and other penalties as provided in section 1-6 of this Code, entitled "General
penalty; continuing violations; repeat violations; other penalties." Repeat
offenders shall be subject to additional fines and other penalties as provided
in section 1-6 of this Code.
Chapter T11
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
For state law as to motor vehicles and traffic generally, see N.J.S.A.,
§ 39:1-1 et seq. As to powers of the Municipality in regard to
regulation of motor vehicles and traffic, see N.J.S.A., § 39:4-197 et
seq.
(a) Home improvement contractors registered pursuant to N.J.A.C.
13:45A-17.1 et seq. on or after December 31, 2005 shall not be required
to register with the municipality as set forth in this chapter.
(b) Persons who are specifically exempt from the registration requirements
of N.J.A.C. 13:45A-17.1 et seq. under N.J.A.C. 13:45A-17.4 on or after
December 31, 2005 shall not be required to register with the
municipality as set forth in this chapter.
§ T10C-4 PRINCETON CODE § T10C-6
BAO:1446
ARTICLE I
In General
§ T11-1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 118, art. 1, § 1.]
The terms used in this chapter shall have the meanings respectively
ascribed to them in subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New
Jersey.
§ T11-2. Speed limits.47 [Ord. No. 362, § 1; Ord. No. 410, § 1; Ord.
No. 486, § 1; Ord. No. 487, § 1; Ord. No. 595, § 1; Ord. No. 635, § 1;
Ord. No. 678, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 693, § 1; Ord. No. 701, §§ 1, 2; Ord.
No. 722, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 893, §§ 1, 2, 3; Ord. No. 879, §§ 1, 2, 3;
Ord. No. 865, §§ 2, 3; Ord. No. 876, §§ 1, 2, 3; Ord. No. 1022, § 1;
Ord. No. 83-21, § 1; Ord. No. 85-15, §§ 1 — 5; Ord. No. 86-12, § 1;
Ord. No. 87-24, §§ 1 — 4; Ord. No. 88-33, § 1; Ord. No. 88-40, §§ 1 —
3; Ord. No. 93-24, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 95-17, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 98-25,
§ 1; Ord. No. 99-1, § 1; Ord. No. 99-13, § 2; Ord. No. 99-14, § 2; Ord.
No. 99-20, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 2000-15, §§ 1,2; Ord. No. 2000-16, §§ 1,
2; Ord. No. 2000-17, § 1; Ord. No. 2001-16, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No.
2001-30, § 1; Ord. No. 2002-2, § 2; Ord. No. 2005-38, § 1; Ord. No.
2007-6, § 1; Ord. No. 2007-8, §§ 1 — 4; Ord. No. 2008-29, § 1; Ord.
No. 2009-06, § 1; Ord. No. 2009-11, §§ 1 — 3; Ord. No. 2009-18, §§ 3,
4; Ord. No. 2009-23, § 1; Ord. No. 2011-14, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No.
2017-22; Ord. No. 2017-23; Ord. No. 2018-16]
The following speed limits are hereby established for traffic along the
streets or parts of streets enumerated in this section, and regulatory and
warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect the designated
speed limits as authorized by the department of transportation:
(a) Thirty-five miles per hour:
ALEXANDER STREET, both directions, entire length, in accordance
with letter and authorization dated November 12, 1971, from the
department of transportation.
BUNN DRIVE, both directions, entire length between Poor Farm Road
and Harrison Street North, except when passing through the
Princeton Charter School area as signed, motorists shall drive at 25
miles per hour in said school zone during recess, when children can
clearly be seen or while children are going to or leaving school during
opening or closing hours.
CHERRY HILL ROAD, both directions, from a point 565 feet north of
the center of Foulet Drive to Rocky Hill-Mount Rose Road. (signed
Cherry Valley Road)
47.Editor's Note: For state law authorizing township to alter speed limits, see N.J.S.A.,
§ 39:4-197. See also, N.J.S.A., § 39:4-98.
§ T11-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T11-2
BAO:1447
CHERRY VALLEY ROAD, eastbound, from Province Line Road to
Route U.S. 206, except 25 miles per hour when passing through the
Princeton Montessori School zone during recess, when the presence
of children is clearly visible from the roadway, or when the children
are going to or leaving school during opening or closing hours.
GREAT ROAD, both directions, from the northernmost intersection
with Great Road East to the Mercer County-Somerset County line.
HERRONTOWN ROAD, both directions, between Poor Farm Road and
River Road.
HUTCHINSON DRIVE, [Deleted by Ord. No. 2017-22]
MERCER STREET, both directions, from Lovers Lane - Olden Lane
intersection to the southern end of Mercer County Bridge No. 330.3.
[Ord. No. 2018-16]
MOUNT LUCAS ROAD, both directions, between Ewing Street and
the Princeton Township and Montgomery Township line.
MOUNT LUCAS ROAD, both directions, from Ewing Street to Poor
Farm Road.
PRETTY BROOK ROAD, both directions, from Province Line Road, to
the Great Road.
SNOWDEN LANE, both directions, between Overbrook Drive and
Herrontown Road.
STUART ROAD, both directions, between the Great Road East and
Cherry Hill Road, except for 25 mile per hour school zone during
recess when children can clearly be seen or while children are going
to or leaving school during opening or closing hours.
TERHUNE ROAD — VAN DYKE ROAD, either direction between
Meadowbrook Drive and Snowden Lane.
TERHUNE ROAD — VAN DYKE ROAD, both directions, between
Harrison Street and Snowden Lane.
Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained as
required by the director of motor vehicles and as specified in the
aforementioned letters.
(b) Forty miles per hour:
CHERRY HILL ROAD, both directions, from Mount Lucas Road to a
point 565 feet north of the center of Foulet Drive.
GREAT ROAD, both directions, between Mountain Avenue and the
southern-most intersection with Great Road East, except as otherwise
provided with respect to the Princeton Day School zone.
GREAT ROAD EAST, both directions, entire length.
PROVINCE LINE ROAD, either direction, from County Road No. 533
at Port Mercer to County Road No. 4, Rosedale Road.
§ T11-2 PRINCETON CODE § T11-2
BAO:1448
QUAKER ROAD, both directions, between the Princeton Pike and the
Princeton Township/Lawrence Township line, except when passing
through the Princeton Friends School area as signed, vehicles shall
proceed at 25 miles per hour within said school zone, during recess,
when children can clearly be seen or while children are going to or
leaving school during opening or closing hours.
(c) Forty-five miles per hour:
PRINCETON PIKE-MERCER STREET (all Route 583, both directions)
except when passing through the Princeton Friends School zone as
signed, vehicles shall proceed at 25 miles per hour during recess,
when children can clearly be seen or while children are going to or
leaving school during opening or closing hours.
PRINCETON PIKE - Mercer Road, both directions, from the southern
end of Mercer County Bridge No. 330.3 to the Princeton and
Township of Lawrence line.
(d) Fifty miles per hour:
[Deleted by Ordinance No. 876, § 3.]
(e) Twenty-five miles per hour:
ABERNATHY DRIVE, both directions, entire length.
ADAMS DRIVE, both directions, entire length.
ALL SAINTS ROAD, both directions, entire length.
ARRETON ROAD, both directions, entire length.
AUDUBON LANE, both directions, entire length.
AUTUMN HILL LANE, both directions, entire length.
AUTUMN HILL ROAD, both directions, entire length.
BAKER COURT, both directions, entire length.
BALCORT DRIVE, both directions, entire length.
BALSAM LANE, both directions, entire length.
BEECH HILL CIRCLE, both directions, entire length.
BILLIE ELLIS LANE, both directions, entire length.
BOGART COURT, both directions, entire length.
BOUVANT DRIVE, both directions, entire length.
BRAEBURN DRIVE, both directions, entire length.
BROOKSTONE DRIVE, both directions, entire length.
BURR DRIVE, both directions, entire length.
CAMPBELL WOODS WAY, both directions, entire length.
CARNEGIE DRIVE, both directions, entire length.
CASTLE HOWARD COURT, both directions, entire length.
§ T11-2 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T11-2
BAO:1449
CEDAR LANE, both directions from Sycamore Road and the Princeton
Boro Line.
CHRISTOPHER DRIVE, both directions, entire length.
CLOVER LANE, both directions, entire length.
CONCORD LANE, both directions, entire length.
CONSTITUTION DRIVE, both directions, entire length.
CRADLEROCK ROAD, both directions, entire length.
CRESTVIEW DRIVE, both directions, entire length.
CROOKED TREE LANE, both directions, entire length.
DAVIES DRIVE, both directions, entire length.
DERWENT DRIVE, both directions, entire length.
DOGWOOD HILL, both directions, entire length.
DOGWOOD LANE, both directions, entire length.
DRAKES CORNER ROAD, both directions, entire length.
EDGERSTOUNE ROAD, both directions, entire length.
ETTL CIRCLE, both directions, entire length.
EVERGREEN CIRCLE, both directions, entire length.
EWING STREET, both directions, in the Princeton Charter School
zone during recess or while children are going to or leaving school,
during opening and closing hours.
FACULTY ROAD, both directions, between Alexander Street and
Washington Road.
FAIRWAY DRIVE, both directions, entire length.
FINLEY ROAD, both directions, entire length.
FITCH WAY, both directions, entire length.
FRANKLIN AVENUE, both directions, entire length.
FREDERICK COURT, both directions, entire length.
GENERAL JOHNSON ROAD, both directions, entire length.
GEORGE DRIVE, both directions, entire length.
GRASMERE WAY, both directions, entire length.
GREAT ROAD, both directions, between Rosedale Road (CR 604) and
Mountain Avenue. [Ord. No. 2017-23]
GREENHOUSE COURT, both directions, entire length.
GREENHOUSE DRIVE, both directions, entire length.
GREENWAY TERRACE, both directions, entire length.
GRIGGS DRIVE, both directions, entire length.
GROVER AVENUE, both directions, entire length.
GUYOT AVENUE, both directions, entire length.
§ T11-2 PRINCETON CODE § T11-2
BAO:1450
HARDY DRIVE, both directions, entire length.
HARTLEY AVENUE, both directions, entire length.
HEATHER LANE, both directions, entire length.
HEMLOCK CIRCLE, both directions, entire length.
HOWE CIRCLE, both directions, entire length.
HUN ROAD, both directions, entire length.
HUNT DRIVE, both directions, entire length.
INDEPENDENCE DRIVE, both directions, entire length.
JOURNEYS END LANE, both directions, entire length.
KATIE'S POND ROAD, both directions, entire length.
KNOLL DRIVE, both directions, entire length.
LAKE DRIVE, both directions, entire length.
LAMBERT DRIVE EAST, both directions, entire length.
LAMBERT DRIVE WEST, both directions, entire length.
LINDEN LANE, both directions, entire length.
LITTLE BROOK DRIVE, both directions, entire length.
LONGVIEW DRIVE, both directions, entire length.
MACLEAN CIRCLE, both directions, entire length.
MAGNOLIA LANE, both directions, entire length.
MAIDENHEAD ROAD, both directions, entire length.
MASON DRIVE, both directions, entire length.
MCCOMB ROAD, both directions, entire length.
MCCOSH CIRCLE, both directions, entire length.
MEETING HOUSE COURT, both directions, entire length.
MERCER STREET, both directions, from New Jersey Route 27
(Nassau Street) to Lovers Lane - Olden Lane intersection
MONTADALE CIRCLE, both directions, entire length.
MONTADALE DRIVE, both directions, entire length.
MOUNTAIN AVENUE, both directions, entire length.
MOUNT LUCAS ROAD, both directions, between Cherry Hill Road
and Valley Road.
NORTH ROAD, both directions, entire length.
OLD GREAT ROAD, both directions, entire length.
OLDEN LANE, both directions, entire length.
PARDEE CIRCLE, both directions, entire length.
PARKSIDE DRIVE, both directions, entire length.
PETTIT PLACE, both directions, entire length.
§ T11-2 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T11-2
BAO:1451
PHEASANT HILL ROAD, both directions, entire length.
PHILIP DRIVE, both directions, entire length.
POOR FARM ROAD, both directions, entire length, between Mt. Lucas
Road and Bunn Drive.
PRINCE WILLIAM COURT, both directions, entire length.
PROSPECT AVENUE, both directions, entire length.
PROSPECT AVENUE EXT., both directions, entire length.
PURITAN COURT, both directions, entire length.
QUAKER ROAD, both directions, between U.S. Route 206 and the
Princeton Pike.
RANDALL ROAD, both directions, entire length.
RANDOM ROAD, both directions, entire length.
REDDING CIRCLE, both directions, entire length.
RED HILL ROAD EAST, both directions, entire length.
RIDGEVIEW CIRCLE, both directions, entire length.
RIVERSIDE DRIVE EAST, both directions, entire length.
RIVERSIDE DRIVE WEST, both directions, entire length.
ROLLING MEAD-LITTLE BROOK ROAD, both directions, entire
length.
ROPER ROAD, both directions, entire length.
ROSS STEVENSON CIRCLE, both directions, entire length.
RUNNING CEDAR ROAD, both directions, entire length.
RUSSELL ROAD, both directions, entire length.
SNOWDEN LANE, both directions between Route 27 and Overbrook
Drive.
SOUTHERN WAY, both directions, entire length.
STETSON WAY, both directions, entire length.
STONE CLIFF ROAD, both directions, entire length.
STONEWALL CIRCLE, both directions, entire length.
STONY BROOK LANE, both directions, entire length.
STUART CLOSE, both directions, entire length.
STUART ROAD, both directions, between The Great Road West and
The Great Road East.
STUART ROAD, both directions, in the Stuart Country Day School of
the Sacred Heart zone during recess or while children are going to or
leaving school, during opening and closing hours.
STUART ROAD WEST, both directions, entire length.
SYCAMORE ROAD, both directions, between Harrison Street and
Riverside Drive West.
§ T11-2 PRINCETON CODE § T11-2
BAO:1452
TALBOT LANE, both directions, entire length.
THANET ROAD, both directions, entire length.
TREWBRIDGE COURT, both directions, entire length.
TYSON LANE, both directions, entire length.
VALLEY ROAD, both directions, entire length.
VAN MARTER COURT, both directions, entire length.
VERNON CIRCLE, both directions, entire length.
WALKER DRIVE, both directions, entire length.
WALNUT LANE, both directions, entire length.
WENDOVER DRIVE, both directions, entire length.
WESTERN WAY, both directions from Cedar Lane to Harrison Street.
WINANT ROAD, both directions, entire length.
WINDERMERE WAY, both directions, entire length.
WINFIELD ROAD, both directions, entire length.
WITHERSPOON STREET, both directions, from Princeton Borough
line to Valley Road.
WOODHULL LANE, both directions, entire length.
WOODSIDE LANE, both directions, entire length.
WOOD WAY, both directions, entire length.
(f) Thirty miles per hour:
BUNN DRIVE, both directions, entire length, between Herrontown
Road and Poor Farm Road.
EWING STREET, northerly end between Harrison Street North and
U.S. Route 206, except as otherwise provided with respect to the
Princeton Charter School zone set forth in section 11-2(e)
hereinabove.
FACULTY ROAD, both directions, between Washington Road and
Broadmead.
GALLUP ROAD, both directions, entire length.
HARRISON STREET NORTH, both directions, entire length.
HERRONTOWN ROAD, both directions, between Snowden Lane and
Poor Farm Road.
HERRONTOWN ROAD, WESTERLY SECTION, both directions,
between U.S. Route 206 and Mt. Lucas Road.
HUTCHINSON DRIVE, both directions, entire length. [Ord. No.
2017-22]
MOUNT LUCAS ROAD, both directions, between Cherry Hill Road
and Ewing Street.
§ T11-2 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T11-2
BAO:1453
§ T11-3. Temporary reduction of speed limits. [Ord. No. 82-10, § 1.]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-98.2, the chief of police is hereby designated
the municipal official who may order a reduction of a regular speed limit
for periods not to exceed 72 hours on segments of roadways under the
township's jurisdiction when said roadways are under construction for
maintenance or repairs. The chief of police is authorized to temporarily
reduce said speed limits under circumstances when, in his opinion, a
reduced speed limit is warranted for the public safety in and about the area
of the roadway which is under construction for maintenance or repairs.
The chief of police, when desiring to execute his authority to temporarily
reduce speed limits under this section, shall notify the commissioner of
transportation not less than seven days before any reduced speed limit
takes effect on the affected segment of the roadway. In the case of
emergency situations, said notification period may be waived by the
commissioner. The chief of police shall also have the responsibility to place
one or more signs indicating the reduced speed limit along that portion of
the affected roadway.
§ T11-3.1. Lane use reservations. [Ord. No. 84-11, § 1; Ord. No.
86-20, § 1; Ord. No. 90-24, § 1; Ord. No. 99-13, § 1; Ord. No.
2004-21, § 1; Ord. No. 2006-29, § 2.]
The lane locations set forth on the following described streets or parts of
streets are designated as "lane use reservations" and the traffic shall move
only as indicated:
Alexander Street. At the intersection of Faculty Road traveling in an
easterly direction, left lane for left turn only into Faculty Road; right lane
straight ahead only.
Alexander Street. At the intersection of Faculty Road, traveling westerly,
right lane for right turn only into Faculty Road; left lane, straight ahead
only.
MOUNT LUCAS ROAD, both directions, from Witherspoon Street to
Ewing Street and from Poor Farm Road to the Montgomery Township
line (Mercer County-Somerset County line).
RIDGEVIEW ROAD, both directions, entire length.
TERHUNE ROAD, both directions, between U.S. Route 206 and Mount
Lucas Road.
TERHUNE ROAD — VAN DYKE ROAD, both directions, between
Harrison Street North and Meadowbrook Drive.
Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above designated speed limits as authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ T11-2 PRINCETON CODE § T11-3.1
BAO:1454
Alexander Street. At the intersection of Lawrence Drive, traveling in a
southerly direction, left lane for left turns only onto the driveway
eastbound for 350 Alexander Street; right lane for right turns and straight
ahead only.
Alexander Street. At the intersection of Lawrence Drive, traveling in a
northerly direction, left lane for left turns only onto Lawrence Drive
westbound; right lane for right turns and straight ahead only.
Bunn Drive. At the intersection of Harrison Street North, traveling in a
westerly direction, left lane for left turns only; right lane for right turns
only.
Cherry Hill Road. At the intersection with Route U.S. 206, easterly side,
the left lane for left turns and straight ahead only; the right lane for right
turns only.
Cherry Hill Road. At the intersection of Route U.S. 206, westerly side, the
left lane for left turns and straight ahead only; the right lane for right
turns only onto Route U.S. 206 southbound.
Ewing Street. At the intersection with Route U.S. 206. The right lane for
right turn only. The left lane for left turn only.
Faculty Road. At the intersection of Washington Road. The left lane for left
turn only, the right lane for right turns and straight ahead only.
Harrison Street North. At the intersection of Bunn Drive, traveling in a
southerly direction, left lane for left turns only onto Bunn Drive
eastbound; right lane for straight ahead only.
Harrison Street North. At the intersection of Terhune Road, traveling in a
northerly direction, left lane for left turns only onto Terhune Road
westbound; middle lane for straight ahead only; and right lane for right
turns only onto Terhune Road eastbound.
Harrison Street North. At the intersection of Terhune Road, traveling in a
southerly direction, left lane for left turns only onto Terhune Road
eastbound; middle lane for straight ahead only; and right lane for right
turns and straight ahead only.
Harrison Street North. At the intersection of Valley Road, traveling in a
southerly direction, left lane for left turns only onto Princeton Shopping
Center driveway eastbound; middle lane for straight ahead only; right
lane for right turns and straight ahead only.
Harrison Street North. At the intersection of Valley Road, traveling in a
northerly direction, left lane for left turns only onto Valley Road
westbound; middle lane for straight ahead only; right lane for right turns
and straight ahead only
Mercer Road. The left lane of the easterly approach of Mercer Road to
Quaker Road shall be for left turns only into Quaker Road southbound.
Mercer Road. At the intersection of Lovers Lane and Olden Lane,
traveling in an easterly direction, left lane for left turns only onto Lovers
Lane; right lane for right turns and straight ahead only.
§ T11-3.1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T11-3.1
BAO:1455
Mercer Road. At the intersection of Lovers Lane and Olden Lane,
traveling in a westerly direction, left lane for left turns only onto Olden
Lane; right lane for right turns and straight ahead only.
Mount Lucas Road. At the intersection with Cherry Hill Road. The right
lane for right turns only. The left lane for straight ahead only.
Quaker Road. The left lane of the southerly approach of Quaker Road to
Mercer Road shall be for left turns only into Mercer Road westbound.
Rosedale Road. At the intersection of the General Johnson Access Road,
traveling in an easterly direction. The left lane for left turns or straight
ahead only. The right lane for right turn only into Greenway Meadows
Park entrance.
Terhune Road. At the intersection of Mount Lucas Road. The right lane for
right turns only. The left lane for turns and straight ahead only.
Terhune Road. At the intersection of Route U.S. 206. The right lane for
right turn only. The left lane for left turn only.
The Great Road. At the intersection of Princeton Day School driveway,
traveling in a northerly direction, left lane for left turn only onto the
Princeton Day School driveway westbound; right lane for right turns and
straight ahead only.
The Great Road. At the intersection of Princeton School driveway,
traveling in a southerly direction, left lane for straight ahead only; right
lane for right turns only onto the Princeton School driveway westbound.
Valley Road. At the intersection of Route U.S. 206. The right lane for right
turns only. The left lane for left turns only.
Valley Road. At the intersection of Witherspoon Street, traveling in an
easterly direction. The left lane for left turns or straight ahead only; the
right lane for right turns only.
Valley Road. At the intersection of North Harrison Street, the right lane
for right turn only, the left lane for left turns and straight ahead only.
§ T11-4. One-way streets.48 [Ord. No. 177; Ord. No. 265, §§ 1, 2; Ord.
No. 274, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 467, § 1; Ord. No. 471, § 1; Ord. No. 678,
§ 3; Ord. No. 836, § 1; Ord. No. 82-9, § 1; Ord. No. 83-33, § 1; Ord.
No. 92-26, § 5; Ord. No. 2000-14, § 1]
The following streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as one-way
streets in the direction indicated:
48.For state law authorizing township to designate one-way streets, see R.S., § 39:4-197(1)c.
§ T11-3.1 PRINCETON CODE § T11-4
BAO:1456
Street Direction Location
Bunn Drive North Harrison Street north to
American Can Company
driveway
John Street North Boundary line of
Borough of Princeton to
Leigh Avenue
Leigh Avenue West Witherspoon Street to
Bayard Lane
Quaker Road North From the tip of the most
southerly triangular
island in the
intersection of Mercer
Road and Quaker Road
to Mercer Road
(approximately 210 feet
plus or minus)
Quaker Road South Between Mercer Road
and the tip of the most
southerly triangular
island in the
intersection of Mercer
Road and Quaker Road
(approximately 80 feet
plus or minus)
Quaker Road North Between Parkside Drive
and State Highway
Route #206
Quaker Road South Southbound east cutoff
1 way only
Southern Way East Entire length
Thanet Road Circle Counter-clockwise From entry onto circle
for entire length
Western Way West Cedar Lane to Harrison
Street
§ T11-5. Right turn prohibition. [Ord. No. 89-19, § 1; Ord. No.
98-36, § 1; Ord. No. 2007-9, § 1; Ord. No. 2007-17, § 1]
No person shall make a right-hand turn between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
9:00 a.m. Monday through Friday on the following streets:
Cherry Valley Road onto Hillside Avenue
§ T11-4 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T11-5.1
BAO:1457
§ T11-5.1. Crosswalks. [Ord. No. 91-34, § 1; Ord. No. 95-17, § 3; Ord.
No. 2014-36]
The described locations designated as crosswalks can be found in the
Princeton Borough Code Section 19-5.
§ T11-5.2. Left turn prohibited. [Ord. No. 2003-1, § 1; Ord. No.
2007-17, § 2]
§ T11-6. Trucks over five tons and four tons excluded on certain
streets.49 [Ord. No. 211, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 239, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 678,
§§ 5, 6; Ord. No. 709, § 1; Ord. No. 846, § 1; Ord. No. 88-1, § 1; Ord.
No. 88-11, § 1; Ord. No. 88-18, § 1; Ord. No. 89-10, § 2; Ord. No.
90-14, § 1; Ord. No. 97-17, § 1; Ord. No. 98-21, § 1; Ord. No. 99-18,
§ 1; Ord. No. 2001-30, § 2; Ord. No. 2003-25, § 1; Ord. No. 2005-4,
§ 1; Ord. No. 2017-41; Ord. No. 2018-3]
(a) No person shall make a left-hand turn at any time on the following
streets:
Cherry Valley Road onto Hillside Avenue.
Hillside Avenue onto Cherry Valley Road.
Valley Road onto State Highway Route 206.
(b) Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above designated, prohibited turning movement as authorized by
the New Jersey Department of Transportation and in accordance with
law.
(a) Trucks over five tons registered gross weight are hereby excluded from
the following described streets or parts of streets, except for the pick
up and delivery of materials on such streets:
Jefferson Road.
Lovers Lane. [Deleted by Ord. No. 2017-41]
Moore Street.
North Road.
Quaker Road, beginning at the township line at the Delaware and
Raritan Canal and extending to New Jersey Highway Route No. 206.
Red Hill Road.
Valley Road.
Witherspoon Street.
49.For state law authorizing township to prohibit certain commercial vehicles on designated
streets, see R.S., §§ 40:67-16.1 to 40:67-16.6. See also, R.S., § 39:4-197(1)b.
§ T11-5.1 PRINCETON CODE § T11-6
BAO:1458
§ T11-6.1. Overweight motor vehicles prohibited from driving over
bridges. [Ord. No. 2008-14, § 1.]
(b) Trucks over four tons registered weight are hereby excluded from the
following described part of street, except for the pickup and delivery of
materials on such part of street:
Burr Drive.
Campbell Woods Way.
Cherry Valley Road, beginning at Province Line Road and extending
to New Jersey Highway Route No. 206.
Drakes Corner Road.
Hillside Avenue.
Lovers Lane. [Ord. No. 2017-41]
McComb Road.
Mountain Avenue.
Olden Lane [Ord. No. 2018-3]
Overbrook Road.
Poor Farm Road.
Pretty Brook Road.
Princeton Pike-Mercer Road, beginning at the Lawrence Township
line and extending to the Princeton Borough line.
Prospect Avenue
Snowden Lane
(c) This section shall not apply to any vehicle owned or operated by the
township or to any vehicle owned and operated by a public utility that
may be engaged in the installation, repair or maintenance of utilities on
such streets.
(a) No motor vehicle shall be driven over a bridge in the township if the
gross weight of the vehicle and load is greater than the gross posted
weight limit of the bridge.
(b) The owner and operator of any motor vehicle used in violation of this
section shall be responsible to the township or other body politic
owning or maintaining such bridge for any damage done to the bridge
by reason of the violation.
(c) Any owner or operator violating this section shall be subject to a fine
not exceeding $1,000. In default of payment thereof, imprisonment in a
county jail for a period not exceeding 10 days shall be imposed.
§ T11-6 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T11-6.2
BAO:1459
§ T11-6.2. School zone speed limit. [Ord. No. 2008-29, § 2.]
The following school zone speed limits are hereby established for traffic
along the streets or parts of streets enumerated in this section, and
regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to affect
the designated school zone speed limits as authorized by the New Jersey
Department of Transportation:
§ T11-7. Penalty.50 [Ord. No. 118, art. 6 § 1; Ord. No. 2008-17, § 1.]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute, every
person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be liable
to a penalty of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 15 days or both.
(a) Along Great Road — Great Road East for both directions of traffic.
Zone 1: 40 miles per hour between the Princeton Borough corporate
line - Princeton Township corporate line and the northernmost
intersection of Great Road East, except for 25 miles per hour when
passing through the Princeton Day School zone during recess, when
the presence of children is clearly visible from the roadway or while
children are going to or leaving school, during opening or closing hours.
Zone 2: 35 miles per hour between the northernmost intersection of
Great Road East and the Princeton Township (Mercer County)
corporate line - Montgomery Township (Somerset County) corporate
line, except for 25 miles per hour when passing through the Princeton
Academy of the Sacred Heart School zone, while "25 MPH When
Flashing" signs are operating during recess, when the presence of
children is clearly visible from the roadway or while children are going
to or leaving school, during opening or closing hours.
50.For state law as to penalty for violation of traffic law generally, see R.S., § 39:4-203.
§ T11-6.2 PRINCETON CODE § T11-7
BAO:1460
ARTICLE II
Stopping, Standing and Parking51
DIVISION 1 - GENERALLY
§ T11-8. Regulations not exclusive.
The provisions of this article imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person of the duty to observe other and more restrictive
provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles as set forth in section 39:4-138 of the Revised Statutes of New
Jersey, any other New Jersey Statutes or as hereinafter provided.
§ T11-8.1. (Reserved)52
DIVISION 2 - PARKING RESTRICTED
§ T11-9. No Stopping or standing — Schools. [Ord. No. 2008-11, § 2]
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle on the following streets or parts of
streets adjacent to schools at any time as follows:
Witherspoon Street. Western side, from the boundary line with the Borough
of Princeton to Valley Road, with the exception of school buses within the
marked dropoff area in front of the Community Park School.
§ T11-10. Two hour parking — At all times. [Ord. No. 548 § 1]
No person shall park a vehicle on the following streets or parts of streets at
any time for a period of more than two hours:
Leigh Avenue. North side, between Witherspoon Street and John Street.
§ T11-11. Same — 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. [Ord. No. 499, § 1; Ord. No.
519, § 2; Ord. No. 611, § 2; Ord. No. 925, § 1; Ord. No. 933, §§ 1, 2;
Ord. No. 95-34, § 1; Ord. No. 96-15, § 1; Ord. No. 2004-16, § 3; Ord.
No. 2017-6 § 1; Ord. No. 2017-43 § 1]
No person shall park a vehicle on the following streets or parts of streets
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. for a period of more than two
hours:
Carnahan Place. East side. [Ord. No. 2017-6 § 1; Ord. No. 2017-43 § 1]
Harris Road. East side, from Henry Avenue to the southerly side of Guyot
Avenue.
51.For state law authorizing township to regulate stopping, standing and parking, see R.S.
39:4-197.
52.Editor's Note: Former section 11-8.1, no stopping or standing previously codified herein
and containing portions of Ordinance No. 2004-16, was repealed in its entirety by
Ordinance No. 2009-10.
§ T11-8 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T11-11
BAO:1461
Henry Avenue. South side, from Witherspoon Street to Harris Road.
John Street. East side.
Winant Road. South side from Edgerstoune Road to its western most
intersection with Russell Road.
Witherspoon Street. East side.
§ T11-11.1. Handicapped parking zones. [Ord. No. 2017-58 § 1; Ord.
No. 84-26, § 1; Ord. No. 91-1, § 1; Ord. No. 92-26, § 1; Ord. No.
96-14, § 1; Ord. No. 2001-24, § 1; Ord. No. 2003-23, § 1; Ord. No.
2004-14, § 1; Ord. No. 2004-18, § 1; Ord. No. 2011, § 1; Ord. No.
2017-58 § 1]
(a) No person shall park a vehicle in the following designated handicapped
parking zones unless said person has been issued a special vehicle
identification card, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-205 by the New Jersey
Motor Vehicle Commission:
Chestnut Street. Chestnut Street, east side, from a point 121 feet
north of the Spruce Street curbline to a point 22 feet northerly, one
space.
Community Park North. Two spaces, one to be located in the
northeast corner of said lot, closest to the existing pedestrian path
and one to be located as the last parking stall on the northwest corner
of said lot closest to the existing restrooms.
Community Park Pool parking lot. The six spaces designated therein
as handicapped spaces.
Community Park South. Two spaces to be located on the north side,
one space to be located at the westerly most end of said lot and one
space to be located at the easterly most end of said lot.
Franklin Avenue. One space located on the southern side abutting
property known as 391 Franklin Avenue starting at a point 645 feet
west from the westerly curbline of Leavitt Lane and extending a
distance of 20 feet therefrom.
Jefferson Road. [Ord. No. 2014-2; deleted by Ord. No. 2016-17]
Jefferson Road. Jefferson Road, East side, two spaces directly in front
of house numbers 77 and 79. [Ord. No. 2016-17]
Princeton Township Municipal Complex Parking Lots. Four spaces
located in north parking lot closest to police building entrance and
two spaces located in south parking lot closest to Human Services
building entrance.
Valley Road Building front parking lot. Three spaces utilizing entire
lot.
Valley Road Building parking lot. One space in visitors' lot closest to
Witherspoon Street.
§ T11-11 PRINCETON CODE § T11-11.1
BAO:1462
§ T11-11.2. Handicapped drop-off zones. [Ord. No. 90-24, § 6.]
No person shall stop or stand in the designated handicapped drop-off area
when public schools are in session between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00
p.m. on the following streets:
Guyot Avenue. Southerly side, from a point 264 feet of the easterly line of
Walnut Lane, extending 40 feet east on Guyot Avenue.
§ T11-11.3. Same — 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. — EXCEPTIONS. [Ord.
No. 2013-28 § 1]
No person shall park a vehicle on the following streets or parts of streets
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. for a period of more than
two hours except for vehicles which are owned or operated by existing
commercial properties or their employees where said properties have
inadequate onsite parking as determined by the Municipal Engineer. Said
properties may obtain from Princeton a parking permit from the Clerk's
Office to permit parking for more than two hours.
Alexander Street, west side, beginning at a point 253 feet north of the
center line of Faculty Road and proceeding north to a point 710 feet from
said center line of Faculty Road.
Alexander Street, east side, beginning at a point 338 feet north of the
northerly curb line of Faculty Road and proceeding north to a point 648 feet
from said northerly curb line of Faculty Road.
DIVISION 3 - PARKING PROHIBITED
§ T11-12. At any time. [Ord. No. 118, art. 5, § 1; Ord. No. 177; Ord.
No. 229, § 3; Ord. No. 233, § 1; Ord. No. 274, §§ 5, 6; Ord. No. 276,
§§ 1, 2, 4; Ord. No. 320, § 1; Ord. No. 448, § 1; Ord. No. 458, § 1; Ord.
No. 469, § 1; Ord. No. 482, § 1; Ord. No. 509, § 1; Ord. No. 519, § 1;
Ord. No. 529, § 1; Ord. No. 540, § 1; Ord. No. 548, §§ 1, 3; Ord. No.
566, § 2; Ord. No. 585, § 2; Ord. No. 606, § 1; Ord. No. 611, § 1; Ord.
Witherspoon Street. East side, two spaces opposite intersection with
Birch Avenue.
(b) No person shall park a vehicle in any space on public or private
property appropriately marked for vehicles for the physically
handicapped unless said person has been issued a special vehicle
identification card and a handicapped person is either the driver or a
passenger in that vehicle.
(c) Any person parking a motor vehicle in a restricted parking space
without a special vehicle identification card shall be liable to a fine of
$250 for the first offense and, for subsequent offenses, a fine of at least
$250 and up to 90 days community service on such terms and in such
form as the court shall deem appropriate, or any combination thereof.
§ T11-11.1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T11-12
BAO:1463
No. 615, § 3; Ord. No. 618, § 1; Ord. No. 632, § 1; Ord. No. 654, § 1;
Ord. No. 694, § 1; Ord. No. 704, § 1; Ord. No. 726, § 1; Ord. No. 737,
§ 1; Ord. No. 759, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 763, § 1; Ord. No. 790, §§ 3, 4;
Ord. No. 882, § 1; Ord. No. 861, § 1; Ord. No. 857, § 1; Ord. No. 925,
§ 2; Ord. No. 927, §§ 7, 8; Ord. No. 964, § 1; Ord. No. 933, § 3; Ord.
No. 1023, § 1; Ord. No. 82-12, § 1; Ord. No. 86-12, § 3; Ord. No.
88-11, §§ 2, 3; Ord. No. 88-24, § 1; Ord. No. 90-24, § 5; Ord. No.
91-12, § 1; Ord. No. 93-4, § 2; Ord. No. 95-18, § 4; Ord. No. 98-35,
§ 1; Ord. No. 2001-1, § 1; Ord. No. 2001-14, § 1; Ord. No. 2001-17,
§ 1; Ord. No. 2002-2, § 3; Ord. No. 2002-13, § 1; Ord. No. 2002-17,
§ 1; Ord. No. 2003-3, § 1; Ord. No. 2004-3, § 1; Ord. No. 2006-17, § 1;
Ord. No. 2006-23, § 1; Ord. No. 2007-24, § 2; Ord. No. 2008-10, § 1;
Ord. No. 2008-11, § 1; Ord. No. 2010-25, § 1; Ord. No. 2012-2; Ord.
No. 2012-9; Ord. No. 2015-32; Ord. No. 2016-03; Ord. No. 2017-4;
Ord. No. 2017-6 § 2; Ord. No. 2017-25; Ord. No. 2017-43 § 2]
No person shall park any vehicle on any of the following streets or parts of
streets at any time:
Abernathy Drive. Northerly side, between Magnolia Lane and Snowden
Lane.
Alexander Street. Both sides, entire length, from the intersection of West
Drive southerly to the Princeton Township-West Windsor Township line.
Alexander Street, east side, beginning at the northerly line of Faculty
Road proceeding north a distance of 420 feet. [Ord. No. 2013-28 § 2;
Ord. No. 2017-25]
Alexander Street, east side, from the southerly line of Faculty Road a
distance of 210 feet south. [Ord. No. 2013-28 § 2]
Alexander Street, west side, from a point opposite the center of the
intersection of Faculty Road to a point 253 feet northerly and to a point
210 feet southerly. [Ord. No. 2013-28 § 2]
Alexander Street, west side, between the municipal boundary line of the
township and a point 365 feet south of such boundary line, as measured
along Alexander Street and between the intersection of West Drive and a
point 1,100 feet north of West Drive, as measured along Alexander Street.
[Ord. No. 2013-28 § 2]
Alexander Street. West side, beginning at a point 263 feet south of the
southerly line of Faculty Road and proceeding south therefrom for a
distance of 105 feet to a point 368 feet from said line of Faculty Road.
[Ord. No. 2013-28 § 2]
Alexander Street. East side, from Faculty Road south to the municipal
border. [Ord. No. 2014-29]
Alexander Street. West side, from a point opposite the center of the
intersection of Faculty Road to a point 210 feet southerly. [Ord. No.
2013-16; Ord. No. 2014-29]
§ T11-12 PRINCETON CODE § T11-12
BAO:1464
Alexander Street. West side, from a point 281 feet south of the center of
the intersection of Faculty Road to a point 107 feet southerly. [Ord. No.
2014-29]
Alexander Street. West side, from a point 210 feet north of the northerly
curb line of Lawrence Drive south to the municipal border. [Ord. No.
2014-29]
Basin Street. South side.
Billie Ellis Lane. North side, from the east curbline of Cherry Valley Road
to a point 70 feet east; north side, from 460 feet east of Cherry Valley
Road; south side, entire length. In addition to the parking regulations
provided for herein above, no person shall park a motor vehicle on any
portion of Billie Ellis Lane if said vehicle is a size larger than a panel truck
and no mobile home, recreation vehicle, boat, boat trailer, inoperative
vehicle or the like shall be parked on any part of said road, except that
those vehicles temporarily on the road for the purpose of servicing
residents within the Griggs Farm development itself shall be permitted to
park in designated parking areas on said road. Additionally, no person
shall park a vehicle on Billie Ellis Lane continuously without moving said
vehicle for a period of more than 72 hours.
Birch Avenue. South side.
Bunn Drive. Both sides, entire length.
Burr Drive. Both sides, entire length except within the cul-de-sac area.
Campbell Woods Way. Both sides, entire length except within the cul-desac
area.
Carnahan Place. West side. [Ord. No. 2017-6 § 2; Ord. No. 2017-43
§ 2]
Clearview Avenue. Southerly side, between Harrison Street North and
Tee-Arr Place.
Edgerstoune Road. Southerly side, between State Highway Route No. 206
and the more easterly intersection of Winant Road.
Edgerstoune Road. North side, between State Highway Route No. 206 and
Hun Road.
Edgerstoune Road. Southerly side, within 100 feet of the culvert crossing
Edgerstoune Road opposite the premises known as No. 91 Edgerstoune
Road.
Edgerstoune Road. Southerly side, along the Hun School of Princeton
property between the more westerly intersection of Winant Road and a
point 714.74 feet to the west.
Faculty Road. Both sides, entire length, from Alexander Street to
Broadmead.
Franklin Avenue. Northerly side, from Walnut Lane to the Princeton
Borough boundary line.
§ T11-12 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T11-12
BAO:1465
Franklin Avenue. South side, from a point 400 feet east of the eastern
curbline at Walnut Lane to the Borough of Princeton boundary line, within
150 feet of its intersection with Snowden Lane.
Great Road. West side, between the southern and northern junctions with
Great Road East.
Griggs Drive. North side, entire length, excluding the area in front of the
building commonly known as the Griggs Farm Clubhouse, from 365 feet to
505 feet east of Cherry Valley Road; south side, from the east curbline of
Cherry Valley Road to a point 1,030 feet east. In addition to the parking
regulations provided for herein above, no person shall park any motor
vehicle on any portion of Griggs Drive if said vehicle is a size larger than a
panel truck and no mobile home, recreation vehicle, boat, boat trailer,
inoperative vehicle or the like shall be parked on any part of said road,
except that those vehicles temporarily on said road for the purpose of
servicing residents within the Griggs Farm development itself shall be
permitted to park in the designated parking areas on said road.
Additionally, no person shall park a vehicle on Griggs Drive continuously
without moving said vehicle for a period of more than 72 hours.
Guyot Avenue. Northerly side, between Walnut Lane and Ewing Street.
Guyot Avenue. South side, between Witherspoon Street and Carnahan
Place.
Harris Road. West side, from the borough line northerly to the southerly
line of Guyot Avenue.
Harrison Street North. East side, between the boundary line of the
borough and Journey's End Lane.
Harrison Street North. West side, between a point 250 feet south of Valley
Road and a point 250 feet north of Valley Road.
Harrison Street South. West side, from the Harrison Street bridge to
Hartley Avenue.
Henry Avenue. North side.
Henry Avenue. South side, a distance of 34 feet west and 33 feet east of
the entrance and exit to the Princeton Medical Center parking garage;
and again from Witherspoon Street to a point 46 feet east of the easterly
curbline of Witherspoon Street.
Jefferson Road. West side.
John Street. Both sides, between Leigh Avenue and the boundary line of
the borough.
John Street. West side, between Leigh Avenue and the northerly end of
John Street.
Leigh Avenue. South side.
Linden Lane. West side, between Guyot Avenue and the boundary line
between the Borough of Princeton and the Township of Princeton.
Lovers Lane. Both sides.
§ T11-12 PRINCETON CODE § T11-12
BAO:1466
Magnolia Lane. From the curbline between the entrance and exit for the
Littlebrook School; from the exit driveway to a point 20 feet north
therefrom.
McComb Road. Both sides, entire length except within the cul-de-sac area.
Mercer Road-Princeton Pike. Both sides, from a line 50 feet northeast to a
line 1,200 feet southwest of the center line of Quaker Road.
Moore Street. East side.
Mount Lucas Road. East side, between Valley Road and Jefferson Road.
Mount Lucas Road. West side, between Valley Road and Cherry Hill Road.
Mount Lucas Road. West side, between a point 240 feet south of Laurel
Road and a point 400 feet south of Laurel Road.
Mount Lucas Road. East side, between Valley Road and a point 130 feet
north of the extension of the Laurel Road north curbline. [Ord. No.
2016-03]
Mount Lucas Road. West side, between Valley Road and Cherry Hill Road.
[Ord. No. 2016-03]
Mount Lucas Road. West side, between a point from the north curbline of
Cherry Hill Road to a distance 180 feet north and from another point
starting at the south curbline of Laurel Road and proceeding a distance of
410 feet south. [Ord. No. 2016-03]
Mount Lucas Road. East side, between Jefferson Road south curbline and
a point 100 feet south. [Ord. No. 2016-03]
Mount Lucas Road. East side, between Jefferson Road north curbline and
a point 245 feet north. [Ord. No. 2016-03]
Mount Lucas Road. East side, between Ewing Street south curbline and
180 feet south. [Ord. No. 2016-03]
Mount Lucas Road. West side, between Ewing Street and Laurel Road.
[Ord. No. 2016-03]
Mount Lucas Road. Both sides, between Ewing Street and Stuart Road
East. [Ord. No. 2016-03]
Pardoe Road. East side, between Mountain Avenue and Westerly Road.
Province Line Road. East side from Pretty Brook Road northerly to a point
approximately 500 feet north of Stuart Road.
Quaker Road. Both sides, between Mercer Street and Route 206.
Race Street. West side, between Leigh Avenue and Birch Avenue.
Race Street. West side, entire length.
Redding Circle. Both sides, entire length.
Riverside Drive. From the Riverside School driveway to a point 20 feet
northerly therefrom.
Russell Road. Southerly side, entire length.
§ T11-12 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T11-12
BAO:1467
Russell Road, north side from the western most intersection with Winant
Road to a point 840 feet westerly. [Ord. No. 2017-4]
Snowden Lane. East side, between Nassau Street and Franklin Avenue.
Snowden Lane. West side.
Southern Way. North side.
Stuart Road. North side, between Great Road and Great Road East.
Stuart Road. Southerly side, between The Great Road and Hardy Drive.
Sycamore Road. North side, between South Harrison Street and Riverside
Drive.
Terhune Road. North side.
Unnamed street within Princeton Community Village commonly known as
the Loop Road. Both sides, entire length.
Valley Road. North side.
Valley Road. South side, between Ewing Street and Harrison Street North.
[Ord. No. 2015-32]
Valley Road. South side, from the east curbline of Witherspoon Street to a
point 90 feet east. [Ord. No. 2015-32]
Van Dyke Road. North side.
Walnut Lane. East side, between Guyot Avenue and Valley Road; west side
from the southern curbline of Valley Road to a point 80 feet south; from
the northern curbline of Guyot Avenue to a point 80 feet north; from the
northern curbline of Hickory Court to a point 37 feet north; from the
southern curbline of Hickory Court to a point 30 feet south.
Walnut Lane. West side, 55 feet to both the north and south of the
intersection with Hickory Court.
Westerly Road. South side, so much as lies within the township between
Elm Road and Pardoe Road.
Western Way. South side, between Cedar Lane and South Harrison Street.
§ T11-13. 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. [Ord. No. 500, § 1; Ord. No. 519,
§ 2; Ord. No. 548, § 1; Ord. No. 744, § 1; Ord. No. 925, § 3; Ord. No.
88-50, § 1]
No person shall park a vehicle on the following streets or parts of streets
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.:
Carnahan Place.
Harris Road.
Henry Avenue.
Jefferson Road.
Moore Street.
Southern Way.
§ T11-12 PRINCETON CODE § T11-13
BAO:1468
Witherspoon Street.
§ T11-13.1. 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m., Mondays through Fridays. [Ord.
No. 87-6, § 1; Ord. No. 88-24, § 2]
No person shall park any vehicle between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m. on the following streets or parts of streets and on the following days:
Alexander Street. Both sides, entire length from the Princeton Borough -
Princeton Township line southerly to the West Windsor Township -
Princeton Township line.
§ T11-14. 2:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. [Ord. No. 592, § 1; Ord. No. 612,
§ 1]
No person shall park a vehicle on any of the following streets or parts of
streets between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m.:
Battle Road.
Haslet Avenue.
Olden Lane.
Springdale Road.
§ T11-15. No parking — 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. — Mondays,
Wednesdays and Fridays. [Ord. No. 548, § 2; Ord. No. 747, § 1; Ord.
No. 884, § 1; Ord. No. 905, § 1; Ord. No. 908, § 1; Ord. No. 84-22, § 2;
Ord. No. 91-12, § 2]
No person shall park any vehicle on the following streets or parts of streets
between 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays.
(Reserved)
§ T11-16. No parking — 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Tuesdays and
Thursdays. [Ord. No. 548, § 2; Ord. No. 747, § 2; Ord. No. 884, § 2;
Ord. No. 905, § 2; Ord. No. 908, § 2; Ord. No. 84-22, § 3; Ord. No.
91-12, § 2]
No person shall park any vehicle on any of the following streets or parts of
streets between 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on Tuesdays and Thursdays.
(Reserved)
§ T11-17. School days — 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. [Ord. No. 469, § 1;
Ord. No. 585, § 1; Ord. No. 594, § 1; Ord. No. 91-2, § 1; Ord. No.
2001-17, §§ 2, 6]
No person shall park any vehicle on any of the following streets or parts of
streets, on any day when public schools are in session, between the hours
of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
§ T11-13 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T11-17
BAO:1469
Magnolia Lane. Westerly side from Littlebrook Drive to Broad Ripple
Drive.
Riverside Drive West. West side, between Roberts Road and Prospect
Avenue.
§ T11-17.1. School days — Two-hour parking. [Ord. No. 99-17, § 1;
Ord. No. 2004-16, § 4]
No person shall park any vehicle on any of the following streets or parts of
streets on any day when public schools are in session, between the hours of
8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. for longer than two hours.
(Reserved)
§ T11-17.2. School days — Pick up/drop off area. [Ord. No. 2001-17,
§ 4; Ord. No. 2004-16, § 5]
No person shall park any vehicle nor allow any vehicle to be unattended
on any of the following streets or parts of streets on any day when public
schools are in session between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. other
than to pick up or drop off a student.
Magnolia Lane. East side, in front of the Littlebrook School.
Walnut Lane. East side, from a point 350 feet south of the intersection of
Walnut Lane and Guyot Avenue extending south to the intersection of
Walnut Lane and Franklin Avenue.
§ T11-17.3. School days — School bus zone. [Ord. No. 2001-17, § 5;
Ord. No. 2008-13, § 1]
No person shall park any vehicle or leave any vehicle unattended on any of
the following streets or parts of streets on any day when public schools are
in session, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., except for school
buses.
Walnut Lane. East side from a point 50 feet from the intersection of
Walnut Lane and Guyot Avenue extending 350 feet south therefrom.
§ T11-17.4. School days — Additional school bus zone. [Ord. No.
2008-13, § 2]
No person shall park any vehicle or leave any vehicle unattended on any of
the following streets or parts of streets on any day when public schools are
in session, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., except for school
buses.
Guyot Avenue. South side from the handicapped parking area adjacent to
the John Witherspoon School to said school's driveway entrance onto
Guyot Avenue.
§ T11-17 PRINCETON CODE § T11-18
BAO:1470
§ T11-18. School days — 8:00 a.m. to 3:15 p.m. [Ord. No. 615, § 1;
Ord. No. 719, § 1; Ord. No. 791, § 1; Ord. No. 87-11, § 1; Ord. No.
2008-11, § 1]
No person shall park any vehicle except school buses on any of the following
streets or parts of streets, on any day during which public schools are in
session, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 3:15 p.m.
Guyot Avenue. Southerly side, between a point 400 feet west of the
westerly line of Linden Lane and a point 40.5 feet westerly of such first
mentioned point.
Prospect Avenue. Northerly side, between the corner of Riverside Drive
West to a point 550 feet easterly therefrom.
§ T11-19. School days — 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:15 p.m. to
3:15 p.m. [Ord. No. 594, § 1; Ord. No. 615, § 2; Ord. No. 719, § 2;
Ord. No. 791, § 2; Ord. No. 87-11, § 2; Ord. No. 88-39, § 1; Ord. No.
91-2, § 2; Ord. No. 2001-17, § 3; Ord. No. 2007-24, § 1]
No person shall park any vehicle on any of the following streets or parts of
streets, on any day when public schools are in session, between the hours
of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. or between the hours of 2:15 p.m. and 3:15 p.m.:
Grover Avenue. Both sides, between Clearview Avenue and Terhune Road.
Guyot Avenue. Southerly side, between the westerly line of Linden Lane
and a point 400 feet west of such line of Linden Lane, and between a point
440.5 feet west of such line of Linden Lane and the easterly curb line of
Walnut Lane.
§ T11-19.1. School days — 11:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. [Ord. No. 827,
§ 1]
No person shall park any vehicle on any of the following streets or parts of
streets between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.:
Mercer Road. Between a point 950 feet northeasterly of the intersection
of Mercer Road and Quaker Road and a point 1,550 feet northeasterly of
the first mentioned point.
§ T11-19.2. (Reserved) [Ord. No. 87-10, § 1; Ord. No. 94-1, § 3; Ord.
No. 2018-23]
§ T11-19.2.1. (Reserved) [Ord. No. 2010-5, § 1; Ord. No. 2018-23]
§ T11-19.3. (Reserved) [Ord. No. 87-23, § 1; Ord. No. 88-50, § 2;
Ord. No. 91-12, § 3; Ord. No. 94-1, § 3; deleted by Ord. No. 2017-42
§ 2]
§ T11-18 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T11-19.3.1
BAO:1471
§ T11-19.3.1. Two hour parking. [Ord. No. 2004-3, § 1]
No person shall park any vehicle on any of the following streets or parts
of streets on any weekday (Monday through Friday), excluding holidays,
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. for longer than two hours.
Linden Lane. East side, between Henry Avenue and the boundary line
between the Borough of Princeton and the Township of Princeton.
DIVISION 3A - RESIDENTIAL PERMIT PARKING DISTRICT
§ T11-19.4. Findings. [Ord. No. 93-29, § 1; Ord. No. 95-6, § 1]
The township committee has determined that there is an acute problem
providing for on-street parking in a neighbor-hood adjacent to the Medical
Center at Princeton primarily attributable to the influx of workers in this
area. The committee, therefore, has determined that the greater public
interest will be best served by ensuring convenient and reasonable access
to homes and businesses in this neighborhood and that the following
limitations on parking will promote such interest.
§ T11-19.5. Designation of residential permit parking district. [Ord.
No. 93-29, § 1; Ord. No. 95-6, § 1]
The following streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as included
in the residential parking district: Leigh Avenue and Birch Avenue, their
entire lengths, between Witherspoon Street and Bayard Lane; Race Street
between Leigh Avenue and the Community Park South parking lot; and
John Street from the Princeton Borough line to the Community Park South
parking lot.
§ T11-19.6. Designation of permit parking areas. [Ord. No. 93-29,
§ 1; Ord. No. 95-6, § 1]
On the following described streets or parts of streets, the following parking
regulations shall be in effect:
(a) Two-hour parking, 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 p.m., Sunday through Saturday;
permitted residential parkers exempt.
(b) Permitted 11:00 p.m. — 8:00 a.m., Sunday through Saturday; permitted
residential parking only.
Name of Street Hours Sides Location
Leigh Avenue As noted above North Entire length
Birch Avenue As noted above North Entire length
Race Street As noted above East Entire length
§ T11-19.3.1 PRINCETON CODE § T11-19.6
BAO:1472
§ T11-19.7. Residential parking permits/decals. [Ord. No. 93-29, § 1;
Ord. No. 95-6, § 1]
All owners of record having fee title to any property with a dwelling unit
thereon within the residential permit parking district established in section
11-19.5 shall be entitled to obtain a residential parking decal(s) from the
township clerk. Said decal(s) shall be made available by the clerk at no
charge to the owner in accordance with the following provisions:
Name of Street Hours Sides Location
John Street As noted above East From borough
line to
Community Park
South parking
lot
(a) The township clerk shall obtain from the township tax department a
certified list of the owners of record of real property with dwelling units
thereon located in the district established in section 11-19.6(b)
hereinabove. Upon verification of ownership, the clerk shall mail a
decal(s) to said owner in accordance with the following schedule:
(1) If the real property is improved with a dwelling unit thereon and
has off-street parking the owner shall receive one decal.
(2) If the real property is improved with a dwelling unit thereon and
has no off-street parking, then said owner shall receive two decals.
No owner can obtain more than two decals for a given property.
(b) The decals issued pursuant to this section shall be valid for one year
commencing June 30, 1995, and shall be reissued by the clerk annually
thereafter to the owners of record within said district. The clerk shall
issue annually decals of different colors to assist with the enforcement
of this residential permit parking program.
(c) Upon the issuance of a decal(s) to the owner by the clerk, said owner
shall promptly affix the decal to the motor vehicle that will park in the
district or make said decal(s) available to tenants of the property who
will park in the district on the vehicle's rear windshield, lower left
corner, so that it can be easily observed by the township police
department when enforcing and regulating the provisions of this
division. Motorcycles shall affix the decal to the rear, left bumper.
(d) If the owner of any business operating within the residential permit
parking district as designated hereinabove demonstrates to the
township clerk that the property which is owned or leased for this
business purpose has no off-street parking, then said business owner
may obtain one decal for the parking of a motor vehicle within said
district.
§ T11-19.6 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T11-19.7
BAO:1473
§ T11-19.8. Exemptions. [Ord. No. 2004-16; Reserved by Ord. No.
2017-12; Ord. No. 93-29, § 1; Ord. No. 95-6, § 1.]
The following vehicles shall be exempt from this division:
§ T11-19.9. through 11-19.9.6 (Reserved)53 [Ord. No. 2004-16;
Reserved by Ord. No. 2017-12]
DIVISION 4 - COMMUNITY PARK SOUTH PARKING YARD
(e) Should any holder of a residential parking decal(s) have a visitor
staying with said individual between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 8:00
a.m., said individual may notify the township police department if said
visitor wishes to park a motor vehicle within the above-referenced
district during these hours. The police department will note the vehicle
type and license plate number and said vehicle will be deemed exempt
as provided for hereinbelow from the parking regulations during these
hours. Said visitors, however, shall not be permitted to park in said
district during said hours for more than two consecutive nights.
(f) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained hereinabove, the
Princeton Nursery School shall be entitled to receive seven decals for
its staff.
(g) The Morning Star Church and the Princeton Elks Lodge may advise the
township police department in writing on a monthly basis as to their
schedules of events which will involve visitors parking within the
district. The police department, pursuant to subsection (e) hereinabove
shall be permitted to grant to both organizations exemption from the
provisions of this section in accordance with section 11-19.8(a)
hereinbelow.
(a) Visitors. As provided for in section 11-19.7.
(b) Contractors, service and delivery vehicles. Contractors, service and
delivery vehicles bearing the name and address of a commercial
business may park without a permit during the time they are rendering
service to a residence or business within the permitted parking area.
(c) Emergency vehicles. Emergency vehicles and public service, telephone
and other public utility vehicles may park within the permit parking
area during the time they are rendering service or repairs within the
area.
DIVISION 3B - (RESERVED)
53.Editor's Note: Former Division 3B Princeton High School/Westminster Choir College
Neighborhood Permit Parking District including Ordinance No. 2004-16 was repealed in
its entirety by Ordinance No. 2017-12. See Princeton Borough Code Chapter 19 Section
19-37 for Princeton High School/Westminster Choir College Neighborhood Permit Parking
District.
§ T11-19.7 PRINCETON CODE § T11-20
BAO:1474
§ T11-20. Defined. [Ord. No. 616, § 4]
As used in this division "Community Park South Parking Yard" means that
certain parking yard in and belonging to the township and located in and
on the south side of the tract of land commonly known as Community Park,
which yard lies between the extension of Race Street and the extension of
John Street.
§ T11-21. Parking between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. [Ord. No. 616,
§ 1; Ord. No. 2001-19, § 2]
No person shall park any vehicle including, but not limited to, commercial
vehicles with a gross weight greater than 6,000 pounds, boats, campers
and trailers between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., on the northerly
side of the Community Park South Parking Yard, on Monday, Wednesday or
Friday, or on the southerly side of such parking yard, on Tuesday, Thursday
or Saturday.
§ T11-22. Parking of trucks and buses. [Ord. No. 616, § 2]
No person shall park any truck or bus in the Community Park South Parking
Yard at any time, except while on business in Community Park.
§ T11-23. Parking within stalls required. [Ord. No. 616, § 3]
No person shall park any vehicle at any time in the Community Park
South Parking Yard except within a parking stall designated by pavement
markings therein.
DIVISION 5 - STOPPING OR STANDING
§ T11-23.1. Prohibited at any time. [Ord. No. 688, § 1; Ord. No. 717,
§ 1; Ord. No. 785, § 1; Ord. No. 787, § 1; Ord. No. 805, § 1; Ord. No.
918, § 1; Ord. No. 924, § 1; Ord. No. 82-22, § 1; Ord. No. 2009-10,
§ 1; Ord. No. 2015-29]
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle at any time upon any of the following
streets or parts of streets:
Alexander Street. East side, from the northerly line of Faculty Road to a
point 95 feet northerly, and from the southerly line of Faculty Road to a
point 105 feet southerly.
Alexander Street. West side, from a point opposite the center of the
intersection of Faculty Road to a point 115 feet northerly and to a point
100 feet southerly.
Cherry Hill Road. Along both sides, from the center line of Mount Lucas
Road to a point 250 feet westerly thereof.
Guyot Avenue. North side, from Moore Street to Ewing Street.
Herrontown Road. South side, from Route 206 (State Road) to Mt. Lucas
Road.
§ T11-20 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T11-23.1
BAO:1475
Mountain Avenue Extension. Along both sides, from the westerly curb line
of Route U.S. 206 to Bayard Lane.
Mount Lucas Road. Both sides, between Valley Road and Cherry Hill
Road.
Province Line Road. East side, between Pretty Brook Road and Audubon
Lane.
Riverside Drive West. East side, from the southerly curb line of Route 27
to a point 110 feet southerly therefrom.
Riverside Drive West. East side, from the northerly curb line of Prospect
Avenue northerly to the Riverside Elementary School driveway.
Snowden Lane. Both sides, from the northerly curb line of Route 27 to a
point 110 feet northerly therefrom.
Valley Road. South side, between Witherspoon Street and Route 206.
Witherspoon Street. West side, between Valley Road and the boundary
line of the Borough of Princeton.
§ T11-23.1.2. Thirty minute parking. [Ord. No. 92-26, § 2]
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle at any time for longer than 30
minutes upon any of the following streets or parking lots:
Witherspoon Street firehouse parking lot. The three visitor parking spaces
closest to Witherspoon Street.
§ T11-23.2. Prohibited on school days from 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
[Ord. No. 688, § 1; Ord. No. 834, § 1; Ord. No. 84-1, § 1; Ord. No.
2003-3, § 2; Ord. No. 2015-1]
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
4:00 p.m. on any day when public schools are in session upon any of the
following streets or parts of streets:
Franklin Avenue. South and west sides, between Walnut Lane and the
boundary line of the Borough of Princeton.
Guyot Avenue. North side, between Walnut Lane and Ewing Street.
Littlebrook Road North. North side, from a point 769 feet west of the
extended westerly edge of pavement of Rollingmead to Magnolia Lane.
Magnolia Lane. East side, from a point 113 feet south of the extended
southerly curb line of Abernathy Drive to Littlebrook Road North
Magnolia Lane. West side, between Abernathy Drive and Broadripple
Drive.
Prospect Avenue. South side, opposite Riverside School property.
Riverside Drive, West. West side, between Robert Road and Prospect
Avenue.
§ T11-23.1 PRINCETON CODE § T11-23.2
BAO:1476
Riverside Drive, West. East side, from the intersection with Prospect
Avenue to a point 430 feet northerly therefrom.
Stuart Road. Southerly side, between The Great Road and Hardy Drive.
Terhune Road. North side, opposite Johnson Park School property.
§ T11-23.2.1. Parking between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of
commercial vehicles with a gross weight greater than 6,000 pounds,
boats, campers and trailers. [Ord. No. 2001-19, § 1]
No person shall park on any township streets or parts of streets between the
hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. commercial vehicles with a gross weight
greater than 6,000 pounds, boats, campers or trailers.
DIVISION 6 - EMERGENCIES
§ T11-23.3. No parking; declared; signs and notice. [Ord. No. 762,
§ 1]
Upon the declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking upon
streets or sections of streets where temporary "EMERGENCY NO
PARKING" signs are displayed. The chief of police, or in his absence the
ranking police officer, is authorized to declare an emergency and to direct
the posting of such "EMERGENCY NO PARKING" signs when weather
conditions, accidents, fires or public celebrations dictate or require the
avoidance of hazards or other conditions which interfere with the free flow
of traffic.
Notification that the "EMERGENCY NO PARKING" signs are being or will
be posted shall be given to the operator or owner of any vehicle which has
been parked prior to the posting of the signs.
§ T11-23.4. Removal and redemption of vehicles in violation. [Ord.
No. 762, § 1]
Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this division shall
be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of
traffic, and any peace officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle.
The owner shall pay the reasonable costs of the removal and storage that
may result from such removal before regaining possession of the vehicle.
§ T11-23.5. When regulations effective. [Ord. No. 762, § 1]
The effectiveness of the provisions of this division is contingent on signs
being erected as required by law.
§ T11-23.6. Temporary municipal road closings. [Ord. No. 85-10,
§ 2]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-94.2, the chief of police of the Township of
Princeton or his next-in-command is hereby authorized to declare closed
§ T11-23.2 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T11-23.6
BAO:1477
to traffic for any lawful purpose any municipal roadway or portions of said
roadway which in the chief's opinion must be closed under emergency
conditions for public safety reasons.
DIVISION 6A - PROHIBITING PARKING TEMPORARILY FOR
SNOWPLOWING, SNOW REMOVAL AND OTHER EMERGENCIES
§ T11-23.6.1. Declaration of snow emergency; removal of vehicles.
[Ord. No. 85-26, § 1; Ord. No. 95-29, § 1.]
The chief of police, or his next-in-command, may declare a snow emergency
whenever significant snow is anticipated due to weather forecasts, or when
snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it can be determined that
a snow emergency exists. During a declared snow emergency, no vehicles
shall be parked on any municipally owned streets in the township. This
parking prohibition shall remain in effect after the snow has ceased until
the streets have been plowed sufficiently and to the extent that parking will
not interfere with the normal flow of traffic.
Any vehicle parked or standing in violation of this section shall be deemed
a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of traffic and
any police officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle. The owner of
such vehicle shall pay the reasonable cost of the removal and storage which
may result from such removal before regaining possession of the vehicle.
§ T11-23.6.2. (Reserved) [Ord. No. 85-26, § 1; repealed by Ord. No.
95-29, § 2]
§ T11-23.6.3. When regulations effective. [Ord. No. 85-26, § 1]
The effectiveness of the provisions of this division is contingent on signs
erected as required by law.
DIVISION 7 - COMMUNITY POOL PARKING YARD
§ T11-23.7. Defined. [Ord. 869, § 1; Ord. No. 85-10, § 1; Ord. No.
90-33, § 1; Ord. No. 2001-12, § 1]
As used in this division "community pool parking yard" means that certain
parking yard in and belonging to the township and located in the eastern
portion of Community Park between the community swimming pool and the
west side of Witherspoon Street.
§ T11-23.8. Parking prohibited (pool off-season); exceptions. [Ord.
No. 869, § 1; Ord. No. 85-10, § 1; Ord. No. 90-33, § 1; Ord. No.
2001-12, § 2]
No person shall park any vehicle in the community pool parking yard
between 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, except as follows:
§ T11-23.6 PRINCETON CODE § T11-23.8
BAO:1478
§ T11-23.8.1. Parking prohibited; exceptions. [Ord. No. 2013-6]
No person shall park any vehicle in the community pool parking, except as
follows:
§ T11-23.9. Parking within stalls. [Ord. No. 869, § 1; Ord. No. 85-10,
§ 1; Ord. No. 90-33, § 1; Ord. No. 2001-12, § 4]
No person shall park any vehicle in the community pool parking yard or
along the driveway leading to and from the parking yard except within a
parking stall designated by pavement markings, and no person shall park
any vehicle within any parking stall designated for emergencies unless such
vehicle is an emergency vehicle engaged in emergency activity.
§ T11-23.9.1. Permit parking. [Ord. No. 96-23, § 1; Ord. No.
2001-12, § 5]
The Princeton joint recreation board is authorized to operate within the
community pool parking yard a permit parking program, as follows:
(a) Persons participating in recreational activities sponsored by the
Princeton joint recreation board; or
(b) Township employees; or
(c) Visitors to the township municipal complex; or
(d) Others by authorization or by permit only.
(a) Persons participating in recreational activities sponsored by the
Princeton recreation board; or
(b) Municipal employees; or
(c) Visitors to the municipal complex.
(a) Between, on or about September 15 and May 15 or such specific dates
annually as determined by the board, said recreation board may
designate within the community pool parking yard parking spaces for
which parking permits on a monthly basis may be purchased.
(b) The charge per month shall be $20 per vehicle. Said fee may be waived
for permit parkers who are employees of the Princeton Regional School
System.
(c) Said recreation board may enter into an agreement within any township
business or institution providing for permit parking for the business or
institution's employees. That agreement shall include, but not be
limited to, providing for snow and ice removal within the parking yard
when necessary by the business and/or institution.54
54.Editor's Note: Former Section 11-23.9.1, Handicapped parking, established by Ordinance
No. 90-24, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 91-31.
§ T11-23.8 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T11-23.9.2
BAO:1479
§ T11-23.9.2. No parking. [Ord. No. 90-24, § 3; Ord. No. 2001-12,
§ 6]
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle at any time in the designated no
stopping or standing area at the west side of the Community Park Pool yard.
DIVISION 7.1 - POLICE DEPARTMENT PARKING YARD
§ T11-23.10. Defined. [Ord. No. 2013-6]
As used in this division "police department parking yard" means that certain
parking yard in and belonging to the township and located within the
following areas:
§ T11-23.11. Parking prohibited; exceptions. [Ord. No. 2013-6]
No person shall park any vehicle in the police department parking yard
Areas (a) and (b), except as follows:
§ T11-23.12. Parking within stalls. [Ord. No. 90-33, § 2; Ord. No.
2006-29, § 4]
No person shall park any vehicle in the police department parking yard or
along the driveway leading to and from the parking yard except within a
parking stall designated by pavement markings, and no person shall park
any vehicle within any parking stall designated or reserved for official police
(a) Located northerly of the Princeton Township Police Department main
building entrance between said building and the south side of Valley
Road.
(b) Located easterly of the Princeton Township Recreation Department
building between said building and the Princeton Township municipal
building.
(c) Located northerly of the Princeton Township Recreation Department
building said parking spaces located along and adjacent to the south
side of NJ State Highway Route 206.
(a) Police department vehicles; or
(b) Police department employees; or
(c) Visitors to the, police department.
No person shall park any vehicle in the police department parking yard
Area (c), except as follows:
(a) Sworn police department employees; or
(b) Recreation department municipal vehicles; or
(c) Sworn police department employees; or
§ T11-23.9.2 PRINCETON CODE § T11-23.12
BAO:1480
department vehicles unless said vehicle is a marked or unmarked official
police vehicle.
§ T11-23.13. (Reserved)55
DIVISION 8 - COMMUNITY PARK NORTH PARKING YARD
§ T11-23.14. Defined. [Ord. No. 91-31, § 1; Ord. No. 2001-12, § 7]
As used in this division, "Community Park North Parking Yard" means that
certain parking yard in and belonging to the township and located in and on
the north side of a tract of land commonly known as Community Park, which
lies adjacent to Mountain Avenue.
§ T11-23.15. Parking between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. [Ord. No.
91-31, § 1; Ord. No. 2001-12, § 8]
No person shall park any vehicle between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m. in the Community Park North parking yard at any time.
§ T11-23.16. Use of lot. [Ord. No. 91-31, § 1; Ord. No. 2001-12, § 9]
No person shall park any truck or bus in the Community Park North parking
yard at any time except while on business in Community Park or the
Mountain Lakes Preserve, or participating in recreation board sponsored
activities.
§ T11-23.16.1. Use of lot during concurrent events. [Ord. No.
2001-12, § 10.]
No person without authorization shall park any vehicle in the Community
Park North parking yard who is doing non-township related business at
Mountain Lakes if a township/recreation board sponsored event is running
in community park north concurrently.
§ T11-23.16.2. Facility permit parking. [Ord. No. 2001-12, § 11]
The recreation board may enter into a facility permit agreement with any
township business, institution, or for a function occurring off-site sponsored
by the business, institution or resident.
§ T11-23.17. Parking within stalls required. [Ord. No. 91-31, § 1;
Ord. No. 2001-12, § 12]
No person shall park any vehicle at any time in the Community Park
North parking yard except within a parking stall designated by pavement
markings thereon.
DIVISION 9 - HILLTOP PARK PARKING YARD
55.Editor's Note: Former Section 11-23.13, Handicapped parking, by Ordinance No. 90-24,
was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 91-31.
§ T11-23.12 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T11-23.18.1
BAO:1481
§ T11-23.18.1. Definition. [Ord. No. 2001-12, § 13]
As used in this division, "Hilltop Park parking yard" means that certain
parking yard in and belonging to the township and located in and on the
northeast side of a tract of land commonly known as Hilltop Park, which lies
adjacent to Bunn Drive.
§ T11-23.18.2. Parking between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. [Ord. No.
2001-12, § 14]
No person shall park any vehicle between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m. in the Hilltop Park in the Hilltop Park parking yard at any time.
§ T11-23.18.3. Use of parking yard. [Ord. No. 2001-12, § 15]
No person shall park any vehicle in the Hilltop Park parking yard at any
time except while on business in Hilltop Park or participating in recreation
board sponsored activities.
§ T11-23.18.4. Facility permit parking. [Ord. No. 2001-12, § 16]
The recreation board may enter into a facility permit agreement with any
township business, institution, or for a function occurring off-site sponsored
by the business, institution or resident.
§ T11-23.18.5. Parking within stalls required. [Ord. No. 2001-12,
§ 17]
No person shall park any vehicle at anytime in the Hilltop Park parking yard
except within a parking stall designated by pavement markings thereon.
DIVISION 10 - SMOYER PARK PARKING YARDS
§ T11-23.18.6. Definition. [Ord. No. 2001-12, § 18]
As used in this division, "Smoyer Park parking yards" means that certain
parking yard in and belonging to the township and located (a) in and on the
west side of a tract of land commonly known as Smoyer Park active side,
which lies adjacent to Snowden Lane; and (b) in and on the north side of
a tract of land commonly known as Smoyer Park passive side, which lies
adjacent to Herrontown Road.
§ T11-23.18.7. Parking from dawn to dusk. [Ord. No. 2001-12, § 19]
No person shall park any vehicle after dusk or before dawn in the Smoyer
Park Parking yards at any time.
§ T11-23.18.8. Use of parking yard. [Ord. No. 2001-12, § 20]
No person shall park any vehicle in the Smoyer Park parking yards at any
time except while on business in Smoyer Park or participating in recreation
board sponsored activities.
§ T11-23.18.1 PRINCETON CODE § T11-23.18.9
BAO:1482
§ T11-23.18.9. Facility permit parking. [Ord. No. 2001-12, § 21]
The recreation board may enter into a facility permit agreement with any
township business, institution or for a function occurring off site sponsored
by the business, institution or resident.
§ T11-23.18.10. Parking within stalls required. [Ord. No. 2001-12,
§ 22]
No person shall park any vehicle at any time in the Smoyer Park parking
yards except within a parking stall designated by pavement markings
thereon.
DIVISION 11 - FARM VIEW FIELDS PARKING YARD
§ T11-23.18.11. Defined. [Ord. No. 2009-12, § 1]
As used in this small division, "Farm View Fields parking yard" means that
certain parking yard in and belonging to the township and located within
the Farm View Fields adjacent to Great Road.
§ T11-23.18.12. Parking from dawn to dusk. [Ord. No. 2009-12, § 1]
No persons shall park any vehicle between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m. in the Farm View Fields parking yard.
§ T11-23.18.13. Use of parking yard. [Ord. No. 2009-12, § 1]
No person shall park any vehicle in the Farm View Fields parking yard at
any time except while on business in the Farm View Fields or participating
in recreation board sponsored activities within the park.
§ T11-23.18.14. Parking within stalls required; other regulations.
[Ord. No. 2009-12, § 1]
No person shall park any vehicle at any time in the Farm View Fields
parking yard except within a parking stall designated by pavement
markings thereon.
No person shall allow any vehicle to stop or stand along the westerly curb of
the Farm View Fields parking yard at any time where indicated. No person
shall engage in the loading or unloading of passengers or equipment from a
vehicle so as to obstruct any driveway or any no stopping or standing zone
within the Farm View Fields parking yard.
§ T11-23.18.9 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T11-23.18.14
BAO:1483

ARTICLE III
Storage of Certain Vehicles
§ T11-24. Definition. [Ord. No. 658, § 6]
"Person" or "owner," as used in this article, shall mean any individual
person, group of persons, partnership, corporation, firm or association or
any other entity.
§ T11-25. Public property. [Ord. No. 658, § 1; Ord. No. 1034, § 1;
Ord. No. 86-11, § 4]
No person shall park, leave or store any inoperable, unlicensed or
uninspected motor vehicle, truck, trailer, or automotive parts on any public
lands or premises, including bicycle paths as designated in sections 4A-2(c)
and 4A-3 of this Code, except in case of emergency and then for a period
of not more than 48 hours. Any motor vehicle, truck, trailer or automotive
parts which are parked, left or stored in violation of this section, upon order
of the police department, may be removed from said public property to a
suitable storage place. Notice of the place to which the vehicle is removed
shall be given promptly to the owner or custodian of the vehicle, if known.
The vehicle shall be released from storage to the owner or person having
the right of possession of such only upon payment of the cost of such
removal and storage. Unclaimed vehicles shall be disposed of as early as
possible, in the manner provided by law for the disposition of abandoned
motor vehicles. The provisions of this section shall be in addition to other
remedies provided for violations of this article.
§ T11-26. Private property. [Ord. No. 658, § 2]
No person shall park, leave, store or maintain any inoperable, unlicensed
or uninspected motor vehicle, truck trailer or automotive parts, excepting
vehicles used for farming or agricultural purposes, for a period of more than
30 days from any private lands or premises.
§ T11-27. Permitting use of land for storage. [Ord. No. 658, § 3]
No owner or occupier of any private lands or premises shall permit or
suffer any inoperable, unlicensed or uninspected motor vehicle, truck trailer
or automotive parts, excepting vehicles used for farming or agricultural
purposes, to be parked, left, stored or maintained on his lands or premises
for more than 30 days.
§ T11-28. Exemptions from article. [Ord. No. 658, § 4]
This article shall not apply to motor vehicles, truck trailers or automotive
parts located or stored in garages or other buildings or to commercial
garage operations; provided, that after December 31, 1969, such motor
vehicles, truck trailers or automotive parts shall be stored or located within
an area enclosed by fence, hedge or evergreens, screening the area from
the public highways and surrounding property owners.
§ T11-24 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T11-29
BAO:1485
§ T11-29. Penalties. [Ord. No. 658, § 5]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be liable to
a fine of not more than $200 or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding
90 days, or both, and each day in which such violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ T11-29 PRINCETON CODE § T11-29
BAO:1486
ARTICLE IV
Motor Driven Vehicles
§ T11-30. Definitions. [Ord. No. 844, § 1; Ord. No. 2009-7, § 1]
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
AUTOMOBILE — Any four-wheeled conveyance designed primarily for use
upon roadways.
HIGHWAYS — The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained, when any part thereof is open to the use of the public
for purposes of vehicular travel.
LOW SPEED VEHICLE — A four-wheeled vehicle with an attainable speed of
more than 20 miles per hour but no more than 25 miles per hour on a paved
surface. It cannot be powered by gas or diesel fuel and must comply with
federal safety standards as noted in CRFS. 517.500 and the requirements
of N.J.S.A. 39:4-31.2(b) requiring the display on the vehicle of a safety decal
as provided by the manufacturer affixed in a conspicuous place on the rear
of the vehicle and state in prominent lettering "25 MPH Vehicle." It must be
titled, registered and insured in the State of New Jersey.
MOTOR DRIVEN VEHICLE — Any conveyance propelled in whole or in
part by other than muscular power, except an automobile or aircraft or a
conveyance that runs only upon stationary rails or tracks.
OPERATION; OPERATE — The propelling of a vehicle in whole or in part by
other than muscular power, as distinguished from the running of a vehicle's
motor or engine while the vehicle is stationary; or, to cause such propelling
of a vehicle.
PROPERTY — Real property, excepting roadways and shoulders, but
including sidewalks, bicycle paths, driveways and other accessways or
paths.
REGISTERED VEHICLE — Any motor driven vehicle actually registered or
licensed pursuant to title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey.
ROADWAY — That portion of a public street or highway that is improved,
designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or
shoulder.
SHOULDER — That portion of the highway, exclusive of and bordering the
roadway, designed for emergency use but not ordinarily to be used for
vehicular travel.
UNREGISTERED VEHICLE — Any motor driven vehicle not actually
registered or licensed pursuant to title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New
Jersey, whether or not such registration is permitted or required by law.
§ T11-30 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T11-31
BAO:1487
§ T11-31. Regulation of use of unregistered motor driven vehicles.
[Ord. No. 844, § 1]
No person owning or having control over any registered motor driven
vehicle shall operate such vehicle or permit or suffer such to be operated
in or upon any property in the township; except, that such vehicle may
be operated in or upon property that is not owned by the township if the
written consent of the owner or occupant of the property is first obtained
and such consent is at all times in the possession of the custodian or
operator of such vehicle while the vehicle is operated on such property.
§ T11-31.1. Regulation of use of registered motor driven vehicles.
[Ord. No. 844, § 1; Ord. No. 90-24, § 2]
No person owning or having control over any registered motor driven
vehicle shall operate such vehicle or permit or suffer such to be operated in
or upon any property in the township other than a driveway, parking area or
other area, way or access provided by the owner or occupant of the property
for the passage or parking of such vehicle; except, that such vehicle may
be operated in or upon other than such driveway, area, way or access on
property that is not owned by the township if the written consent of the
owner or occupant of the property is first obtained and such consent is at
all times in the possession of the custodian or operator of such vehicle while
the vehicle is being operated on other than such driveway, area, way or
access.
§ T11-31.2. Order to remove vehicle. [Ord. No. 844, § 1]
Any police officer may order any person owning or having control over or
operating any vehicle that is operated on any property in violation of section
11-31 or section 11-31.1 to remove such vehicle from such property, and the
failure of such person to comply with such order shall constitute a separate
or additional violation of this article.
§ T11-31.3. Removal of vehicle by police. [Ord. No. 844, § 1]
Any police officer may cause any vehicle that is operated on any property
in violation of section 11-31 or section 11-31.1 to be removed from the
property to a suitable storage place. Notice of the place to which the vehicle
is removed shall be given promptly to the owner or custodian of the vehicle,
if known. The vehicle shall be released from storage to the owner or person
having the right of possession of such only upon payment of the cost of such
removal and storage. Unclaimed vehicles shall be disposed of, as nearly as
possible, in the manner provided by law for the disposition of abandoned
motor vehicles. The provisions of this section shall be in addition to other
remedies provided for violations of this article.
§ T11-31 PRINCETON CODE § T11-31.4
BAO:1488
§ T11-31.4. Muffler required for unregistered vehicles. [Ord. No.
844, § 1]
No person owning or having control over any unregistered motor driven
vehicle shall operate such vehicle or suffer or permit such to be operated
unless at all times during operation it is equipped with a muffler in good
working order and has no device that would permit a cut-out or by pass of
the muffler.
§ T11-31.5. Operation of unregistered vehicles in loud manner
prohibited. [Ord. No. 844, § 1]
No person owning or having control over any unregistered motor driven
vehicle shall operate such vehicle or suffer or permit such to be operated in
such manner as to create loud, unnecessary or unusual noise.
§ T11-31.5.1. Operating of low speed vehicle. [Ord. No. 2009-7, § 2]
A low speed vehicle as that term is defined in section 11-30 hereinabove
may operate on Alexander Street and Sycamore Road, their entire length.
§ T11-31.6. Exemptions from article. [Ord. No. 844, § 1]
The provisions of this article shall not apply to:
§ T11-31.7. Covering of vehicles to prevent load spillage. [Ord. No.
88-42, § 2]
No person owning or having control over any motor driven vehicle shall
operate such vehicle or suffer or permit such vehicle to be operated in such
manner as to allow the spillage, leakage or otherwise loss of any load being
transported in said motor driven vehicle. Adequate covering materials shall
be required of any vehicle necessary to prevent the leakage, spillage or loss
of any load being carried by that vehicle.
(a) Police, fire or other emergency vehicles.
(b) Vehicles engaged in construction or maintenance work while so
engaged or while going to or returning from such work.
(c) Vehicles engaged in agricultural or horticultural work, including lawn
mowing while so engaged or while going to or returning from such
work.
(d) Motorized wheel chairs.
(e) Cases in which the regulations of this article are inconsistent with state
law or in which regulation has been or shall be preempted by state law.
§ T11-31.4 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T11-31.8
BAO:1489
§ T11-31.8. Prohibition on idling of diesel powered motor vehicles
on township streets. [Ord. No. 2004-9, § 1]
Pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:27-14.3, no person may cause, suffer, allow or permit
the engine of a diesel powered motor vehicle to idle for more than three
consecutive minutes on streets within the Township of Princeton, if the
vehicle is not in motion with the following exceptions:
(a) The above provisions shall not apply:
(1) A diesel bus while it is discharging or picking up passengers;
(2) A motor vehicle stopped in a line of traffic;
(3) A motor vehicle whose primary power source is utilized in whole or
in part for necessary and definitively prescribed mechanical
operation other than propulsion, passenger compartment, heating
or passenger compartment airconditioning;
(4) A motor vehicle being, or waiting to be examined by a state or
federal motor vehicle inspector;
(5) An emergency motor vehicle in an emergency situation;
(6) A motor vehicle is being repaired;
(7) A motor vehicle while it is being engaged in the process of
connection or detachment of a trailer or of an exchange of trailer;
or
(8) A motor vehicle manufactured with a sleeper berth while it is being
used in a nonresidentially zoned area by the vehicle's operator for
sleeping or resting, unless the vehicle is equipped with a functions
auxiliary power system designed in whole or in part to maintain
cabin or sleeper berth comfort or to mitigate cold weather startup
difficulties;
(9) A motor vehicle at the vehicle operator's place of business where
the motor vehicle is permanently assigned may idle for 30
consecutive minutes;
(10) A motor vehicle may idle for 15 consecutive minutes when the
vehicle engine has been stopped for three or more hours.
(b) Furthermore, no person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit any
emission control apparatus or element of design installed on any diesel
powered motor vehicle or diesel engine to be disconnected, detached,
deactivated or in any other way rendered inoperable or less effective in
respect to limiting or controlling emissions than it was designed to be
by the original equipment or vehicle manufacturers, except for the
purpose of diagnostics, maintenance, repair or replacement and only
for the duration of such operation.
§ T11-31.8 PRINCETON CODE § T11-31.9
BAO:1490
§ T11-31.9. Idling of gasoline fueled motor vehicles on township
streets. [Ord. No. 2004-9, § 2]
Pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:27-14.3, no person may cause, suffer allow or permit
the engine of a gasoline fueled motor vehicle to idle for more than three
consecutive minutes on streets within the Township of Princeton if the
vehicle is not in motion with the following exceptions:
§ T11-31.10. Penalty. [Ord. No. 2004-9, § 3]
Any person who operated a motor vehicle or owns a motor vehicle which
he/she permits to be operated on Township streets in violation of sections
11-31.8 or 11-31.9 of this Code shall be liable for a minimum penalty of a
fine of not less than $100 and not more than $1,000. In addition, any person
violating sections 11-31.8 and 11-31.9 may be subject to imprisonment not
exceeding 90 days or may be required to perform community service for
a period not exceeding 90 days, all in accordance with section 1-6 of said
Code. Any person who is convicted of violating sections 11-31.8 and 11-31.9
within one year of the date of a previous violation of the same provision
and who was fined for that previous violation shall be sentenced by the
court to an additional fine as a repeat offender. The additional fine imposed
by the court upon a person for a repeated offense shall not be less than
the minimum or exceed the maximum penalty set forth herein, but shall be
calculated separately from the fine imposed for violation of sections 11-31.8
and 11-31.9.
(a) The above provisions shall not apply to:
(1) Autobuses while discharging or picking up passengers;
(2) Motor vehicles stopped in a line of traffic;
(3) Motor vehicles whose primary and/or secondary power source is
utilized in whole or in part for necessary and definitively prescribed
mechanical operation other than propulsion, passenger
compartment heating or air conditions;
(4) Motor vehicles being or waiting to be examined by state or federal
motor vehicle inspectors;
(5) Emergency motor vehicles in an emergency situation;
(6) Motor vehicles while being repaired;
(7) Motor vehicles while engaged in the process of connection,
detachment or exchange of trailers; or
(8) Motor vehicles manufactured with a sleeper berth while being used
in a nonresidentially zoned area by the vehicle's operator for
sleeping or resting.
§ T11-31.9 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T11-31.10
BAO:1491

ARTICLE V
Princeton Shopping Center
DIVISION 2 - TRAFFIC REGULATION
§ T11-32. Findings and purpose. [Ord. No. 760, § 1]
The township committee hereby finds that the lack of enforceable traffic
and parking regulations in the shopping center, which is a privately owned,
commercial complex containing parking yards and parking places that are
open to the public or to which the public is invited, has contributed
significantly to traffic and parking conditions in the shopping center that
pose a substantial threat to the health, safety and welfare of motorists and
pedestrians therein. It is therefore the purpose of the township committee
by this article to regulate traffic and the parking of vehicles in the parking
yards and parking places of the shopping center, pursuant to the New Jersey
Revised Statutes, section 40:48-2.46, and thereby to promote the public
health, safety and welfare.
§ T11-33. Definitions. [Ord. No. 760, § 1; Ord. No. 767, § 1; Ord. No.
789, § 1; Ord. No. 841, § 1]
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
BICYCLE — A two-wheeled vehicle propelled by muscular power only.
BUS STOP — An area of the shopping center so designated on the traffic
map and marked with signs and pavement markings giving notice thereof
as shown on such map.
CURB LOADING ZONE — An area of the shopping center so designated on
the traffic map and marked with signs and pavement markings giving notice
thereof as shown on such map.
DRIVEWAY — A driveway in the shopping center designated as such and
shown on the traffic map and having the following pavement markings:
The outer edges marked with white lines; the center line, in the case of a
driveway for two-way traffic, marked with a yellow line; and the traffic lanes
marked with white directional arrows.
MOTORIZED BICYCLE — A two-wheeled, pedal vehicle having a helper
motor characterized in that the maximum piston displacement is less than
50 centimeters, rated no more than one and five tenths brake horsepower
and capable of or designed for a maximum speed of no more than 25 miles
per hour.
No stopping or standing zone. An area of the shopping center so designated
on the traffic map and marked with signs and pavement markings giving
notice thereof as shown on such map.
ONE-WAY DRIVEWAY — A driveway designated for one-way traffic in the
direction indicated by the arrows shown on the traffic map and marked with
appropriate signs giving notice thereof 45 shown on such map.
§ T11-32 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T11-33
BAO:1493
PRINCETON SHOPPING CENTER OR SHOPPING CENTER — That complex
of commercial buildings and appurtenant access and parking areas located
on North Harrison Street and Terhune Road in the Township of Princeton,
Mercer County, New Jersey, known and designated on the township tax map
as Lot 425, Section 33.
TRAFFIC MAP — That certain map of the shopping center annexed hereto
and made part hereof and entitled "Traffic Flow Plan, Princeton Shopping
Center prepared by the Princeton Township Engineering Department,
December 1972, revised February 22, 1973, revised May 6, 1974."
VEHICLE — Any conveyance, however propelled, including bicycles.
YIELD INTERSECTION — An intersection of driveways marked by a "yield
right of way" sign as shown on the traffic map.
§ T11-34. Speed limit. [Ord. No. 760, § 1]
No person shall drive a vehicle in the shopping center at a rate of speed
exceeding 15 miles per hour; provided, that signs giving notice of such
speed limit are posted as shown on the traffic map.
§ T11-35. Traffic to stay on driveways; keeping to right. [Ord. No.
760, § 1]
All vehicular traffic in the shopping center shall stay within driveways or
within aisles or ways giving access to parking stalls or bicycle racks, except
when using parking stalls, bicycle racks, curb loading zones or bus stops as
permitted by this article. Upon all driveways except one-way driveways, the
driver of a vehicle shall drive it on the right half of the drive-way. He shall
drive a vehicle as closely as possible to the right-hand edge of the driveway
unless it is impracticable to travel on that side of the driveway, and except
when overtaking and passing another vehicle.
§ T11-36. One-way driveways. [Ord. No. 760, § 1]
A vehicle shall be driven upon a one-way driveway only in the direction
designated.
§ T11-37. Yielding right of way at yield intersections. [Ord. No. 760,
§ 1.]
No driver of a vehicle shall enter upon or cross an intersecting driveway
marked with a "yield right of way" sign, at a yield intersection, without first
slowing to a reasonable speed for existing conditions and visibility, stopping
if necessary, and the driver shall yield the right of way to all traffic on
the intersecting driveway which is so close as to constitute an immediate
hazard.
§ T11-33 PRINCETON CODE § T11-37.1
BAO:1494
§ T11-37.1. Stop intersections. [Ord. No. 93-4, § 1]
The following stop intersections are hereby designated within the Princeton
Shopping Center:
Stop Intersections Stop Sign(s) On
Southerly one-way entrance to the
Princeton Shopping Center from
Harrison Street North.
Northeasterly corner of said
entrance at its intersection with the
adjacent internal driveway.
Driveway intersection adjacent to
southeasterly corner of Princeton
Shopping Center building complex.
Southeasterly corner of said
intersection stopping traffic
proceeding in an easterly direction
approaching the driveway along the
rear of the shopping center
complex.
§ T11-38. Parking within parking stalls or bicycle racks only. [Ord.
No. 760, § 1]
No person shall park a vehicle other than a bicycle in the shopping center at
any time except within a parking stall marked on the pavement, unless such
vehicle shall be occupying a curb loading zone or bus stop as permitted by
this article. No person shall park a bicycle in the shopping center at any
time except in a bicycle rack furnished for that purpose.
§ T11-38.1. Handicapped parking space. [Ord. No. 82-8, § 1; Ord.
No. 91-1, § 2; Ord. No. 92-26, § 4; Ord. No. 93-20, § 1; Ord. No.
2003-23, § 2]
§ T11-39. Stopping or standing. [Ord. No. 760, § 1; Ord. No. 86-12,
§ 2; Ord. No. 2006-38, § 1]
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle at any time in any no stopping or
standing zone.
§ T11-40. Standing or parking — Curb loading zones. [Ord. No. 760,
§ 1]
(a) Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.46, the 29 parking spaces designated as
handicapped parking spaces within the Princeton Shopping Center are
hereby designated as restricted parking spaces for use by persons who
have been issued special vehicle identification cards for handicapped
parking pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-205 by the Division of Motor Vehicles.
No other person shall be permitted to park in said spaces.
(b) Any person parking a motor vehicle in a restricted parking space
without a special vehicle identification card shall be liable to a fine of
$250 for the first offense and, for subsequent offenses, a fine of at least
$250 and up to 90 days community service on such terms and in such
form as the court shall deem appropriate, or any combination thereof.
§ T11-37.1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T11-40
BAO:1495
§ T11-41. Same — Bus stops. [Ord. No. 760, § 1]
No person shall park or stand any vehicle in a bus stop other than a
passenger bus in the course of a regularly scheduled run that has been
authorized or approved as required by law.
§ T11-42. Bicycles, motorized vehicles, skateboards, roller skates,
roller blades and scooters prohibited in the interior courtyard.
[Ord. No. 760, § 1; Ord. No. 841, § 2; Ord. No. 88-11, § 4; Ord. No.
2001-4, § 1]
The use of the following shall not be permitted in the interior courtyard
and adjacent sidewalks of the shopping center or upon the walkways in
or adjoining the inner courtyard, provided that signs giving notice of such
prohibition are posted as shown on the traffic map or as will otherwise give
reasonable notice:
§ T11-43. Signs, pavement markings and bicycle racks —
Installation and maintenance. [Ord. No. 760, § 1; Ord. No. 767, § 2]
The signs, pavement markings and bicycle racks required by this article
shall be procured and installed as provided in an agreement between the
township and the owner of the shopping center dated September 17, 1973,
which is hereby approved. The cost of the initial procurement and
installation of the signs and pavement markings shall be divided equally
between the parties, and the cost of the initial procurement and installation
(a) No operator of a vehicle shall stand or park the vehicle in a curb loading
zone for a period of time longer than is necessary for the loading or
unloading of passengers or materials.
(b) No operator of a vehicle that is occupying a curb loading zone while
engaged in the loading or unloading of passengers or materials shall
permit any part of such vehicle or materials to extend beyond the limits
of the curb loading zone in such manner as to obstruct any driveway or
any no stopping or standing zone between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and
6:00 p.m., except in an emergency and then only after prior notice to
and approval of the chief of police.
(a) Bicycles and motorized vehicles, excluding motorized vehicles utilized
by handicap persons, except when occupying a rack furnished for the
purpose of parking such or while being walked to or from such rack;
(b) Scooters;
(c) Skateboards;
(d) Roller skates; and,
(e) Roller blades.
DIVISION 2 - ADMINISTRATION
§ T11-40 PRINCETON CODE § T11-43
BAO:1496
of the bicycle racks shall be borne by the owner of the shopping center, all
as provided in such agreement.
Certain entrance and exit radii in the shopping center shall be realigned so
as to conform to increased radii, as shown on the traffic map, and the cost
thereof shall be borne by the owner of the shopping center, all as provided
in such agreement.
The owner of the shopping center shall, subsequent to initial procurement
and installation, maintain such signs, pavement markings and bicycle racks
in good condition at no cost or expense to the township. To that end, the
owner shall repair, restore or replace the same or any of them within a
reasonable time after receipt of written notice from the chief of police to do
so, which notice shall be sent by certified mail to the address of the owner
as shown on the township tax records.
Certain parking stalls in the shopping center shall be removed by the owner
in accordance with the traffic map.
§ T11-44. Same — Specifications and approval. [Ord. No. 760, § 1]
All signs and pavement markings required by this article, and the
installation thereof, shall conform to specifications established by or
pursuant to law for signs and markings for like regulation of traffic on
the public highways. If there be no such specifications for any particular
sign or pavement marking, and in the case of bicycle racks and curbing,
the same shall conform to specifications established by the chief of police,
and the specifications so established by him shall, as nearly as practicable,
be patterned after specifications for signs and markings for similar traffic
regulation on the public highways.
All signs, pavement markings, bicycle racks and curbing realignment
required by this article or plans thereof shall be submitted to the chief
of police for his approval prior to the installation thereof, and the chief
of police shall approve the same if he finds that they comply with the
provisions of this section.
§ T11-43 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T11-44
BAO:1497

ARTICLE VI
Traffic Control Signals
§ T11-45. Locations established. [Ord. No. 785, § 2; Ord. No. 95-17,
§ 5; Ord. No. 2006-24, § 1; Ord. No. 2006-29, § 1; Ord. No. 2007-27,
§ 1]
Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated at the following
intersections:
Alexander Street and Lawrence Drive.
Alexander Street and Faculty Road.
Ewing Street and Mount Lucas Road.
Harrison Street North and Bunn Drive.
Harrison Street North and Terhune Road.
Mercer Street - Lovers Lane and Olden Lane.
The Great Road (CR 601) and Cherry Valley Road: In accordance with the
as-built traffic signal plan revision dated August 14, 2007.
The Great Road and Princeton Day School driveway.
Witherspoon Street - Mount Lucas Road and Valley Road.
§ T11-46. Conformity with state law and regulations. [Ord. No. 785,
§ 2.]
All such traffic control signal installations shall be in accordance with
the provisions of an act concerning motor vehicles and traffic regulations,
subtitle 1 of title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey, and shall conform
to the design and be maintained in operation in the manner authorized by
the department of transportation of the state.
§ T11-45 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T11-46
BAO:1499

ARTICLE VII
Griggs Farm Development
§ T11-47. Findings and purpose; title 39 jurisdiction. [Ord. No.
92-3, § 1]
The Griggs Farm Condominium Association has filed a written consent with
the Township of Princeton that the provisions of subtitle 1, chapter 39 of
the Revised Statutes of New Jersey, be made applicable to Griggs Drive and
Billie Ellis Lane within the Griggs Farm condominium development located
within said township. The township committee hereby finds that extending
title 39 jurisdiction as requested is appropriate in order to promote the
public health, safety and welfare and said title 39 jurisdiction is hereby
extended to the said roadways within the Griggs Farm development
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1, et seq.
§ T11-48. Handicapped parking. [Ord. No. 92-3, § 1; Ord. No.
2003-23, § 3]
All parking stalls shall be 12 feet wide and as shown on the final approved
site plan which is on file in the office of the township engineer and said
spaces shall be signed with reserved parking and penalty plates (R-7-8
sign) in the designated parking areas for persons who have been issued the
handicapped parking permits by the New Jersey Division of Motor Vehicles.
Any person parking a motor vehicle in a restricted parking space without a
special vehicle identification card shall be liable for a fine of $250 for the
first offense and, for subsequent offenses, a fine of at least $250 and up to
90 days community service on such terms and in such form as the court
shall deem appropriate, or any combination thereof.
§ T11-49. Through streets.
§ T11-50. Speed limits. [Ord. No. 92-3, § 1; Ord. No. 2002-2, § 1]
(a) The following streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as
through streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the near right side of
each street intersecting the through street.
Billie Ellis Lane, entire length from Cherry Valley Road to Griggs Drive.
Griggs Drive, entire length from Billie Ellis Lane to Cherry Valley Road.
(b) The following intersections are hereby designated stop intersections:
Intersections Stop On
Cherry Valley Road and Griggs
Drive
Griggs Drive
Billie Ellis Lane and Cherry Valley
Road [Ord. No. 92-3, § 1]
Billie Ellis Lane
§ T11-47 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T11-50
BAO:1501
§ T11-51. Tow-away. [Ord. No. 92-3, § 1]
Any vehicle parked or standing in violation of the parking regulations on
Griggs Drive and Billie Ellis Lane set forth in section 11-52 below may be
removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
§ T11-52. (Reserved) [Ord. No. 92-3, § 1; Ord. No. 94-1, § 1;
repealed by Ord. No. 2002-2, § 1]
§ T11-53. Penalty. [Ord. No. 92-3, § 1]
The penalty provisions of section 11-7 of this Code shall apply to any
violations of the provisions of this article.
(a) The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following roads are:
Road MPH Limits
(Reserved)
§ T11-50 PRINCETON CODE § T11-53
BAO:1502
ARTICLE VIII
Traffic Channelization Controls
§ T11-54. Locations established. [Ord. No. 92-26, § 3; Ord. No.
2002-7, § 1]
Traffic channelization patterns shall be established as provided for herein
at the following intersections:
Ewing Street - Harrison Street North.
Valley Road.
§ T11-55. Channelization controls. [Ord. No. 92-26, § 3; Ord. No.
2002-7, § 2]
The following channelization controls shall pertain to the following
locations:
(a) Ewing Street - Harrison Street North:
(1) Proceeding northerly on Ewing Street approaching the Harrison
Street North intersection, the first opening connection between
Ewing Street and Harrison Street North, which runs a distance of
approximately 25 feet to 30 feet, shall be designated one-way only
from Ewing Street to Harrison Street North. There shall be
installed signage designating this area one-way only. There shall be
installed on the northerly intersection of this connection to
Harrison Street North a "no left turn" sign. There shall be installed
on the southerly side of the intersection a stop sign.
(2) On Ewing Street proceeding northerly at the intersection of
Harrison Street North beyond the one-way connection to Harrison
Street North referred to in paragraph (2) hereinabove, there shall
be installed a stop sign at the most northerly edge of the existing
island requiring vehicles to stop on Ewing Street before proceeding
northerly on Harrison Street North. Additionally, at said location a
"no right turn" sign shall additionally be installed. Finally, in said
area located on the Harrison Street North side of said intersection
a "no left turn" sign shall be installed.
(3) Proceeding on Harrison Street North in a northerly direction, there
shall be installed on the easterly side of said Harrison Street North
a "no left turn" sign at the intersection of Harrison Street North
and Ewing Street at the northerly edge of the traffic island referred
to in paragraph (2) hereinabove.
(b) Valley Road - at State Highway Route 206 Intersection:
(1) Proceeding westerly on Valley Road approaching its intersection
with State Highway Route 206, channelization controls shall be
installed to require right turn only onto State Highway Route 206
§ T11-54 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T11-55
BAO:1503
North and to prohibit left hand turns at said intersection. Said
channelization shall also facilitate permitting right turns only into
Valley Road from State Highway Route 206 northerly and to
prohibit left hand turns onto Valley Road from State Highway Route
206 proceeding in a southerly direction.
§ T11-55 PRINCETON CODE § T11-55
BAO:1504
ARTICLE IX
Washington Oaks at Princeton Development
§ T11-56. Findings and purpose; Title 39 jurisdiction. [Ord. No.
95-30, § 1; Ord. No. 2010-24, § 1]
The Washington Oaks at Princeton Condominium Association has filed a
written consent with the Township of Princeton that the provisions of
Subtitle 1, Chapter 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey be made
applicable to all of the streets and roadways within their development,
including the eyebrow roads off of Benjamin Rush Lane. The township
committee hereby finds that extending Title 39 jurisdiction as requested
is appropriate in order to promote the public health, safety and welfare
and said Title 39 jurisdiction is hereby extended to all of the streets and
roadways within the Washington Oaks at Princeton development, including
the eyebrow roads off of Benjamin Rush Lane, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1,
et seq.
§ T11-57. Through streets. [Ord. No. 95-30, § 1]
§ T11-58. Stop Intersections. [Ord. No. 95-30, § 1]
The following stop intersections are hereby designated:
Stop Intersection Stop Sign(s) On
State Highway 206/Lawrenceville
Road and Hutchinson Drive Hutchinson Drive
Mercer Road and Hutchinson Drive Hutchinson Drive
Leicester Court and Fleming Way Leicester Court
Warren Court and Fleming Way Warren Court
Benjamin Rush Lane and Neil Court Neil Court
Wilkinson Way and Rodney Court Rodney Court
Wilkinson Way and St. Clair Court St. Clair Court
Wilkinson Way and Bullock Drive Bullock Drive
§ T11-59. Speed limits. [Ord. No. 95-30, § 1]
The following speed limits are hereby established for traffic along the
streets or parts of streets enumerated in this section, and regulatory and
warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect the designated
speed limits as authorized by the New Jersey Department of Transportation:
(a) The following streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as
through streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the near right side of
each street intersecting the through street.
Hutchinson Drive, entire length.
§ T11-56 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T11-59
BAO:1505
§ T11-60. One-way streets. [Ord. No. 95-30, § 1]
The following streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as one-way
in the direction indicated:
Street Direction Location
Brickhouse Road North Around the circular
portion of the roadway
§ T11-61. Parking prohibited. [Ord. No. 95-30, § 1; Ord. No.
2010-24, § 2; Ord. No. 2014-31]
No person shall park any vehicle on any of the streets or parts of streets
referenced in this article except within a parking stall designated by
pavement markings. Parking may also take place within the development in
driveways and designated parking lots.
§ T11-61.1. Handicapped parking zones. [Ord. No. 2007-5, § 1; Ord.
No. 2013-14; Ord. No. 2017-40]
(a) Twenty-five miles per hour:
(1) Benjamin Rush Lane, both directions, entire length.
(2) Brickhouse Road, both directions, entire length.
(3) Bullock Drive, both directions, entire length.
(4) Fleming Way, both directions, entire length.
(5) Leicester Court, both directions, entire length.
(6) Neil Court, both directions, entire length.
(7) Rodney Court, both directions, entire length.
(8) St. Clair Court, both directions, entire length.
(9) Warren Court, both directions, entire length.
(10)Wilkinson Way, both directions, entire length.
(a) Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.46, the below referenced parking spaces
are designated as handicapped parking spaces within the Washington
Oaks at Princeton development. These spaces are hereby designated as
restricted parking spaces for use by persons who have been issued
special vehicle identification cards for handicapped parking pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 39:4-205 by the Motor Vehicle Commission or have been issued
license plates by said Commission of handicapped drivers. No other
person shall be permitted to park in said spaces. If any person parking a
motor vehicle in a restricted parking space without a special vehicle
identification card or handicapped license plates shall be liable to a fine
of $250 for the first offense and, for subsequent offenses, a fine of at
§ T11-59 PRINCETON CODE § T11-61.1
BAO:1506
§ T11-62. Tow away. [Ord. No. 95-30, § 1]
Any vehicle parked or standing in violation of the parking regulations
provided for in section 11-61 may be removed by towing the vehicle at the
owner's or operator's expense.
§ T11-63. Penalties. [Ord. No. 95-30, § 1]
The provisions of section 11-7 of this Code shall apply to any violations of
the provisions of this article.
least $250 and up to 90 days community service on such terms and in
such form as the Court shall determine appropriate, or any combination
thereof. The handicapped parking spaces shall be as follows:
(1) Washington Oaks at Princeton development. One space to be
located in the northerly most corner of the parking lot fronting
Building 5 on Brickhouse Road.
(2) Washington Oaks at Princeton Development. One space to be
located in the easterly most corner of the parking lot fronting
building 4 on Brickhouse Road in the immediate vicinity of 416
Brickhouse Road;
(3) Washington Oaks at Princeton Development. One space to be
located at the parking lot fronting building 4 on Brickhouse Road in
the immediate vicinity of 417 Brickhouse Road.
(4) Washington Oaks at Princeton Development. One space to be
located at the southerly most corner of the parking lot fronting
Building 1 on Brickhouse Road in the immediate vicinity of 123
Brickhouse Road.
§ T11-61.1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T11-63
BAO:1507

ARTICLE X
Work Zone Regulations
§ T11-64. Adoption of Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
for Streets and Highways. [Ord. No. 2010-10, § 1]
The township committee hereby finds and declares that problems of traffic
control occur when traffic must be moved through or around street
construction, maintenance operation, and utility work, above and below
ground which requires blocking the roadway and obstructing the normal
flow of traffic; and that such obstructions are or can become dangerous
when not properly controlled. In order to better promote the public health,
safety, peace and welfare, it is necessary to establish controls and
regulations directed to the safe and expeditious movement of traffic through
construction and maintenance zones and to provide safety for the work
force performing these operations.
§ T11-65. Preconstruction meetings. [Ord. No. 2010-10, § 1]
It shall be the responsibility of the person, contractor, or of a public utility
wishing to conduct work that will interfere with the normal traffic flow, on,
under, above any roadway or roadway right-of-way, to contact the traffic
safety bureau of the township police department and the township
engineering department in order to arrange a review or preconstruction
meeting to submit plans for the safe movement of traffic during such period
of construction activity. Any person, contractor or utility who fails to comply
with this section prior to the start of such work or whose plans are not
approved by the traffic safety unit of the police department is in violation of
this part.
§ T11-66. Street or highway construction under the jurisdiction of
the township. [Ord. No. 2010-10, § 1]
Prior to the commencement of any work within the right-of-way or easement
area of any street or highway under the jurisdiction of the township a permit
is required to be obtained from the township engineering department.
Permits shall be obtained in accordance with sections 19-5 and 19-9 of
the township code. All work shall be completed in accordance with all
applicable provisions of Chapter 19 of the Code.
§ T11-67. Hazardous conditions. [Ord. No. 2010-10, § 1]
The person, contractor, or utility, prior to the start of any work, shall
provide the traffic safety bureau of the police department and the township
engineering department with at least two emergency contact phone
numbers to be called in case of emergency problems at the construction or
maintenance site. If for any reason emergency contacts cannot be reached,
or if the emergency contact person does not respond to the call from the
police department to correct such hazardous conditions within one hour of
notification, the township may respond to correct such hazardous condition.
§ T11-64 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T11-67
BAO:1509
The reasonable fees for such emergency service by the township shall be
charged to the person, contractor, or utility responsible for such hazardous
conditions.
§ T11-68. Hours permitted for construction. [Ord. No. 2010-10, § 1]
There shall be no construction, maintenance operations, or utility work on
any roadway in the township before the hour of 9:00 a.m. or after 3:00 p.m.
This time limit may be adjusted to permit work to prior to 9:00 a.m. or after
3:00 p.m. by the traffic safety bureau of the township police department in
consultation with the township engineering department. If it is determined
by the traffic sergeant or designee that the construction or maintenance
operations prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 4:00 p.m. would substantially delay
traffic or cause a safety or health hazard, the work shall then be permitted
only between 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
§ T11-69. Road closing and detours. [Ord. No. 2010-10, § 1]
Road closing and/or traffic detours and diversions shall not be permitted
unless approved by the township police department traffic safety bureau in
consultation with the township engineering department.
§ T11-70. Traffic control. [Ord. No. 2010-10, § 1]
Traffic control shall be posted at all construction or maintenance sites
when determined by the township police department and in accordance
with the M.U.T.C.D., when that same is necessary to provide for the safe
and expeditious movement of traffic. Traffic control must be carried out by
certified personnel or police, depending on site conditions.
§ T11-71. Stop work. [Ord. No. 2010-10, § 1]
The traffic safety unit of the township police department and the township
engineering department shall have the authority to stop work, including the
removal of equipment and vehicles, material stored with the street right-ofway,
backfilling of open excavations and/or other related work, in order to
abate any nuisance and/or safety hazard or for any violation of the part.
§ T11-72. Site preparation. [Ord. No. 2010-10, § 1]
It is to be expressly understood that no materials, vehicles or equipment
are to be placed in the roadway, sidewalk or right-of-way area until all
construction signs, lights, devices, and pavement markings are installed.
§ T11-73. Violations and penalties. [Ord. No. 2010-10, § 1]
Any person, contractor or utility who commits a violation of this part shall,
upon conviction thereof for first offense pay a fine of not less than $100 nor
more than $500 and/or be imprisoned for a term not exceeding 90 days.
For a second offense, upon conviction thereof, pay a fine of not less than
$250 and/or be imprisoned for a term not exceeding 90 days. For a third
§ T11-67 PRINCETON CODE § T11-73
BAO:1510
offense, upon conviction thereof, pay a fine of not less than $500 and/or
imprisoned for a term not exceeding 90 days. A separate offense shall be
deemed to have occurred on each day during or on which a violation occurs
or continues.
§ T11-73 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T11-73
BAO:1511
Chapter T12
MUNICIPAL COURT
Editor's Note: This Chapter 12 will be part of the Princeton Code.
§ T12-1. Court Established. [Ord. No. 2014-11]
A municipal court for the municipality of Princeton is established pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1 et seq.
§ T12-2. Name of court. [Ord. No. 2014-11]
The name of the municipal court shall be the "Municipal Court of
Princeton."
§ T12-3. Appointment and term of office of municipal court judge.
[Ord. No. 2014-11]
There shall be a municipal judge of the municipal court, who shall be
appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the council and shall
serve for a term of three years from the date of appointment and until a
successor is appointed and qualified. Any appointments to fill a vacancy not
caused by the expiration of term shall be made for the unexpired term only.
§ T12-4. Additional municipal judges. [Ord. No. 2014-11]
With the written consent of the Assignment Judge of the vicinage, the
municipality may (1) increase the number of judgeships of the municipal
court, or (2) appoint one or more temporary judges. Each term of a
temporary judge shall not exceed one year. Appointment of any of the
foregoing additional judges shall be made by the mayor with the advice and
consent of the council.
§ T12-5. Designation of acting judge. [Ord. No. 2014-11]
Subject to the Rules of Court, the Assignment Judge of the vicinage may
appoint an acting judge of the municipal court to serve as judge temporarily
when the municipal court judge is unable to hold the municipal court or for
other cause.
§ T12-6. Qualification of judges; compensation. [Ord. No. 2014-11]
The municipal court judge shall be a resident of New Jersey and an attorneyat-
law admitted to practice in this state for at least five years. The municipal
court judge shall be paid an annual salary in an amount prescribed by the
council in the annual salary ordinance.
§ T11-73 PRINCETON CODE § T12-7
BAO:1512
§ T12-7. Territorial jurisdiction. [Ord. No. 2014-11]
The municipal court shall have jurisdiction over cases arising within
Princeton, namely, those specified offenses enumerated in N.J.S.A. 2B:12-17,
and as may be otherwise conferred by the laws of New Jersey.
§ T12-8. Time and place of holding court. [Ord. No. 2014-11]
The municipal court shall be held at the municipal building at 400
Witherspoon Street, Princeton, NJ at the time designated by the municipal
judge, and at such other times as the business of the court may require,
subject to the rules applicable to municipal courts.
§ T12-9. Municipal Court Administrator; Deputy Administrator;
Court Employees. [Ord. No. 2014-11]
There shall be a certified municipal court administrator and a certified
deputy court administrator of the municipal court, as well as other
necessary employees. The court administrator and deputy court
administrator shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent
of the council, and shall be compensated in accordance with the annual
salary ordinance. The municipal court administrator and deputy
administrator are authorized to attest in the municipal judge's name and
sign any process, order, warrant, or judgment issued by the municipal court.
The administrator and deputy administrator shall also have the authority
granted by law and by the Rules of Court to administrators and clerks of
courts of record.
The judge of the municipal court may designate, in writing, an acting
administrator or deputy administrator to serve temporarily for an absent
administrator until the absent administrator returns or until a new
administrator is appointed.
§ T12-10. Bond or insurance. [Ord. No. 2014-11]
Before assuming the duties of office, the municipal judge or municipal court
administrator, deputy administrator or other municipal court employees
who handle money in the scope of their employment shall be covered by a
bond or insurance against loss or misappropriation of funds payable to the
municipality in an amount and with terms set by the council.
§ T12-11. Officers empowered to execute process. [Ord. No.
2014-11]
Any law enforcement officer, or any other person authorized by law, may
act in the service, execution and return of process, orders, warrants and
judgments issued by the municipal court.
§ T12-12. Officials authorized to act for court. [Ord. No. 2014-11]
§ T12-7 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T12-12
BAO:1513
Chapter T13
OFFENSES — MISCELLANEOUS
For state law as to crimes generally, see R.S., § 2A:85-1 et seq. As to
disorderly persons, see R.S., § 2A:169-1 et seq.
§ T13-1. Disorderly persons — Invasion of privacy. [Ord. No. 96-13,
§ 1]
No person shall, within the boundaries of the township, invade the privacy
of any person by going upon the private property of another surreptitiously
or furtively for the purpose of peering through windows, doors or other
openings, thereby engaging in conduct associated with what is commonly
known as a "Peeping Tom."
(a) The administrator or deputy administrator of the municipal court, when
authorized by the municipal judge, may exercise the power of the
municipal court to administer oaths for complaints filed with the
municipal court and to issue warrants and summonses.
(b) The police officer in charge of the police station, other than an officer
who participated in the arrest of the defendant, may exercise the power
of the municipal court to administer oaths for complaints filed with the
municipal court. Any police officer may issue summonses related to
such complaints and may as authorized by the Rules of the Court issue a
summons in lieu of an arrest for an offense committed in the officer's
presence.
(c) The authority of the municipal court to set conditions of pre-trial
release may be exercised by the administrator or deputy administrator
of the municipal court who is authorized by the municipal judge; or by
the police officer in charge of the police station, other than an officer
who participated in the arrest of the defendant. The authority may be
exercised only in accordance with bail schedules promulgated by the
Administrative Office of the Courts or by the municipal court.
(d) Except as otherwise provided by the Rules of Court, a person charged
with a non-indictable offense shall be released on summons or personal
recognizance without unnecessary delay and within 12 hours after
arrest unless the judge or court administrator has set the conditions for
pretrial release and the conditions remain unmet.
(e) A person acting for the municipal court as authorized in this section
shall immediately file the complaint, warrant, summons or
recognizance which was the subject of the action with the municipal
court.
§ T12-12 PRINCETON CODE § T13-1a
BAO:1514
§ T13-1a. Public nuisance.56 [Ord. No. 98-27, § 1; Ord. No. 2001-20,
§ 8; Ord. No. 2010-16, § 1]
No person shall, within the boundaries of the township, by any means or
instrumentality, (1) interfere with or annoy the comfort or general wellbeing
of the inhabits of the township, (2) disturb the public peace and
quiet by loud, boisterous or vulgar conduct, (3) create or participate in
a diversion, disturbance or disorderly assemblage, in any public place,
tending to breach the peace, (4) engage in acts of vice and immorality in
any public place, or (5) obstruct or interfere with any person lawfully being
in a public place.
Editor's Note: As to disorderly conduct by taxicab drivers, see § 21-11 of
this Code.
§ T13-2. (Reserved) [Reserved by Ord. No. 2015-44 § 1]
Editor's Note: For regulations pertaining to feeding of deer see Princeton
Borough Code Chapter 6, Animal Control.
§ T13-3. (Reserved) [Reserved by Ord. No. 2015-44 § 1]
§ T13-4. (Reserved) [Reserved by Ord. No. 2015-44 § 1]
§ T13-5. (Reserved) [Reserved by Ord. No. 2015-24]
§ T13-5.1. Urinating in public prohibited. [Ord. No. 2006-31, § 1]
No person shall urinate or place any bodily waste of humans on any public
street, sidewalk or other place in public view, or to which the public is
invited or has access, except in a lavatory toilet or similar facility.
§ T13-6. Firearms — Discharge prohibited and possession
regulated.57 [Ord. No. 21 § 1; Ord. No. 743, § 1; Ord. No. 91-32, § 1]
No person shall discharge any firearm within the boundaries of the
township or across any part of the township; nor shall any person have
in his possession a loaded gun while within 450 feet of any occupied
building, except the owner or lessee of such building or a person specifically
authorized in writing by such owner or lessee,58 or within 450 feet of a
school playground. The provisions of this section shall be subject to section
13-7.
6 (Reserved)
56.
57.For state law as to weapons generally, see N.J.S.A., § 2A:151-1 et seq.
58.For state law as to trespass upon lands while carrying a gun, see N.J.S.A., § 2A:63-1.
§ T13-1a BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T13-7
BAO:1515
§ T13-7. Same — Persons to whom section 13-6 is not applicable.
[Ord. No. 221, § 2; Ord. No. 230, § 1; Ord. No. 743, § 2; Ord. No. 788,
§ 1; Ord. No. 843, § 1; Ord. No. 91-32, § 1; Ord. No. 2002-10, § 1]
Section 13-6 shall not apply to:
(a) Law enforcement officers of any governmental agency while in the
performance of their duties.
(b) Members of any legally recognized military organization while in the
performance of their duties.
(c) Members of government or civilian rifle or pistol clubs duly organized
in accordance with the rules prescribed by the National Board for the
Promotion of Rifle Practice, in going to or from their several places of
target practice and carrying weapons necessary for such practice
(provided such firearms are unloaded), and in discharging firearms as
part of such practice; provided, that a copy of the charter is filed with
the chief of police and that the practice range, if within the township, is
approved by the chief of police as complying with nationally recognized
standards for such ranges.
(d) Privately employed security personnel who are authorized by law to
carry firearms, while in the performance of their duties.
(e) Persons engaged in skeet or trap shooting on ranges approved by the
chief of police as complying with recognized standards for such ranges.
(f) Persons lawfully using firearms in the protection of person or property.
(g) Persons engaged in the discharge of firearms loaded only with blanks at
commemorative events or historic pageants; provided, however, that
such persons shall have obtained prior thereto a special permit from the
township committee upon application prescribed by the township clerk.
(h) Members of nonprofit civic or government-affiliated organizations while
engaged in a rifle target shoot sponsored by such organization;
provided, that the range for such target shoot shall first be approved by
the chief of police as complying with recognized standards and that the
location of such range, the type and calibre of the ammunition to be
used at such target shoot and the date of such shoot shall first be
approved by the chief of police as being reasonably commensurate with
the safety of the public and the participants in the shoot; and provided,
further that the sponsor of the target shoot shall first file with the chief
of police a certificate of an insurance company authorized to do
business in the state evidencing that the sponsor and the township are
insured against liability for personal injury or death in the sum of at
least $500,000 and against liability for property damage, arising from
the conducting of the target shoot, in the sum of at least $20,000.
(i) Persons lawfully participating in the New Jersey State Division of Fish
and Wildlife permit muzzleloader six-day firearm and special permit
§ T13-7 PRINCETON CODE § T13-7
BAO:1516
§ T13-8. Gaming — Gambling prohibited.59 [Ord. No. 98, § 3;
Repealed by Ord. No. 1000, § 1]
§ T13-9. Same — Possession of lottery slips, etc., prohibited.60 [Ord.
No. 98, § 8; Repealed by Ord. No. 1000, § 1]
§ T13-10. Malicious mischief — Damage, etc., to property.61 [Ord.
No. 98, § 4; Repealed by Ord. No. 1000, § 1]
§ T13-10.1. through 13-10.4 (Reserved) [Ord. No. 2014-35]
§ T13-11. Smoking prohibited inside any buildings within the
Princeton Township Municipal Complex. [Ord. No. 84-14, § 1; Ord.
No. 2002-11, § 1]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3D-48(b), smoking is prohibited inside at anytime
any area within the Princeton Township Municipal Complex buildings. For
purposes of this section, the Municipal Complex buildings shall consist of
the following buildings:
Princeton Township Municipal Building including police department
facilities, recreation building, public works department building and the
Valley Road building. As required by N.J.S.A. 26:3D-50, signs shall be posted
on the exterior and within the interior of said buildings indicating "smoking
shotgun season, either sex, provided that said persons meet the
following criteria:
(1) Have a valid firearm hunting license and muzzleloader rifle permit
or special shotgun deer permit as required by N.J.A.C.
7:25-5.28(f)(1) and N.J.A.C. 7:25-5.29(f)(1);
(2) Have received written permission from a landowner or landowner's
agent to hunt said property and have said written permission in the
person's possession at the time of hunting;
(3) Agree to hunt from a standing tree or structure as permitted by the
New Jersey State Game Code, if requested by a landowner;
(4) Agree to hunt only within the deer management zone designated by
the New Jersey State Division of Fish and Wildlife;
(5) Agree to park their motor vehicles in areas designated by the
landowner.
59.For state law as to gaming generally, see R.S., § 2A:112-1 et seq. As to prohibition against
lotteries and sale of lottery tickets on premises licensed to sell alcoholic beverages, see
§ 3-12 of this Code. As to prohibition against gambling and illegal games on premises
licensed for sale of alcoholic beverages, see § 3-13. As to prohibition against slot machines
on premises licensed for sale of alcoholic beverages, see § 3-14. As to prohibition against
gambling in connection with bagatelle and amusement games, see § 4-5.
60.For state law as to lotteries, see N.J.S.A., § 2A:121-1 et seq.
61.For state law as to malicious mischief, see N.J.S.A., § 2A:122-1 et seq.
§ T13-7 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T13-11
BAO:1517
prohibited." Any person smoking in violation of this section is subject to a
fine of $25 pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3D-51.
§ T13-12. Same — No smoking signs to be posted. [Ord. No. 84-14,
§ 1; Repealed by Ord. No. 2002-11, § 2]
§ T13-13. Riots and mobs.62 [Ord. No. 98, § 1; Repealed by Ord. No.
1000, § 1]
§ T13-14. Fleeing or attempting to elude a police officer by means
of motor vehicle, on foot or by other means. [Ord. No. 1002, § 1]
§ T13-15. Placement of graffiti on public and private property —
Purpose. [Ord. No. 2002-22, § 1]
The township committee of the Township of Princeton finds and declares
that the use of broad-tipped pens, paint spray cans, pencils, pens, crayons
or other marking devices to write graffiti, verbal or otherwise, on the
walls or other available spaces on public or private buildings, vehicles,
areas or facilities, causes a serious defacement of such buildings, vehicles
and areas, public and private; contributes to the deterioration of property
values, as well as offending the public's right, public and private, not to have
unsightly and unlawful graffiti on, with defacement of, public and private
property; and constitutes a deleterious practice contrary to the public
health and welfare. The township committee further finds and declares that
such contempt for the property rights of private citizens, as well as public
facilities, contributes to the erosion of law and order and contributes to the
deterioration of quality of life of the community and must be opposed and
punished.
§ T13-16. Graffiti — Definitions. [Ord. No. 2002-22, § 2]
(a) No person, while operating a motor vehicle on any street or highway,
shall knowingly flee from or attempt to elude any law enforcement
officer, after having received a signal from such officer to bring the
vehicle to a complete stop.
(b) No person, while on foot or traveling by any other means, shall
knowingly flee from or attempt to elude any law enforcement officer,
after having received a signal from such officer to halt.
(a) GRAFFITI - Shall mean any letters, numbers, word or words, writing,
inscription, symbol, drawing, carving, etching or other marking of any
nature whatsoever which defaces, obliterates, covers, alters, damages,
mars or destroys the real or personal property of another. It shall not
include easily removable chalk markings on the public sidewalk and
street in connection with traditional children's games, such as bases for
62.For state law as to offenses concerning mobs, riots and unlawful assemblies, see N.J.S.A.
§ 2A:126-1 et seq. As to liability of municipalities for damage resulting from mob violence
or riots, see N.J.S.A. 2A:48-1 et seq.
§ T13-11 PRINCETON CODE § T13-16
BAO:1518
§ T13-17. Graffiti — Prohibited acts and conduct. [Ord. No. 2002-22,
§ 3]
§ T13-18. Graffiti — Removal. [Ord. No. 2002-22, § 4]
§ T13-19. Graffiti — Prosecution of persons under 18 years of age;
action in court. [Ord. No. 2002-22 § 4]
stickball, handball, hopscotch and the like, nor temporary, easily
removable chalk markings in connection with any lawful business or
public purpose or activity.
(b) MINOR - Shall mean juvenile under 18 years of age as set forth in
N.J.S.A. 2A:4A-22.
(c) FAMILY COURT - Shall mean the Superior Court of New Jersey,
Chancery Division, Family Part as set forth in N.J.S.A. 2A:4A-22.
(a) No person shall without the prior consent of the owner, purposely or
knowingly place, write, paint, draw, figure, inscribe or mark or cause
any graffiti to be placed upon any public property or the real or
personal property of another.
(b) Any parent, guardian or custodian in charge of a minor who is convicted
of violating this section who has neglected to properly supervise such
minor shall be presumed to have aided and assisted, allowed and/or
permitted said minor in violation of the provisions of this section.
(c) Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:53A-15, any parent, guardian or other person
having custody of a minor who fails or neglects to exercise reasonable
supervision and control of the conduct of such minor, shall be liable in a
civil action for any willful, malicious or unlawful injury or destruction by
such minor of the real or personal property of another.
(a) Any person owning either real or personal property upon which graffiti
has been placed in violation of section 13-17 herein above, shall remove
said graffiti from said property within 10 days of being notified by the
township that graffiti has been placed on said property. All costs
associated with the removal of said graffiti shall be reimbursed to said
property owner through the township municipal court in accordance
with the penalty provisions set forth in section 13-20(b) herein below.
(a) If, at the time of the offense charged under section 13-17, any person(s)
shall be under the age of 18 years, the Family Court shall have exclusive
jurisdiction of the trial of such minor(s), and such minor(s) shall be
surrendered to the court, and the case, including all papers and process
thereto, shall be transferred to said court as provided in N.J.S.A.
21A:4A.
(b) The parent, legal guardian or other person having care and custody of
said minor shall be summoned or arrested and brought before the judge
§ T13-16 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T13-19
BAO:1519
§ T13-20. Graffiti — Violations and penalties. [Ord. No. 2002-22 § 6]
§ T13-21. Private storm drain inlet retrofitting requirements -
Purpose. [Ord. No. 2011-7, § 1]
This section of the Code requires the retrofitting of existing storm drain
inlets which are in direct contact with repaving, repairing, reconstruction,
or resurfacing or alterations of facilities on private property, to prevent
the discharge of solids and floatables (such as plastic bottles, cans, food
wrappers and other litter) to the municipal separate storm sewer system(s)
operated by the township so as to protect public health, safety and welfare,
and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ T13-21.1. Private storm drain inlet retrofitting requirements —
Definitions. [Ord. No. 2011-7, § 1]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this section clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
of the municipal court of the township and may be subject to the
penalties provided herein.
(a) Penalties. Any person who shall violate any provisions of section 13-17
shall be subject to the penalties as provided in section 1-6 or required to
perform community service. Each day in which such violation continues
shall constitute a separate offense. Repeat offenders, as that term is
defined in section 1-6, shall be subject to the penalties set forth in
section 1-6.
(b) Restoration of property; reimbursement for same. As a condition of
sentencing, the municipal court shall have the authority to order that
the offender be responsible for cleaning, repairing, painting or
otherwise restoring the damaged property to the condition it was prior
to being damaged, if said property has not already been restored by the
owner in accordance with section 13-18 herein above. If the owner of
the property has already restored the property, the municipal court
shall assess a fine or penalty which shall be intended to reimburse the
owner for the expenses incurred by said owner to restore the property.
The owner shall file a certification setting forth the amount of said
expenses with the court clerk. In the event that the property has not
been restored by the owner, and the offender is unable to clean, repair,
paint or otherwise restore the damaged property to the condition it was
prior to being damaged, then the municipal court shall have the further
authority to order that said offender make the necessary monetary
restitution to restore the property to its original undamaged condition.
(c) Exception — Offender under the age of 18. An exception to subsections
(a) and (b) applies in the case of a minor who shall, upon conviction, be
subject to the penalties imposed on him/her by the judge of the Family
Court.
§ T13-19 PRINCETON CODE § T13-21.1
BAO:1520
consistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
§ T13-21.2. Private storm drain inlet retrofitting requirements —
Prohibited conduct. [Ord. No. 2011-7, § 1]
No person in control of private property (except a residential lot with one
single-family house) shall authorize the repaving, repairing (excluding the
repair of individual potholes), resurfacing (including top coating or chip
sealing with asphalt emulsion or a thin base of hot bitumen, reconstructing
or altering any surface that is in direct contact with an existing storm drain
inlet on that property unless the storm drain inlet either:
§ T13-21.3. Private storm drain inlet retrofitting requirements —
Design standard. [Ord. No. 2011-7, § 1]
Storm drain inlets identified in Section 13-21.2 above shall comply with
the following standard to control passage of solid and floatable materials
through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this paragraph, "solid and
floatable materials" shall mean sediment, debris, trash and other floating,
suspended or settleable solids. For exemptions to this standard see
subsection (c) hereinbelow.
(a) MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) - Shall mean a
conveyance or system of conveyances including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches,
manmade channels or storm drains) that is owned or operated by the
township, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.
(b) PERSON - Shall mean any individual, corporation, company,
partnership, firm, association or political subdivision of this state
subject to municipal litigation.
(c) STORM DRAIN INLET - Shall mean an opening in a storm drain used to
collect stormwater runoff and includes, but is not limited to, a grate
inlet, curb-opening inlet, slotted inlet and combination inlet.
(d) WATERS OF THE STATE - Shall mean the ocean and its estuaries, all
springs, streams and bodies of surface or ground water, whether
natural or artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or
subject to its jurisdiction.
(a) Already meets the design standard below to control passage of solid
and floatable materials; or
(b) Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in Section 13-21.3 below
prior to the completion of the project.
§ T13-21.1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T13-21.3
BAO:1521
(a) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever they
use a grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect
stormwater from that surface into a storm drain or surface water body
under that grate:
(1) The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT) bicycle
safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT Bicycle
Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning and Design
Guidelines (April 1996); or
(2) A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate has an
area of no more than seven square inches, or is no greater than
one-half inches across the smallest dimension.
Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates in grate
inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening portion) of combination
inlets, grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates
and grates of spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground
surfaces include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open
channels and stormwater basin floors.
(b) Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear space in
that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if the curb opening
has two or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no more than seven
inches or be no greater than two inches across the smallest dimension.
(c) This standard does not apply:
(1) Where the township engineer agrees that this standard would
cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could not practicably
be overcome by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that
meet these standards;
(2) Where flows are conveyed through any device (e.g., end of pipe
netting facility, manufactured treatment device or a catch basin
hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all
solid and floatable materials that could not pass through one of the
following:
a. A rectangular space four and five-eighths inches long and 1 1/2
inches wide (this option does not apply for outfall netting
facilities); or
b. A bar screen having a bar space of one-half inches.
(d) Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has parallel bars
with one inch spacing between the bars; or
(e) Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places
Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet this standard is an
§ T13-21.3 PRINCETON CODE § T13-21.3
BAO:1522
§ T13-21.4. Private storm drain inlet retrofitting requirements —
Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2011-7, § 1]
Sections 13-21 through 13-21.5 shall be enforced by the township engineer
of the township.
§ T13-21.5. Private storm drain inlet retrofitting requirements —
Penalties. [Ord. No. 2011-7, § 1]
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of sections
13-21-13-21.3 shall be subject to a fine for each storm drain inlet that is not
retrofitted to meet the design standard pursuant to section 1-6 of this Code.
Chapter T14
PEDDLING, SOLICITING AND RELATED ACTIVITIES; ANTILITTERING
REGULATION
Editor's Note: Chapter 14 to be included in the Princeton Code.
undertaking that constitutes an encroachment or will damage or
destroy the New Jersey Register listed historic property.
§ T13-21.3 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T13-21.5
BAO:1523

ARTICLE I
Solicitors, Canvassers, Peddlers and Transient Merchants
§ T14-1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2014-12]
The purposes of this article are to (1) deter the use of peddling or soliciting
to gain access to homes or other premises for criminal purposes; (2)
maintain peace, comfort, quiet and privacy for residents of Princeton while
balancing the same against the opportunity for peddlers and solicitors to
exercise their rights of free speech; (3) discourage unethical, dishonest and
illegal business practices; (4) prevent dishonest solicitation of funds; (5)
protect the safety and welfare of the inhabitants of Princeton as well as
peddlers and solicitors engaged in such activities within Princeton; and (6)
preserve safety and order in and about the streets, sidewalks, businesses
and public areas in Princeton. All application fees to be charged for the
issuance of licenses are not to be considered as revenue, but are charges
for the purpose of covering the expenses of administering this article.
§ T14-2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2014-12]
CANVASSER — See definition of solicitor below.
COMMERCIAL — Shall mean pertaining to or engaging in commerce, or
prepared, done or acting with the sole emphasis on salability or profit. The
term commercial shall not include charitable speech.
INDIVIDUAL — Shall mean any natural person.
ITINERANT VENDOR — See definition of transient merchant below.
MERCHANDISE — Shall mean all goods, wares, food, drinks, fruits,
vegetables, magazines, subscriptions, periodicals, printed material, farm
products, all types of articles of personal property, all types of orders or
contracts for services, home improvements or alterations, and anything
that may be sold or distributed shall be considered "merchandise" for the
purpose of this article.
NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION — Shall mean (1) any organization tax
exempt under § 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code; (2) any
organization created under or otherwise subject to the provisions of Title
15A of the New Jersey Statutes; (3) any organization, whether or not
qualified under § 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code or subject to the
provisions of Title 15A of the New Jersey Statutes, whose primary purpose is
to benefit the school age children of Princeton, including but not limited to
schools, school clubs and organizations, Cub Scouts, Boy Scouts, Brownies,
Girl Scouts and similar youth groups; (4) any organization whose primary
purpose is to advocate for religious or political causes, whether or not
qualified under § 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code or subject to Title
15A of the New Jersey Statues; or (5) any department within Princeton's
municipal governmental structure, including, but not limited to, the Police
Department and any volunteer fire or first aid company that is located in,
has a substantial membership from or serves Princeton.
§ T14-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T14-2
BAO:1525
PEDDLER — Shall mean any person who goes from house to house or place
to place by any means of conveyance, carrying or transporting merchandise
for the purpose of selling and delivering the merchandise to customers. The
term peddler shall include the words, hawker and huckster, and shall also
include a person who from time to time offers merchandise for sale from
one or more fixed locations out of doors, when the merchandise is displayed
or stored in a motor vehicle located on the property, whether the property
is owned by that person or by others.
PERSON — Shall mean and include any natural person, firm, partnership,
corporation, organization, club, or association or any principal, agent,
employee or representative thereof.
SOLICITOR — Shall mean an individual who goes from house to house or
from place to place by any means of conveyance, soliciting or attempting to
take orders for the sale of merchandise or services of any kind for future
performance or delivery, whether or not such individual has, carries or
exposes for sale a sample of the merchandise or services, and whether
or not he is collecting advance payments on such sales or orders, or who
engages in any of the foregoing activities from a stationary location or any
street or any public place. The word solicitor shall also mean any individual
who goes from house to house or from place to place for the purpose of
obtaining contributions or subscriptions, or who does research analyses,
makes surveys or opinion polls, obtains rating data or similar information,
distributes advertisements or handbills of a commercial nature or who
engages in any similar work which involves a door to door or place to place
activity. The word solicitor shall also include the word canvasser.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT — Shall mean any person who merchandises
or sells with the intent to close out or discontinue a business within a
period of one year from the date of commencement and occupies a room,
building or other permanently constructed premises for the purpose of
selling merchandise. The words transient merchant shall also include the
words itinerant vendor.
§ T14-3. License required; exceptions.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any peddler, solicitor or transient merchant to
sell, offer for sale or distribute merchandise, printed material or
services within Princeton without first obtaining a license from the
clerk by filing an application for license, paying a license fee and
obtaining said license.
(b) The license requirements of this article shall not apply to the following:
(1) Any nonprofit organization as defined in section 14-2 of this article,
provided that the means of identification assigned by such
organization, if any, is carried by the peddler, solicitor or transient
merchant. If no means of identification is assigned by such
organization, the peddler, solicitor or transient merchant shall be
required to carry a bona fide means of identification, including but
§ T14-2 PRINCETON CODE § T14-3
BAO:1526
§ T14-4. Effect of license. [Ord. No. 2014-12]
Upon obtaining a license as hereinafter provided, a peddler, solicitor or
transient merchant may conduct licensed activities within Princeton only as
long as he adheres to the regulations set forth in this article and carries
the license upon his person or displays the license in a conspicuous place at
all times during the conduct of the licensed activities. The license shall be
shown to any individual upon request.
§ T14-5. Application for license.
An application for license shall be made upon forms provided by Princeton,
including a New Jersey State Bureau of Identification form authorizing
release of any criminal history record information to the Princeton Police
Department, shall be sworn to, shall be filed with the municipal clerk and
shall contain or be accompanied by the following information:
not limited to a valid driver's license or other government-issued
identification.
(2) Any person intending to distribute noncommercial or not-for-profit
handbills, pamphlets, leaflets, circulars, advertisements or printed
material.
(3) Any person (a) campaigning for any elected public office or public
question, which is to be voted upon in Princeton at a general,
special, primary or school board election, or in a national or State
election; (b) distributing handbills, pamphlets, leaflets, circulars,
advertisements or printed material with respect thereto; or (c)
otherwise engaging in political speech.
(4) Any person engaging in the advocacy of noncommercial or not-forprofit
causes, whether or not in connection with a larger
organization, or engaging in spontaneous speech, including, but
not limited, to speech between neighbors.
(5) Any person honorably discharged from the military of the United
States as defined by N.J.S.A. 45:24-9 and 24-10, possessing
corresponding identification in conformity with said statute.
(6) Any person who is an exempt fireman as defined by N.J.S.A. 45:24-9
and 24-10, possessing corresponding identification in conformity
with said statute.
(7) Any person holding a solicitation license or permit issued under any
legislation of the United States government or by a state agency
pursuant to statute.
(c) Nothing in this section shall be construed as exempting the persons or
organizations listed in section 14-3(b) from compliance with the
provisions of this article that do not deal with or relate to licenses.
§ T14-3 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T14-5
BAO:1527
(a) For solicitors and peddlers.
(1) Applicant's name, permanent address, local address(if different
from permanent address) and telephone number.
(2) Name and address of the organization or person(s)on whose behalf
soliciting or peddling is being made, together with telephone
numbers.
(3) A description of the nature of merchandise to be sold.
(4) Length of time for which license is desired.
(5) A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted
of any crime, disorderly persons offense or petty disorderly persons
offense involving deceptive business practices or fraud, or a
violation of any ordinance enacted in other municipalities
concerning peddling, solicitation or transient merchandising, when
and where the offense(s) occurred and the penalty imposed, if any.
(6) Motor vehicle registration number, make and model of any motor
vehicle used by the applicant in connection with his peddling or
soliciting.
(7) Applicant's photo identification, which the municipal clerk will
photocopy and attach to the application.
(8) If the applicant is an agent, employee or representative, he shall
attach to the application a letter from the person or organization
for whom the applicant works or represents, authorizing the
applicant to act as its agent, employee or representative and
assuming responsibility for the applicant's conduct.
(9) All applicants selling merchandise subject to sales tax shall submit
a copy of a valid certificate of authority issued by the Director of
the New Jersey Division of Taxation, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:32B-15,
empowering the applicant to collect sales tax. Certificates shall not
be required for the sale of property exempted from sales and use
taxation pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:32B-8.2. All licensees shall attach
the original certificate to their cart, stand, truck or other
merchandising device, as required by N.J.S.A. 54:32B-15.
(10) All applicants selling food items for immediate consumption shall
submit a copy of the board of health license.
(b) For Transient Merchants.
(1) Applicant's name, permanent address, local address (if any) and
telephone number.
(2) Description of the nature of the business or activity including the
average quantity, kind and value of the merchandise to be sold.
§ T14-5 PRINCETON CODE § T14-5
BAO:1528
(3) Applicant's photo identification, which the municipal clerk will
photocopy and attach to the application.
(4) The days during which the business is to be conducted.
(5) The name and addresses of the persons from whom the goods
making up the stock were or are to be purchased by the applicant.
(6) A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted
of any crime, disorderly persons offense or petty disorderly persons
offense involving deceptive business practices or fraud, or a
violation of any ordinance enacted in other municipalities
concerning peddling, solicitation or transient merchandising, when
and where the offense(s) occurred and the penalty imposed, if any.
(7) A bond in accordance with N.J.S.A. 45:24-5 in an amount equal to
25% of the value of the personal property shown in the disclosures
required by subsection (b)(2) above but in no event less than
$1,000. The bond shall be in effect for a period of one year from the
date of license issuance, shall indemnify and pay Princeton any
penalties or costs incurred in the enforcement of this section and
the purchaser of personal property a sum equal to at least the
amount of any payment such purchaser may have been induced to
make through the misrepresentation of the applicant, its agents,
servants or employees. The bond shall be in a form approved by the
municipal attorney.
(8) An instrument in accordance with N.J.S.A. 45:24-6 appointing the
clerk as the applicant's true and lawful agent.
(9) If the applicant is an agent, employee or representative, he shall
attach to the application a letter from the person or organization
for whom the applicant works or represents, authorizing the
applicant to act as its agent, employee or representative and
assuming responsibility for the applicant's conduct.
(10) All transient merchants are subject to the statutory requirements
set forth in N.J.S.A. 45:24-1 et seq., and shall be subject to the
penalties set forth therein in the event of a failure to comply with
any of said requirements.
(11) All applicants shall submit a copy of a valid certificate of authority
issued by the Director of the New Jersey Division of Taxation,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:32B-15, empowering the applicant to collect
sales tax. Certificates shall not be required for the sale of property
exempted from sales and use taxation pursuant to N.J.S.A.
54:32B-8.2. The licensee shall prominently display the original
certificate at his place of business as may be authorized by the
license, as required by N.J.S.A. 54:32B-15.
(12) All applicants selling food items for immediate consumption shall
submit a copy of the board of health license.
§ T14-5 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T14-6
BAO:1529
§ T14-6. Approval or rejection of application.
§ T14-7. Denial or issuance of license; expiration. [Ord. No.
2014-12]
(a) Following the filing of a complete application and payment of the
license fee as set forth in section 14-11 to the municipal clerk, the clerk
shall forward the application to the chief of police, who shall, as soon as
practicable but no later than within 30 days make such investigation,
within the limits of the resources available to the chief, which may
include background checks, of statements made in the application and
the business responsibility and character of the applicant or any
employee or agent who shall engage in the licensed activity, for the
protection of the public good. Where sufficient cause is shown therefor,
the chief of police shall have such additional time as may be reasonably
necessary to make the investigation.
(b) If, as a result of such investigation, the character or business
responsibility of the applicant or any employee or agent who shall
engage in the licensed activity is found to be unsatisfactory, the chief of
police shall endorse on such application his disapproval and the reasons
therefor and return the application to the clerk. The chief may
disapprove an application if such a disapproval is based on one or more
of the following findings with respect to the applicant:
(1) Conviction of any crime, disorderly persons offense or petty
disorderly persons offense involving deceptive business practices
or fraud, or a violation of any ordinance enacted in any municipality
concerning peddling, solicitation or transient merchandising.
(2) Record of breaches of peddling, solicitation or transient merchant
contracts.
(3) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements contained in the
application for license.
(c) In the absence of such findings, the chief of police shall find the
applicant satisfactory and shall endorse his approval on the application
and return the application to the clerk.
(a) If the applicant or any employee or agent who shall engage in the
licensed activity is found unsatisfactory by the chief of police, and he
endorses his disapproval upon the application, the clerk shall notify the
applicant by mail that the application is disapproved and shall deny
issuance of the license. Such notice shall be mailed within five working
days following the endorsement of disapproval by the chief of police.
(b) If the application is found to be satisfactory by the chief of police, the
clerk shall issue a license addressed to the applicant to conduct the
business applied for. The license shall be on a form issued by the clerk's
office.
§ T14-6 PRINCETON CODE § T14-7
BAO:1530
§ T14-8. Revocation of license.
§ T14-9. Appeal. [Ord. No. 2014-12]
Any person aggrieved by the action of the chief of police or municipal clerk
in the denial of an application for a license, or in the decision with reference
to revocation of a license, shall have the right to appeal to the council. The
council shall not hear any appeal unless the applicant has first made appeal
to the chief of police. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the clerk,
within 14 days after notice of the action complained of has been mailed to
such person's last known address, a written statement setting forth fully
the grounds for a hearing on such appeal. The council shall set a time and
place for hearing the appeal and a notice of the hearing shall be given to
(c) All peddling and soliciting licenses shall expire December 31 of the
calendar year in which they are issued unless, by their terms, they
expire prior to that time, and shall be limited to the express purpose set
forth therein. With respect to transient merchants, the license shall
expire no later than 180 days after its issuance.
(a) Licenses may be revoked by the chief of police, or his designee, for any
of the following causes:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements contained in the
application for license.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying out activities pursuant to the license.
(3) Violation of any provision of this article or another Princeton
ordinance.
(4) Conviction of any crime, disorderly persons offense or petty
disorderly persons offense involving deceptive business practices
or fraud.
(5) Violation of ordinances enacted in other municipalities concerning
peddling, solicitation or transient merchandising.
(b) Notice of revocation shall be personally communicated to the licensee,
and thereafter it shall be unlawful for the licensee or any of the
licensee's employees or agents to sell, offer for sale or distribute
merchandise or services in the municipality. If a hearing is requested by
a licensee, the licensee shall be provided with a notice of the hearing
before the chief of police or his designee. The notice shall be in writing,
setting forth the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the
hearing. The notice shall be served personally upon the licensee or
mailed postage prepaid to the licensee's address as given by the
licensee in making the application, at least five days prior to the date
set for the hearing, and no more than five days after receipt by the chief
of police or his designee of the written request for a hearing.
§ T14-7 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T14-9
BAO:1531
the applicant. The decision of the council on the appeal shall be final and
conclusive.
§ T14-10. General regulations. [Ord. No. 2014-12]
It shall be unlawful for a person to:
(a) Attempt to peddle or distribute merchandise or printed material, or
solicit funds or canvass for information, without first having identified
himself as a peddler, solicitor, transient merchant or canvasser
registered with the municipality and displaying the license issued
therefor.
(b) Have exclusive right to any location on public property.
(c) Enter or attempt to enter the land of any resident where such resident
has posted or placed a clearly visible sign indicating that such resident
does not wish to be disturbed by peddlers or solicitors.
(d) Refuse to leave a private dwelling or property after having been once
requested to do so by the owner or occupant thereof.
(e) Shout, cry out, blow a horn, ring a bell, or use any sound making or
amplifying device on any streets, parks or public places of the
municipality, or upon private property, that would create or become a
nuisance or noise disturbance as prohibited elsewhere this Code.
(f) Distribute obscene merchandise or printed material, or printed
material that advocates unlawful conduct.
(g) Litter the streets, public places or other property within the
municipality by any merchandise or printed material.
(h) Station, place, set up or maintain a cart, wagon, motor vehicle or other
vehicle, or allow it to remain on any sidewalk in a way that would:
(1) Restrict, obstruct, interfere with or impede any pedestrian's rightof-
way;
(2) Restrict, obstruct, interfere with or impede the ingress or egress
from the abutting property;
(3) Create or become a nuisance;
(4) Increase traffic congestion, cause or increase traffic delay or
hazard;
(5) Cause or create or constitute a danger to life, health or property.
(i) Peddle, solicit, offer to sell or solicit, or engage in the business of selling
except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
§ T14-9 PRINCETON CODE § T14-10
BAO:1532
(j) Peddle using a cart of the dimensions of which exceeds two feet in
width, four feet in length and four feet in height including wheel height,
while conducting business on any sidewalk.
(k) Use any cart which, when fully loaded with merchandise, cannot be
easily moved and maintained under control by the licensee only.
(l) Use, set up, attach, place or permit the use of any table, crate, carton,
rack, device or structure of any kind to increase the selling or display
capacity of the peddler's cart.
(m) Station, place, set up or maintain a peddler's cart or allow it to remain
on any sidewalk if to do so would reduce the unobstructed pedestrian
right-of-way.
(n) Engage in the business of peddling within 10 feet of any location where
the curb has been depressed to facilitate pedestrian or vehicle
movement.
(o) Engage in the business of peddling on any sidewalk or along any street
within 15 feet of any fire hydrant, crosswalk or driveway.
(p) Station, place, set up or maintain a peddler's cart or goods against
display windows of fixed location businesses, nor shall they be within 20
feet from an entranceway to any building, store, theater, library, school,
museum, movie house, sports arena or other place of public assembly,
without the permission of the property owner and in such a manner as
to restrict, obstruct, interfere with or impede pedestrian or vehicular
right-of-way.
(q) Engage in the business of peddling on any sidewalk or along any street
within 10 feet from intersecting streets or sidewalks.
(r) Engage in the business of peddling within 30 feet of any location where
another peddler is engaged in the business of peddling.
(s) Engage in the business of selling at any location without giving a
written receipt to each customer for any sale in excess of $20. The
receipt shall show clearly the seller's name, business address, license
number, a description of the merchandise sold, and the purchase price,
and shall be sequentially numbered.
(t) Engage in the business of peddling on any sidewalk or along any street
within 10 feet of a bus stop. For purpose of this section, the words "bus
stop" shall include the sidewalk and the adjoining street where there is
a designated bus stop.
(u) Sell food, drinks, ice cream, confections or other items for immediate
consumption unless the peddler has available for public use a litter
receptacle which shall be clearly marked and maintained for patronage
use, nor shall any peddler leave any location without first picking up,
removing and disposing of any trash or refuse remaining from the sales
made by him; nor shall any person sell food, drinks, ice cream,
§ T14-10 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T14-10
BAO:1533
§ T14-11. Application fee required. [Ord. No. 2014-12]
§ T14-12. Exceptions. [Ord. No. 2014-12]
This article shall not affect any of the following persons or activities:
confections or other food items for consumption without having first
received any permit or license required by the municipality or the board
of health for food handling.
(v) Leave any cart unattended at any time or place or leave the same
overnight on any sidewalk.
(w) Stop, stand or park any vending cart or motorized vehicle used for
vending purposes for more than five minutes for the purpose of selling
food and merchandise.
(x) Station, place, set up or maintain a cart, wagon, table, stand, display or
vehicle on private property unless the owner has previously secured
approval for such use of the property pursuant to the provisions of Code
governing land use.
(y) Use any non-motorized carts except at the following location: on the
sidewalk running along the south side of Nassau Street from
Washington Road to University Place. Vending by means of nonmotorized
vending carts shall be prohibited in any other locations other
than those set forth in this subsection (y).
(z) Use of any motorized vending carts and/or motorized vehicles for
vending purposes in any location except on the street.
(a) Each application shall be accompanied by an application fee as stated in
Section 2-125 for each individual solicitor or peddler, or transient
merchant license, to compensate the municipality for the cost of
administering this article, including the investigation and regulation of
the conduct of licenses. Such fees will not be refunded if a license is
denied or revoked.
(b) No license issued under this article shall be used at any time by any
person other than the person to whom it was issued.
(c) Where an organization has several agents peddling, soliciting,
distributing merchandise or printed material or services, or canvassing,
each agent shall pay the applicable application fee and shall be issued a
separate license.
(a) Any person engaged in the delivery, in the regular course of business, of
goods, wares, merchandise, or other articles of personal property to the
premises of persons who had previously ordered same or were entitled
to receive same by reason of prior agreement.
§ T14-10 PRINCETON CODE § T14-12
BAO:1534
§ T14-13. Penalties. [Ord. No. 2014-12]
Any person who shall solicit or peddle, or operate as a transient merchant
within the municipality in violation of any provision of this article shall
be subject to the penalties provided for in section 1-6 of this Code. Each
violation of a provision of this article shall be considered a separate offense
and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during
which or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(b) Any nonprofit organization, as defined in section 14-2 of this article,
engaged in the solicitation of funds for charitable purposes solely from
its members.
(c) Any person engaged in the solicitation of funds for a nonprofit
organization, when solicitation occurs on premises owned or controlled
by the person soliciting funds or with the permission of the person who
owns or controls the premises.
(d) Federal census-taking and surveys taken pursuant to federal, state or
local laws.
(e) Any public utility, or its employees, which is subject to the regulation of
the State Board of Public Utility Commissioners; provided, however,
that such employees shall display the identification badge or card
issued by the employer.
(f) Children enrolled in public and private elementary and secondary
schools in Princeton, including children peddling or soliciting for
schools, school clubs and organizations, Cub Scouts, Boy Scouts,
Brownies, Girl Scouts, and similar youth groups.
(g) Any person engaged in the delivery or solicitation of subscriptions for a
print media organization provided, however, that said person shall
adhere to the general regulations set forth in section 14-10 hereinabove
and in addition such persons shall display an identification badge
(subject to the approval by the police department) provided by the print
media and an information sheet shall be filed with the police
department and clerk containing (1) the proposed location of
solicitation; (2) the make, model and license plate number of any
vehicle being used during such solicitation; (3) the name of the
supervisor of the persons soliciting; and (4) the names of all those
soliciting within Princeton on behalf of said print media.
§ T14-12 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T14-13
BAO:1535

ARTICLE II
Anti-Littering Regulation
§ T14-14. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2017-17 § 4]
The purpose of this article is to establish requirements to control littering
in Princeton, so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to
prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ T14-15. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2017-17 § 4]
As used in this article, the word or phrases shall have the meanings
indicated unless otherwise required by the context:
COMMERCIAL MATTER OR MATERIAL — Any printed or written matter,
any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or
any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copy of any matter
of literature which, while containing reading matter other than advertising
matter, is predominantly and essentially an advertisement and is distributed
or circulated for advertising purposes or for the private benefit and gain of
any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.
COMMERCIAL PREMISES — A building or buildings or any part thereof,
and the lot or tract of land upon which the building or buildings are
situated, where commercial activity of any kind takes place. Commercial
activity shall include, but is not limited to, automobile service stations;
stores for retail sales; liquor stores; taverns and inns; restaurants,
including, but not limited to, drive-in restaurants, snack bars, hot dog,
hamburger, and ice cream stands; professional activities, including, but
not limited to medical, dental, legal, architectural, accounting; personal
services, including, but not limited to real estate, insurance, barber shops,
hairdressers, repair shops of all kinds, shopping centers; and amusements,
including, but not limited to, movies, skating rinks, bowling alleys, whether
part of a shopping area or not.
GARBAGE — The animal and vegetable and other organic wastes resulting
from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food or other
products.
LITTER — Garbage, refuse, and rubbish, as defined herein, and all other
waste material, such as chemical, building and automobile shop, which is
discarded or thrown or deposited as herein prohibited.
LITTER RECEPTACLE — A container suitable for the depositing of litter.
OCCUPANT — Any person having actual possession of the premises or any
part thereof.
OPERATOR — Any person having charge, care or control of the premises or
any part thereof, whether with or without the consent of the owner.
OWNER — Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others, shall
have legal or equitable title to any premises, with or without accompanying
actual possession thereof; or shall have charge, care of control of any
§ T14-14 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T14-15
BAO:1537
premises as owner or agent of the owner, or as fiduciary, administrator,
administratrix, trustee, receiver or guardian of the estate or as mortgagee
in possession was obtained. Any person who is a lessee subletting or
reassigning any part or all of any premises shall be deemed to be a co-owner
with the lessor and shall have joint responsibility over the portion of the
premises subject or assigned by said lessee.
PRIVATE PROPERTY — Any dwelling or structure, whether or not occupied,
and any yard, grounds, sidewalk, wall, fence, driveway, porch, steps,
vestibule or mailbox belonging to or appurtenant to such dwelling or
structure.
PUBLIC WAYS ADJACENT TO PRIVATE PROPERTY — The areas between
the edge of the pavement or traveled portion of a highway, street or road,
whether or not curbed, and the adjacent private property line, and all
areas used for any public park, playground, municipal building or other
installation, including driveways, parking areas, walks, paths and other
public ways thereupon.
REFUSE — All putrescible and non-putrescible solid wastes (except body
wastes), including but not limited to garbage and rubbish.
RUBBISH — Non-putrescible solid wastes, consisting of both combustible
and non-combustible waste, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes,
cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery
and similar materials, except natural fall of leaves and needles left
undisturbed.
§ T14-16. Acts of litter prohibited. [Ord. No. 2017-17 § 4]
No person shall place upon, deposit, throw upon, leave or abandon upon any
commercial, private or public property located within the municipality any
litter, other than in a litter receptacle.
Whenever any litter is thrown or discarded or allowed to fall from a vehicle
or boat, the operator or owner, or both, of the vehicle or boat shall also be
deemed to have violated this section.
§ T14-17. Duty to keep commercial premises sanitary. [Ord. No.
2017-17 § 4]
Occupants, owners, and/or operators of commercial premises within the
municipality shall be responsible for removing litter from the sidewalks,
walkways, pedestrian areas and parking areas during every day the
premises are open for business. The areas shall be swept or otherwise
cleaned as often as is necessary to maintain it free of litter.
§ T14-18. Removal of litter from commercial premises. [Ord. No.
2017-17 § 4]
Every owner, operator and/or occupant of commercial premises shall have
the duty and responsibility of providing sufficient and suitable litter
receptacles with tightfitting covers for receiving and holding litter; and the
§ T14-15 PRINCETON CODE § T14-18
BAO:1538
litter receptacles shall be maintained in a manner, with the cover in place
so as to avoid the creation of a nuisance.
§ T14-19. Additional acts prohibited. [Ord. No. 2017-17 § 4]
No person shall place or cause to be placed upon, delivered, deposited,
thrown upon, left or abandoned within or upon any private property or
public ways adjacent to private property in the municipality any garbage,
cans, bottles, cartons and other types of refuse or rubbish, or any handbills,
advertisements, brochures, flyers, shoppers or other unsolicited
commercial matter, printed or otherwise, of every kind or nature
whatsoever.
§ T14-20. Exceptions. [Ord. No. 2017-17 § 4]
The provisions of section 14-19 shall not be applicable to the delivery of:
(a) Mail, parcels or packages by and in accordance with the rules of the
United States Postal Service.
(b) Parcels, packages and materials by vendors organized for such
purposes, and those delivered by vendors where ordered by or on
behalf of the owner or occupant of the recipient premises.
(c) Newspapers and other publications and periodicals that are solicited or
subscribed to by the owner or occupant of the recipient premises,
provided that such material is placed firmly in a receptacle designed for
such purpose, or there being no such receptacle, is tightly secured or
packaged so as to prevent blowing or scattering upon the recipient
premises or adjacent areas.
(d) Unsolicited and unsubscribed newspapers, publications and other
periodicals that are wholly or partially of a commercial nature, provided
that such material is placed firmly in a receptacle designed for such
purpose, or there being no such receptacle is tightly secured or
packaged so as to prevent blowing or scattering upon the recipient
premises or adjacent areas.
(e) Laundry, dry cleaning, dairy, bakery and similar food products, and
commercial product sampling, by agreement with or invitation of the
owner or occupant of the recipient premises.
(f) Solicitation cards, brochures and flyers by duly authorized bona-fide
non-profit charitable organizations, including, but not limited to, United
Fund, American Red Cross, religious, educational, medical and
volunteer police, fire and ambulance organizations, provided that such
material is tightly secured or packaged and placed in such manner as
not to blow or scatter upon the recipient premises or adjacent areas.
(g) Non-commercial handbills of a political or other nature whose
distribution is protected by constitutional rights of free speech,
provided that such handbills are tightly secured or packaged in such
§ T14-18 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T14-20
BAO:1539
§ T14-21. Objection to delivery of unsolicited, commercial
publications. [Ord. No. 2017-17 § 4]
The owner or occupant of any property within the municipality shall have
the right, at any time, in writing, either by certified mail or in person,
to transmit to the local office of the publisher and/or distributor of any
unsolicited or unsubscribed newspapers, publications or other periodicals
that are wholly or partially of a commercial nature, a notice of objection to
the continued delivery of any such unsolicited and unsubscribed material.
Such notice of objection shall clearly identify the property to which the
continued delivery of any such unsolicited or unsubscribed material is
objected. Any publisher and/or distributor who receives said notice of
objection, shall comply with said notice within 14 days of receipt of said
notice and shall discontinue the delivery of the objected to material to the
property identified by said notice. Such notice of objection shall continue
in effect until revoked, and it shall be deemed a violation of this article for
any person, including, but not limited to, a publisher and/or distributor to
deliver, continue to deliver or cause to be delivered any such unsolicited
and unsubscribed material to the property of any such objecting owner or
occupant.
To facilitate cooperative action with regard to violations as herein
described, any owner or occupant of any property within the municipality
who has transmitted written notice of objection as provided for herein
to the publisher and/or distributor, may file a copy of said notice and all
subsequent correspondence pertaining to said notice with the municipal
clerk, who will maintain a file of such correspondence for public inspection.
Said municipal clerk files are to be kept current by removing therefrom any
correspondence which is more than three years old.
§ T14-22. Placement and servicing of litter receptacles in public
places. [Ord. No. 2017-17 § 4]
Litter receptacles shall be required in the following areas:
manner as not to blow and scatter upon the recipient premises or
adjacent areas.
(a) In buildings held out for use by the public, including schools,
government buildings, and railroad and bus stations; parks; all street
vendor locations; self-service refreshment areas; construction sites;
gasoline service station islands; shopping centers; parking lots; boat
moorage and fueling stations; boat launching areas; public and private
piers operated for public use; beaches and bathing areas;
(b) At any and all special events to which the public is invited, including
sporting events, parades, carnivals, circuses, and festivals.
The owners of the above mentioned places or the sponsors of the
above-mentioned events, as the case may be, shall be responsible for
providing and servicing the receptacles at such times and in such
§ T14-20 PRINCETON CODE § T14-22
BAO:1540
§ T14-23. Separate violations. [Ord. No. 2017-17 § 4]
Each violation of the provisions of this article shall be deemed a separate
violation whether it shall occur on the same day or on succeeding days.
§ T14-24. Violations and penalties. [Ord. No. 2017-17 § 4]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this article shall
be liable in the municipal court for fines as follows:
§ T14-25. Severability. [Ord. No. 2017-17 § 4]
Every section or provision of this article shall be deemed a separate
provision to the extent that if any portion shall be declared invalid, such
determination shall not affect the remaining parts of this ordinance, which
shall remain in force and effect to the extent severable.
§ T14-26. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2017-17 § 4]
This article shall be enforced by the police department and/or health
department of the municipality of Princeton.
a manner that clean and adequate storage in the receptacles is
maintained at all times.
(a) For the first violation, a fine of not less than $100.
(b) For a second violation, a fine of not less than $200.
(c) For a third violation, a fine of not less than $300.
(d) For each subsequent violation within one year of the date of the first
violation, a fine of not less than $500.
§ T14-22 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T14-26
BAO:1541
Chapter T14A
PERSONNEL
§ T14-26 PRINCETON CODE § T14-26
BAO:1542
ARTICLE I
Compensation
§ T14A-1. Applicability. [Ord. No. 669, § 1]
The salaries, wages or compensation of officers and employees of the
township are hereby fixed and determined as provided in this article.
§ T14A-2. Mayor and township committee. [Ord. No. 669, § 2; Ord.
No. 782, § 1; Ord. No. 880, § 1; Ord. No. 84-13, § 1; Ord. No. 87-9,
§ 1; Ord. No. 88-12, § 1; Ord. No. 89-3, § 1]
The annual salary of each member of the township committee shall be
$5,051 except that the annual salary of the chairman of the committee,
or mayor shall be $5,845. In addition, each member, including the mayor
shall be entitled to compensation for the necessary expenses incurred in the
performance of duties of the office. Salary shall be payable quarter-annually
or monthly, as requested by each member, and expenses shall be payable
upon proper requisition therefor.
§ T14A-3. Police. [Ord. No. 669, § 3; Ord. No. 712, § 1; Ord. No. 727,
§ 1; Ord. No. 761, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 798, § 1; Ord. No. 810, §§ 1 to 3;
Ord. No. 829, § 1; Ord. No. 835, § 1; Ord. No. 871, § 1; Ord. No. 862,
§ 1; Ord. No. 909, § 1; Ord. No. 900, § 1; Ord. No. 948, § 1; Ord. No.
990, § 2; Ord. No. 1030, § 1; Ord. No. 82-16, § 1; Ord. No. 83-22, § 1;
Ord. No. 84-2, § 1, Ord. No. 85-1, § 1; Ord. No. 85-3, § 1; Ord. No.
85-20, § 1; Ord. No. 86-8, § 1; Ord. No. 87-9, § 2; Ord. No. 88-12, § 2;
Ord. No. 89-1, § 1; Ord. No. 89-3, § 2; Ord. No. 91-9, § 1; Ord. No.
94-25, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 96-22, § 1]
(a) Salaries.63 Annual salaries of regular members of the police force shall
be as follows:
January 1, 1996 January 1, 1997
Sergeant Patrol
Officers
$59,637 $61,963
After 1 year in rank $46,939 $48,770
After 2 years in rank $50,080 $52,033
After 3 years in rank $52,206 $54,242
After 4 years in rank $54,117 $56,228
(b) Service increments. Each annual salary shall be increased by an
increment of $400, after 10 years' service, $700 after 15 years' service,
$1,000 after 20 years' service, and $1,300 after 24 years' service;
provided, however, such increments shall not exceed $1,300 in the
aggregate.
63.Editor's Note: The salaries set forth hereinabove shall be established retroactively to
January 1, 1996, except as otherwise indicated.
§ T14A-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T14A-3
BAO:1543
§ T14A-4. Full-time, salaried personnel other than police. [Ord. No.
664, § 4; Ord. No. 712, § 2; Ord. No. 727, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 761, § 3;
Ord. No. 782, §§ 2 to 5; Ord. No. 798, § 2; Ord. No. 810, § 4; Ord. No.
820, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 829, §§ 2 to 4; Ord. No. 835, §§ 2, 3; Ord. No.
847, §§ 1 to 3; Ord. No. 862, §§ 2 to 5; Ord. No. 900, §§ 2 to 7; Ord.
No. 972, §§ 1 to 7; Ord. No. 991, §§ 1 to 3; Ord. No. 1030, §§ 2, 3;
Ord. No. 82-16, §§ 2 to 6; Ord. No. 83-22, §§ 2 to 4; Ord. No. 83-25,
§§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 84-2, § 2; Ord. No. 84-25, § 1; Ord. No. 85-1, § 1;
Ord. No. 85-3, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 85-15, § 1; Ord. No. 86-8, §§ 1-3; Ord.
No. 87-9, §§ 3, 4; Ord. No. 88-12, §§ 3, 4; Ord. No. 89-3, §§ 3, 4; Ord.
No. 97-3, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 2009-20, § 1]
(c) Special duty increments. Each annual salary shall be increased during
the recipient's designation as a detective or juvenile officer or traffic
safety officer by an increment of $200 upon such designation and by an
increment of $200 after each year's service in such designated capacity
thereafter, but such increments shall not exceed $600 in the aggregate.
Such increments shall be in lieu of compensation for extra duty
authorized in subsection (d) below.
(d) Overtime. Regular members of the police force shall be entitled to
overtime compensation for duty required and performed outside of and
in addition to regularly scheduled duty assignments, by extra pay at the
hourly rate of 1 1/2 times the regular hourly rate of said regular
member of the police force; provided, however, that attendance at
departmental training courses, weapons firing sessions and seminars
shall be compensated by compensatory time off, on an hour for hour
basis.
(1) The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to the chief,
lieutenants, detectives, juvenile officer and traffic safety officer.
(e) Special police (crossing guards). Special police as-signed as school
crossing guards shall be compensated at a daily rate of not less than $3
nor more than $12, as fixed by resolution of the township committee
with reference to the location of the duty post and the amount of time
the post is to be manned.
(f) Installment payments. The salaries, wages or compensation fixed and
determined according to this section shall be payable in biweekly
installments.
(a) (Reserved)64
(b) Salary Schedule for personnel. The annual salary for each full-time
employee shall be fixed by resolution of the township committee.
(c) (Reserved)65
64.Editor's Note: Paragraph (a), "Salary grade levels of personnel," previously found herein,
has been repealed in entirety by Ordinance No. 89-3.
§ T14A-3 PRINCETON CODE § T14A-4
BAO:1544
(d) Overtime compensation. Personnel who are subject to the provisions of
this section, unless exempted under subsection (f) below, shall be
compensated for weekly overtime as follows: by overtime pay at the
rate of 1 1/2 times the regular hourly rate, for all work in excess of 40
hours in a given work week; and by overtime pay at the rate equal to the
regular hourly rate, for work performed in excess of the number of
hours in the regular work week but less than 40 hours.
(e) Holiday pay. Personnel who are subject to the provisions of this section,
unless exempted under subsection (f) below, shall be compensated for
holiday work at the rate of two times the regular hourly rate. Holiday
work shall not be counted in computing overtime.
(f) Exempt employees. The following personnel shall not receive overtime
compensation or holiday pay as provided above and are exempt from
the provisions of subsections (d) and (e) above:
Administrative Coordinator
Administrator
Assistant Recreation Director
Assistant Township Administrator
Assistant Township Engineer
Chief Financial Officer
Construction Official
Court Administrator
Director, Drug Abuse Programs
Drug Abuse Counselor
Fire Official
Municipal Clerk
Public Works Superintendent
Recreation Director
Recreation Supervisor
Resident Planner
Tax Assessor
Tax Collector
Township Engineer
(g) Installment payments. The salaries, wages or compensation fixed and
determined according to this section shall be payable in biweekly
installments.
65.Editor's Note: Paragraphs (bb), "Exceptions as to salaries of certain salary graded
personnel," and (c) "Salaries on non-salary graded, full-time personnel," previously
contained herein, have been repealed in entirety by Ordinance No. 89-3.
§ T14A-4 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T14A-4
BAO:1545
§ T14A-5. Part-time, salaried personnel other than the mayor and
township committee. [Ord. No. 669, § 5; Ord. No. 712, § 3; Ord. No.
761, § 4; Ord. No. 782, § 6; Ord. No. 810, § 5; Ord. No. 820, § 3; Ord.
No. 835, § 4; Ord. No. 847, § 4; Ord. No. 871, § 2; Ord. No. 862, § 6;
Ord. No. 900, § 8; Ord. No. 972, § 8; Ord. No. 991, § 4; Ord. No.
1030, § 4; Ord. No. 82-16, § 7; Ord. No. 83-22, § 5; Ord. No. 83-25,
§ 3; Ord. No. 84-2, § 3; Ord. No. 84-9, § 1; Ord. No. 85-3, § 3; Ord.
No. 86-8, § 4; Ord. No. 87-9, § 5; Ord. No. 88-12, § 5; Ord. No. 89-3,
§ 5; Ord. No. 2009-20, § 2]
§ T14A-6. Certain nonsalaried personnel generally. [Ord. No. 782,
§ 7; Ord. No. 820, § 4; Ord. No. 862, § 7; Ord. No. 82-16, § 8]
Regular time - Hourly rates. The following nonsalaried personnel, except
those covered under section 14A-6.1, shall be compensated for regular time,
on the basis of a forty-hour week, at hourly rates to be fixed by resolution
(h) Longevity service increments. Each annual salary for salaried
personnel, other than police, shall be increased by an increment of
$550 after seven years of service, $900 after 10 years of service, $1,200
after 15 years of service, $1,700 after 20 years of service and one
$1,850 after 24 years of service; provided, however, that said
increments shall not exceed $1,850 in the aggregate.
(a) Salaries.66 Annual salaries of part-time salaried personnel shall be as
follows:
Temporary Building Inspector $18/hour
Attorney $51,000
Crosstown '62 Coordinator $9,860
Municipal Court Judge $18,762
School Crossing Guards $15/day
Tax Assessor $31,831
Assistant to the Assessor $17,363
Secretary to Construction Official $10.98/hour
Assessing Clerk $8.50/hour
(b) Extra services. The aforesaid personnel shall be compensated for
services over and above their salaried services in such amounts and at
such time as the township committee shall from time to time by
resolution determine.
(c) Installment payments. The salaries, wages or compensation fixed and
determined according to this section shall be payable in monthly
installments, except as hereinabove otherwise provided.
66.Editor's Note: The salaries set forth herein are established retroactively to January 1,
1989, except as otherwise indicated.
§ T14A-4 PRINCETON CODE § T14A-6
BAO:1546
of the township committee within the following ranges for the employment
indicated:
The zoning board of adjustment attorney shall be compensated for his
regular duties at the rate of $50 per hour payable monthly and for services
rendered above his regular services in such amounts and at such times
as shall be determined from time to time by concurring resolutions of the
board of adjustment and the township committee.
§ T14A-6.1. Certain nonsalaried recreational and seasonal
personnel. [Ord. No. 820, § 5; Ord. No. 862, § 8; Ord. No. 900, § 9;
Ord. No. 949, § 1; Ord. No. 972, § 9; Ord. No. 940, § 1]
(a) Regular time compensation ranges. The following nonsalaried
recreational or seasonal personnel shall be compensated for work at
rates to be fixed by resolution of the management committee of the
Joint Recreation Board of Princeton Borough and Township within the
following ranges:
Title Minimum Rate Maximum Rate
Clerk Typist $3 per hour $4 per hour
Playground
Supervisor
$120 per week $175 per week
Playground Director $90 per week $150 per week
Playground Arts &
Crafts Specialist
$90 per week $150 per week
Assistant Playground
Director
$85 per week $100 per week
Wading Pool
Attendant
$85 per week $100 per week
Assistant Pool
Manager
$4 per hour $6 per hour
Lifeguard $2.30 per hour $3.50 per hour
Swim Instruction
Supervisor
$3.25 per hour $5 per hour
Swim Instructor:
Basic Swim
$3 per hour $4 per hour
Swim Instructor:
Advanced Swim
$3 per hour $5 per hour
Pool Office Staff $2.20 per hour $3.50 per hour
Tennis Courts
Attendant
$2.30 per hour $3.50 per hour
Maintenance Staff:
Tennis
$2.30 per hour $3.50 per hour
§ T14A-6 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T14A-6.1
BAO:1547
Title Minimum Rate Maximum Rate
Maintenance Staff:
General
$2.30 per hour $3.50 per hour
Activity Instructor $20 per session $30 per session
$7.50 per hour $10 per hour
Assistant Activity
Instructor
$10 per session $15 per session
$5 per hour $7.50 per hour
Student Activity
Instructor
$5 per session $10 per session
$2.50 per hour $5 per hour
Program Supervisor $15 per session $30 per session
$7 per hour $9 per hour
Assistant Program
Supervisor
$8 per session $12 per session
$3.50 per hour $6 per hour
Recreation Leader $10 per session $20 per session
$5 per hour $7.50 per hour
Assistant Recreation
Leader
$7.50 per session $15 per session
$3.75 per hour $5 per hour
Student Recreation
Leader
$4.50 per session $10 per session
$2.50 per hour $3.50 per hour
Athletic Officials $10 per game $20 per game
Student Athletics
Officials
$3 per game $7 per game
Scorers and Timers $3 per game $5 per game
Municipal Intern $2.50 per hour $3.50 per hour
Ice Safety Officer $7 per hour $9 per hour
Ice Safety Supervisor $3.50 per hour $5 per hour
Assistant Ice Safety
Supervisor
$3 per hour $4.50 per hour
(b) Overtime. If required by law, the aforesaid personnel shall be
compensated for work in excess of 40 hours per week at the rate of 1 1/
2 times their regular rates set forth in subsection (a) above.
§ T14A-6.1 PRINCETON CODE § T14A-6.1
BAO:1548
§ T14A-7. Provision for other personnel. [Ord. No. 669, § 7]
The salaries, wages or compensation of any officers or employees for whom
compensation is not provided in this article shall be fixed and determined
by resolution of the township committee from time to time in such amount
as shall be commensurate with the nature and extent of their employment
and with the compensation hereinabove provided for similar employment.
§ T14A-8. Provision for accumulated employee absence benefits.
[Ord. No. 2002-3, § 1]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:30-15, the township is hereby
authorized to pay to eligible township employees accumulated absence
benefits including any vacation days, terminal leave or other absence time
authorized in accordance with the Princeton Township Personnel Manual.
These benefits shall include carry-forward absence benefits and benefits
paid to an employee upon retirement in accordance with the provisions of
said Manual.
(c) Installment payments. The wages or compensation fixed and
determined in accordance with this section shall be payable in biweekly
installments.
§ T14A-6.1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T14A-8
BAO:1549

ARTICLE II
Defined Contribution Retirement Program
§ T14A-9. Eligible positions. [Ord. No. 2008-30, § 1]
The Township Committee hereby accepts the recommendation of the
Pension Certifying Officer and determines that the following positions are
eligible for enrollment in the DCRP, subject to the various exclusions and
special circumstances described in Chapter 92 and in LFN 2008-10 and Fact
Sheet #80:
§ T14A-10. Exempt positions. [Ord. No. 2008-30, § 2]
Individuals serving in the following positions are exempt from defined
contribution retirement program membership, pursuant to
N.J.S.A.43:15C-2:
(a) The Township Committee Members if sworn in on or after July 1, 2007,
unless previously enrolled in PERS as an elected official prior to July 1,
2007.
(b) Township Administrator, if appointed or promoted on or after July 1,
2007, unless previously enrolled in PERS prior to July 1, 2007.
(c) Department heads, if appointed or promoted by the governing body on
or after July 1, 2007, unless previously enrolled in PERS prior to July 1,
2007, subject to the guidelines for exclusions set forth in N.J.S.A.
43:15C-2 et seq. and LFN 2008-10.
(d) Municipal court judge, municipal prosecutor and municipal attorney if
appointed on or after July 1, 2007, unless previously enrolled in PERS
prior to July 1, 2007, subject to the guidelines for exclusions set forth in
N.J.S.A. 43:15C-2 et seq. and LFN 2008-10, including but not limited to
exclusions for individuals appointed through a professional services
agreement.
(a) Certified health officer;
(b) Tax collector;
(c) Chief financial officer;
(d) Construction code official;
(e) Qualified purchasing agent;
(f) Tax assessor;
(g) Municipal planner;
(h) Registered municipal clerk;
(i) Licensed uniform subcode inspector;
§ T14A-9 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T14A-10
BAO:1551
§ T14A-11. Pension certifying officer to ensure enrollment. [Ord.
No. 2008-30, § 3]
The pension certifying officer will ensure that the specific individuals in the
listed positions who are eligible for DCRP enrollment are duly enrolled, and
that any future employee or elected or appointed individual who is deemed
eligible, shall be enrolled in the DCRP.
§ T14A-12. Implementation of program. [Ord. No. 2008-30, § 4]
This article shall be implemented, construed and subject to the aforesaid
Chapter 92 of the laws of 2007 as amended from time to time, any
regulations promulgated pursuant to Chapter 92, and any guidance
documents from the Local Finance Board or the Division of Pensions and
Benefits.
§ T14A-13. Additional duties of the pension certifying officer. [Ord.
No. 2008-30, § 5]
The pension certifying officer is hereby authorized and directed to make
all future determinations concerning retirement plan enrollment, in
accordance with the requirements of this article, and subject to review by
the Division of Pensions and Benefits.
§ T14A-14. Article to be included in the Township Personnel
Manual. [Ord. No. 2008-30, § 6]
The operative provisions of this article shall be included in the Township
Personnel Manual, which may be amended from time to time to conform
to any amendments to Chapter 92, to any Regulations adopted pursuant to
Chapter 92, or any amended guidelines from the Local Finance Board or the
Division of Pensions and Benefits.
(j) Principal public works manager.
§ T14A-10 PRINCETON CODE § T14A-14
BAO:1552
Chapter T15
(RESERVED)
Chapter T16
RECREATION AND PARKS AND SIMILAR PUBLIC PLACES
§ T14A-14 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T14A-14
BAO:1553

ARTICLE I
Board of Parks and Recreation Commissioners; Executive Director
§ T16-1. Board of parks and recreation commissioners created;
membership; term of office of members; alternates. [Ord. No.
2014-41 § 2]
(a) There is hereby established a board of parks and recreation
commissioners consisting of seven members and two alternates,
designated as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2," all of whom shall
be Princeton residents and one of whom shall be a member of the
governing body. The mayor, with the advice and consent of the council,
shall appoint the regular and alternate members.
(b) The term of office of the regular members shall be five years. The term
for members of the initial board shall begin on the date of their
appointment and shall be as follows: one member shall be appointed for
one year, one member shall be appointed for two years, one member
shall be appointed for three years, two members shall be appointed for
four years, and two members shall be appointed for five years. All
subsequent appointments, except to fill vacancies, shall be for the full
term of five years, to take effect on January 1.
(c) Alternate No. 1 and Alternate No. 2 shall serve during the absence or
disqualification of any regular member. The term of each alternate
member shall be five years commencing on January 1 of the year of
appointment; provided, however, that in the event two alternate
members are appointed, the initial term of Alternate No. 2 shall be four
years and the initial term of Alternate No. 1 shall be five years. The
terms of the initial alternate members appointed shall commence on the
day of their appointment and shall expire on the fourth or fifth
December 31 next ensuing after the date of their appointments, as the
case may be.
(d) No alternate member shall be permitted to act on any matter in which
the alternate has either directly or indirectly any personal or financial
interest. An alternate member may, after public hearing if he or she
requests one, be removed by the governing body for cause. An alternate
member may participate in discussion of the proceedings but may not
vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member. A
vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular member may vote
instead of an alternate member. In the event that a choice must be
made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall
vote.
(e) A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of term for any
regular or alternate member shall be filled by the governing body for
the unexpired term only.
§ T16-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T16-1
BAO:1555
§ T16-2. Duties and authority of the board of parks and recreation
commissioners. [Ord. No. 2014-41 § 2]
Subject to the general authority of the mayor and council, and pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:12-1 et seq., the board of parks and recreation commissioners
shall have the authority and duty to:
(f) Regular and alternate members shall serve until their respective
successors are appointed and shall qualify, and shall not receive
compensation for service on the board.
(g) The board shall have the power to appoint from among its members a
chairperson, who shall be the presiding officer, and such additional
officers as the board may desire, whose terms shall expire on December
31 in the year of appointment or until their successors are elected and
qualified. Said appointments shall be made at the first regular meeting
in January of each calendar year.
(a) Plan, develop and implement balanced recreation programs and
activities to serve the needs of Princeton residents through the board
and the Princeton recreation department;
(b) Supervise, oversee and maintain all parks, playgrounds and recreation
areas (also referred collectively as "recreation facilities" in this article)
belonging to Princeton through the board and the recreation
department, and such other municipal departments and personnel as
may be appropriate;
(c) Make and enforce rules and regulations governing the use of recreation
facilities and the conduct of recreation programs and activities under
its jurisdiction, including the establishment of user and participant fees,
subject to the review of the governing body;
(d) Upon consultation with the governing body, appoint an executive
director for a term not to exceed three years to assist the board execute
its responsibilities and to oversee the recreation department;
(e) Appoint such additional personnel as may be required to carry out the
responsibilities of the board and to assist the executive director operate
the recreation programs, activities and facilities;
(f) Collect funds generated by its recreation programs, activities and
facilities and maintain same in a revolving trust fund, to be under the
control of the board and for purposes of defraying the expense of
operating, maintaining and improving the recreation programs,
activities and facilities;
(g) Comply with all local policies and regulations, including Princeton
ordinances, as well as all applicable state statutes, including, but not
limited to the Local Public Contracts Law, Local Finance Law, Open
Public Meetings Act and Open Public Records Act;
§ T16-1 PRINCETON CODE § T16-2
BAO:1556
§ T16-3. Executive director; appointment; duties. [Ord. No. 2014-41
§ 2]
In accordance with section 16-2 above, the board of parks and recreation
commissioners shall appoint an executive director who shall serve under,
and report to, the board and the administrator. The director shall be the
head of the recreation department, and shall be subject to all Princeton
policies and procedures, including but not limited to personnel policies. The
director shall serve until the appointment and qualification of his or her
successor, and shall receive such compensation as may be provided for by
the governing body in the salary ordinance. The director shall:
(h) Hold regular public meetings to discuss and act on items within its
authority as dictated in this article. Said meeting schedule will be
established at the first meeting in January of each calendar year, and all
meetings shall comply with the Open Public Meetings Act;
(i) Provide an accounting of the board's activities to the governing body,
which at a minimum will include, but not be limited to, programs run,
revenue received and expenditures made. From time to time, the
governing body may require additional information and/or reporting
requirements that the board shall produce;
(j) Promulgate and adopt bylaws for governing its own affairs; and
(k) Such other powers and authority as is provided pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:12-1 through 40:12-15, inclusive, except that the board shall not
have the authority to acquire lands for public playgrounds and
recreation places without the prior authorization of the governing body,
and title to any such land so acquired shall be taken in the name of the
municipality.
(a) Develop, oversee and administer recreation programs and activities;
(b) Manage, control and maintain the facilities used in connection with the
recreation programs and activities;
(c) Be responsible to, and consult regularly with, the board and the
administrator for compliance with the budget and all financial,
personnel and purchasing policies;
(d) Manage, oversee and direct employees appointed by the board, in
consultation with the board;
(e) As head of the recreation department, manage, oversee and direct the
day-to-day operations of the municipal employees assigned to the
recreation department;
(f) Attend all meetings of the board and respond to the direction of the
board;
(g) Administer, implement and enforce personnel, organizational and
policy decisions for the recreation department;
§ T16-2 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T16-3
BAO:1557
(h) Submit to the governing body an annual report of the work of the
executive director and of the department for the benefit of the public,
and shall prepare and submit such other reports as may be requested
from time to time by the governing body or administrator;
(i) Upon consultation with the board, prepare and recommend to the
governing body an operating budget for the board and the recreation
department for each calendar year; and
(j) Perform such additional duties as may be requested by the board and
the administrator.
§ T16-3 PRINCETON CODE § T16-3
BAO:1558
ARTICLE II
General Provisions; Rules and Regulations for Parks and Recreation
Areas
§ T16-4. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2014-41 § 2]
As used this article, the following terms shall have the following meaning:
ACTIVE RECREATION — Shall mean play or instruction, whether
organized, structured, unstructured or spontaneous, requiring equipment
by an individual, a league, or a group utilizing areas such as playing fields
and courts, playgrounds, jogging areas, bicycle paths, horseback riding,
designated dog areas, ponds, barbecue areas and pavilions.
ANIMALS — Shall mean any animals within the jurisdiction of a park,
including but not limited to cats, dogs, deer, horses, fowl or birds.
BOARD OF PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSIONERS OR BOARD —
Shall mean the board of parks and recreation commissioners, created by
section 16-1 above.
PARKS AND/OR RECREATION AREAS — Shall mean all the real property,
facilities and structures situated in Princeton acquired by or under the
jurisdiction and care of the board and municipality, or that is hereafter
acquired by it or comes under their jurisdiction, namely all parks,
playgrounds, recreational facilities, trails, open space, and any other areas
or facilities designated by Princeton to be used for both active and passive
recreation.
PASSIVE RECREATION — Shall mean activities that are less rigorous and
active than those that constitute active recreation, such as hiking,
picnicking and the enjoyment and observation of natural areas including but
not limited to flower beds, plantings and natural habitat generally.
PATH — Shall mean any footpath, walk, or any passageway maintained for
use by pedestrians.
PEDESTRIAN — Shall mean a person on foot.
PERMIT — Shall mean any written license or permission issued by or under
the authority of the municipality permitting a specific event or activity in
Princeton.
PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVE — Shall mean every road or lane or driveway
generally not open to public use.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — Shall mean the privilege of the immediate use of a
roadway, drive or path.
SAFETY ZONE — Shall mean any space (within a roadway or drive)
established for pedestrian use.
SKATE PARK — Shall mean that portion of Hilltop Park wherein a facility
has been constructed for skateboarding.
§ T16-4 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T16-4
BAO:1559
STOPPING OR STANDING WHEN PROHIBITED — Shall mean any
cessation of movement of a vehicle occupied or not except when necessary
to avoid conflict with other traffic.
TRAFFIC — Shall mean pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles,
either singly or together.
VEHICLE — Shall mean any conveyance (except a baby carriage or stroller,
in use for the transport of a baby or child) including but not limited to motor
vehicles, bicycles, tricycles, sleds, sleighs, pushcarts, or vehicles propelled
by other than muscular power.
§ T16-5. Scope. [Ord. No. 2014-41 § 2]
This article shall be effective within all the parks and recreation areas, as
defined in section 16-4, under the administration of the municipality and the
board of parks and recreation commissioners, and to the extent specified
else wherein this article or chapter, to public plazas, public open spaces and
to the Mountain Lakes Preserve, and shall regulate the use thereof by all
persons.
All persons using parks and recreation areas must obey the provisions of
this article, Princeton ordinances, other chapters of this Code and New
Jersey statutes and regulations incorporated herein, and the posted rules
and regulations established for the proper, effective and safe utilization of
the parks and recreation areas.
No provision of this article shall make unlawful any act necessarily
performed by any officer or employee of the municipality or board of parks
and recreation commissioners, or any designated agent in line of duty or
work as such, or by any person or his or her employees or agents in
the proper and necessary execution of the terms of any agreement with
the municipality or board of parks and recreation commissioners, or a
designated agent of either.
Any act otherwise prohibited by law or local ordinance shall be lawful if
performed under, by virtue of and strictly within the provisions of a permit
so to do, and to the extent authorized thereby.
§ T16-6. Prohibited uses of the Princeton parks and recreation
areas; general regulations and restrictions. [Ord. No. 2014-41 § 2]
(a) Advertising. No person shall post, paint, affix, distribute, hand out,
deliver, place, cast, leave about or display any bill, billboard, placard,
ticket, handbill, circular, flag, banner, transparency, target, sign or any
other matter for advertising purposes, nor shall any person operate any
musical instrument, or use any sound-making or amplifying device for
advertising purposes or for the purpose of attracting attention to any
exhibition, show, performance or other display, unless he or she
complies with Chapter 14, entitled "Peddling, Soliciting and Related
Activities," and obtains a permit therefor, as required by Chapter 14,
section 14-3. Any such activity shall only be permitted to the extent the
§ T16-4 PRINCETON CODE § T16-6
BAO:1560
proposed activity will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from
the general public enjoyment of the park or recreation area.
(b) Peddling and soliciting. No person shall solicit for any purpose, nor
shall any person sell or offer for sale any object or merchandise or any
other thing within the parks and recreation areas, unless he or she
complies with Chapter 14, entitled "Peddling, Soliciting and Related
Activities," and obtains a permit therefor, as required by Chapter 14,
section 14-3. Any such activity shall only be permitted to the extent the
proposed activity will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from
the general public enjoyment of the park or recreation area.
(c) Animals.
(1) No person owning or in charge of an animal shall permit that
animal to run at large. For purposes of this section, "run at large"
shall refer to an animal not securely confined by an adequate leash
of not more than eight feet long and under the control of its owner
or other responsible person whenever the animal is off its owner's
or custodian's property. An animal shall not run at large on any
public land.
(2) Any person owning or in charge of a dog must immediately remove
all dog feces deposited on park and recreation areas, including dog
parks, by placing it in a bag to be sealed and removed from the
area.
(3) Dogs, cats and other domestic animals shall not be permitted to be
in John Street Public Park, Mary Moss Playground, Potts Park,
Barbara Boggs Sigmund Playground, Maggie's Playground and the
Pine Street Park Playground.
(4) No horse shall be driven or ridden in a park or recreation area
except on and along any pipeline right-of-way of Trans-Continental
Gas Pipe Line Co.
(5) No person shall molest, kill, wound, trap, take, chase, shoot or
throw projectiles at, or remove, or have in his possession any
animal, reptile, bird or eggs, or knowingly buy, receive, have in his
or her possession, sell or give away any such animal, reptile, bird or
eggs so taken, except that nothing in this section shall be deemed
to apply to any agent specifically authorized by resolution of the
municipality to hunt white-tailed deer for deer management
purposes.
(6) No person shall fish in any of the lakes, ponds, streams or canals
bordering or within a park or recreation area without a valid state
fishing license, and only during the seasons established by the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, Division of Fish
and Wildlife. No person shall kill, wound, discharge or throw
projectiles at any fish in such waters, or place therein any
piscivorous fish, poison or any other substances injurious to fish.
§ T16-6 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T16-6
BAO:1561
(d) Alcoholic beverages. No person or group shall bring, possess, sell, buy,
give away or consume any alcoholic beverages in any park or recreation
area at any time, except as follows:
(1) In connection with an organized function or social affair for which
express prior permission has been received in writing from the
governing body and the requisite permit obtained from the Director
of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control, subject to any terms
and restrictions relating to the public safety and general welfare of
the municipality; or
(2) At the main dwelling unit located within the Mountain Lakes
Preserve, when authorized by a special alcoholic beverage permit.
(e) Barbecues and cooking fires. No person shall build, light or maintain a
fire within a park or recreation area except in a grill or fireplace
provided and designated for that purpose by the municipality, subject to
the following:
(1) All fires shall be continuously under the care and direction of a
competent adult from the time they are kindled until they are
extinguished.
(2) No cigar, cigarette, or lighted match shall be discarded carelessly
or in a manner which may start a fire.
(3) Only charcoal shall be used for cooking fires in the permanent
barbecue grills.
(4) No barbecue fire shall be left unattended and all fires shall be
extinguished immediately after use.
(f) Motorized vehicles. The operation of any state-licensed motorized
vehicles, including mopeds and motorcycles, is restricted to designated
park roadways and parking areas. Operation of any other motorized
vehicle, including snowmobiles, all-terrain vehicles and mini-bikes, is
prohibited in any area designated by the board or Princeton as a park or
recreation area, with the exception of municipal vehicles. Authorized
motorized vehicles shall only be parked in areas and spaces clearly and
specifically marked with striping and/or signage or directed by the
police or another authorized representative of the municipality. During
periods of darkness said vehicles shall have parking lights in operation.
No vehicles shall be parked in the parking areas or otherwise left in any
park or recreation area except when the parks and recreation areas are
open.
(g) Ice skating. No person shall use any body of water in any recreation
area for ice skating, except on the areas of the ponds specifically
authorized for same located in Community Park North Park and
Barbara Smoyer Memorial Park. In addition, no person shall go upon
ice in any authorized ice skating area with or without skates other than
between 10:00 a.m. and dusk, and only to the extent authorized by
§ T16-6 PRINCETON CODE § T16-6
BAO:1562
signage or instructions for safety purposes in the permitted skating
areas.
(h) Explosives. No person shall bring into, or have in possession, at said
parks any fireworks or any other explosives, including any substance,
compounds, mixture or article having properties of such a character
that alone or in combination or conjunction with other substances or
compounds, may decompose suddenly and generate sufficient heat, gas
or pressure, or any or all of them to produce rapid flaming, combustion,
or administer a destructive blow to surrounding objects.
(i) Firearms and weapons. No person shall carry or possess firearms of any
description; or air rifles, spring guns, bows and arrows, slings or any
other form of weapon (concealed or not) potentially harmful to wildlife
and dangerous to human safety; or any instrument that can be loaded
with and fire blank cartridges; or any kind of trapping device. Shooting
into park areas from beyond park boundaries is prohibited.
(j) Property damage. No person shall:
(1) Injure, deface, displace, remove, fill in, raise, destroy, damage or
tamper with any public property located in any park or recreation
area, real or personal, including but not limited to trees, plants,
pavements, equipment, buildings, signage and furnishings.
(2) Take up or remove or carry away any rock, stone, gravel, sand, clay
or earth, or make any excavation of any kind, name or nature.
(3) Throw or place any foreign or waste substance in any lake, river,
lagoon, stream, storm sewer, or drain of the parks or leading into or
bordering upon the aforementioned or any substance, matter, or
thing which may or shall result in the pollution of said waters.
(4) Injure trees, shrubs, and grass, or destroy, cut, break, deface,
mutilate, disturb, sever or remove from the ground, any plant,
flower, growing thing, stem, branch or leaf thereof, or:
a. Pile debris of any kind against same; or
b. Attach any rope or cable or other contrivance thereto, except
that nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to apply to any
agent specifically authorized by the municipality to hunt whitetailed
deer for deer management purposes; or
c. Set fire or assist in setting a fire to any of the same; or
d. Ride or hitch horses or any other animal over or to any of the
same.
(k) Rubbish and refuse matter; household refuse.
§ T16-6 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T16-6
BAO:1563
(1) No person shall take into, leave in, or throw, drop or discharge in a
park or recreation area any rubbish, refuse, garbage or other
obnoxious material.
(2) No person shall transport or dump household refuse into public
receptacles located within any park or recreation area.
(l) Closing hours. No person shall enter or remain in a park past closing
hours (dusk), except as may be authorized such as in the case of the
permitted use of lighted recreation areas.
(m) Opening hours. No person shall enter or remain in a park before
opening hours (dawn), except as may be authorized such as in the case
of the permitted use of lighted recreation areas.
(n) Minors. No parent or guardian or custodian of any minor shall permit or
allow a minor to do any act prohibited by this article.
(o) No person shall engage in golfing or practice golf shots except as may
be authorized by the appropriate municipal officer or duly authorized
agent.
(p) No person shall engage in boating except as may be authorized by the
appropriate municipal officer or duly authorized agent.
(q) No person shall engage in wind surfing, sail boating, motor boating or
the use of jet skis or wave runners, except as may be authorized by the
appropriate municipal officer or duly authorized agent.
(r) No person shall engage in scuba diving or spear fishing.
(s) No person shall engage in archery except as may be authorized by
appropriate municipal officer or duly authorized agent.
(t) No person shall swim or wade except at the Community Park Pools and
the John Street Wading Pool, and as authorized by appropriate
municipal officer or duly authorized agent.
(u) No person shall wash automobiles or of other motor vehicles, or
vehicles propelled by other than muscular power.
(v) No person shall sled or ski except as authorized by the appropriate
municipal officer or duly authorized agent.
(w) No person shall engage in model airplane flying except as may be
authorized by the appropriate municipal officer or duly authorized
agent.
(x) No person shall skateboard, except within the Hilltop Park Skate Park,
in accordance with the requirements of section 16-8 of this chapter.
(y) No person shall feed wildlife as prohibited in section 16-7 below.
(z) No person shall gamble.
§ T16-6 PRINCETON CODE § T16-6
BAO:1564
§ T16-7. No wildlife feeding. [Ord. No. 2014-41 § 2]
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
(aa) No person shall pitch or otherwise utilize tents or other temporary
shelter for camping.
(bb)No person shall enter or leave park facilities except at established
entrances and exits.
(cc) No person shall bring, carry or cause to be brought into the parks and
recreation areas any glass bottles or other glass containers except upon
written permission from an authorized officer of the municipality.
(dd)No person shall throw stones or other projectiles so as to annoy or
injure other persons.
(ee) No person shall climb or stand upon any wall, fence, shelter, seat,
statue or other structure not constructed for such.
(ff) No person shall litter in the parks, or deposit on the ice or in the ponds
any matter that would tend to damage the ice for skating or pollute the
ponds.
(gg)No person shall fail to obey, or interfere with a police officer, animal
control officer or other board or Princeton employee in the proper
performance of duties within a park or recreation area.
(hh)No person shall remove or open permanent or temporary barriers,
signs, directionals, gates or fences.
(ii) No person shall, by any means or instrumentality, threaten or coerce
action from another individual, so as to interfere with the individual's
lawful use of the parks and recreation areas.
(jj) No person shall engage in smoking in any park or recreation area, as
prohibited by Princeton Board of Health Ordinance 2013-01, as may be
amended.
(a) Feed, in any park or recreation area, or on any other property owned or
operated by the municipality, any wildlife, excluding confined wildlife
(for example, wildlife confined to zoos, parks or rehabilitation centers,
or unconfined wildlife at environmental educational centers).
(b) For purposes of this section, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivatives shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use
in the text of this section clearly demonstrates a different meaning.
When not inconsistent with the text, words used in the present tense
include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular
number, and words used in the singular number include the plural. The
word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
§ T16-6 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T16-7
BAO:1565
§ T16-8. Hilltop Skate Park. [Ord. No. 2014-41 § 2]
In addition to the regulations provided for in the other sections of this
article, the following regulations shall pertain to the skateboarding facility
within Hilltop Park:
§ T16-9. Mountain Lakes Preserve. [Ord. No. 2014-41 § 2]
In addition to the regulations provided for in the other sections of this
article, the following regulations shall pertain to the Mountain Lakes
Preserve:
(1) "Feed" shall mean to give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or
scatter any edible material with the intention of feeding, attracting
or enticing wildlife. Feeding does not include baiting in the legal
taking of fish and/or game nor shall it be deemed to apply to any
agent specifically authorized by the municipality to hunt white-tail
deer for deer management purposes.
(2) "Wildlife" shall mean all animals that are neither human nor
domesticated.
(c) This section shall be enforced by the police department. Any person
found in violation of this section shall be ordered to cease the feeding
immediately and be subject to penalties and fines as provided for in
section 1-6 of this Code.
(a) The Skate Park is open dawn to dusk daily, weather and conditions
permitting. In addition, if the gate to the Skate Park is locked, the Skate
Park shall not be considered open and public access shall not be
authorized.
(b) Skaters must be at least seven years old to use the Skate Park; skaters
seven through 10 years old must be supervised by a parent/guardian.
(c) Only skateboards, scooters and inline skates are permitted.
(d) No bikes are permitted.
(e) No graffiti, tagging or stickers.
(f) No pets inside the Skate Park.
(g) No food or drink inside the Skate Park.
(h) Non-skaters are not allowed inside the Skate Park.
(i) No personal ramps, boxes, or other skate elements allowed.
(j) Profanity and obscene language/behavior is not allowed.
(k) Skaters must wear at all times helmets, elbow pads and knee pads.
§ T16-7 PRINCETON CODE § T16-9
BAO:1566
§ T16-10. Permits. [Ord. No. 2014-41 § 2]
A permit authorizing a person or organization the exclusive use of a
designated park facility or recreation area in which such reservation is
specifically authorized by the board may be granted upon written
application to the executive director of the recreation department, payment
of the permit fee set forth below and satisfaction of the requirements of
this section. All conditions of the permit approval must be adhered to and
any violation thereof, the rules and regulations set forth in this chapter
governing the use of parks and recreation areas, or false statements on the
application, shall constitute grounds for its revocation by the municipality.
Permits shall only be permitted in park facilities and recreation areas
designated by the executive director as appropriate for same.
In addition, the following shall apply:
(a) No person shall harm, hunt, trap or harvest and remove from the
Mountain Lakes Preserve any animals, except for (1) fishing with a valid
fishing license during the seasons established by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection, Division of Fish and Wildlife;
(2) such limited and controlled wildlife management activities under
the supervision of the municipality as may be necessary to keep the
animal population within the numbers consistent with the ecological
balance of the area or for public health, safety and welfare purposes; or
(3) a certified animal control officer acting under the authority of
N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.16 for community safety purposes as it relates to
animal control.
(a) A permit shall be obtained by application to the executive director,
which application shall contain the following:
(1) The name and address of the applicant;
(2) The name and address of the person, persons, corporations or
associations sponsoring the activity, if any;
(3) The day and hours for which the permit is desired;
(4) The park or portion thereof for which the permit is desired;
(5) The specific activity or use for which the permit is necessary,
including the number of persons to be covered by such permit; and
(6) A fee in the amount of $40 per use. The fee shall be used to
compensate the municipality for the cost of administering this
section, including the regulation of the conduct of the permittee.
(b) The executive director shall consider such application and, within 15
days of receipt of a complete application, including the hold harmless
agreement required below, either grant or deny the application. The
decision of the executive director shall be transmitted to the applicant
§ T16-9 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T16-10
BAO:1567
§ T16-11. Violations and penalties. [Ord. No. 2014-41 § 2]
Except for conduct which would constitute a crime or an offense under the
criminal laws applicable in the municipality, which would be subject to more
shown on the application. The standards for issuance of such permit by
the executive director shall include the following:
(1) That the proposed activity or use of the park will not unreasonably
interfere with or detract from the general public enjoyment of the
park, nor will it detract from the promotion of public health,
welfare, safety and recreation; and
(2) That the recreation area or facility desired has not been reserved
for other use at the date and hour requested by the application.
(c) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the executive director as
hereinabove provided, shall have the right to appeal to the
administrator by serving written notice thereof on the municipal clerk
within five days of notification of the decision of the executive director.
A copy of such notice shall also be served on the executive director
within the same time and he or she shall immediately forward the
application and the reasons for its refusal to the administrator who
shall consider the appeal under the application standards set forth in
this section and sustain or overrule the decision of the executive
director within 10 days from receipt of the appeal by the municipal
clerk.
(d) The person to whom the permit is issued shall be liable for all loss,
damage or injury sustained by any person whatsoever by reason of the
negligence or intentional act of the person, its agents, servants,
employees or guests, to whom the permit was issued. All permittees
shall be required to submit a signed and duly authorized hold harmless
agreement in a form prescribed by the executive director.
(e) The executive director or his or her designee shall have the authority to
revoke any permit upon a finding of violation of any rule, regulation or
ordinance or upon good cause shown.
(f) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, the chief of police
or his or her designee shall be authorized to revoke a permit issued
hereunder when, during the course of the activity for which the permit
has been issued, the safety of any persons or the safety of personal
property, including that of the municipality, is in clear and immediate
danger as a result of the activity authorized by the permit. Where such
permit has been revoked or where persons and personal property are
endangered as set forth above by a person or persons who do not
possess such permit, the chief of police or his or her designee is
authorized to require that such person or persons leave the park area
and take all steps necessary to eliminate the condition which endangers
persons or personal property.
§ T16-10 PRINCETON CODE § T16-11
BAO:1568
substantial penalties, any violation of this chapter shall be subject to the
penalty provisions of section 1-6 of this Code.
§ T16-12. Validity. [Ord. No. 2014-41 § 2]
The invalidity of any of the sections of this chapter shall not affect the
validity and enforceability of the remaining sections.
§ T16-13. Posting of regulations. [Ord. No. 2014-41 § 2]
The provisions of this article or a summary thereof shall be conspicuously
posted at each entrance to the parks and recreation areas where effective
and at such other places as the department of infrastructure and operations
or recreation department, or a designated agent of either, shall deem
advisable.
§ T16-11 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T16-13
BAO:1569

ARTICLE III
Princeton Athletic Code of Conduct
§ T16-14. Code of conduct for recreation athletics programs;
violations of code of conduct. [Ord. No. 2014-41 § 2]
(a) The board of parks and recreation commissioners, in consultation with
the governing body, is hereby authorized to approve and adopt an
athletic code of conduct applicable to all sporting activities that take
place on park and recreation lands in the municipality. The athletic code
of conduct shall apply to all athletes, parents/legal guardians, coaches
and officials involved in any of the sports activities involving the board
and recreation department. Said athletic code of conduct shall address
coaches' certification requirements, the type of background checks that
will be undertaken and completed for all coaches, and rules and
regulations that will encourage all participants in athletic events to
practice good sportsmanship and to demonstrate fairness, respect and
self-control while engaged in any athletic activity. The board of parks
and recreation commissioners is hereby authorized to develop a form of
athletic volunteer application, subject to the approval of the executive
director, who shall cause copies of the athletic code of conduct to be
made available to all those participating in athletic events involving the
board and recreation department.
(b) In addition to being subject to fines and penalties for conduct which
violates this Code, any Princeton ordinance or any other law, any person
violating the athletic code of conduct may be banned from any
subsequent athletic event.
§ T16-14 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T16-14
BAO:1571

ARTICLE IV
Public Plazas and Public Open Spaces
§ T16-15. Public plazas. [Ord. No. 2014-41 § 2]
Public plazas shall include: Albert E. Hinds Community Plaza, Phyllis L.
March and Plaza and plaza adjacent to 1 Monument Drive, and any other
areas so designated by resolution of the municipality.
§ T16-16. Dogs, cats and other animals. [Ord. No. 2014-41 § 2]
No dogs, cats or other animals shall be permitted in any public plaza at any
time, except for service dogs.
§ T16-17. Automobiles, motorcycles and motorized bicycles. [Ord.
No. 2014-41 § 2]
No person shall operate any automobile, motorcycle or motorized bicycle
in any public plaza, but this section shall not apply to vehicles owned and
operated by the municipality.
§ T16-18. Gambling. [Ord. No. 2014-41 § 2]
Gambling of any kind is prohibited in any public plaza.
§ T16-19. Disorderly conduct. [Ord. No. 2014-41 § 2]
No person shall engage in any rough or disorderly conduct which endangers
the safety, health or well-being of another who is using any public plaza, as
described and prohibited in section 16-6 of this chapter.
§ T16-20. Use of bicycles and skateboards. [Ord. No. 2014-41 § 2]
No person shall ride a bicycle or skateboard in a public plaza, nor shall a
person park a bicycle therein other than a designated bicycle parking area.
§ T16-21. Alcoholic beverages. [Ord. No. 2014-41 § 2]
No alcoholic beverage shall be permitted in any public plaza except as may
be authorized in subsection 16-6 of this chapter.
§ T16-22. Garbage and trash. [Ord. No. 2014-41 § 2]
No person shall deposit any newspaper, bottle or other container, garbage,
trash, rubbish, litter or other refuse in any public plaza other than in a
receptacle provided for that purpose.
§ T16-23. Public plaza property. [Ord. No. 2014-41 § 2]
No person shall mutilate, damage or destroy, or without authorization
remove, any public plaza property, including trees, plants, pavements,
equipment and furnishings.
§ T16-15 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T16-24
BAO:1573
§ T16-24. Smoking and fires in a public plaza. [Ord. No. 2014-41
§ 2]
Smoking is prohibited within public plazas and signs shall be posted to
advise the public of this prohibition. No person shall light or maintain any
other fire in a public plaza.
§ T16-25. Public open spaces. [Ord. No. 2014-41 § 2]
For the purpose of this chapter, public open space shall be defined as
that portion of private lands which have been made open to the public
for their use and enjoyment by the owner of said lands, in connection
with zoning approvals, dedication of said lands or similar means. Where
the owner of said lands has filed a written request with the municipality
that the provisions of this chapter shall be made applicable to these public
open spaces, then the provisions of this chapter, with the exception of that
dealing with hours of operation, shall, in the discretion of the municipality,
be made applicable thereto.
§ T16-24 PRINCETON CODE § T16-25
BAO:1574
ARTICLE V
Ice-Borne Activity on Lake Carnegie
§ T16-26. Ice-borne activity on Lake Carnegie - Findings and
purpose. [Ord. No. 2014-41 § 2]
The council finds that Lake Carnegie, although privately owned, is a place
of public resort and recreation that is used by many persons, both children
and adults, for ice skating and other ice-borne activity; that such use
extends throughout the lake's length of more than three miles, thus making
it difficult to provide surveillance and enforce safety regulations for iceborne
activity; that there have been accidents on the lake, including deaths,
caused by persons breaking through the ice; and that the owner of the
lake has requested the municipality to restrict the use thereof in the public
interest.
It is therefore the purpose of the council, in the exercise of the police power,
to restrict ice-borne activity on Lake Carnegie to an area that is manageable
for regulatory purposes and thereby to promote the public health, safety
and welfare.
§ T16-27. Prohibited areas; permitted hours. [Ord. No. 2014-41 § 2]
No person shall go upon ice on Lake Carnegie, with or without skates,
ice-boat or vehicle other than between 10:00 a.m. and dusk and only to
the extent authorized by signage or instructions for safety purposes in
the permitted skating areas, on that part of the lake lying between the
Washington Road bridge and the Harrison Street bridge. This limitation
shall be conspicuously posted in the areas where effective.
§ T16-28. Persons exempt. [Ord. No. 2014-41 § 2]
The provisions of section 16-27 shall not apply to persons engaged in
emergency operations, maintenance functions duly authorized by the owner
or regulatory functions duly authorized by any governmental agency.
§ T16-26 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T16-28
BAO:1575
Chapter T17
(RESERVED)
Editor's Note: Former Chapter 17, Refuse, Garbage and Obnoxious
Growth containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 15, 138, 406, 732,
84-33, 88-42, 89-12, 89-21, 90-16, 91-33, 92-30, 94-14, 2000-10,
2005-13 and 2010-36 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance
No. 2017-7. See Princeton Borough Code Chapter 15, Garbage and
Refuse.
Chapter T17A
SCHOOLS
§ T16-28 PRINCETON CODE § T16-28
BAO:1576
ARTICLE I
Drug-Free School Zones
§ T17A-1. Approval and adoption of drug-free and driving under the
influence of alcohol or drugs school zone map. [Ord. No. 88-37, § 1;
Ord. No. 2002-24, § 1; Ord. No. 2010-9, § 1]
In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7 and
N.J.S.A. 2C:11-5, the drug-free and driving under the influence of alcohol
or drugs school zone map produced on February 1, 2010 by the Princeton
Township Engineer, is hereby approved and adopted as an official finding
and record of the location and areas within the municipality of property
which is used for school purposes and which is owned by or leased to any
elementary or secondary school or school board, and the areas on or within
1,000 feet of any such school property.
The aforementioned drug-free and driving under the influence of alcohol or
drugs zone map shall be maintained on file in the office of the Princeton
Township Clerk. Certified copies of said zone map and this chapter
establishing drug-fee and driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs
school zones shall be furnished to the office of the Mercer County
Prosecutor.
§ T17A-2. Location and boundaries of school property. [Ord. No.
88-37, § 2; Ord. No. 2002-24, § 2]
The drug-free and driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs school
zone map approved and adopted pursuant to section 17A-1 of this article
shall continue to constitute an official finding and record as to the location
and boundaries of areas on or within 1,000 feet of property owned by or
leased to any elementary or secondary school or school board which is
used for school purposes until such time, if any, that this article shall be
amended to reflect any additions or deletions with respect to the location
and boundaries of school property and drug-free school zones. The name
and location of each school property is as follows.
(a) Community Park School.
(b) John Witherspoon School.
(c) Littlebrook School.
(d) Riverside School.
(e) Johnson Park School.
(f) Princeton Day School.
(g) Stuart County Day School.
(h) Princeton High School.
(i) The Huns School of Princeton.
§ T17A-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T17A-2
BAO:1577
§ T17A-3. Changes in location and boundaries. [Ord. No. 88-37, § 3]
The Princeton Regional School Board, or the chief administrative officer in
the case of any private or parochial school, is hereby directed and shall
have the continuing obligation to promptly notify the Princeton Township
Engineer and the Princeton Township Attorney of any changes or
contemplated changes in the location and boundaries of any property
owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or school board
and which is used for school purposes.
§ T17A-4. Map on file. [Ord. No. 88-37, § 4]
The Princeton Township Clerk is hereby directed to receive and to keep on
file the original of the map approved and adopted pursuant to section 17A-1
of this article, and to provide at a reasonable cost a true copy thereof to any
person, agency or court which may from time to time request such a copy,
along with a certification that such copy is a true copy of the map approved
and adopted herein and kept on file. It is hereby further directed that a true
copy of such map and of this article shall be provided without cost to the
Mercer County Clerk and to the Office of Mercer County Prosecutor.
§ T17A-5. Additional matters. [Ord. No. 88-37, § 5]
The following additional matters are hereby determined, declared, recited
and stated:
(j) The Princeton Charter School.
(k) The Friends School.
(l) American Boychoir School.
(m) Princeton Academy.
(n) Princeton Montessori School.
(a) It is understood that the map approved and adopted pursuant to section
17A-1 of this article was prepared and is intended to be used as
evidence in prosecutions arising under the criminal laws of this state,
and that pursuant to state law, such map shall constitute prima facie
evidence of the following:
(1) The location of elementary and secondary schools within the
municipality;
(2) The boundaries of the real property which is owned by or leased to
such schools or a school board;
(3) That such school property is and continues to be used for school
purposes; and
(4) The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within 1,000
feet of such school property.
§ T17A-2 PRINCETON CODE § T17A-5
BAO:1578
(b) All of the property depicted on the map approved and adopted herein as
school property was owned by or leased to a school or school board and
was being used for school purposes as of July 9, 1987, that being the
effective date of N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.
(c) Pursuant to the provisions of L. 1988, c. 44, a prosecutor is not
precluded from introducing or relying upon any other evidence or
testimony to establish a violation of the offense defined in that statute,
including use of a map or diagram other than the one approved and
adopted pursuant to section 17A-1 of this article. The failure of the map
approved herein to depict the location and boundaries of any property
which is, in fact, used for school purposes and which is owned by or
leased to any elementary or secondary school or school board, whether
the absence of such depiction is the result of inadvertent omission or
the result of any changes in the location and boundaries of such
property which have not yet been incorporated into a revised approved
map, shall not be deemed to be an official finding and record that such
property is not owned by or leased to a school or school board, or that
such property is not used for school purposes.
(d) All of the requirements set forth in L. 1988, c. 44 concerning the
preparation, approval and adoption of a drugfree school zone map have
been complied with.
§ T17A-5 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T17A-5
BAO:1579
Chapter T18
(RESERVED)
Editor's Note: For sewers and sewage disposal regulations see
Princeton Borough Code Chapter 34 Water and Sewers.
Chapter T18A
SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
§ T18A-1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 906, § 1]
The purpose of this chapter is to control soil erosion and sediment damages
and related environmental damage by requiring adequate provisions for
surface water retention and drainage and for the protection of exposed
soil surfaces in order to promote the safety, public health, convenience and
general welfare of the community.
§ T18A-2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 906, § 1; Ord. No. 945, § 1]
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically stated:
APPLICANT — A person, partnership, corporation, municipal corporation or
public agency requesting permission to engage in land disturbance activity.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — A proposed subdivision of land,
site plan, conditional use, zoning variance, planned development or
construction permit.
CRITICAL AREA — A sediment-producing highly erodible or severely
eroded area; or a ground water recharge area.
EROSION — Detachment or movement of soil or rock fragments by water,
wind, ice and gravity.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — A plan which fully indicates
necessary land treatment measures, including a schedule of the timing
for their installation, which will effectively minimize soil erosion and
sedimentation. Such measures shall be in accordance with standards as
promulgated by the state soil conservation committee.
EXCAVATION OR CUT — Any act by which soil or rock is cut into, dug,
quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced or relocated.
LAND — Any ground, soil, or earth including marshes, swamps,
drainageways, and areas not permanently covered by water within the
municipality.
LAND DISTURBANCES — Any activity involving clearing, grading,
transporting, filling and any other activity which causes land to be exposed
to the danger of erosion.
§ T17A-5 PRINCETON CODE § T18A-2
BAO:1580
MULCHING — The application of plant residue or other suitable materials
to the land surface to conserve moisture, hold soil in place, and aid in
establishing plant cover.
PERMIT — A certificate issued to perform work under this chapter by the
township engineer.
PLAN — A scheme which indicates land treatment measures including a
schedule of the timing for their installation, to minimize soil erosion and
sedimentation.
PROJECT — The disturbance of more than 5,000 square feet of the surface
area of land for the accommodation of construction for which the Standard
Construction Code of the State of New Jersey would require a construction
permit, except that the construction of a single-family dwelling unit shall
not be deemed a "project" under this chapter unless such unit is part of a
proposed subdivision, site plan, conditional use, zoning variance, planned
development or construction permit application involving two or more such
single-family dwelling units.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in
suspension, is being transported, or has been moved by air, water, ice or
gravity as a product of erosion.
SEDIMENT BASIN — A barrier or dam built at suitable locations to retain
rock, sand, gravel, silt or other materials.
SITE — Any plot, parcel, or parcels of land.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin.
SOIL CONSERVATION DISTRICT — A governmental subdivision of this
state, which encompasses this municipality, organized in accordance with
the provisions of R.S. 4:247 et seq.
STANDARDS — Standards shall be as defined in "Standards for Soil Erosion
and Sediment Control in New Jersey," as promulgated by the state soil
conservation committee.
STATE SOIL CONSERVATION COMMITTEE — An agency of the state
established in accordance with the provisions of R.S. 4:243.
STRIPPING — Any activity which disturbs vegetated or otherwise stabilized
soil surface.
§ T18A-3. Procedure and regulation. [Ord. No. 906, § 1; Ord. No.
945, § 2]
Unless exempt under section 18A-11, no land area within this municipality
shall be disturbed by any person, partnership, corporation, or other public
agency unless the applicant has submitted to the township engineer a
plan to provide for soil erosion and sediment control for such land area in
accordance with the "Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in
New Jersey," as promulgated by the state soil conservation committee, and
a valid land disturbance permit has been issued by the township engineer.
§ T18A-2 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T18A-4
BAO:1581
§ T18A-4. Date required. [Ord. No. 906, § 1; Ord. No. 945, § 3]
The applicant shall submit a separate soil erosion and sediment control plan
for each noncontiguous site. The applicant may consult with the Mercer
County soil conservation district in the selection of appropriate erosion and
sediment control measures and the development of the plan. Such plan shall
contain:
§ T18A-5. Review and approval. [Ord. No. 906, § 1]
(a) Location and description of existing natural and man-made features on
and surrounding the site including general topography and soil
characteristics and a copy of the pertinent sheets of the county soil
conservation district soil survey.
(b) Location and description of proposed changes to the site. Scale shall be
in accordance with the provisions of the land subdivision regulations of
the township. Appropriate contour maps shall be submitted showing
existing and proposed contours of area from which material is to be
removed.
(c) Measures for soil erosion and sediment control shall meet or exceed
"Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey," as
promulgated by the state soil conservation committee. Such standards
shall be on file at the offices of the local soil conservation district, the
construction official and the township engineer.
(d) A schedule of the sequence of installation of planned erosion and
sediment control measures as related to the progress of the project
including anticipated starting and completion dates.
(e) All proposed revisions of data required shall be submitted by applicant
to the township engineer.
(a) Soil erosion and sediment control plans shall be reviewed by the
township engineer or other designated official and approved when in
conformance with the "Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control in New Jersey," as promulgated by the state soil conservation
committee.
The township engineer or other designated official may seek the
assistance of the Mercer County soil conservation district in the review
of such plans and may deem as approved those plans which have been
reviewed and determined adequate by the district.
(b) The township engineer or other designated official shall grant or deny
certification within a period of 30 days after submission of a complete
application unless, by mutual agreement in writing between the
township and the applicant, the period of 30 days shall be extended for
an additional period of 30 days. Failure of the township to grant or deny
certification within such period or such extension thereof shall
§ T18A-4 PRINCETON CODE § T18A-5
BAO:1582
§ T18A-6. Principles and requirements — General design principles.
[Ord. No. 906, § 1]
Control measures shall apply to all aspects of the proposed land disturbance
and shall be in operation during all stages of the disturbance activity. The
following principles shall apply to the soil erosion and sediment control
plan:
§ T18A-7. Maintenance. [Ord. No. 906, § 1]
All necessary soil erosion and sediment control measures installed under
this chapter shall be adequately maintained.
§ T18A-8. Performance guarantees. [Ord. No. 906, § 1; Ord. No. 945,
§ 4]
constitute certification. For purposes of this section, a major revision of
the plan by the applicant shall constitute a new submission.
(c) Written notice of the decision of the township shall be provided to the
applicant indicating the municipality's decision on the plans. A copy of
this decision with other appropriate information shall be sent to the
local soil conservation district. The decision shall include street
address, lot and block number, proposed land use, and such other
information as district shall require.
(a) Stripping of vegetation, grading or other soil disturbance shall be done
in a manner which will minimize soil erosion.
(b) Whenever feasible, useful and appropriate existing vegetation shall be
retained and protected.
(c) The extent of the disturbed area and the duration of its exposure shall
be kept within practical limits as specified in the "Standards for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey," as promulgated by the
state soil conservation committee.
(d) Temporary seeding, mulching or other suitable stabilization measures
shall be used to protect exposed critical areas during construction or
other land disturbance.
(e) Drainage provisions shall accommodate increased runoff, resulting
from modified soil and surface conditions during and after development
or disturbance, in accordance with section 10B-227 of this Code.
(f) Water runoff shall be minimized and retained on site wherever possible
to facilitate ground water recharge.
(g) Sediment shall be retained on site to the maximum extent feasible.
(h) Diversions, sediment basins, and similar required structures shall be
installed prior to any on-site grading or disturbance.
§ T18A-5 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T18A-8
BAO:1583
§ T18A-9. Application fees. [Ord. No. 906, § 1; Ord. No. 945, § 5;
Ord. No. 84-21, § 3]
Each application shall be accompanied by a fee and an escrow deposit as
established by section 10B-36 of this code. The escrow deposit shall be
held in escrow by the municipality under a written agreement with the
applicant for the purpose of defraying the cost of the review of the soil
erosion and sediment control plan by the township engineer or his designee.
Said cost shall be based upon the time devoted to such review, and the
time so devoted shall be valued according to the method established by
resolution of the municipal governing body on file in the offices of the
municipal clerk and engineer. Said escrow agreement shall be in such
form as shall be approved by the municipal attorney and shall include the
following provisions: (a) that the escrowed funds shall be used for payment
to the municipality of the cost of review; (b) that if said cost is less than
the amount of the escrowed funds, the difference shall be refunded to the
applicant upon demand; and (c) that if said cost exceeds the amount of the
(a) The applicant shall post with the township clerk an adequate
performance bond to assure completion of required control measures.
The amount of the bond shall be determined by the township engineer,
and said amount shall include the cost of inspections pursuant to
subsection (b) hereof in accordance with fees established for such
inspections by resolution of the municipal governing body on file in the
offices of the municipal clerk and engineer.
(b) The township shall provide for inspection by the township engineer or
his designee for each development for which a performance guarantee
has been posted, and the township engineer or his designee shall certify
that installations and practices are or are not in compliance with
performance principles and standards prescribed by this chapter and
with any specific requirements that have been stated as conditions of
approval of the application. The applicant shall be required to have a
certified plan on site during construction.
(c) The township engineer or his designee shall issue a stop construction
order if a project is not being executed in accordance with the certified
plan.
(d) A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued unless there has been
compliance with the provisions of a certified plan for permanent
measures to control soil erosion and sedimentation. A formal report of
such compliance shall be filed with the municipal agent authorized to
issue certificates of occupancy. A copy of this report shall be sent to the
Mercer County soil conservation district.
(e) The township may, within 30 days after date of such report, release the
performance bond in whole or in part, depending upon the township's
assessment of need to withhold all or a portion of the bond to assure full
compliance with all requirements, including adequate maintenance of
the facilities.
§ T18A-8 PRINCETON CODE § T18A-9
BAO:1584
escrowed funds, the excess shall be paid by the applicant to the municipality
upon demand.
§ T18A-10. Injunctive relief and penalties. [Ord. No. 906, § 1]
If any person violates any of the provisions of this chapter or any standard
promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, or fails to comply
with the provisions of a certified plan, the municipality may institute a civil
action in the Superior Court for injunctive relief to prohibit and prevent
such violation or violations, and the court may proceed in a summary
manner. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter or
any standard promulgated pursuant to this chapter or fails to comply with
the provisions of a certified plan, shall be liable to a penalty of not less
than $25 nor more than $3,000 to be collected in a summary proceeding
pursuant to the Penalty Enforcement Law (N.J.S. 2A:58-1 et seq.). The
Superior Court, county court, county district court and municipal court shall
have jurisdiction to enforce the Penalty Enforcement Law. If the violation is
of a continuing nature, each day during which it continues shall constitute
an additional separate and distinct offense.
§ T18A-11. Exemptions. [Ord. No. 906, § 1]
The following activities are specifically exempted from this chapter:
§ T18A-12. Appeals. [Ord. No. 906, § 1]
Appeals from decisions under this chapter may be made to the municipal
governing body in writing within 10 days after the date of such decision.
The appellant shall be entitled to a hearing before the municipal governing
body within 30 days after date of appeal. The governing body shall render
its decision within 30 days after the closing of the hearing.
§ T18A-13. Relationship to land use regulations. [Ord. No. 906, § 1]
In cases where activity, work or development is subject to the provisions of
this chapter and also to the provisions of chapter 10B of this Code (Land
Use), the provisions of this chapter shall be administered so as to avoid
duplication of effort and expense insofar as practicable, and no requirement
imposed pursuant to chapter 10B shall affect a more stringent requirement
imposed pursuant to this chapter.
(a) The construction of a single family unit unless such unit is part of a
proposed subdivision, site plan, conditional use, zoning variance,
planned development or construction permit application involving two
or more such single-family dwelling units.
(b) Use of land for gardening primarily for home consumption.
(c) Agricultural use of lands.
§ T18A-9 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T18A-14
BAO:1585
§ T18A-14. Amendments. [Ord. No. 906, § 1]
No amendment to this chapter shall become effective until approved by the
state soil conservation committee.
Chapter T18B
SPECIAL EVENTS
§ T18A-14 PRINCETON CODE § T18A-14
BAO:1586
ARTICLE I
In General
§ T18B-1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 988, § 1]
For the purposes of this chapter, the term "special event" shall be deemed to
include any soap box derby, marathon run, walkathon, bikeathon, or jogging
group, or other organized group having a similar common purpose or goal
proceeding along a public street or other public right-of-way within the
township.
§ T18B-2. Application to conduct event. [Ord. No. 988, § 1]
An application for a permit to conduct a special event shall be made to the
chief of police in writing, by the person or persons in charge or responsible
for such event. A fee of $25 shall accompany the application. Such
application shall set forth the following information:
(a) The name, address and telephone number of the person requesting the
permit.
(b) The name and address of the organization or group he or she is
representing.
(c) The name, address and telephone number of the person or persons who
will act as chairman of the special event and be responsible for the
conduct thereof.
(d) The number of monitors to be provided and the identifying marks,
badges or symbols to be worn or used by the monitors.
(e) The purpose of the event, the estimated number of persons to
participate and otherwise attend, and the number and types of vehicles
(if any) to participate.
(f) The method of notifying participants of the terms and conditions of the
special event.
(g) The date the event is to be conducted and the hours it will be
commenced and terminated.
(h) The location where the special event is to be held, including the specific
assembly and dispersal location, and the specific route and the plans for
assembly and dispersal of the participants.
(i) Whether or not any music will be provided, either live or recorded.
(j) The number, types and locations of all loud speakers and amplifying
devices to be used.
(k) The name and address of any charity for which the special event is
being run including a disclosure as to the percentage of proceeds to be
§ T18B-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T18B-2
BAO:1587
§ T18B-3. Issuance or denial of permit. [Ord. No. 988, § 1]
If the chief of police shall find that the special event is not to be held for any
unlawful purpose and will not in any manner tend to unreasonably interfere
with the public use of the streets and sidewalks, he shall recommend
issuance of such permit by the township administrator or, for reasons
stated, shall recommend that the requested permit be denied. After giving
consideration to the recommendations of the chief of police, the final
determination as to whether or not a permit shall be issued shall be made
by the township administrator with a right of appeal to township committee.
§ T18B-4. Time limitation for application; removal of signs. [Ord.
No. 988, § 1]
No such permit shall be issued for a special event unless application for
such permit has been made not less than 30 days in advance of the date on
which such special event is sought to be held. All directional signs erected
in connection with the special event shall be removed within 24 hours of the
termination of such event.
§ T18B-5. Conditions contained in permit; closing of streets. [Ord.
No. 988, § 1]
Any permit granted under this chapter may contain conditions reasonably
calculated to reduce or minimize dangers and hazards to vehicular or
pedestrian traffic and the public health, safety and welfare, including but
not limited to changes in the date, time, duration or number of participants
as requested by the applicant. For the purposes of public safety and welfare,
the township administrator may order the temporary closing of streets and/
or the temporary prohibition of parking along same during the event, and
shall direct the posting of proper warning signs in connection with said
event, as provided by law.
§ T18B-6. Indemnification. [Ord. No. 988, § 1]
The holder of a special event permit shall agree in writing to indemnify
and hold harmless the township, its servants, agents and employees, for
any and all claims caused by or arising out of the activity covered in such
permit. Further, the holder of such permit shall present to the township
administrator an insurance policy in advance of the holding of the event
in a form acceptable to the administrator which will provide for the
raised from the special event to be actually donated to the charity after
administrative costs are deducted.
(l) Whether any admission fee will be charged for participation in the
special event and the amount of such fee, if any.
(m) Such other information as the chief of police may deem necessary in
order to properly provide for traffic control, street and property
maintenance and the protection of the public health, safety and welfare.
§ T18B-2 PRINCETON CODE § T18B-6
BAO:1588
indemnification as aforementioned. Additionally, if the chief of police
recommends to the township administrator that additional police officers
be made available for the purpose of preserving the public health, safety
and welfare during the course of the special event, the holder of the special
event permit shall deposit in advance of the holding of the event a sum of
money to be determined by the chief of police to pay in full for all police
services which the chief of police deems necessary in connection with the
special event. After the conduct of the special event, if additional costs are
incurred for the purpose of providing police protection, the holder of the
permit shall be required to pay to the township the additional fund within 10
days of notification by the township as to the exact figure due. In the event
that the sum of money so deposited in advance exceeds the funds needed
to pay for actual police protection, the township shall refund any excess
deposit within 10 days after the holding of the special event.
§ T18B-6 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T18B-6
BAO:1589

ARTICLE II
Tournament Events Permits
§ T18B-7. Definitions. [Ord. No. 99-12, § 1]
For purposes of this article, the term "tournament event" means a golf
tournament to be held over a period of two or more days, and including
events associated with the tournament, if it is projected that the tournament
attendance will exceed 25,000 people per day.
§ T18B-8. Application to conduct event. [Ord. No. 99-12, § 1]
Not later than 120 days prior to the tournament, an application for a
permit to conduct a tournament event shall be made in writing to the
Township Committee of the Township of Princeton (hereinafter referred
to as "township") and the Township Council of the Township of Lawrence
(hereinafter referred to as "Lawrence") (by the person or entity) or (the
sponsor) responsible for staging the event. A fee of $1,500 shall accompany
the application with 50% of said fee payable to the township and 50% of
said fee payable to Lawrence. Additionally, an escrow deposit of $5,000
for retaining professional consultants to review the applicant's submission
shall be paid to the township. If additional escrow funds are needed, the
applicant shall make payment within 15 days of the request. The township
will provide the applicant with a final accounting within 30 days after
the tournament, and within 15 days thereafter the applicant will make
any remaining payment or the township shall return to the applicant any
excess escrow funds. Said funds shall be jointly utilized by the township and
Lawrence for the review of the event application by the professional review
committee established in section 18B-10 hereinbelow.
§ T18B-9. Submission requirements. [Ord. No. 99-12, § 1]
The application shall include:
(a) Tournament event plan. Including:
(1) Dates:
a. When pre-tournament construction will start;
b. When pre-tournament events start;
c. Of tournament play with rain dates, if any;
d. When post-tournament removal of temporary facilities will end.
(2) Description of and schedule of golf events during tournament
week.
(3) Projection of number of people attending golf event on a day by day
basis during tournament week, including:
a. Spectators;
§ T18B-7 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T18B-9
BAO:1591
b. Volunteers;
c. Golfers and their staff;
d. Tournament staff;
e. Sponsors and hosts and their staff;
f. Others.
(4) Information about applicant to demonstrate professional
experience and financial responsibility.
(5) Contact person(s) to be contacted by municipal staff in the event of
problems. If there is more than one contact person, the area of
responsibility of each contact person shall be specified.
(6) A description of location of each entrance and exit to the golf
course, including:
a. What people or vehicles are allowed to enter and leave;
b. If both vehicles and pedestrians, how separated;
c. Permitted hours of entrance and exit;
d. Plan for staffing, regulating, and controlling entrances and
exits;
e. Where ticket booths are located;
f. What entrance trucks will use for pre- and post-tournament
construction and removal activities;
g. What entrances will be used for service traffic during the
tournament event.
(7) The plan for off-site event directional signage and the plan for its
removal after the event.
(8) The plan for dealing with inclement weather as it relates to
cancellation of days of the event and public notification process.
(b) Transportation plan. Including the following elements:
(1) An off-site parking plan designating:
a. The location of off-site parking areas;
b. The number of cars which can be accommodated at each
location;
c. The contractual arrangements which are in effect for each
location;
§ T18B-9 PRINCETON CODE § T18B-9
BAO:1592
d. A schedule showing when during the tournament each of the
locations will be in use;
e. A capacity analysis report which relates the number of parking
spaces to the expected crowd size during the tournament with
particular reference to peak periods;
f. The plan, if any, for VIP and handicapped parking;
g. A plan showing any limitations on the off-site parking areas in
the event of inclement weather.
(2) A routing and parking allocation plan showing:
a. The expected geographical areas from which those driving to
the event will be coming and the methodology for determining
this;
b. The plan for directing drivers to parking areas, including VIP
and handicapped parking, if any;
c. The driving directions which will be sent to advance
purchasers of tickets;
d. The parking information and directions which will be included
with the tournament promotional materials for those not
purchasing tickets in advance.
(3) A busing plan showing:
a. The main and any secondary tournament drop-off and pick-up
areas;
b. The routes from the off-site parking areas to the drop-off areas;
c. The routes from the drop-off areas to the off-site parking areas;
d. The schedule of bus departures from the off-site parking areas
during the course of the tournament and the expected bus
travel times;
e. The capacity of the drop-off and pick-up areas to handle the
proposed schedules, particularly at peak times;
f. The plan for linking buses to other public transportation (e.g.,
train station and bus stops) and from in-town locations for use
by local residents;
g. The contractual arrangement for having buses available;
h. The plans for general and any special arrangements for
intersection and other roadway control devices or persons;
i. The staging areas for buses not in use;
§ T18B-9 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T18B-9
BAO:1593
j. The plan for avoiding conflicts between buses and pedestrians
and other traffic near the tournament entrance and exit areas.
(4) The course-area parking and traffic regulations plan showing:
a. Any special parking regulations which are proposed for public
roads which are proximate to the course;
b. The plan for legally adopting any special regulations;
c. The plan for posting and enforcing the regulations and for
coordinating with the needs of local residents;
d. Whether it is contemplated that there will be restriction on
private land owners in the vicinity of the course from setting up
parking lots on their property;
e. Whether it is contemplated that private cars or taxicabs or van
services will be allowed to drop off people at the entrance
areas.
(5) A pedestrian safety plan, including:
a. Specially designated areas for pedestrians using the public
street, including any special plans needed for pedestrians
walking along or crossing Route 206;
b. The plan for directing pedestrians to the entrance areas;
c. Plan for the safety of passengers embarking and disembarking
from the bus drop-off and on-line at the pick-up areas.
(6) A bicycle plan, including:
a. Whether it is contemplated there will be restrictions on
bicyclists using public roads in the course area;
b. Where bicycle racks will be provided at the course.
(7) A background traffic plan, including:
a. Estimates of non-tournament traffic on area roadways during
the tournament period and identifying times and places of
potential conflicts with tournament traffic;
b. Other unusual traffic-generating activities taking place within
a five mile radius of the course and of each off-site parking area
during the tournament event.
(8) A summary and analysis plan prepared by a professional traffic
engineer and based on the facts in the other elements of the plan
demonstrating:
a. That the off-site parking areas are adequate to accommodate
the expected parking demand during the tournament event;
§ T18B-9 PRINCETON CODE § T18B-9
BAO:1594
b. That the routing and parking allocation plan is designed to
effectively disperse the arriving automobiles and to direct
them to parking areas with the least disruption on local area
streets;
c. That the busing plan is adequate to safely transport people
from the off-site parking areas to the tournament drop-off
areas and from the tournament pick-up areas to the off-site
parking areas without undue travel times, without undue wait
times, and without causing undue traffic congestion;
d. That the parking and other traffic movements on the area
roadways are adequately regulated so as to minimize the
problem for area residents and will not unduly interfere with
buses and other transportation objectives;
e. That the proposed plans do not pose a safety problem for
pedestrians and bicyclists and will not interfere with buses and
other transportation objectives, and that adequate
arrangements have been made to accommodate the needs of
handicapped persons; and
f. That the bus drop-off and pick-up areas are designed to
efficiently and safely board and unload passengers and to avoid
conflicting bus movements and with sufficient capacity to
handle pick-up demands.
(c) Emergency and other services plan.
(1) Police services plan describing:
a. The police services that will be required during the
tournament;
b. Special security arrangements which might be necessary;
c. Any private security companies and personnel which will be
present during the tournament.
(2) Fire services plan describing:
a. The location and volume of water availability from fire
hydrants within or adjacent to the tournament site, or from
other sources;
b. The duration of flows or storage capacity as measured in hours
of deliverable flows and water pressure available for fire
protection purposes within the site of the tournament;
c. How the on site temporary structures to be located during the
tournament, such as tents, food preparation areas, as defined
under subsection (d)(3) hereinbelow satisfy the requirements
of the National Fire Protection Association Standards 1231 as
§ T18B-9 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T18B-9
BAO:1595
adopted by the township pursuant to section 10B-118.3 of this
Code.
(3) Ambulance and emergency services plan describing:
a. The proposed location for the stationing of ambulance and first
aid station on the site of the tournament;
b. The medical personnel that the applicant proposes having
available on site during the tournament;
c. The location of an emergency helevac landing area for the
removal of those who may become ill or injured on site during
the tournament.
(4) Trash removal plan describing:
a. The size and location of all trash receptacles and holding areas
on site;
b. The method to be utilized for the removal of the trash from the
tournament site;
c. The number of trips that will be made to and from the site
during the tournament for trash removal purposes and the
proposed routing of the trash removal vehicles;
d. A certification that the trash storage and removal will be done
in accordance with the applicable regulations of the Princeton
Board of Health.
(5) Disaster control plan describing the plans and contingencies
should there be a natural disaster occurring during the
tournament.
(d) Temporary tournament facilities plan. Including a site plan showing the
location and dimensions of the following structures, facilities or areas
together with a narrative describing the use of temporary structures
and facilities.
(1) Press and media coverage.
a. Location and size of staging area(s), including setback from
property lines;
b. Location of press and media area(s), including setback from
property lines;
c. Location and height of elevated camera area(s) and antennas,
including height and setback from property lines;
d. Power supply and needs (if new service is to be brought in).
(2) Concession area.
§ T18B-9 PRINCETON CODE § T18B-9
BAO:1596
a. Location and size of area(s);
b. Location, size, height, and setback from property lines of
structure(s);
c. Power supply and needs (if new service is to be brought in).
(3) Temporary structures such as grandstands, skyboxes, hospitality
tents, leader boards, trailers media, press, tournament officials,
etc., portable rest rooms, and water fountains.
a. Location, size, height, and setback from property lines of
structures;
b. Description of special maintenance requirements;
c. Power supply and needs (if new service is to be brought in).
(4) Trash storage area.
a. Location, size, height, and setback from property lines of
area(s) for refuse and recyclables;
b. Tonnage estimate for solid waste and schedule for pick-up;
c. Plan for controlling wind blown debris.
(5) Emergency services.
a. Location of emergency service area;
b. Emergency service access points.
(6) Utility connections.
a. Location and size of existing and proposed utility connection;
b. Location and size of any proposed generator(s);
(7) On-site advertising.
a. Sign location, size, height, and setback from property lines;
b. Whether it is contemplated that there will be cigarette or
liquor advertising.
(8) Noise, light, and odors.
a. Identify source and location;
b. Identify control measures;
c. Measurement estimates showing compliance with township
noise ordinance.
d. Plans to assure compliance with other municipal standards.
§ T18B-9 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T18B-9
BAO:1597
(e) Risk management plan. Including:
(1) Insurance. The applicant shall present to the township
administrator and the Lawrence Manager all necessary insurance
information. All insurance policies shall be provided by companies
licensed to do business in the State of New Jersey. The applicant
shall purchase and maintain insurance with companies satisfactory
to the township administrator and Lawrence Manager as follows:
a. Public liability policies, including comprehensive general
liability insurance, for the satisfaction of all claims for damages
by reason of bodily injury to or the death of any one person and
of all claims for damages by reason of bodily injury to or the
death of all persons resulting from an accident. Such liability
policies shall be in an amount of not less than $2,000,000 for
each person and $5,000,000 for each accident. If the township
administrator or the Lawrence Manager deems this insurance
to be inadequate to fully protect the township or Lawrence,
either the township administrator or Lawrence Manager, with
the consent of the professional review committee, may require
increased insurance to provide both the township and
Lawrence with adequate protection. The named insured shall
be the applicant, and the township and Lawrence shall be
named as additional insureds.
b. Contractual liability insurance must be included in the
comprehensive general liability insurance specifically insuring
the indemnification clause specified below in sub-section
(e)(2).
c. Policies shall remain in force until the tournament event has
concluded and until all retained deposits and performance
bonds have been released.
d. Certificates of insurance required must be filed with the
township administrator and the Lawrence Manager. The
comprehensive general liability certificate must specifically
state that standard contractual liability insurance is in force
insuring the indemnification clause, and the indemnification
clause must be typed on the certificate or specifically
incorporated therein by reference. All certificates must provide
for 30 days' prior written notice to the township administrator
and Lawrence Manager of policy cancellation or material
change.
e. Copies of the insurance policies must be filed with the
township and Lawrence at least 14 days before the beginning
of the tournament event.
(2) Indemnification. The applicant shall agree in writing to assume the
defense of and indemnify and save harmless the township and
Lawrence, their servants, agents, employees and officers for all
§ T18B-9 PRINCETON CODE § T18B-9
BAO:1598
suits, actions, damages or claims to which the township or
Lawrence may be subjected of any kind or nature whatsoever
resulting from, caused by, arising out of or as a consequence of
such tournament event, excluding negligence and intentional acts
or failure to act by the township or Lawrence, its servants, agents,
employees and officers.
(3) Performance bonds/letters of credit. The applicant, within 10 days
after issuance of a permit, shall supply the township administrator
and Lawrence Manager with a performance bond or letter of credit
in an amount equal to 100% of the costs associated with the
tournament event as specified in the tournament agreement and
guaranteed by a qualified surety on a performance bond. In the
event of the insolvency of the surety, the applicant shall forthwith
furnish and maintain another performance bond. In lieu of posting
the aforementioned performance bonds/letters of credit, the
sponsor may make a cash deposit to cover said cost with the
township. The costs associated with the tournament event or which
the aforementioned performance bond/letters of credit must be
posted shall cover the following: contractual arrangements under
sections 18B-9(b)(1)c, 18B-9(b)(3)g. and 18B-9(c)(4) hereinabove.
If these contractual arrangements are submitted to and approved
by the township attorney and Lawrence Attorney prior to the
issuance of the permit, the township administrator and the
Lawrence Manager may relieve the applicant from the
requirements of posting security for them.
(4) Deposits. An amount equal to at least 10% of the performance bond
or letter of credit must be provided to the township administrator
in cash or its equivalent at the time the performance bond or letter
of credit is required to be supplied to be held by the township for
the joint benefit of said township and Lawrence. This amount shall
be held until the applicant has fully performed its obligations to the
township and may also be used as security to assure the repairs of
damage to public property and for the removal of off-site signs.
Said deposit shall secure performance of the cost associated with
the tournament event as referenced in paragraph (e)(3)
hereinabove.
(f) Staffing plan. Including:
(1) A description of the paid staff (other than police and other
emergency services personnel described in subsection (c)
hereinabove), including numbers, their schedule, their onsite
activities and responsibilities, and any special parking
arrangements.
(2) A description of the volunteer staff including:
a. Day by day schedule showing how many and when needed;
b. A description of the activities to be performed;
§ T18B-9 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T18B-9
BAO:1599
§ T18B-10. Professional review committee. [Ord. No. 99-12, § 1]
The applicant's submissions shall be reviewed by a joint committee of
township officials and Lawrence officials. This committee shall consist of
11 members to be constituted as follows: five members from the township
as appointed by the township committee to include: the chief of police,
the municipal planner, the municipal fire official and two other appointees;
five members from Lawrence appointed by five members from Lawrence as
determined by the Lawrence Township Tournament Events Ordinance; and
the Princeton Borough Chief of Police or his or her designee.
The committee after reviewing the applicant's submissions may request
such additional information as may be necessary to fully evaluate the
applicant's permit request. The committee may also designate professional
consultants to review and evaluate submission items which are beyond the
expertise of the committee. The committee shall make a final determination
as to whether the permit should be issued, including any conditions to be
attached to the permit.
§ T18B-11. Specific arrangements and payment for emergency
services. [Ord. No. 99-12, § 1]
c. A description of any special parking arrangements.
(3) A recruitment plan, showing:
a. How recruited;
b. How trained;
c. Who is responsible for recruiting volunteers;
d. What payments or other items are required from volunteers.
(g) Local Charitable Purpose Fund plan. The applicant shall cause an
amount equal to 10% of the total charitable funds generated by the
tournament to be paid into the Local Charitable Purpose Fund. The
fund shall be either a new IRS § 501(c)(3) entity or part of an existing
IRS § 501(c)(3) entity as mutually determined by the township
committee and the Lawrence Council. The Local Charitable Purpose
Fund will allocate funds to local charitable purposes, as determined by
its board of trustees.
(a) Police.
(1) At least 60 days prior to the proposed tournament, the applicant
shall meet with the township chief of police or his or her designee
and the Lawrence Chief of Police or his or her designee to review
the police services that will be required during the tournament. At
that time, the applicant shall review in detail the final
transportation plan.
§ T18B-9 PRINCETON CODE § T18B-11
BAO:1600
(2) After discussing with the applicant the requirement for police
services, the township police department and Lawrence Police
Department shall determine the cost of providing police personnel
for the tournament, including, but not limited to, the expense
associated with regular duty officers assigned to the tournament
and the need for special officers assigned to the tournament. The
applicant shall be required to post an escrow deposit or payment
bond with the township and Lawrence in the amount determined by
the respective chiefs of police or his or her designee to cover these
anticipated costs. All costs associated with providing these services
to the tournament shall be paid by the applicant through said
deposit.
(3) Within 30 days following the tournament, the township and
Lawrence shall provide a full and final accounting to the applicant
as to the costs charged to this escrow deposit. All funds
unexpended shall be returned to the applicant. If the escrow
deposit is insufficient, the applicant shall be required to pay to the
township or Lawrence any additional costs within 15 days of
receiving said final accounting.
(b) Fire.
(1) At least 60 days prior to the tournament, the applicant shall meet
with the township fire official and Lawrence Fire Official to ensure
that the fire protection plan is adequate. The applicant shall also
review with the said fire officials the establishment of an instant
command system to provide adequate fire protection during the
tournament.
(2) All costs associated with the time spent by the township fire official
and Lawrence Fire Official in conferring with the applicant and
reviewing the fire protection plan shall be paid for through an
escrow deposit by the applicant.
(c) Ambulance and emergency services.
(1) At least 60 days prior to the tournament, the applicant shall meet
with representatives of the Princeton First Aid and Rescue Squad
and Lawrence First Aid and Rescue Squad to ensure that there will
be adequate ambulance and emergency services available on the
site at the tournament.
(2) The applicant shall also arrange to make a reasonable donation to
both squads providing ambulance and emergency services to the
tournament.
(d) Disaster control. At least 60 days prior to the tournament, the applicant
shall meet with the Princeton Township Emergency Management
Council and Lawrence Emergency Management Council to discuss
plans and contingencies should there be a natural disaster occurring
during the tournament.
§ T18B-11 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T18B-12
BAO:1601
§ T18B-12. Issuance of permit. [Ord. No. 99-12, § 1]
As provided for in section 18B-10 hereinabove, the professional review
committee shall approve, disapprove, or approve with conditions the
issuance of a tournament permit. Any permit granted under this article may
contain conditions reasonably calculated to reduce or minimize the dangers
and hazards to vehicular or pedestrian traffic and the public health, safety,
or welfare; to reduce or minimize the possibility of damage to public and
private property and the liability of the township therefor; and to reduce or
minimize the nuisance effects arising out of the tournament event activity.67
67.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes Ordinance Nos. 182, 235, 445, 446, 774,
86-11, 87-33, 88-2, 88-9, 90-28, 93-7, 95-16, 98-6, 99-15, 1035, 2001-2, 2003-16, 2005-13,
2010-18, 2014-27, 2008-12. Replaced in entirety by Ord. No. 2018-12.
§ T18B-12 PRINCETON CODE § T18B-12
BAO:1602
Chapter T19
STREETS, SIDEWALKS, BIKE LANES AND SHARED USE
PATHS
§ T18B-12 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T18B-12
BAO:1603

ARTICLE I
In General
§ T19-1. IN GENERAL.
§ T19-1.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2018-12]
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words or phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this Section:
BICYCLE BOULEVARD — A traffic-calmed street where bicyclists are
afforded an enhanced level of safety and comfort.
BICYCLE LANE OR BIKE LANE — A portion of roadway that has been
designated for preferential or exclusive use by bicyclists by pavement
markings and, if used, signs. It is intended for one-way travel, usually in the
same direction as the adjacent traffic lane, unless designed as a contra-flow
lane.
DEBRIS — Leaves, branches, logs, ashes, dirt, litter or other material,
including but not limited to bulky household waste, tires and construction
debris as defined in Section 10A-5 of the "Code of the Borough of Princeton,
New Jersey, 1974", and yard waste.
DISTRIBUTOR — Any person, association of persons, firm or corporation,
responsible, in whole or in part, jointly or severally, for placing, locating,
installing or maintaining a newspaper vending machine in a public right-ofway
or public place in the municipality of Princeton.
ENGINEER OR MUNICIPAL ENGINEER — The municipal engineer of the
municipality of Princeton, or other person designated by the Mayor and
Council of the municipality to act in that capacity.
HIGHWAY — Every way or place of whatever nature open to the use of the
public as a matter of right for purposes of travel, including sidewalks, curbs
and gutters.
NEWSPAPER VENDING MACHINE — Any machine, rack, self-service or
coin-operated box, stand, rack, container, storage unit or any other
dispenser installed, utilized and maintained for the purpose of offering for
sale and distribution newspapers, news periodicals, news magazines and
any other similar publications.
NEWSPAPER, NEWS PERIODICAL AND NEWS MAGAZINE — Any
newspaper, periodical or magazine of general circulation as defined by
general law; any newspaper, periodical or magazine duly entered with the
Post Office Department of the United States, in accordance with federal
statute or regulation; and any newspaper periodical or magazine filed and
recorded with any recording officer as required by general law.
OWNER — A person who holds the legal title to the premises, or in event
the premises are the subject of an agreement of sale or lease, whereby the
control of the premises is vested in the vendee or lessee, such vendee or
lessee shall be deemed the owner for the purposes of this Chapter.
§ T19-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T19-1.1
BAO:1605
PRINCETON ENGINEERING DESIGN STANDARDS — The design
standards as described in Section 19-1.3 hereafter.
ROADWAY — As used in this Chapter, that portion of any street or highway
improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic.
SHARED LANE — A lane of a roadway that is open to both bicycle and motor
vehicle travel.
SHARED USE PATH — A bikeway physically separated from motor vehicle
traffic by an open space or barrier and either within the highway rightof-
way or within an independent right-of-way. Shared use paths may also
be used by pedestrians, skaters, wheelchair users, joggers, and other nonmotorized
users. Most shared use paths are designed for two-way travel.
SIDEWALK — Any surface provided for the exclusive use of pedestrians,
including the area between the curb of any street and the property line
adjacent thereto, or, if there is no curb, the area between the edge of the
street and the property line adjacent thereto, and shall include the public
right-of-way along such street or sidewalk.
STREET — Any road, highway, public way, public alley, easement, sidewalk,
shared use path or other right-of-way accepted or maintained by the
municipality as a public street and dedicated to public use, as well as any
state or county road or highway over which the municipality has acquired
jurisdiction by agreement.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or
may be transported upon a highway.
§ T19-1.2. Obstruction of streets, sidewalks, shared use paths, bike
lanes, curbs, and gutters without approval; exceptions. [Ord. No.
2018-12]
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, place, maintain or continue,
or cause to be placed, maintained or continued, any debris or
obstruction of any kind upon any part of the public streets, sidewalks,
shared use paths, curbs and gutters, of the municipality for any length
of time whatsoever, unless as may be specifically permitted in
accordance with this Code or other municipal ordinance, or upon
receipt of the approval of the Mayor and Council. Such approval may be
revoked at any time by the Mayor and Council. A change of ownership
of the subject property will not require re-approval of the encroachment
by the Mayor and Council. Particular restrictions shall be placed upon
awnings, retaining walls, vaults, flower tubs, trash receptacles, exhaust
vents and air-conditioning vents as set forth below. Any outdoor
displays or advertisements in existence at the time of adoption of this
ordinance must comply with the standards set forth herein, regardless
of any prior approval which may have been given by the Mayor and
Council for same.
(1) Awnings must meet all requirements of the Uniform Construction
Code. No sign, advertisement or object of any kind may be hung
§ T19-1.1 PRINCETON CODE § T19-1.2
BAO:1606
from an awning. Applicants seeking approval for awning
installation at properties located in an Historic Preservation
District must also make application to the Historic Preservation
Commission;
(2) Applicants seeking approval for the installation of retaining walls,
vaults, flower tubs, air-conditioning units, exhaust units and trash
receptacles at properties located in an Historic Preservation
District must also make application to the Historic Preservation
Commission. A change of ownership of the property will not require
reapproval of the existing encroachment.
(b) Exceptions. An approval from the Mayor and Council shall not be
required in the following circumstances:
(1) Outdoor displays of books, flowers, plants, vegetables and
newspapers shall be permitted provided that the display shall not
exceed a total length of 30 feet along the principal frontage or
facade of the area occupied by the business, shall be placed within
a distance of no more than 36 inches from the building face at any
point along the building and that a minimum of five feet of an
unobstructed sidewalk area must be maintained;
(2) Where such obstruction is temporary and caused by the loading or
unloading of goods, wares and merchandise to or from vehicles,
and when such obstruction exists for no longer space of time as
necessary and unavoidable for the purposes of transportation, a
reasonable portion of the right-of-way may be so occupied;
(3) Receptacles for garbage, refuse and recycling from property in the
municipality when placed in accordance with the standards set
forth in Chapter 15 of the "Code of the Borough of Princeton, New
Jersey, 1974";
(4) Trash receptacles installed by establishments open to the public in
accordance with this Code or other ordinance shall be permitted;
(5) Temporary obstructions as may be placed or maintained by public
utility corporations, or their agents or employees, in the
maintenance, adjustment, repair or replacement of their service
facilities pursuant to state law and existing easement agreements;
and
(6) Placement of a temporary free-standing advertisement sign in
accordance with the appropriate provisions of this Code, including
but not limited to Section 17A-368 of the "Code of the Borough of
Princeton, New Jersey, 1974".
(c) The following procedures shall apply in cases where any person has
violated subsections 19-1.2(a) or (b):
§ T19-1.2 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T19-1.2
BAO:1607
§ T19-1.3. Princeton Engineering Design Standards. [Ord. No.
2018-12]
(1) Issuance of summons and complaint (prior written notice not
required):
a. In the event the debris creates a traffic or public safety hazard,
or violates the provisions of the "Stormwater Management
Planning Regulations," N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.1 et seq., the municipality
may issue a complaint and summons returnable in municipal
court without any prior notice to the violator; and
b. In such cases the debris may be removed by or under the
direction of the municipal engineer, director of public works, or
designee of one or both, and the cost of same shall be charged
to the violator.
(2) Issuance of summons and complaint (prior written notice
required):
a. In the event of any violation of subsections 19-1.2(a) or (b)
other than one identified in subsection 19-1.2(c)(1)a above, the
municipality shall provide written notice to the violator that
there is a violation of subsection 19-1.2(a) or (b) as appropriate
prior to issuing a complaint and summons returnable in
municipal court; and
b. Only if the violator shall refuse or neglect to remove the debris
within seven days of the date of the written notice may the
municipality issue a complaint and summons returnable in
municipal court, without any required further notice to the
violator; and
c. In such cases the debris may be removed by or under the
direction of the municipal engineer, director of public works, or
designee of one or both, and the cost of same shall be charged
to the violator.
(3) For each violation of this Section, the violator shall be subject to
such fines and other penalties as provided in Section 1-6 of this
Code. Repeat offenders shall be subject to additional fines and
other penalties as provided in Section 1-6 of this Code.
(a) The Princeton Engineering Department is authorized to use the current
editions of the AASHTO Design Guides, NACTO Design Guides, "NJDOT
Roadway Design Manual" and "State of New Jersey Complete Streets
Design Guide," and their included reference publications, for the design
of geometric improvements within the public right of way (collectively
referenced in this Section as the "Design Manuals"). As used in this
Section and Chapter, the phrase "Princeton Engineering Design
Standards" shall refer to the Design Manuals.
§ T19-1.2 PRINCETON CODE § T19-1.3
BAO:1608
(b) The Princeton Engineering Design Standards are hereby adopted by
reference and made a part of this Code. Said documents shall also be
maintained in the office of the engineer for review and/or copying
during the normal business hours of the municipality.
§ T19-1.3 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T19-1.3
BAO:1609

ARTICLE II
Leaf, Branch and Log Collection Program
§ T19-1A. LEAF, BRANCH AND LOG COLLECTION PROGRAM.
§ T19-1A.1. Introduction; intent. [Ord. No. 2018-12]
§ T19-1A.2. Division of municipality into Sections for collection;
notification of Sections and collection schedules; report to Mayor
and Council. [Ord. No. 2018-12]
For purposes of collection under this article, the municipality shall be
divided into several Sections. The director of infrastructure and operations
shall determine the identity, quantity and location of these Sections. The
director shall designate the Sections annually and may also amend the
identity, quantity or location of Sections as may be necessary. The director's
exercise of authority under this Section shall be subject to the
administrator's approval. The director shall also report the designated
collection Sections and corresponding schedule to the Mayor and Council
annually.
§ T19-1A.3. Leaf collection schedule and requirements.
(a) Princeton residents shall be permitted to dispose of leaves, branches
and logs in accordance with the requirements set forth in this article.
(b) It shall be the municipality's policy to encourage residents to:
(1) Participate in the program described in this article; or
(2) To minimize the negative environmental and budgetary impacts of
the leaf, branch and log program and to provide flexibility apart
from the schedule, to compost, chip and/or mulch leaves, branches
and logs on their own property; or
(3) Take leaves, branches and logs to the Lawrence Township
Ecological Facility, or such other ecological facility that may be
designated by the municipality, for disposal.
(c) The intent of this article is to:
(1) Keep Princeton's streets, roads, sidewalks, bike paths and public
right-of-ways free from debris for the safe passage of vehicles,
including emergency vehicles, pedestrians and bicycles.
(2) Preserve and protect public property;
(3) Assist residents in the disposal and removal of leaves, branches and
logs in an orderly and organized fashion; and
(4) Satisfy Princeton's stormwater management planning
requirements.
§ T19-1A BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T19-1A.3
BAO:1611
(a) The municipality will collect leaves along residential roadways and
streets between the months of March and December. The director of
infrastructure and operations shall determine the leaf collection
schedule annually, specifying type of pick up (loose vs. bagged) and
frequency of collection, and may also amend said schedule as may be
necessary, subject to the approval of the administrator.
(b) Leaves shall be left for collection as follows:
(1) Leaves must be placed in piles (referred to as "loose leaves") or in
biodegradable paper bags (referred to as "bagged leaves").
(2) Requirements for collection of loose leaves:
a. Loose leaves shall be left out for the municipality's collection
by placing the pile(s) on the paved roadway adjacent to the
curb or the beginning of the paved roadway and extending no
more than three feet from the curb or if there is no curb, no
more than three feet from where the paved roadway begins.
b. Loose leaves shall not be left on any sidewalk, bike path, bike
lane, or walkway, over utility boxes such as gas and water
shutoffs or sewer clean-outs or within 10 feet of any storm
sewer inlet or fire hydrant.
c. Loose leaves shall be left out for collection prior to the start of
the scheduled collection week, but not more than seven days
prior to its start. For purposes of this Section, "start of the
scheduled collection week" shall mean 7:00 a.m. on Monday
and "collection week" shall mean Monday through Friday.
(3) Requirements for collection of bagged leaves:
a. Bagged leaves shall be left out for the municipality's collection
by placing the bag(s) on the edge of the roadway. For purposes
of this paragraph, "on the edge of the roadway" shall refer to
the grass (or dirt area if no grass) that is immediately adjacent
to the paved roadway but shall not mean the paved roadway
itself or on the curb.
b. Bagged leaves shall not be left on any sidewalk, bike path, bike
lane, or walkway, over utility boxes such as gas and water
shutoffs or sewer clean-outs or within 10 feet of any storm
sewer inlet or fire hydrant.
c. Bagged leaves shall be left out for collection prior to the start
of the scheduled collection week, but not more than seven days
prior to its start. For purposes of this Section, "start of the
scheduled collection week" shall mean 7:00 a.m. on Monday
and "collection week" shall mean Monday through Friday.
§ T19-1A.3 PRINCETON CODE § T19-1A.3
BAO:1612
(c) Also refer to Schedules A and B for a summary and illustration,
respectively, of the requirements of this section. (Schedules A and B
may be found at the end of this section.)
(d) Notwithstanding the above, leaves may be taken to the Lawrence
Township Ecological Facility, or such other ecological facility that may
be designated by the municipality, for disposal. Leaves may also be
disposed of on an owner's property, such as in wooded areas if
practicable.
SCHEDULE A
(Article 1A, Section 19-1A-3)
Loose
Leaves
Bagged
Leaves Branches Logs
Time of
Collection
Monthly
during
October,
November
and
December
Weekly
during
October,
November
and
December
Spring and
Fall each
year
Spring and
Fall each
year
Placement
for
Collection
Loose leaves
are to be
placed in
piles
Bagged are
to be placed
in
biodegradable
bags.
Branches are
to be placed
in separate
untied
bundles or
piles
Logs are to
be placed in
separate
untied
bundles or
piles
Limitations
on Quantity
or Size of
Materials
3 inches
wide
None Branches
must be cut
no longer
than 3 feet
in length &
no larger
than 4
inches in
diameter
Logs must
be cut no
longer than
3 feet in
length & no
larger than 6
inches in
diameter
Bunches or
piles of
branches
shall be no
greater in
size than 3
feet in
length, 3
feet in width
& 3 feet in
height
Bunches or
piles of logs
shall be no
greater in
size than 3
feet in width,
3 feet in
length & 3
feet in
height
§ T19-1A.3 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T19-1A.3
BAO:1613
SCHEDULE A
(Article 1A, Section 19-1A-3)
Loose
Leaves
Bagged
Leaves Branches Logs
A maximum
of 3 bundles
or piles of
logs per
property
may be left
for any
scheduled
collection
Where
Materials
Must be Left
for
Collection
On paved
roadway but
not more
than 3 feet
into paved
roadway
(measured
from curb or
if no curb,
from where
pavement
begins)
On grass (or
dirt area if
not grass)
that is
immediately
adjacent to
edge of
paved
roadway but
not on paved
roadway
itself or on
the curb
On paved
roadway but
not more
than 3 feet
into paved
roadway
(measured
from curb or
if no curb,
from where
pavement
begins)
On paved
roadway but
not more
than 3 feet
into paved
roadway
(measured
from curb or
if no curb,
from where
pavement
begins)
When
Materials
Must be Left
for
Collection
Not more
than 7 days
prior to
scheduled
collection
work
Not more
than 7 days
prior to
scheduled
collection
week
Not more
than 7 days
prior to
scheduled
collection
week
Not more
than 7 days
prior to
scheduled
collection
week
§ T19-1A.3 PRINCETON CODE § T19-1A.3
BAO:1614
§ T19-1A.4. Branch and log collection.
SCHEDULE B
(Article 1A, Section 19-1A-3)
(a) The municipality will collect branches and logs along residential
roadways and streets during the spring and fall each year and such
other times that may be deemed necessary by director of infrastructure
and operations, such as after major storm events. The director of
infrastructure and operations shall determine the branch and log
collection schedule annually and may also amend said schedule as may
be necessary, subject to the approval of the administrator.
(b) Branches shall be left out for collection as follows (per each scheduled
collection day):
(1) Branches shall be placed in separate untied bundles or piles and
left for collection by placing the bundle(s) or pile(s) on the paved
roadway adjacent to the curb or the beginning of the paved
roadway and extending no more than three feet from the curb or if
there is no curb, no more than three feet from where the paved
roadway begins.
(2) Branches must be cut no longer than three feet in length and no
larger than four inches in diameter.
(3) Bundles and piles of branches may be no greater in size than three
feet in length, three feet in width and three feet in height.
(4) Branches may not be placed on any sidewalk, bike path, bike lane,
or walkway, over utility boxes such as gas and water shutoffs or
sewer clean-outs or within 10 feet of any storm sewer inlet or fire
hydrant.
(5) Branches shall be left out for collection prior to the start of the
scheduled collection week, but not more than seven days prior to
its start. For purposes of this Section, "start of the scheduled
§ T19-1A.3 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T19-1A.4
BAO:1615
§ T19-1A.5. Responsibility of municipality to pick up leaves,
branches and logs not left in accordance with program
requirements or left on private property. [Ord. No. 2018-12]
The municipality will not be responsible for:
collection week" shall mean 7:00 a.m. on Monday and "collection
week" shall mean Monday through Friday.
(c) Logs shall be left out for collection as follows (per each scheduled
collection day):
(1) Logs shall be placed in separate untied bundles or piles and left for
collection by placing the bundle(s) or pile(s) on the paved roadway
adjacent to the curb or the beginning of the paved roadway and
extending no more than three feet from the curb or if there is no
curb, no more than three feet from where the paved roadway
begins.
(2) Logs must be cut no longer than three feet in length and no larger
than six inches in diameter.
(3) Bundles and piles of logs shall be no greater in size than three feet
in length, three feet in width and three feet in height.
(4) A maximum amount of three bundles or piles of logs per property
may be left for collection.
(5) Logs may not be placed on any sidewalk, bike path, bike lane, or
walkway, over utility boxes such as gas and water shutoffs or sewer
clean-outs or within 10 feet of any storm sewer inlet or fire hydrant.
(6) Logs shall be left out for collection prior to the start of the
scheduled collection week, but not more than seven days prior to
its start. For purposes of this Section, "start of the scheduled
collection week" shall mean 7:00 a.m. on Monday and "collection
week" shall mean Monday through Friday.
(d) Also refer to Schedules A and B attached hereto for a summary and
illustration, respectively, of the requirements of this Section.
(e) Notwithstanding the above, branches and logs (not greater than six
inches in diameter) may be taken to the Lawrence Township Ecological
Facility, or such other ecological facility that may be designated by the
municipality, for disposal. Branches and logs may also be disposed of on
an owner's property, such as in wooded areas if practicable.
(a) Collecting leaves, branches or logs left within any public right-of-way if
not done in accordance with the requirements of this article, except as
provided in Section 19-1.1 of this Chapter; or
§ T19-1A.4 PRINCETON CODE § T19-1A.5
BAO:1616
§ T19-1A.6. Enforcement, violations and penalties. [Ord. No.
2018-12]
(b) Collecting any leaves, branches or logs left on any private property,
except as provided in Section 15-2 of the "Code of the Borough of
Princeton, New Jersey, 1974."
(a) The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the department of
infrastructure and operations and police department.
(b) Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be subject to
such fines and other penalties as set forth in Section 1-6 of this Code.
§ T19-1A.5 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T19-1A.6
BAO:1617

ARTICLE III
Newspaper Vending Machines
§ T19-2. NEWSPAPER VENDING MACHINES.
§ T19-2.1. Newspaper vending machines - Special permit required;
standards; approval by Mayor and Council. [Ord. No. 2018-12]
(a) Special permit required. It shall be unlawful for any distributor to erect,
place, maintain or operate on any street or sidewalk or in any other
public way or place in the municipality any newspaper vending machine
without first having obtained a special permit from the municipal clerk,
approved by the Mayor and Council in accordance with the standards
and time period set forth below.
(b) Application for special permit.
(1) Any distributor who desires to install and maintain a newspaper
vending machine on public property along the streets and
sidewalks within the municipality shall make an application for a
permit, in writing, to the municipal clerk on such forms as shall be
provided by the office of the municipal clerk. Said application shall
specify: the name, address and telephone number of the applicant;
the proposed specific location of the newspaper vending
machine(s); the location of any existing newspaper vending
machines within the municipality belonging to said applicant,
including the date each was installed; and shall be signed by the
applicant or the applicant's authorized representative.
(2) Any distributor having a newspaper vending machine which is
already located or installed in whole or in part on any public
sidewalk or public right-of-way within the municipality on the
effective date of this Section shall, within 30 days from the effective
date hereof, file an application for a special permit, unless said
distributor has already obtained similar approval from the Mayor
and Council for the installation and use of a newspaper vending
machine at a specified location in the municipality.
(3) Each distributor shall have a duty to promptly notify the municipal
clerk of any changes in the information provided in its application.
(c) Standards for issuance of permit. The Mayor and Council shall issue a
special permit if the proposed location and character of the newspaper
vending machine complies with the requirements of Sections 19-2.2
and 19-2.3.
(d) Time to act on application; statement of reasons.
(1) The Mayor and Council shall either grant or deny an application for
a special permit to install and maintain a newspaper vending
machine at the location specified in the application at a regular
meeting held no later than 30 days from receipt of a completed
§ T19-2 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T19-2.1
BAO:1619
§ T19-2.2. Standards for installation, maintenance and operation of
newspaper vending machines. [Ord. No. 2018-12]
Any newspaper vending machine which in whole or in part rests upon, in
or over any public sidewalk or public right-of-way or which projects onto,
into or over any part of a public right-of-way within the municipality shall
comply with the following standards:
application by the municipal clerk. At that meeting the Mayor and
Council shall state with particularity the reasons for its decision to
grant or deny the application, including, in the case of a denial,
the specific provisions of Sections 19-2.2 and 19-2.3 which the
application fails to meet.
(2) The Mayor and Council shall grant or deny applications for a
special permit in the order from which a completed application is
received by the municipal clerk.
(e) Fees. A permit fee in the amount of $25 for the first newspaper vending
machine installed by a distributor and $10 for each additional
newspaper vending machine shall be paid upon submission of an
application for a special permit. No application shall be deemed
complete unless it is accompanied by the required permit fee.
(f) Annual renewal. Any permit issued hereunder shall be valid for a period
of one year from the date of issuance thereof and shall be renewable
upon the payment of an annual fee in the amount of $25, which shall be
accompanied by written confirmation that the location of the
newspaper vending machine has not been changed.
(g) The purpose of the initial permit fee required in subsection (e) and the
annual renewal fee required by subsection (f) is to offset the costs of
administration, inspection and enforcement of the provisions of
Sections 19-2.1 to 19-2.5 of this article.
(a) No newspaper vending machine shall exceed 60 inches in height, 24
inches in width or 20 inches in depth.
(b) No newspaper vending machine shall be used for commercial
advertising or commercial publicity purposes other than to display,
promote or advertise the sale of the newspaper, news periodical or
magazine sold therein.
(c) Each newspaper vending machine shall be equipped with a coin-return
mechanism to permit a person using the machine to secure an
immediate refund in the event that he or she is unable to receive the
publication paid for. The coin-return mechanism shall at all times be
maintained in good working order.
(d) Each newspaper vending machine shall have affixed thereto, in a
readily visible place so as to be seen by anyone using the newspaper
vending machine, a notice setting forth the name and address of the
§ T19-2.1 PRINCETON CODE § T19-2.2
BAO:1620
§ T19-2.3. Location and placement of newspaper vending machines.
[Ord. No. 2018-12]
Any newspaper vending machine which rests in whole or in part upon or on
any portion of a public sidewalk or public right-of-way or which project onto,
into or over any part of a public right-of-way shall be located in accordance
with the provisions of this Section:
distributor and the telephone number of a working telephone service
to call to report a malfunction or to secure a refund in the event
of a malfunction of the coin-return mechanism or to give the notices
provided for in Section 19-2.5.
(e) Each newspaper vending machine shall be maintained in a neat and
clean condition and in good repair at all times. Specifically, but without
limiting the generality of the foregoing, each newspaper vending
machine shall be serviced and maintained so that:
(1) It is reasonably free of loose, chipped peeling and cracked paint in
the visible painted areas thereof;
(2) It is reasonably free of rust and corrosion, in the visible metal areas
thereon;
(3) The clear plastic or glass parts thereof, if any, through which the
publications therein are viewed, are not broken and reasonably
free of cracks, dents blemishes and discoloration;
(4) The paper or cardboard parts or inserts thereof, if any, are
reasonably free of tears, peelings, or fading; and
(5) The structural parts thereof are not broken, cracked or otherwise
dangerous to users thereof.
(a) No newspaper vending machine shall be used or maintained which
projects onto, into or over any part of the roadway of any public street
or which rests, wholly or in part, upon, along or over any portion of the
roadway of any public street.
(b) No newspaper vending machine shall be permitted to rest upon, in or
over any public sidewalk when such installation, use or maintenance:
(1) Endangers the safety of persons or property;
(2) Unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrians
along the public sidewalk or public right-of-way;
(3) Unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of vehicular
traffic, including any legally parked or stopped vehicle, along the
public roadway;
(4) Unreasonably interferes with the ingress into or egress from any
public or private property or place of business;
§ T19-2.2 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T19-2.3
BAO:1621
(5) Unreasonably interferes with the use of traffic signs, traffic signals,
fire hydrants, police or fire call boxes, utility poles, mailboxes or
other equipment located on or near the public roadway, public
sidewalk or the public right-of-way;
(6) Unreasonably interferes with access to and the operation of
municipal parking meters; or
(7) Unreasonably interferes with public access to benches or rest stops
provided along the public right-of-way.
(c) Newspaper vending machines shall be bolted, weighted or otherwise
secured so as to prevent their unauthorized removal or their accidental
movement within the public sidewalk or public right-of-way, provided
that such machines shall not be chained and/or secured to trees, signs,
public property or public sidewalks.
(d) Newspaper vending machines must be placed next to each other and
grouped; provided that no group of newspaper vending machines shall
extend for a distance of more than four feet along a curb. A "group"
shall mean up to two machines and separated from any other group by a
distance of at least 20 feet. A "group" of machines shall be aligned in a
manner as to provide a uniform grouping and the minimization of
incursions into the public right-of-way.
(e) Newspaper vending machines shall be placed adjacent to a curb line;
provided that all newspaper vending machines so installed shall face
away from the roadway so as not to provide drive-up access to
motorists.
(f) No newspaper vending machine shall be placed, installed, located, used
or maintained:
(1) Within three feet of any marked crosswalk;
(2) Within 12 feet of a curb return of any unmarked crosswalk;
(3) Within five feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call box or
other emergency facility or equipment;
(4) Within five feet of any driveway;
(5) Within three feet of or on any public area, improved with lawn,
flowers, shrubs, trees, or other landscaping other than that strip of
the public easement between the curb and sidewalk;
(6) Within five feet of a "No Stopping - No Standing" zone;
(7) Within three feet of the entrance of a bus shelter; or
(8) Within a designated and properly marked bus stop, except that
newspaper vending machines may be located within the first five
feet of the designated bus stop measured from the near side point
of the designated bus stop, and within the last five feet along the
§ T19-2.3 PRINCETON CODE § T19-2.3
BAO:1622
§ T19-2.4. Newspaper vending machine enforcement. [Ord. No.
2018-12]
§ T19-2.5. Newspaper vending machines - Violations and penalties.
[Ord. No. 2018-12]
designated bus stop, measured from the far side point of the
designated bus stop; provided, however, that such newspaper
vending machines do not unreasonably interfere with the loading
and unloading of passengers.
(a) The municipal clerk is empowered with the responsibility and authority
of enforcing the requirements governing newspaper vending machines.
If said official determines that a newspaper vending machine does not
comply with the provisions of Sections 19-2.1 to 19-2.3, the clerk shall
mail a written notice to the distributor of such newspaper vending
machine, by certified mail, return receipt requested, stating the
reasons why such newspaper vending machine does not comply with
the aforesaid provisions.
(b) If a distributor fails to adjust, correct, obtain a permit or otherwise
cause such newspaper vending machine to comply with the provisions
of Sections 19-2.1 to 19-2.3 within seven days from the date written
notice of noncompliance is mailed by the municipal clerk, then such
distributor shall be deemed in violation thereof.
(a) Any distributor who fails to comply with the provisions of Sections
19-2.1 to 19-2.4 shall, upon conviction thereof in the municipal court,
be punishable by the penalties as set forth in Section 1-6 of this Code.
Each day for which a distributor fails to comply with the provisions of
this Section constitutes a separate violation hereunder.
(b) If a distributor is convicted of a violation of this Section by the
municipal court and if such distributor thereafter refuses to remedy or
correct the violation within 10 days from the date of conviction, then
the municipal clerk shall be empowered to remove the newspaper
vending machine which is the basis for such conviction from the public
sidewalk or public right-of-way or other place and return such
newspaper vending machine to the distributor identified on the
newspaper vending machine.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, deface or vandalize
any newspaper vending machine within the municipality. Any person
who shall violate this Section shall, upon conviction thereof in the
municipal court, be subject to the penalties set forth in Section 1-6 of
this Code.
(d) Repeat offenders, as that term is defined in Section 1-6 of this Code,
shall be subject to the penalties set forth in Section 1-6 of this Code.
§ T19-2.3 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T19-2.6
BAO:1623
§ T19-2.6. Newspaper vending machines - Reservation. [Ord. No.
2018-12]
If as a result of changed conditions the Mayor and Council find that it is
necessary and in the public interest to alter the standards, the method
of vending or the prescribed location of any newspaper vending machine
provided for herein, no alteration shall be taken until all affected
distributors are afforded due notice and hearing on the nature of said
alteration.
§ T19-2.6 PRINCETON CODE § T19-2.6
BAO:1624
ARTICLE IV
Acts Harmful to Highways, etc.
§ T19-3. ACTS HARMFUL TO HIGHWAYS.
§ T19-3.1. Discharging of waste liquid into highway. [Ord. No.
2018-12]
It shall be unlawful for any person to cast, throw, cause to be cast or
thrown or allow to flow onto any public highway any waste liquid or fluid
or any other harmful substance; provided, that this Section shall not apply
to the ordinary drainage of surface water from abutting lands or to such
waste liquid or fluid or substance as may be permitted to drain thereon
in accordance with the terms of a written permit, which the municipal
engineer is authorized to grant, or as otherwise authorized in this Code.
§ T19-3.2. Fires on highways without permit. [Ord. No. 2018-12]
It shall be unlawful for any person to kindle or maintain, or cause to
be kindled or maintained, any fire on any public highway within the
municipality; provided, that the provisions of this Section shall not apply
to the use of blow-torches, melting pots and other similar devices used
by public utility corporations, or their agents and employees, in the
maintenance, adjustment, repair or replacement of their service facilities.
§ T19-3.3. Driving on newly laid pavement, sidewalk, curb or gutter.
[Ord. No. 2018-12]
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle upon any newly laid
pavement or other prepared road surface, sidewalk surface, curb or gutter,
or part thereof, in the course of construction or repair.
§ T19-3.4. Driving over unprotected curb; doing any act to damage,
litter or deface highway surfaces, sidewalks, curbs or gutters. [Ord.
No. 2018-12]
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive over any curb without first
placing a buffer, jumper block or other device in such position as will
effectively protect such curb from injury. No person shall do or cause to
be done any act which will result in injury to public highway surfaces,
sidewalks, curbs and gutters, or litter, deface or spoil the appearance of the
same within the municipality.
§ T19-3.5. Smooth surface metal coverings over sidewalk openings;
projection of flanges, hinges, etc., above sidewalk surfaces. [Ord.
No. 2018-12]
No iron or metal covering, rim, fastening or fixture with a smooth surface
shall be constructed over any cellar entrance or other opening in any
sidewalk, nor shall any flange, hinge, butt, fastening or fixture be so
constructed as to project above the surface of the sidewalk adjacent thereto.
§ T19-3 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T19-3.5
BAO:1625

ARTICLE V
Excavation and Occupation of Right-of-Way
§ T19-4. EXCAVATION AND OCCUPATION OF RIGHT-OF-WAY.
§ T19-4.1. Excavation and occupation permits — When required.
[Ord. No. 2018-12]
§ T19-4.2. Application. [Ord. No. 2018-12]
(a) Types of permits covered under this article.
(1) Excavation. No person shall cut, dig, drill or make any opening,
hole, trench, tunnel or other excavation in any portion of the roads,
streets, alleys, highways, sidewalks, shared use paths, curbs or
gutters under the jurisdiction of the municipality, whether paved or
unpaved, without first having obtained from the municipal engineer
a written permit for that purpose, which shall only issue following
the applicant's satisfaction of the requirements of this article.
(2) Occupation of right-of-way (also "occupation" as used in this
article). No person shall move any building, structure, machinery,
apparatus or other object of unusual size or weight along, across,
through or over any road, street, alley, highway, sidewalk, shared
use path, curb or gutter under the jurisdiction of the municipality,
whether paved or unpaved, or permit any building, structure,
machinery, dumpster, crane, scaffolding, apparatus or other object
in the process of removal to remain in any road, street, alley,
highway, sidewalk, shared use path, curb or gutter under the
jurisdiction of the municipality, whether paved or unpaved, without
obtaining a permit for that purpose, which shall only issue
following the applicant's satisfaction of the requirements of this
article.
(b) The work or activity for which the permit has been issued under
subsection (a) of this Section shall commence within a period of 45 days
from the issuance of said permit. If not so commenced, the permit shall
be automatically terminated and may only be renewed upon the
repayment of the permit fees required hereunder.
(c) Every permit shall expire following the passage of time determined by
the municipal engineer to be necessary for completion of the work or
within 90 days, whichever is sooner. If the permittee is unable to
commence or complete work within the specified time period, he or she
shall, prior to the expiration of the permit, present in writing to the
municipal engineer a request for an extension of time, setting forth
therein the reasons for the requested extension. Upon receipt of that
request, the municipal engineer may grant an extension of time if he or
she deems it to be necessary and not contrary to public interest.
§ T19-4 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T19-4.2
BAO:1627
§ T19-4.3. Permit and inspection fees: charges for repaving by the
municipality. [Ord. No. 2018-12]
(a) An application for permit required by Section 19-4.1(a), shall be made
to the municipal engineer who is hereby authorized to issue the permit
pursuant to the provisions of this article.
(b) The application shall be made in writing on the forms furnished by the
municipal engineer, signed by the applicant and accompanied by a plan
as required by subsection (c) below, together with any fees, charges,
performance bond (or check or deposit) and certificates required by
this article. Fees need not be paid in advance where an emergency has
arisen which makes it necessary to commence work immediately;
provided that an application for a permit is made simultaneously with
the commencement of the work or as soon thereafter as it is
practicable.
(c) Each application shall include a plan showing the exact location and
dimensions of all openings or occupation proposed, together with a
statement giving detailed and complete information as to the character
of the work proposed. Said plan include a traffic control plan subject to
the approval of the Princeton police department.
(d) As a condition to the issuance of any such permit, the permittee is
deemed to have agreed to replace or repair, at its own cost and
expense, the portion of the road, street, curb, gutter, unimproved area
and/or sidewalk disturbed or damaged by the work. In cases where
multiple trenches are required, the applicant may be required to
replace all disturbed areas between trenches.
(e) The applicant must also agree to indemnify, defend and hold harmless
the municipality and its officers, employees and agents from any and all
costs, damages and liabilities which may accrue or be claimed to accrue
by reason of any work performed under said permit, and as required by
Section 19-4.5 The acceptance of any permit under this article shall
constitute such an agreement whether the same is expressed or not.
(f) The applicant must also pay the permit and inspection fees required
under Section 19-4.3, furnish a certificate of insurance as required by
Section 19-4.4 and furnish a bond when required by Sections 19-4.2 and
4.8.
(g) The permit must be in the possession of the party or parties actually
doing the work and must be exhibited to the municipal engineer or duly
authorized inspectors or, in the case of county or state highways, to the
respective inspectors of those organizations.
(a) Each application for a permit to open a street or sidewalk or occupation
of right-of-way shall be accompanied by the payment of an application
fee to the municipality in the amounts set forth in Section 2-99 of the
"Code of the Borough of Princeton, New Jersey, 1974." The application
§ T19-4.2 PRINCETON CODE § T19-4.3
BAO:1628
§ T19-4.4. Insurance requirements. [Ord. No. 2018-12]
fee is a flat fee to cover direct administrative expenses, including
municipal inspection services, and is nonrefundable.
(b) The permit fee is inclusive of the reasonable cost of the municipality's
inspection of the work as may be necessary to be conducted pursuant to
this article.
(c) In cases where the permittee fails to make the required restorations in
connection with a permit, the municipality shall undertake such work at
the sole cost and expense of the permittee. The municipal engineer
shall keep an accurate record of the costs and expenses incurred in
undertaking said restoration and shall bill the permittee based on the
flat rate for each opening or occupation in accordance with the
schedule set forth in Section 2-99 of the "Code of the Borough of
Princeton, New Jersey, 1974", which charge shall in addition to the
permit fee and inspection fee hereinbefore set forth in subsections (a)
and (b).
(d) In the case of longitudinal trenches of such length, or in other cases
where the restoration work in connection with an excavation permit is
of such magnitude, that such charges are not, in the judgment of the
municipal engineer, sufficient to cover the cost of restoration, the
municipal engineer shall certify such conditions to the Mayor and
Council, who shall fix such terms as will provide for the proper
restoration.
(a) No permit shall be issued until the applicant has furnished the
municipal engineer with an acceptable certificate of insurance
indicating that he or she is insured against injury to persons and
damage to property caused by any act or omission of the permittee, his
or her agents, employees or subcontractors, done in the course of the
work to be performed under the permit. The insurance shall cover all
hazards likely to arise in connection with the work, including but not
limited to collapse, explosion and underground work by equipment on
the street and all operations, including labor, equipment, materials and
all else involved in work under the permit and shall also insure against
liability arising from completed operations. The liability insurance for
bodily injury in effect shall be in an amount not less than $1,000,000 for
each person, $1,000,000 for each accident or occurrence and
$1,000,000 for property damages, and with an aggregate of $2,000,000
for all accidents or occurrences.
(b) The municipal engineer may waive the requirements of this subsection
in the case of public utilities or authorities upon the presentation of
satisfactory proof that it is capable of meeting claims against it up to
the amount of the limits of the insurance policy which would otherwise
be required.
§ T19-4.3 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T19-4.4
BAO:1629
§ T19-4.5. Municipality to be held harmless from liability
concerning work under permit. [Ord. No. 2018-12]
The holder of the permit issued pursuant to this article shall indemnify,
defend and hold harmless the municipality and each of its officers,
employees and agents from all loss, damage, claim, or expense, including
expenses incurred in the defense of any litigation, arising out of injury to
any person or property resulting from any work done by the permittee,
its employees, or agents, in connection with the performance of the work
covered by the permit. In addition, the permittee agrees to indemnify the
municipality and each of its officers, employees and agents for any expense
incurred in enforcing the provisions of this article.
§ T19-4.6. Revocation of permits. [Ord. No. 2018-12]
(c) Self-insurers may be relieved of the obligation of submitting certificates
if they are self-insured in accordance with the requirements of state law
and submit certificates thereof acceptable to the municipal attorney.
(d) The insurance required by this Section shall also contain a clause
holding the municipality and its agents, servants and employees
harmless against any claim or damage which may arise out of any
liability resulting from the permittee's work.
(a) Any permit may be revoked by the municipal engineer, after notice to
the permittee, and based upon the following grounds:
(1) Violation of any condition of the permit or of any provision of this
article;
(2) Violation of any provision of any other applicable ordinance or law
relating to the work to be performed under the permit; or
(3) The existence of any condition or the doing of any act constituting
or creating a nuisance or hazard to the public or safety or the
property of others.
(b) Written notice of any such violation or condition shall be served upon
the permittee or his agent engaged in the work. The notice shall contain
a brief statement of the grounds relied upon for revoking the permit.
Notice may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the person to
be notified or by certified or registered United States mail addressed to
the person to be notified at the address stated in the application.
(c) A permittee shall be granted a period of 48 hours from the date of the
notice to correct the violation and to proceed with the diligent
prosecution of the work authorized by the permit before said permit is
revoked.
(d) When any permit has been revoked and the work authorized by the
permit has not been completed, the municipal engineer shall take
whatever action may be necessary to complete the work authorized by
§ T19-4.4 PRINCETON CODE § T19-4.6
BAO:1630
§ T19-4.7. Inspection. [Ord. No. 2018-12]
The municipal engineer shall periodically inspect the areas of the work
covered by the permit, including all street, sidewalk, curb or gutter
openings and repairs, and resurfacing thereof, for the purpose of
determining compliance with any of the conditions imposed on the issuance
of the permit and the plans previously filed with the municipal engineer's
office detailing the work to be performed by the permittee. After
undertaking such inspection, the municipal engineer may:
§ T19-4.8. Excavation permits - Bond requirements. [Ord. No.
2018-12]
the permit and to restore the street, sidewalk, curb or gutter, or part
thereof, to a condition equal to its condition before the opening was
made or occupation took place. All expenses incurred by the
municipality shall be recovered from the bond, or the check or deposit
in lieu of bond, filed by the permittee.
(a) Order a temporary stop to the road, sidewalk, curb or gutter opening;
(b) Order the permittee to perform or correct specified work in accordance
with the directions of the municipal engineer;
(c) Order a stop to any work; revoke the permit; correct or complete any
work after notification to the permittee and his or her neglect or refusal
to make such corrections, and take such other action permitted by this
article; and/or
(d) Take such other actions deemed reasonable under the circumstances.
(a) Performance bond. Before an excavation permit is issued, and except as
otherwise provided below in this subsection, each applicant shall
submit to the municipality an acceptable bond with good and sufficient
surety, approved by the municipal attorney, to guarantee faithful
performance of the work authorized by the permit. The amount of the
bond shall be based on the square footage of the excavation, as follows:
Size of Excavation
(square feet (sf)) Performance Bond Amount
0 — 60 $500
61 — 150 $1,000
Over 150 100% of the estimated pavement
restoration cost using $7/sf
§ T19-4.6 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T19-4.8
BAO:1631
The term of the bond shall begin upon the date of posting thereof and
shall terminate upon receipt by the permittee of a certificate of final
inspection and approval from the municipal engineer to the effect that
all provisions of this article have been complied with, and in any event
no less than 12 months following completion of the work.
A public utility or authority requesting a permit shall furnish one bond
annually in the amount of $10,000 for general repair and replacement
work. A public utility or authority shall furnish a separate bond per
infrastructure replacement project in the amount of 100% of the
estimated pavement restoration, calculated by multiplying the halfwidth
of the roadway pavement by the length of the main pipeline by
a cost of $7/sf.
(b) Deposit in lieu of bond. An applicant may submit a cash deposit,
certified check or cashier's check in lieu of the surety bond, conditioned
upon the faithful performance of the work authorized by the permit
granted pursuant to this article, and provided that the municipality may
use any or all of such deposit to defray the cost of any work the
municipality performs to restore and maintain the street, sidewalk,
curb or gutter in the event the permittee fails to perform such work.
(c) Default. Whenever the municipal engineer shall find that a default has
occurred in the performance of any term or condition of the permit, he
or she shall thereupon give written notice of the default to the principal
and, as applicable, the surety on the bond. Such notice shall state the
work to be done, the estimated cost thereof, which shall include the
estimated administrative costs to the municipality, and the period of
time determined by the municipal engineer to be reasonably necessary
for completion of such work. After receipt of such notice by the surety
(if there is one), the surety must, within the time therein specified,
either cause the required work to be performed or, failing therein,
indemnify the municipality for the cost of doing the work as set forth in
the notice.
(d) The bond shall be conditioned upon the indemnification and hold
harmless requirements set forth in Section 19-4.5 and upon the
permittee's completed restoration of the surface and foundation of the
street, sidewalk, curb or gutter for which the permit is granted. Said
restoration must be accomplished in a manner acceptable to the
municipal engineer and as required by this article.
(e) No bond or deposit or check in lieu of bond shall be released until all
repaving and replacing of streets or other surfaces or appurtenances
within the street area are fully completed to the satisfaction of the
municipal engineer and all costs and fees required by Sections 19-4.3
and 19-4.12 are paid in full. In no event shall any such bond, deposit or
check be released within a period of 12 months from the completion of
said work, except as provided in subsection (f), and until, and upon,
written approval by the municipal engineer.
§ T19-4.8 PRINCETON CODE § T19-4.8
BAO:1632
§ T19-4.9. Backfilling of trenches; maintenance of trenches in safe
condition. [Ord. No. 2018-12]
Any person making a cut in any public street in the municipality under the
authority of any permit which may be issued by the municipal engineer shall
backfill the trench with care, using such methods as the municipal engineer
may from time to time prescribe in the rules and regulations promulgated
under Section 19-4.11, and shall be responsible for the maintenance of
such trench in a safe and smooth condition until the final repair is made
by the permittee. Failure to exercise such care or to maintain any trench
in a safe condition at all times shall be sufficient reason for the municipal
engineer to refuse to issue any further permits to any person, company,
firm or corporation and shall constitute grounds for revocation of the permit
under Section 19-4.6 of this article.
§ T19-4.10. Same — Repaving to be done by permittee after opening
made in street; exception. [Ord. No. 2018-12]
(f) Maintenance guarantee. Upon satisfactory completion of all work
permitted or required under permits issued pursuant to this article, the
municipality may authorize a refund of 80% of the security for deposit
where the same has been made by check or cash and may retain the
remaining 20% thereof as security for the maintenance of said work for
a period not to exceed one year. All bonds and certificates of insurance
required by this article shall contain a provision that the same shall
remain in full force and effect for a period not to exceed one year after
the last work under any permit has been completed and accepted by the
municipality. Upon satisfactory completion of all work permitted or
required under the permit, and the expiration of the one-year time
period provided herein, the municipal engineer will release the full or
remaining amount of the security deposit.
(a) All paving disturbed or removed in the making of any opening in any
street within the municipality for any purpose whatsoever by any
person shall be restored and replaced by the permittee at the
permittee's cost, under the supervision of the municipal engineer. All
work shall be done subject to the inspection and approval of the
municipal engineer and in accordance with such methods as he or she
may from time to time prescribe.
(b) The municipal engineer shall possess the right to supervise the
replacement of surfaces, and the permittee agrees to be bound by the
municipal engineer's requirements in furtherance of restoration.
(c) The specific manner and nature of the restoration required shall be set
forth in the rules and regulations of the municipal engineer,
promulgated pursuant to Section 19-4.11, as supplemented by any and
all requirements contained in this article.
(d) In no case shall any opening made by a permittee be considered the
charge or care of the municipality, or any of its officers or employees,
§ T19-4.8 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T19-4.10
BAO:1633
§ T19-4.11. Municipal engineer authorized to formulate rules
governing opening and restoring of streets, sidewalks, curbs or
gutters. [Ord. No. 2018-12]
The municipal engineer shall have the authority to formulate from time
to time rules and regulations which he or she deems necessary for the
administration and enforcement of this article. Such rules and regulations
shall govern the methods and materials to be used in opening and restoring
any public street, sidewalk, curb or gutter in the municipality, including the
cutting and removal of paving over the trench, backfilling, restoration of the
paving and other details which, in his or her judgment, may be important
elements of the making of proper repairs. A copy of all current rules and
regulations shall be furnished to each permittee at the time of issuance of
the permit.
§ T19-4.12. Newly paved streets; restrictions on excavations. [Ord.
No. 2018-12]
and no officer or employee is authorized in any way to assume any
jurisdiction over any such opening, except in the exercise of police
power when the permittee fails to make the required repairs within a
period of 10 days and it is necessary to protect life and property or to
cure an unsafe condition as set forth in subsection (e).
(e) When the required work has not been completed within a period of 10
days, and the permittee has not requested an extension of time, and
when the municipality deems the unfinished work to be unsafe
condition, the municipal engineer may, if he deems necessary, take
steps to place a permanent pavement over the opening for which the
permit has been issued. All costs and expenses incurred by the
municipality for undertaking this work shall be borne by the permittee.
(f) Permits issued pursuant to Section 19-4.12, excavation of newly paved
streets within a period of five years, shall be subject to the additional
restoration obligations set forth in that Section.
(a) Notice of pending paving or repaving; time restriction on excavations.
Whenever the Mayor and Council enacts any ordinance or resolution
providing for the improvement, paving or repaving of any street, the
municipal engineer shall promptly mail a written notice thereof to all
persons owning property abutting on the street about to be paved or
improved and to all public utilities and authorities operating in the
municipality, including any person, firm or corporation owning any
sewer main or conduit or other utility in or under said street. Such
notice shall notify such person, firm, corporation or public utility that:
(1) No excavation permit shall be issued for openings, cuts or
excavation in said streets for a period of five years after the date of
completion of said improvement, paving or repaving by the
municipality, unless otherwise approved by the municipal engineer;
and
§ T19-4.10 PRINCETON CODE § T19-4.12
BAO:1634
§ T19-4.13. Violations and penalties. [Ord. No. 2018-12]
Any person who violates any provisions of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to the penalties set forth in Section 1-6 of this Code.
Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as set forth
hereinunder. Repeat offenders, as that term is defined in Section 1-6 of this
Code, shall be subject to the penalties set forth in Section 1-6 of this Code.
§ T19-4.14. Nonapplicability. [Ord. No. 2018-12]
The provisions of this article shall not apply to public utility companies
having infrastructure projects with the municipality or operating under
special ordinances or statutes, nor to any person doing work in any of said
streets, avenues, roads or highways subject to a municipal infrastructure
project.
(2) Application for excavating permits for work to be done prior to
such paving or repaving shall be submitted promptly in order that
the work covered by the excavation permit shall be completed as
soon as practicable and in no event after final roadway paving.
(b) Opening newly paved street; restrictions. No permit shall be issued by
the municipal engineer to any person, firm, corporation, public utility or
authority given notice under subsection (a) above which would allow an
excavation or opening in a paved or improved street surface less than
five years old unless the applicant can clearly demonstrate that the
need for the proposed work could not have been reasonably foreseen at
the time of the prior notice.
(c) Opening newly paved street; restoration obligations and fees.
(1) If by special permission by the municipal engineer a permit is
issued to open any paved or improved street surface less than five
years old, the permittee shall be required to complete restoration
in the following manner, as determined by the municipal engineer:
a. Mill and resurface the entire street in which the opening or
excavation is made, from curb to curb and for a minimum
distance extending to the limits of the opening or excavation or
as directed by the engineer.
b. In cases of minor trenching, as determined by the municipal
engineer, infrared pavement technology of an area one foot
beyond all limits of the trench opening.
(2) The permittee must also pay the required application and
inspection fees provided in Section 19-4.3.
§ T19-4.12 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T19-4.14
BAO:1635

ARTICLE VI
Street Names and Building Numbers
§ T19-5. STREET NAMES AND BUILDING NUMBERS.
§ T19-5.1. Posting of street names. [Ord. No. 2018-12]
It shall be the duty of the municipal engineer to have the names of all the
streets and avenues of the municipality conspicuously posted at the corners
of such streets or avenues and to properly maintain the same.
§ T19-5.2. Determination of method for numbering buildings;
display of numbers required. [Ord. No. 2018-12]
Every dwelling, commercial, industrial or institutional building in the
municipality shall be assigned a street address and numbered as
determined upon by the municipal engineer. Such numbers shall meet the
following criteria:
§ T19-5.3. Municipal engineer to see that buildings are properly
numbered. [Ord. No. 2018-12]
It shall be the duty of the municipal engineer to see that such numbers as
are determined upon by the municipal engineer shall be kept in such good
condition as to be always clearly discernible; and that they shall be of such
size and upon such material as the municipal engineer shall approve; and
that the cost thereof is borne by the building's owner. The posting of the
address number on the structure shall be required prior to the issuance of
any certificate of occupancy or continued certificate of occupancy by the
construction official.
§ T19-5.4. Violations. [Ord. No. 2018-12]
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse or neglect, for 30 days after
having been notified in writing so to do by the municipal engineer, to put
upon his or her house, store or other building the number determined upon
(a) Number shall be posted within three feet of the main entrance on the
structure. If the structure is more than 75 feet from the street or main
entrance not visible from street, a remote address sign shall also be
posted within 10 feet of the street visible from either side of the
driveway.
(b) Numbers shall contrast with the building background and shall be
separate from the mailbox. Numbers shall be at least four inches high
for one- or two-family dwellings, at least six inches high for multi-family
dwellings and at least eight inches high for commercial/industrial/
institutional structures. Numbers shall be Arabic numeral or alphabet
letter and must be easily readable from the street, day or night.
Numbers shall not be spelled out.
§ T19-5 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T19-5.4
BAO:1637
by the municipal engineer as the number of his or her house, store or
building, or to make the same clear and distinguishable.
§ T19-5.4 PRINCETON CODE § T19-5.4
BAO:1638
ARTICLE VII
Street Lights
§ T19-6. STREET LIGHTS.
§ T19-6.1. Installation of street lights. [Ord. No. 2018-12]
No street light shall be installed within the municipality unless it complies
with the following standards:
(a) The street light and its installation satisfies the design standards set
forth in Section 10B-178.1 of the "Code of the Township of Princeton,
New Jersey, 1968".
(b) No street light poles or fixtures except as provided for in Section
10B-178.1 of the "Code of the Township of Princeton, New Jersey, 1968"
shall be installed without application being made to and approvals
being obtained from the municipal engineer.
(c) In any new development, the street lighting design, installation of
underground facilities and provision for future installation of street
lights within said development shall be the responsibility of the
developer.
(d) In any new development, the developer or homeowners' association
shall assume monthly operation and maintenance cost for any street
light installed along a public street until certificates of occupancy have
been issued for at least 50% of the dwelling units and 50% of the floor
area of the nonresidential uses on the dedicated public street or portion
thereof.
§ T19-6 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T19-6.1
BAO:1639

ARTICLE VIII
Plants Obstructing Vision, etc.
§ T19-7. PLANTS OBSTRUCTING VISION.
§ T19-7.1. Finding by Mayor and Council of dangerous condition;
notice to owner to correct dangerous condition. [Ord. No. 2018-12]
Whenever the Mayor and Council shall find that the excessive growth of
brush, hedges or other plant life upon any lot in the municipality constitutes
a dangerous condition or a menace to public safety, the municipal engineer
shall forthwith notify the owner of any such lot, in writing, and shall order
him to cut and trim all brush, hedges and other plant life growing upon
his or her land, within 10 feet of any roadway or within 25 feet of the
intersection of any roadway, to a height of not more than 2 1/2 feet. Any
such order shall require compliance therewith within 10 days from receipt
of such notice.
§ T19-7.2. Municipal engineer to investigate and report on
dangerous growths. [Ord. No. 2018-12]
The municipal engineer is hereby authorized and directed to investigate
and, from time to time, to report to the Mayor and Council with respect
to excessive growth of brush, hedges and other plant life within close
proximity to the public highways of the municipality, which may constitute
a dangerous condition or a menace to public safety.
§ T19-7.3. Removal by municipality; costs of removal to be charged
against and become lien on land. [Ord. No. 2018-12]
Whenever any person shall fail to comply with the written notice and
order received from the municipal engineer within the period specified, the
municipal engineer is authorized and empowered to enter the land abutting
on the public highways and to cause such brush, hedges and plant life to
be cut and trimmed in accordance with the requirements of such notice
and order. Upon the completion of such cutting and trimming, the municipal
engineer shall certify the cost thereof to the Mayor and Council, who shall
examine the certificate, and if the same is found to be correct, the Mayor
and Council shall cause such cost to be charged against the abutting land.
If the cost certified by the municipal engineer should be found excessive,
the Mayor and Council so charged shall cause the reasonable cost to be
charged against such land. The amount so charged shall forthwith become
a lien upon such land and shall be added to and form part of the taxes next
to be assessed and levied upon such land, the same to bear interest at the
same rate as other taxes, and shall be collected and enforced by the same
officers and in the same manner as taxes.
§ T19-7 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T19-7.4
BAO:1641
§ T19-7.4. Effect of article upon certain provisions relative to shade
trees. [Ord. No. 2018-12]
This article shall not be construed so as to require the cutting, trimming
or felling of any shade tree regulated and controlled by Chapter 22 of the
"Code of the Township of Princeton, New Jersey, 1968".
§ T19-7.4 PRINCETON CODE § T19-7.4
BAO:1642
ARTICLE IX
Streets - Standard Specifications for Construction
§ T19-8. STREETS - STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS FOR
CONSTRUCTION.
§ T19-8.1. General specifications for construction. [Ord. No.
2018-12]
In addition to the specifications and standards for construction referred to
in this Chapter, Chapter 22 of the "Code of the Township of Princeton, New
Jersey, 1968" concerning trees and shrubs and Chapter 5A.1. of the "Code of
the Borough of Princeton, New Jersey, 1974" concerning construction code
enforcement and inspections, all construction in the municipality involving
road construction, concrete work, driveway aprons, clearance for sight
distances, shared use path construction, storm pipe drainage construction,
traffic control during construction, under drain-French drain systems, tree
removal and street openings shall comply with the standard specifications
for construction adopted by the municipality as set forth in Section 19-1.2A
above and as directed by the municipal engineer.
§ T19-8 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T19-8.1
BAO:1643

ARTICLE X
Construction, Repair and Maintenance of Sidewalks
§ T19-9. CONSTRUCTION, REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE OF
SIDEWALKS.
§ T19-9.1. Existing sidewalks - Responsibility of abutting property
owners. [Ord. No. 2018-12]
§ T19-9.2. Same - Repair and reconstruction; exceptions. [Ord. No.
2018-12]
(a) It shall be the responsibility of any property owner, lessee, tenant,
occupant or person in charge of said property, building, or structure
abutting a sidewalk to maintain the area on both sides of said sidewalk,
so as to prevent a hazard or nuisance to pedestrians using said
sidewalk. This maintenance responsibility shall include, but not be
limited to, the removal of weeds, brush, obnoxious growth, as well as
routine cutting of grass up to the edge of the sidewalk pavement and to
the edge of the roadway pavement.
(b) Said owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or person in charge of said
property shall keep vegetation (i.e., hedges, trees, branches,
shrubbery) trimmed to a distance of one foot laterally from the sidewalk
and height of eight feet vertical from the sidewalk.
(c) No person shall sweep or deposit into any gutter, street, storm sewer
inlet or other public place any accumulation of litter removed from any
public or private sidewalk, path or driveway.
Failure of any person to maintain said areas described above shall
permit the municipality to undertake said maintenance and assess the
cost of same to the property owner as permitted by Section 19-9.4 of
this article.
(a) Generally. Unless otherwise specifically directed by the Mayor and
Council for a specific municipal project, or as otherwise specifically
provided in (b) below, any sidewalk that is in need of repair or
reconstruction shall be repaired or reconstructed wholly at the cost of
the owner of the real estate abutting such sidewalk in accordance with
this article. If a specific repair or reconstruction is undertaken by the
municipality for a given project, then the owner of the real estate
abutting such sidewalk shall nonetheless be responsible thereafter for
its maintenance, and any subsequent required repairs or
reconstruction, as required in this article.
(b) Repairs necessitated by municipal trees.
(1) Notice. If any sidewalk is found to have been raised and/or
damaged by municipally-owned trees, the owner of the property in
front of which the sidewalk is located shall have the primary
§ T19-9 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T19-9.2
BAO:1645
§ T19-9.3. Same - Specifications and standards; location, alignment
and grade; inspection and approval. [Ord. No. 2018-12]
Repair or reconstruction under this article shall be as directed by the
municipal engineer and according to the applicable specifications and
standards set forth in the Princeton Engineering Design Standards.
Location, alignment and good grade of repair or construction work shall
be determined in accordance with the provisions of Section 19-9.9 below
that are applicable to new sidewalks. Repair and reconstruction work shall
be subject to the permitting, inspection and approval by the municipal
engineer.
§ T19-9.4. Same - Notice to owner; municipality to do work upon
failure of owner. [Ord. No. 2018-12]
Whenever the municipality requires any improvement in accordance with
this article where the cost is to be borne wholly by the abutting owner,
the Mayor and Council shall cause a notice thereof to be given to the
owners of all real estate affected thereby. Such notice shall contain a
description of the property affected sufficient to identify it, a description
of the improvement and notice that, unless such owner completes the
improvement within 60 days after service of such notice, the municipality
will make the improvement at the expense of the owner. Such notice shall
be served and proof of service shall be filed in the manner provided by
law. If the owner of any real estate affected by such improvement shall fail
to make such improvement within the time and in the manner directed by
such notice, the council may cause the improvement to be made under the
supervision of the municipal engineer.
responsibility for notifying the municipal engineer in writing of the
condition.
(2) Inspection. The municipal engineer shall perform an inspection of
the sidewalk after receiving such notice and shall consult with the
municipal arborist and/or the director of infrastructure and
operations as to any remedial measures available to resolve the
condition. The available remedies to be considered shall include
but shall not be limited to removal of the tree and/or rerouting,
replacing or grinding of the sidewalk.
(3) Remediation. Once the appropriate remedy is approved by the
municipal engineer, he or she shall cause to be performed, all work
necessary to implement the remedial measures as soon thereafter
as is reasonably possible, subject to available funding.
(4) Cost of repair. The cost of any work done to remove, repair and/or
replace the tree and/or sidewalk shall be borne by the municipality.
§ T19-9.2 PRINCETON CODE § T19-9.5
BAO:1646
§ T19-9.5. Same - Assessment of costs; lien upon real estate;
payment and collection. [Ord. No. 2018-12]
Whenever the council shall make such repair or reconstruction or cause it
to be made in cases where the cost is to be borne wholly by the abutting
owner, the municipal engineer shall keep an accurate account of the cost
thereof, shall assess such cost upon the several properties abutting the
improvement in proportion to the respective frontages thereon and shall
file a report thereof under oath with the municipal clerk. The council shall
examine such report and, if properly made, shall confirm and file it with the
officer charged with the collection of assessments. Before confirming the
report, the council shall give notice to the owners named therein of the time
and place fixed for examination of the report, which notice shall be serviced
in the manner provided for by law. Such assessments shall bear interest
from the time of confirmation at the same rate and with the same penalties
for nonpayment as assessments for local improvements in the municipality,
and from the confirmation thereof shall be a first and paramount lien
upon the real estate assessed to the same extent, and be collected and
enforced in the same manner as assessments for local improvements. The
council may provide for the payment and collection of such assessments
in installments, if necessary, in the same manner and at the same rate of
interest as assessments for local improvements are payable in installments
in the municipality.
§ T19-9.6. Snow and ice on sidewalks and shared use paths to be
removed or covered by owner or occupant of bordering premises.
[Ord. No. 2018-12]
Except as may otherwise be provided in Section 19-9.7(a), the owner or
occupant of premises abutting or bordering on sidewalks and shared use
paths along public streets in the municipality shall remove or cause to be
removed from the sidewalks in front of or bordering upon their premises
all snow and ice within 24 hours after such snow shall have ceased falling
thereon or after such ice shall have formed thereon. In the case of ice that
may be so frozen as to make removal impracticable, the owner or occupant
shall cause the same to be thoroughly covered with sand or other suitable
material, within 24 hours after such ice shall have formed thereon.
In all residential land use zones, the owner or occupant, as appropriate,
shall remove snow and ice from their sidewalk at a minimum width of four
feet.
In all other land use zones, including but not limited to the Central Business
District (CBD), the owner or occupant shall remove snow and ice from the
building to the curb, or snow pile or bank at the curb created by municipal
snow removal operations. The owner or occupant in the CBD shall pile the
snow in the area(s) designated for same by the municipality.
In all zones, the owner or occupant must remove snow and ice from the
entire width of any handicap ramps abutting street corner locations.
§ T19-9.5 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T19-9.7
BAO:1647
§ T19-9.7. Authority of public works to remove snow and ice from
sidewalks; cost to become lien on bordering real estate;
enforcement. [Ord. No. 2018-12]
§ T19-9.8. Placing of snow or ice on public rights-of-way prohibited.
[Ord. No. 2018-12]
No person shall throw, place or deposit any snow or ice which has
accumulated upon private property into or upon any public sidewalk shared
use path or the paved portion of any public street in the municipality or into
or upon any area within the right-of-way lines of any street in such a way as
to hinder the passage of persons, bicycles, vehicles or obstruct vision.
§ T19-9.9. New sidewalks - Specifications and standards for
construction. [Ord. No. 2018-12]
All new sidewalks, when installed, shall be constructed of concrete and shall
be five feet wide or as directed by the engineer, and constructed according
to specifications and standards set forth in the Princeton Engineering
Design Standards. Such walks are hereby classified according to, and shall
be constructed with, the minimum pavement widths and the paving material
specified above in this section.
§ T19-9.10. New Sidewalks - Location, alignment and design. [Ord.
No. 2018-12]
The exact location, alignment and design of all new sidewalks shall be
determined by the municipal engineer with due regard to the function
(a) The municipality has the right to remove snow at its own cost from
certain sidewalks when it deems it to be in the public interest to do so.
(b) In case snow or ice shall not be removed or such ice shall not be
covered as provided in the preceding Section, the owner or occupant,
as the case may be, shall be in violation of said Section.
(c) The police department shall be responsible for enforcing the provisions
of this article and said violator shall be subject to such penalties
provided for in Section 1-6 of this Code.
(d) In addition to the right of the municipality to issue a summons and
complaint in municipal court, the director of public works shall have the
authority to direct the removal or covering. In such event, the cost of
such work shall be certified by the director of public works to the
council, which shall examine such certification and, if found to be
correct, shall cause such cost to be charged against the real estate
abutting or bordering upon the sidewalks. The amount so charged shall
become a lien and tax upon such real estate, and shall be added to and
be part of the taxes next to be levied and assessed on the real estate and
shall be enforced and collected with interest by the same officers and in
the same manner as other taxes in the municipality.
§ T19-9.7 PRINCETON CODE § T19-9.10
BAO:1648
of the walk, the nature of the terrain, the elimination or minimization of
the removal of trees and the avoidance of other natural obstacles. The
improvement shall conform as nearly as practicable to such established
grade.
§ T19-9.10 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T19-9.10
BAO:1649

ARTICLE XI
Right-of-Way Permits
§ T19-10. RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMITS.
§ T19-10.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2019-8]
ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW TEAM — Means the municipal planner,
engineer and zoning officer.
ANTICIPATED MUNICIPAL EXPENSES — Mean the cost of processing
an application for a right-of-way permit including, but not limited to,
professional fees such as engineer and attorney costs.
CABINET — Means a small box-like or rectangular structure used to
facilitate utility or wireless service from within the municipal right-of-way.
ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM — Mean the part of the electric
system, after the transmission system that is dedicated to delivering electric
energy to an end user.
EXISTING POLE — Means a pole that is in lawful existence within the
municipal right-of-way.
GROUND LEVEL CABINET — Means a cabinet that is not attached to an
existing pole and is touching or directly supported by the ground.
MUNICIPAL RIGHT-OF-WAY — Means the surface of, and the space above
or below, any public street, road, place, public way or place, sidewalk,
alley, boulevard, parkway, drive, and the like, held by the municipality as an
easement or in fee simply ownership. This term also includes rights-of-way
held by the County of Mercer where Princeton's approval is required for the
use of same pursuant to N.J.S.A. 27:16-6. This term shall not include private
roadways.
POLE — Means a long, slender, rounded piece of wood or metal.
POLE MOUNTED ANTENNA — Means a device that is attached to a pole
and used to transmit radio or microwave signals and shall include, but
not be limited to, small cell equipment and transmission media such as
femtocells, picocells, microcells, and outside distributed antenna systems.
POLE MOUNTED CABINET — Means a cabinet that is proposed to be
placed on an existing or proposed pole.
PROPOSED POLE — Means a pole that is proposed to be placed in the
municipal right-of-way.
RIGHT-OF-WAY AGREEMENT — Means an agreement that sets forth the
terms and conditions for use of the municipal right-of-way and includes, but
is not limited to, municipal franchise agreements.
RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT — Means an approval from the municipality setting
forth the applicant's compliance with the requirements of this article.
§ T19-10 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T19-10.1
BAO:1651
SHOT CLOCK — Means the time limit of 60 days for collocation on existing
facilities and 90 days for a new structure, as established by the FCC, for the
review of applications filed under this article.
SURROUNDING STREETSCAPE — Means existing poles within the same
right-of-way that are located within 500 feet of the proposed pole.
UTILITIES REGULATED BY THE BOARD OF PUBLIC UTILITIES — Means
companies subject to regulation by the New Jersey Board of Public Utilities
under chapter 48 of the revised statutes.
UTILITY SERVICE — Means electric, telephone, or cable service.
§ T19-10.2. Pole mounted antennas, access to right-of-way, right-ofway
agreements. [Ord. No. 2019-8]
§ T19-10.3. Application to utilities regulated by the Board of Public
Utilities, other entities. [Ord. No. 2019-8]
§ T19-10.4. Right-of-way permits, siting standards for poles,
antennas and cabinets in the right-of-way. [Ord. No. 2019-8]
(a) No person shall operate or place any type of pole mounted antenna
within the municipal right-of-way without first entering into a right-ofway
agreement pursuant to the provisions of this section.
(b) The terms of said right-of-way agreement shall include:
(1) A term not to exceed 15 years;
(2) Reasonable insurance requirements;
(3) Fines for unauthorized installations;
(4) Requirements regarding the repair, maintenance and relocation of
equipment;
(5) A reference to the siting standards set forth in this section; and
(6) Any other items which may reasonably be required.
(a) Notwithstanding any franchise or right-of-way agreement to the
contrary, all facilities proposed to be placed within the municipal rightof-
way by a utility regulated by the Board of Public Utilities, or any
other entity lawfully within the municipal right-of-way, shall be subject
to the standards and procedures set forth in this article and shall
require right-of-way permits for the siting of poles, antennas and
cabinets in the municipal right-of-way.
(a) No pole, antenna or cabinet shall be installed within the municipal
right-of-way without the issuance of a right-of-way permit.
(b) Pole siting standards.
§ T19-10.1 PRINCETON CODE § T19-10.4
BAO:1652
(1) Height. No pole shall be taller than 35 feet or 110% of the height of
poles in the surrounding streetscape, whichever is taller.
(2) Distance from the curb line. No pole shall be closer than 18 inches
from the curb line.
(3) Location, safety and aesthetics. No pole shall be erected in the
right-of-way unless it:
a. Is used to bring utility service across the right-of-way to an
existing or proposed development from an existing pole; or
b. Is replacing an existing pole; or
c. Has been approved pursuant to section 19-10.5 of this code; or
d. Is located on the opposite side of the street from the electric
distribution system; and
e. For sites in any residential zone, is 200 linear feet from any
other existing pole or proposed pole along the same side of the
street, or for sites in any other zone, is at least 100 linear feet
from any other existing pole or proposed pole along the same
side of the street; and
f. Is not located in an area with underground utilities; and
g. Does not interfere with any existing sight triangles or sight
distance; and
h. Allows adequate room so as not to impede the public's or
municipality's use of the right-of-way; and
i. Is finished and/or painted and otherwise camouflaged, in
conformance with best available stealth technology methods,
so as to blend in compatibly with its background and so as to
minimize its visual impact on surrounding properties; and
j. If in a historic district of the municipality, has been reviewed
and approved by the historic preservation committee.
(4) Any necessary equipment is permitted on a pole where said pole
otherwise conforms with the standards set forth in section
19-10.4.b.
(c) Ground level cabinet site standards.
(1) Ground level cabinets are permitted only if placement on a pole is
not possible or feasible.
(2) No ground level cabinet shall be installed unless it:
a. Is less than 28 cubic feet in volume; and
§ T19-10.4 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T19-10.4
BAO:1653
§ T19-10.5. Application process. [Ord. No. 2019-8]
b. Is finished and/or painted so as to blend in compatibly with its
background and so as to minimize its visual impact on
surrounding properties; and
c. Does not interfere with any existing sight triangles or sight
distance; and
d. Allows adequate room so as not to impede the public's or
municipality use of the right-of-way.
(d) Pole mounted antenna and pole mounted cabinet siting standards.
(1) Pole mounted antennas are permitted on existing poles in all zones,
provided that each pole mounted antenna:
a. Does not exceed three cubic feet in volume; and
b. Is finished and/or painted and otherwise camouflaged, in
conformance with best available stealth technology methods,
so as to blend in compatibly with its background and so as to
minimize its visual impact on surrounding properties; and
c. Does not interfere with any sight triangles or sight distance;
and
d. Allows adequate room so as not to impede the public's or
municipality's use of the right-of-way.
(2) Pole mounted cabinets are permitted on existing poles in all zones,
provided that each pole mounted cabinet:
a. Does not exceed 16 cubic feet; and
b. Is finished and/or painted and otherwise camouflaged, in
conformance with best available stealth technology methods,
so as to blend in compatibly with its background and so as to
minimize its visual impact on surrounding properties; and
c. Does not interfere with any sight triangles or sight distance;
and
d. Allows adequate room so as not to impede the public's or
municipality's use of the right-of-way.
(3) The municipality may in its discretion require that a permittee
provide a certification from a licensed engineer attesting to the
structural integrity of any pole mounted antenna or pole mounted
cabinet.
(a) Pre-application meeting. Prior to submitting a formal application to the
municipality for use of the municipal right-of-way, all applicants are
§ T19-10.4 PRINCETON CODE § T19-10.5
BAO:1654
advised to meet with the municipal engineer to review the scope of the
applicant's proposal.
(b) Review process.
(1) Applications for attachments to third-party utility infrastructure
will be reviewed through an administrative review process by the
administrative review team. Prior to approval of any application,
the municipality may in its discretion ask the applicant to hold a
public open house and provide notice of same by regular mail to all
property owners identified by the municipal engineer as requiring
notice. Applicant shall also provide evidence of permission to use
the infrastructure from the third-party property owner.
(2) Applications for attachments to municipally-owned infrastructure
will be reviewed through an administrative review process by the
administrative review team. Prior to approval of any application,
the municipality may in its discretion ask the applicant to hold a
public open house and provide notice of same by regular mail to all
property owners identified by the municipal engineer as requiring
notice.
(3) Any siting standard set forth in Section 19-10.4 may be waived
where the applicant demonstrates that strict enforcement of said
standard:
a. Will prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting any interstate or
intrastate telecommunications service pursuant to 47 U.S.C.
253(a); or
b. Will prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting personal wireless
service pursuant to 47 U.S.C. 332(c)(7)(B)(i)(II); or
c. Will violate any requirement set forth by the Federal
Communications Commission in its order entitled
"Accelerating Wireless Broadband Deployment by Removing
Barriers to Infrastructure Investment; Accelerating Wireline
Broadband Deployment by Removing Barriers to
Infrastructure Investment." WT Docket No. 17-79; WC Docket
17-84; or
d. Will prohibit, or have the effect of prohibiting, the ability of an
entity to provide utility service to any prospective customer
within the municipality.
(c) All applications made under this section shall be expedited so as to
comply with the shot clocks set forth in the Federal Communications
Commission order entitled "Accelerating Wireless Broadband
Deployment by Removing Barriers to Infrastructure Investment;
Accelerating Wireline Broadband Deployment by the Removal of
Barriers to Infrastructure Investment." WT Docket No. 17-79; WC
Docket No. 17-84.
§ T19-10.5 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T19-10.5
BAO:1655
§ T19-10.6. Right-of-way permit fees and charges. [Ord. No. 2019-8]
(d) Every application made pursuant to this article shall include a stamped
survey prepared by a New Jersey licensed surveyor demonstrating that
any proposed pole is located within the municipal right-of-way. An
application which does not include such a survey shall immediately be
deemed incomplete.
(e) New poles and ground level cabinets shall be reviewed as outlined in
19-10.5.b above. If an application is denied, the factual basis for such
denial will be provided in writing to the applicant.
(f) Pole mounted antenna and pole mounted cabinets shall be reviewed as
outlined in 19-10.5.b above. If an application is denied, the factual basis
for such denial will be provided in writing to the applicant.
(g) An appeal from a final decision made by the administrative review team
shall be made to the Princeton municipal council.
(a) Permit application fee. Every right-of-way permit application shall
include an application fee in the following amounts:
(1) One to five poles: $500.
(2) Each additional pole submitted simultaneously: $100.
(b) Right-of-way use fee. In exchange for the privilege of non-exclusive
occupancy of the public right-of-way, the successful applicant shall pay
to the municipality an annual fee of $500 for the use of each pole in the
right-of-way, and $100 per month for each municipally-owned facility on
which its equipment is deployed. The initial fee shall be due and
payable within 30 days of installation of the equipment, and on the
anniversary date of the installation each year thereafter. Commencing
on the fifth anniversary of the initial installation and continuing on each
fifth anniversary thereafter, the right-of-way use fee shall be adjusted
by a percentage amount equal to the percentage change in the U.S.
Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics consumer price index
(all items, all urban consumers, 1982-1984=100) which occurred
during the previous five-year period for the New York-Northern New
Jersey-Long Island, NY-NJ-PA metropolitan statistical area (MSA).
(c) Escrow deposit towards anticipated municipal expenses.
(1) In addition to the permit application fee, the applicant shall submit
to the municipal planning department all fees required for an
administrative waiver in accordance with section 17A-174A of the
former Borough of Princeton Code for infrastructure on property in
the boundaries of the former Borough of Princeton, and in
accordance with section 10B-206.1 for infrastructure on property
in the boundaries of the former Township of Princeton, or the
current municipal code of record at the time of the application.
§ T19-10.5 PRINCETON CODE § T19-10.6
BAO:1656
§ T19-10.7. Miscellaneous provisions. [Ord. No. 2019-8]
(2) Applicant's deposit towards anticipated municipal expenses shall
be placed in an escrow account. If said escrow deposit contains
insufficient funds to enable the municipality to perform its review,
the chief financial officer of the municipality shall provide applicant
a notice of insufficient balance. In order for review to continue, the
applicant shall, within 10 days post a deposit to the account in an
amount to be mutually agreed upon.
(3) The chief financial officer shall, upon request by the applicant, and
after a final decision has been made regarding the pending right-ofway
permit application, refund any unused balance from
applicant's escrow deposit towards anticipated municipal
expenses.
(a) Any approval received pursuant to this article shall not relieve the
applicant from receiving consent from the owner of the land above or
on which an applicant's facility may be located as may be required
under New Jersey law.
(b) Applicant must, in addition to receiving a right-of-way permit, also
receive all necessary road opening permits, construction permits, and
any other requirement set forth in Princeton's ordinances or applicable
state statutes.
(c) Princeton's consent for the use of county roads, as required pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 27:16-6, shall take the form of a right-of-way permit subject to
the standards and application process set forth in this article, except
that the applicant shall not be required to enter into a right-of-way
agreement with the municipality.
§ T19-10.6 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T19-10.7
BAO:1657
Chapter T20
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
Chapter T21
(RESERVED)
Chapter T22
TREES AND SHRUBS
Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes Ordinance Nos. 203,
98-17, 2003-24, 2005-20, 2012-7, 2014-26, 2016-32.
§ T19-10.7 PRINCETON CODE § T19-10.7
BAO:1658
ARTICLE I
Findings, Intent and Purpose; Definitions68
§ T22-1. Findings, intent and purpose. [Ord. No. 2016-34]
The mayor and council recognize that trees and shrubs are a natural
resource that provide aesthetic, economic, ecological, environmental and
health benefits to the Municipality of Princeton and its inhabitants, and
that the treatment of trees and shrubs on individual properties can have
significant impacts not only on those individual properties, but also on
neighboring properties, the streetscape, the tree canopy and the entire
municipality.
For these reasons, the mayor and council find that it is in the interest
of Princeton and its inhabitants to establish rules and regulations for the
stewardship of trees and shrubs within Princeton, on both public and
private property, and more specifically, for the care and protection of trees
and shrubs, preservation of the maximum number of trees and shrubs,
safeguarding of specimen and significant trees and replacement of removed
or destroyed trees.
§ T22-2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2016-34]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
definitions:
(a) CALIPER - Shall mean the diameter of the trunk of a tree measured at a
point six inches above ground level.
(b) CANOPY - Shall mean the upper and outermost part of a tree created by
the tree's crown and shall mean, in the case of contiguous trees, the
upper and outermost parts of the trees' crowns.
(c) CROWN - Shall mean the upper mass or head of a tree created by its
branches and leaves.
(d) DECIDUOUS TREE - Shall mean any woody plant with a main stem or
multiple stems with branches protruding above the root flare and that
seasonally loses its leaves.
(e) DESTROY - Shall mean to kill or damage irreparably, which shall be
deemed to include, but not be limited to: damage inflicted to the root
system by machinery, storage of materials, soil compaction or change of
natural grade above or below the root system or around the trunk;
damage inflicted on the tree permitting fungus, pests or other
infestation; excessive pruning or thinning not in conformance with
American National Standards Institute (ANSI) standards, leading to a
failure to thrive; paving over the root system with any impervious
materials within such proximity as to be fatally harmful to the tree; or
68.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes Ordinance Nos. 203, 98-17, 2003-24,
2005-20, 2012-7, 2014-26, 2016-32.
§ T22-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T22-2
BAO:1659
application of any substance toxic to the tree or causing the tree to be
exposed to any such substance.
(f) DIAMETER BREAST HEIGHT OR DBH - Shall mean the diameter of the
trunk of a tree measured at a point 4 1/2 feet about ground level on the
downhill side of the tree.
(g) DRIP LINE - Shall mean an imaginary line on the surface and
subsurface of the ground delineated by the outer limits of the branches
of a tree and measured plumb from the branches to the ground. When
the outer limits of the branches are indistinct or otherwise unclear, the
drip line shall be presumed to be located 1 1/2 feet from the center of
the trunk of a tree for each inch of the trunk DBH. In the case of trees
with multiple trunks, the drip line of each trunk shall be measured
separately.
(h) ENFORCEMENT OFFICER - Shall mean a certified arborist appointed
by the Administrator upon consultation with the shade tree commission
for the purpose of enforcing the terms of this chapter.
(i) EVERGREEN TREE - Shall mean a tree with foliage that remains green
and functional throughout the year.
(j) ORNAMENTAL TREE - Shall mean a tree that can be single or multiple
stemmed and that grows to a maximum height of 25 feet.
(k) PRINCETON SHADE TREE TRUST RESERVE - Shall mean a fund
established and maintained by Princeton for purposes of planting and
maintaining trees and shrubs on public property.
(l) REPLACEMENT TREE - Shall mean, in the case of a deciduous tree, a
tree which measures at least 2 1/2 inches in caliper, and in the case of
an evergreen tree, a tree which measures at least six feet in height
measured from grade. In all cases, the replacement tree shall be of a
species and size appropriate for the premises on which it will be
planted. Replacement nursery stock shall adhere to the American
Standard for Nursery Stock (ANSI Z60.1).
(m) SIGNIFICANT TREE - Shall mean a tree or grove of trees recognized as
significant by the shade tree commission or enforcement officer on the
basis of specimen, quality, historical significance, location, size or other
unique characteristics.
(n) SPECIMEN TREE - Shall mean any tree equal to at least 80% of the size
of those listed on the "Champion Big Tree Register" of the New Jersey
Community Forestry Program in the Department of Environmental
Protection's Division of Parks and Forestry, or any tree actually listed on
the "Champion Big Tree Register."
(o) SHRUB - Shall mean any woody plant with persistent stems protruding
from grade level.
§ T22-2 PRINCETON CODE § T22-2
BAO:1660
(p) TREE - Shall mean any woody plant with a main stem or multiple stems
with branches protruding above the root flare, which includes all
deciduous, ornamental and evergreen trees.
(q) TREE PROTECTION ZONE - Shall mean the area within the "drip line"
of a tree, as that term is defined in section 22-2(g) above.
§ T22-2 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T22-2
BAO:1661

ARTICLE II
Shade Tree Commission
§ T22-3. Commission created; membership; term of office of
members. [Ord. No. 2016-34]
§ T22-4. Powers and duties of the shade tree commission. [Ord. No.
2016-34]
The shade tree commission shall have the following general powers and
duties:
(a) There is hereby established a shade tree commission consisting of
seven members and two alternates, designated as "Alternate No. 1" and
"Alternate No. 2." There shall also be one non-voting liaison appointed
from the governing body. The mayor, upon consultation with the
council, shall appoint the members and alternates. All members and
alternates shall be Princeton residents. The term of office of the
members shall be five years. The term for members of the initial
commission shall begin on the date of their appointment and shall be as
follows: one member shall be appointed for one year, one member shall
be appointed for two years, one member shall be appointed for three
years, two members shall be appointed for four years, and two
members shall be appointed for five years. All subsequent
appointments, except to fill vacancies, shall be for the full term of five
years, to take effect on January 1. The commission shall annually elect
its chairperson from among its members.
(b) Alternate No. 1 and Alternate No. 2 shall serve during the absence or
disqualification of any regular member or members. The term of each
alternate member shall be five years commencing on January 1 of the
year of appointment; provided, however, that in the event two alternate
members are appointed, the initial term of Alternate No. 2 shall be four
years and the initial term of Alternate No. 1 shall be five years. The
terms of the initial alternate members appointed shall commence on the
day of their appointment and shall expire on the fourth or fifth
December 31 next ensuing after the date of their appointments, as the
case may be. An alternate member may participate in discussion of the
proceedings but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification
of a regular member. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular
member may vote instead of an alternate member.
(a) Policy making responsibility in the regulation, planting, care and
control of trees and shrubs upon and in the streets, highways, public
places, public right-of-ways and parks of the municipality. The shade
tree commission shall have responsibility for the regulation, planting,
care and control of trees and shrubs upon and in State and County
highways and County parks only to the extent authorized or required by
law;
§ T22-3 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T22-4
BAO:1663
§ T22-5. Interference with work prohibited. [Ord. No. 2016-34]
No person shall prevent, delay or interfere with any lawful work undertaken
by the shade tree commission or its authorized agent.
(b) Responsibility to consult and advise with the enforcement officer in all
matters within its purview;
(c) All authority conferred by N.J.S.A. 40:64-1 et seq., to the extent
applicable;
(d) Authority to review tree surveys, removal plans and planting plans
submitted with land development applications referred to it by the
planning board or zoning board. After its review the commission may
prepare a report of its findings and recommendations to be sent to the
board of jurisdiction at least 14 days prior to that board's scheduled
hearing of the development application;
(e) Authority to prepare criteria, standards, guidelines, and
recommendations, including recommendations as to specific
appropriations, for the use of funds collected in the Princeton Shade
Tree Trust Reserve. The use of said funds shall be subject to the prior
review and recommendation of the shade tree commission;
(f) Authority to develop a list of sites throughout Princeton that require the
replacement of trees or the addition of new trees, and regularly update
the list to reflect the replacement or removal of trees;
(g) Authority to develop and maintain a recommended tree species list;
(h) Authority to develop and maintain an inventory of trees and shrubs
upon and in the streets, highways, public places, public right-of-ways
and parks of the municipality;
(i) Responsibility to develop and recommend tree removal standards for
trees located on private property;
(j) Responsibility to make, keep, and preserve minutes and records of its
meetings and activities, and to make annual reports to the mayor and
council. Copies of all minutes and records of its meetings and activities
shall be filed with the clerk;
(k) Responsibility to decide appeals and recommend informal resolution of
complaints, as set forth in sections 22-15 and 22-16, respectively,
below; and
(l) Such additional functions as required by this chapter or within the law
as may be delegated to it.
§ T22-4 PRINCETON CODE § T22-5
BAO:1664
ARTICLE III
Protection of Trees and Shrubs on or Extending onto Public Streets,
Highways and Right-of-Ways, and Public Property
§ T22-6. Approval required for certain actions concerning trees and
shrubs located on public streets, highways and right-of-ways, and
property under Municipality's jurisdiction. [Ord. No. 2016-34]
(a) No person shall do, or cause to be done, any of the following acts upon
public streets, highways, right-of-ways or parks or other lands under
the Municipality's jurisdiction, or cause or permit the same to be done
by any third party contractor or subcontractor, without obtaining the
written approval of the enforcement officer, in accordance with
subsection (b) below:
(1) Cut, trim, break, climb with spikes, disturb the roots of or
otherwise injure, remove or destroy any tree or shrub or injure,
misuse or remove any structure or device placed to support or
protect such tree or shrub.
(2) Plant any tree or shrub.
(3) Fasten or affix any rope, wire, electric attachment, sign or other
device to a tree or shrub.
(4) Place or maintain, or cause to be placed or maintained, in or upon
the ground, any stone, cement, sidewalk, mortar, building material,
impervious material or other substance that shall impede or
prevent the free access of water, air or fertilizer to the roots of any
tree or shrub or within the drip line of a tree or shrub.
(5) Place or cause to be placed any chemical or substance harmful to
tree life, including but not limited to gasoline or oil, on any tree or
shrub or within the drip line of any tree or shrub.
(6) Hitch or fasten an animal to any tree or shrub, or to any guard or
support provided for the same, or permit any animal to bite or
otherwise injure any tree or shrub.
(7) Hitch or fasten a bicycle or other personal property to any tree or
shrub, or to any guard or support provided for the same.
(b) A person may request in writing the approval of the enforcement officer
to undertake an activity otherwise prohibited in section 22-6(a) above.
Within 20 business days of said written request, the enforcement officer
shall, in his or her discretion, approve or deny the request. The failure
of the enforcement officer to approve or deny the request within 20
business days shall constitute an approval of the request.
(c) Excepted from the requirements of this section are the following:
(1) The treatment of trees and shrubs by the appropriate public agency
with the consent of the enforcement officer; and
§ T22-6 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T22-6
BAO:1665
§ T22-7. Removal or trimming by Municipality when interfering
with public street, highway or right-of-way use; duty to reimburse
Municipality for work performed. [Ord. No. 2016-34]
If the limbs or branches of any trees or shrubs grown on any land in the
Municipality extend over or into any of the public streets, highways or rightof-
ways in the Municipality and interfere with the free and uninterrupted
use of such streets, highways or right-of-ways for any lawful purpose, the
enforcement officer shall notify and direct the owner of the premises on
which such trees or shrubs may stand, or the agent of such owner, to trim or
detach, on or before a time to be fixed in such notice, any limbs, branches
or parts of trees or shrubs so extending in the street, highway or right-ofway
in the Municipality. If the owner of any such trees or shrubs shall fail
or neglect to comply with the terms of such notice, the enforcement officer
is authorized and empowered to trim or detach, or cause to be trimmed or
detached, any limbs, branches or parts of trees or shrubs so extending into
the street, highway or right-of-way in the Municipality. Upon completion of
such work, there shall be rendered, by the enforcement officer, to the owner
of the premises on which such trees or shrubs stood and for whom such
work was done, a bill for such work, showing the money expended by the
Municipality therefor, and upon failure of the party for whom such work
was done and such money expended to reimburse the Municipality within
60 days from the time of completion of such work, suit shall be brought in
the name of the Municipality for the amount due in any court of competent
jurisdiction.
§ T22-8. Removal of substance, material or covering at base of trees
and shrubs; duty to reimburse Municipality for work performed.
[Ord. No. 2016-34]
Where any tree or shrub in any public street, highway or right-of-way in the
Municipality may be surrounded at the base of its trunk by ground which
is not open as required in section 22-6(a)(4) above, or by open ground of
less quantity or measurement than that herein required in section 22-6(a)(4)
above, it shall be the duty of the enforcement officer to notify the owner of
the property in front of which any such tree or shrub may be to remove,
within a time fixed in such notice, so much of the substance, material or
other covering as may be necessary to give the space of open ground herein
required. If the person so notified shall not remove the substance, material
or covering by the time so fixed, the enforcement officer may do so, or
cause the same to be done and, upon completion thereof, render a bill to
the person so notified for the work done and the money expended therefor.
If payment shall not be made within 60 days from the time of completion
of such work, suit shall be brought in the name of the Municipality for the
amount due in any court of competent jurisdiction.
(2) The management, including integrated pest management, of Ash
(Fraxinus spp.) trees to protect against damage and/or loss of the
trees due to infestation by the Emerald Ash Borer (Agrilus
planipennis), with the consent of the enforcement officer.
§ T22-6 PRINCETON CODE § T22-9
BAO:1666
§ T22-9. Protection of trees and shrubs from utility wires. [Ord. No.
2016-34]
Any person having control over any wire for the transmission of electric
current or telephone, cable or any other utility service along a public street,
highway or right-of-way shall at all times guard all trees and shrubs through
which such wires pass against any injury from the wires or from the current
carried by them. Prior to undertaking any work on the utility affecting any
such tree or shrub, the utility company shall provide at least five days' prior
written notice to the enforcement officer and abutting property owner of
same. The device or means used shall be subject to the approval of the
enforcement officer.
§ T22-9 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T22-9
BAO:1667

ARTICLE IV
Removal of Trees on Private Property; Permit Requirements
§ T22-10. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2016-34]
This article is intended to further the intent and purpose of this chapter,
as set forth in Article I above. To that end, this article establishes tree
removal standards for trees located on private property. The purpose of
these specific standards is to encourage and further the protection and
preservation of trees and their canopy as important public and
environmental resources and to:
§ T22-11. Trees requiring permit before removal. [Ord. No.
2016-34]
It shall be a violation of this article for any person to remove or otherwise
destroy any tree as set forth in this section, or to cause or permit the
same to be done by any third party contractor or subcontractor, without
first obtaining a permit or approval as provided herein below. Except as
otherwise provided in section 22-12 below, the following acts are hereby
regulated and shall require a tree removal permit:
§ T22-12. Exceptions. [Ord. No. 2016-34; Ord. No. 2016-40]
Excepted from the requirements of this article are the following:
(a) Control and prevent the indiscriminate or excessive removal and
destruction of trees and their canopy.
(b) Control and prevent conditions that cause an increase in stormwater
run-off, sedimentation, soil erosion, loss of wildlife habitat and air and
noise pollution, or that inhibit aquifer recharge or impair the ambiance
or physical appearance of neighborhoods, historic landscapes and
streetscapes.
(c) Strike a balance between limiting the adverse impacts of tree removal
and not unduly interfering with the ability of a property owner to
appropriately remove trees on private property.
(a) Removal of or otherwise destroying a tree with a DBH of eight inches or
more;
(b) Removal of or otherwise destroying an ornamental or evergreen tree
with a height of 10 feet or more;
(c) Removal or otherwise destroying a tree with a canopy extending over a
public right-of-way; and
(d) Removal of or otherwise destroying any specimen or significant tree, as
defined in section 22-2 above.
(a) Any tree that poses imminent danger to life or property or where
removal is in response to an emergency. To qualify under this exception,
§ T22-10 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T22-12
BAO:1669
the tree shall only be removed to the extent necessary to abate the
imminent danger or emergency. If notification of the removal of said
tree pursuant to this article has not been given to the enforcement
officer prior to removal, then notification must be provided by the next
business day or as soon as practicable thereafter. Said notification shall
include verification that the tree removal was necessary to abate the
imminent danger or emergency;
(b) Any tree that has fallen solely as a result of storm damage or other
natural causes;
(c) Any dead tree or substantially diseased tree as a result of natural
causes or storm damage where:
(1) The tree is still standing;
(2) The person desiring to destroy or remove the tree is the owner of
the land upon which the tree is located;
(3) The person notifies the enforcement officer of the desire to remove
the tree; and
(4) The enforcement officer verifies in writing that the tree is dead or
substantially diseased as a result of natural causes. The failure of
the enforcement officer to approve or deny the request within 15
days shall constitute an approval of the request;
(d) Tree removal that is a part of any land development application subject
to the jurisdiction of the planning or zoning boards, or any of their
subcommittees. The shade tree commission may, however, provide its
review and comment, if any, regarding the tree removal to the board of
jurisdiction;
(e) Tree removal as part of an application requiring preservation plan
approval by the historic preservation commission or the commission's
administrative officer for properties that are subject to the
commission's jurisdiction within the historic preservation zoning
districts or historic preservation buffer zoning districts; and
(f) The removal of any trees that are a part of an approved woodland
management program pursuant to the provisions of the New Jersey
Farmland Assessment Act of 1964.
(g) The removal of any Ash (Fraxinus spp.) tree due to actual or anticipated
infestation by the Emerald Ash Borer (Agrilus planipennis), provided
that the person desiring to remove the tree or trees complies with the
following:
(1) The person shall file a permit application in accordance with
section 22-13 below. The permit application shall specify the
number of Ash trees to be removed and treated on the premises,
and include all information and support required by section 22-13,
§ T22-12 PRINCETON CODE § T22-12
BAO:1670
§ T22-13. Application for tree removal permit. [Ord. No. 2016-34]
except that the filing fee required by section 22-13(g) shall be
waived; and
(2) There is no requirement for a permit application to include a tree
replacement plan under section 22-13(d), except that there is a
recommended tree replacement goal of 10% of removed Ash trees,
with a recommended goal of a minimum of one tree replanted per
application. The replanted tree(s) (if any) shall, if site conditions
permit, be planted in the same or contiguous location(s) on the
premises.
The exception created by this subsection (g) shall continue for 10
years from the date on which it goes into effect. Upon expiration of
this ten-year term, this section (g) shall automatically be null and
void and of no force and effect.
(a) General Application Requirements. A person desiring to remove or
otherwise destroy a tree or trees as provided for in section 22-11 above
shall first apply to the enforcement officer for a permit, on forms
provided by the municipality and containing the information required in
subsections (b), (c) and (d) of this section.
(b) Narrative. The application required by subsection (a) above shall
include a narrative specifying:
(1) The location of the premises where the tree removal or destruction
is to take place, by both street address and lot and block number;
(2) The name and address of the owner of the premises;
(3) The name and address of the applicant for the permit, if other than
the owner, accompanied by the owner's consent to said application;
(4) A list providing the species, DBH and number of trees to be
destroyed or removed;
(5) The reason or purpose for the destruction or removal of trees; and
(6) A description of the applicant's tree replacement plan, in
accordance with subsection (d) below.
(c) Sketch/Printed Plan. The application required by subsection (a) above
shall be accompanied by a sketch and/or printed plan showing the
following:
(1) The size of the lot;
(2) All structures and their appurtenances, including but not limited to
any building, garage, shed, deck, pool, driveway, walkway, patio or
other impervious surface;
§ T22-12 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T22-13
BAO:1671
(3) The location upon the lot where the destruction or removal of the
tree or trees is proposed to take place;
(4) The identity and location of trees to be destroyed or removed;
(5) The location of all streams and wetlands on the lot; and
(6) The proposed location(s) for planting of replacement tree(s), as
well as their species and DBH.
(d) Tree Replacement Plan. The application required by subsection (a)
above shall be accompanied by a narrative and/or sketch or printed
plan showing a tree replacement plan, to include and comply with the
following:
(1) The tree replacement plan shall provide for replacing the removed
or destroyed tree(s) in the same or contiguous location(s) on the
premises, and in accordance with the following specific
requirements. The tree replacement plan shall require that the
applicant replace each removed or destroyed tree with one or more
trees depending upon the DBH of the removed or destroyed tree,
and in accordance with Schedule A immediately below, the "Tree
Replacement Schedule."
Schedule A - Tree Replacement Schedule
Tree Removed/
Destroyed
Required
Replacement Tree
Tree Replacement
Fee
Tree with DBH of 8
inches to 16.99
inches
1 Replacement Tree $400
Tree with DBH of 17
inches to 30.99
inches
2 Replacement Trees $800
Tree with DBH 31
inches to 38.99
inches
3 Replacement Trees $1,200
Tree with DBH of 39
inches or greater
4 Replacement Trees $1,600
(2) Based on industry standards and site conditions on the premises,
and in consultation with the enforcement officer, the applicant may,
in lieu of on-premises planting of the required replacement tree(s),
be permitted to plant the replacement tree(s) on one or more
appropriate off-premises locations, or pay a tree replacement fee
into the Princeton Shade Tree Trust Reserve for each tree removed
based on the foregoing Tree Replacement Schedule. The tree
replacement fee shall represent the cost to replace the removed or
destroyed tree(s), including administration and labor costs, and
shall be maintained and utilized by Princeton for purposes of
§ T22-13 PRINCETON CODE § T22-13
BAO:1672
§ T22-14. Review of application for tree removal; decision on
application; time requirements; expiration. [Ord. No. 2016-34]
planting and maintaining trees and shrubs on public property. At
least 50% of the required replacement trees shall be planted either
on the premises or in an appropriate off-premises location(s). As
used hereafter, the phrase "tree replacement plan" shall be deemed
to include reference to the payment of a tree replacement fee.
(3) The tree replacement plan shall identify the applicant's proposal
for compliance with this subsection (d), including specifying the
species, size and quantity of replacement trees, the proposed
location(s) for planting of replacement trees on and off the
premises and the applicant's acknowledgment of the required tree
replacement fees. In order to maintain the existing canopy,
preference shall be for the replacement of deciduous trees with
deciduous trees and evergreen trees with evergreen trees.
(e) Marking. The applicant shall conspicuously mark each tree to be
removed or destroyed with a material which can be wrapped around the
trunk of each tree, such as ribbon or string.
(f) Notice. Prior to filing the application, the applicant shall mail or hand
deliver a copy of the application to the owners of the properties
contiguous to the premises where the proposed tree destruction or
removal is to take place. The applicant shall confirm compliance with
this requirement on the application.
(g) The fee for each application shall be $40.
(a) The enforcement officer shall accept for filing the permit application
referenced in section 22-13 above. Said application shall be date and
time stamped when received. Thereafter, the enforcement officer shall
within 20 business days of receipt of the completed application:
(1) Visit and inspect the location and inspect the land and trees that
are the subject of the application;
(2) If necessary, meet with the applicant to discuss the application; and
(3) Grant or deny the requested permit in whole or in part, or make
recommendations that would make the application acceptable to
the enforcement officer, in writing and in accordance with the
following considerations:
a. Whether the removal or destruction of the tree or trees will
cause or contribute to physical or environmental problems on
the land and other property, including but not limited to
flooding, soil instability and erosion.
b. Whether the destruction or removal of the tree or trees will
have a negative impact on the contiguous canopy or on the
§ T22-13 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T22-14
BAO:1673
§ T22-15. Appeals. [Ord. No. 2016-34]
growth and development of the remaining trees on the land
and other property.
c. Whether the destruction or removal of the tree or trees will
have a negative aesthetic or visual impact on the land and
other property.
d. Whether the destruction or removal of the tree or trees will
threaten or otherwise lead to a loss of wildlife habitat or tree
species.
e. Whether the tree or trees are specimen or significant tree(s) as
defined in section 22-2 above.
f. Whether the destruction or removal of the tree or trees is
under the jurisdiction of a New Jersey or Federal agency,
including but not limited to the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection.
g. Whether the destruction or removal of the tree or trees is a
part of an overall landscape plan for the property.
h. Whether a denial of the permit, in whole or part, would cause
an undue hardship on the applicant.
i. Whether the applicant's tree replacement plan will mitigate
the negative impact that the tree removal or destruction will
have on the land and other property.
(b) A decision other than one to grant the requested permit in its entirety
shall include the enforcement officer's written findings and reasons for
said decision.
(c) The failure of the enforcement officer to grant or deny the application
for a permit for the removal or destruction of a tree or trees within the
twenty-business-day period shall constitute approval of said application
and entitle the applicant to the permit requested unless an extension of
the twenty business-day period has been agreed upon between the
applicant and the enforcement officer in writing before the period
expires.
(d) The removal of trees and any tree replacement plan are to be
implemented within one year from issuance of the permit. A permit
shall expire and shall no longer be in effect 12 months after the date
said permit was first granted, unless an extension of the twelve-month
period has been agreed upon between the permittee and the
enforcement officer in writing before the period expires.
(e) Permits shall not be transferrable.
§ T22-14 PRINCETON CODE § T22-15
BAO:1674
(a) If an application for a permit is denied or otherwise not granted in
whole, the applicant shall have a right to appeal the matter.
(b) The applicant may appeal to the shade tree commission or may choose
to appeal directly to the mayor and council. Should the applicant choose
to appeal to the shade tree commission and is not thereafter satisfied
with the shade tree commission's decision, the applicant shall have the
right to appeal to the mayor and council. An applicant who appeals the
enforcement officer's decision directly to the mayor and council waives
his or her right to appeal to the shade tree commission.
(1) Appeal to shade tree commission. An appeal to the shade tree
commission is taken by submitting written notice to the shade tree
commission within 10 days of receipt of a full or partial denial from
the enforcement officer. The applicant will be notified as to the date
and time when his or her matter will be heard by the shade tree
commission. The shade tree commission shall decide the matter
anew and in accordance with the standards set forth in subsections
(a)(3) a.-I of section 22-14 above. The shade tree commission shall
render its decision within 45 days of receipt of the written notice of
appeal. The failure of the shade tree commission to decide the
appeal within 45 days shall constitute reversal of the decision by
the enforcement officer. In any event, the applicant shall be notified
of the shade tree commission's action or failure to act by written
notice from the shade tree commission. If the applicant is not
satisfied with the shade tree commission's decision, then the
applicant shall have a right to appeal to the mayor and council as
set forth in paragraph (2) below.
(2) Appeal to mayor and council. An appeal to the mayor and council is
taken by submitting written notice to the clerk within 10 days of
receipt of a full or partial denial from the enforcement officer or
within 10 days of receipt of the shade tree commission's decision,
as the case may be. The applicant will be notified as to the date and
time when his or her matter will be heard by the mayor and council.
The mayor and council shall decide the matter anew and in
accordance with the standards set forth in subsections (a)(3) a.-I of
section 22-14 above. The mayor and council shall render their
decision within 45 days of receipt of the written notice of appeal.
The failure of the mayor and council to decide the appeal within 45
days shall constitute reversal of the decision by the enforcement
officer. In any event, the applicant shall be notified of the mayor
and council's action or failure to act by written notice from the
clerk. If the applicant is not satisfied with the mayor and council's
decision, then the applicant shall have a right to pursue an appeal
in a court of competent jurisdiction as permitted by law.
§ T22-15 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T22-15
BAO:1675

ARTICLE V
General Provisions
§ T22-16. Violations and penalties; informal resolution and formal
complaint procedures. [Ord. No. 2016-34]
A person who removes or destroys a tree without a required permit or
approval, or otherwise violates or causes to be violated any of the provisions
of this chapter, shall be subject to the following informal resolution and
formal complaint procedures, as applicable:
(a) Informal resolution. Any person who removes or destroys a tree without
a required permit or approval under this chapter shall have the
opportunity to resolve the matter prior to the issuance of a summons
and complaint. The following procedure shall apply:
(1) The enforcement officer shall offer a written recommendation
(using a form approved by the public works department) that is, in
his or her judgment, sufficient to resolve the matter, which shall
include either replacement of the removed or destroyed tree(s) or
the payment of a replacement fee to the Municipality for removal or
destruction of the tree(s), or both, in accordance with Schedule A
above, the Tree Replacement Schedule. In addition to the planting
of a replacement tree(s) and/or payment of a tree replacement
fee(s) in accordance with Schedule A, there shall also be required
the payment of an administrative service fee, which shall be
charged per hour based on the anticipated staff time in
investigating and resolving the matter, and which may include site
visits and analysis, supervisory services and/or clerical services.
The hourly rate shall be the hourly wage of the employee
conducting the site visit(s) and analysis, supervisory services and/
or clerical services as set by the council by resolution from year to
year. The hourly wage of salaried personnel shall be calculated by
dividing the employee's annual salary as set by the council by
resolution by 26 (weeks) and then dividing that biweekly pay by the
number of hours worked in a biweekly period. The tree
replacement and service fees shall be paid into the Princeton Shade
Tree Trust Reserve.
(2) The person shall have 10 days following receipt of the enforcement
officer's written recommendation to accept said recommendation
in writing. If the person accepts the enforcement officer's
recommendation in writing within the ten-day period, then any
agreed-upon tree replacement or payment of a tree replacement
fee, and payment of the service fee, shall be completed within 10
days of written acceptance of the enforcement officer's
recommendation. If not completed within this ten-day period, then
the enforcement officer shall have the authority to cause the
issuance of a summons and complaint returnable in the Princeton
municipal court.
§ T22-16 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T22-16
BAO:1677
§ T22-17. Annual report. [Ord. No. 2016-34]
The enforcement officer shall make an annual report to the shade tree
commission, which shall then report to the mayor and council, as to permits
granted and denied in each calendar year pursuant to this article. Said
report shall also include data concerning the quantity of complaints
resolved, fees and assessments collected and disbursements from the
Princeton Shade Tree Trust Reserve. Such report shall be submitted by
February 1 of each year as to the preceding year's activities.
§ T22-18. Severance. [Ord. No. 2016-34]
In the event that any portion of this chapter, or the application of this
chapter to any specific situation, shall be declared invalid, such declaration
(3) If the person does not accept the enforcement officer's
recommendation, then during the initial ten-day period the person
may request, in writing, that the shade tree commission review the
enforcement officer's recommendation. If such request is timely
submitted to the enforcement officer, then the person shall have
the opportunity to bring the matter before the shade tree
commission during its next regularly scheduled meeting. The shade
tree commission shall have 30 days after said meeting to issue its
recommendation on the matter, or until and including its following
regularly scheduled meeting, whichever occurs first. The person
seeking such review shall have 10 days after receipt of the shade
tree commission's recommendation to advise the shade tree
commission and enforcement officer in writing as to whether he or
she accepts the shade tree commission's recommendation. Any
agreed-upon tree replacement or payment of a tree replacement
fee, and payment of the service fee, shall be completed within 10
days of written acceptance of the shade tree commission
recommendation. If not completed within this ten-day period, the
enforcement officer shall have the authority to cause the issuance
of a summons and complaint returnable in the Princeton municipal
court.
(4) If the person does not accept the enforcement officer's initial
recommendation or the shade tree commission's recommendation
within the applicable periods set forth above, then the enforcement
officer shall have the authority to cause the issuance of a summons
and complaint returnable in the Princeton municipal court.
(b) Adjudication of complaints in municipal court. A person violating this
chapter, who has not otherwise resolved the matter as set forth above in
subsection (a) of this section, shall be subject to the penalties set forth
in section 1-6 of this Code. In addition, the court may order restitution
(appraised value) and/or replacement of the tree or trees illegally
removed or destroyed. Each tree removed or destroyed on the same lot
in violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate violation.
§ T22-16 PRINCETON CODE § T22-18
BAO:1678
shall not, in any manner, prejudice the enforcement of the remaining
provisions, or the enforcement of this chapter in other situations.
§ T22-18 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T22-18
BAO:1679

ARTICLE VI
Contractor Registration
§ T22-19. Registration requirements. [Ord. No. 2016-34]
(a) No person shall engage in tree pruning, removal and/or repair in the
Municipality for hire without first registering with the enforcement
officer, on forms to be supplied by said enforcement officer. Completed
registration forms shall become public records.
(b) The purpose of this registration requirement is to ensure that persons
engaged in tree pruning, removal and/or repair in the Municipality for
hire are cognizant of the Municipality's tree ordinances and other
applicable ordinances, laws and regulations.
(c) At the time of registration, applicants shall certify that they have
received a copy of and will comply with the Municipality's tree
ordinances.
(d) The Municipality makes no guarantee or representation regarding the
fitness, knowledge or qualification of any person that is registered by
the Municipality to engage in tree pruning, removal and/or repair for
hire.
(e) Every registration shall be issued and renewed on an annual basis,
effective January 1 of each year, upon payment of an annual fee to the
enforcement officer in the amount of $50.
(f) No registration shall be required of any owner of real property in the
Municipality who shall personally perform activities otherwise
requiring a registration; except that all such work must otherwise
comply with the Municipality's tree ordinances.
(g) The mayor and council may, upon recommendation of the director of
infrastructure and operations, or his or her designee, after notice and
an opportunity for a hearing, suspend or revoke any registration for
violation of law (including but not limited to wage theft laws) or related
Municipal ordinances, or for good cause, which is shown to be
prejudicial to the public health, safety or welfare. When the director of
infrastructure and operations, or his or her designee, has reasonable
cause or belief that an emergency affecting the public health, safety or
welfare so requires, said director (or designee) may temporarily
suspend any registration for a period not to exceed one week, until the
mayor and council can be convened to consider said suspension.
(h) Applicants shall be advised at the time of registration that they are
required to dispose of all trees for which a permit of removal is granted
pursuant to section 22-14 in accordance with then current industry
standards of proper disposal for said trees.
(i) Any person who violates this section shall be subject to the penalties set
forth in section 22-16 above.
§ T22-19 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T22-19
BAO:1681
(j) As used in this article, "wage theft" shall mean having been found guilty,
liable or responsible in any judicial or administrative proceeding of
committing a violation of the Federal Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938,
29 U.S.C.A. § 201 et seq., the New Jersey Wage and Hour Law, N.J.S.A.
34:11-56a. et seq., the New Jersey State Wage Payment Law, N.J.S.A.
34:11-4.1 et seq. or N.J.S.A. 2C:40A-2 (violation of contract to pay
employees).
§ T22-19 PRINCETON CODE § T22-19
BAO:1682
ARTICLE VII
Tree Protection on Construction Sites
§ T22-20. Tree protection and tree protection zones on construction
sites. [Ord. No. 2016-34]
(a) As used in this article, reference to "construction site" or "site" shall
refer to any real property upon which any person (referred to herein as
a "contractor") proposes to or does engage in the construction,
reconstruction or demolition of any building, structure or other
improvement including landscaping located upon said real property.
(b) Contractors shall comply with the provisions of this chapter on site
during construction.
(c) Contractors shall safeguard areas referred to herein as "tree protection
zones" on the site during construction. The phrase "tree protection
zone" is defined in section 22-2 above.
(1) No contractor shall be permitted to place or maintain, or cause to
be placed or maintained, in or upon a tree protection zone, any
stone, cement, sidewalk, mortar, building material, impervious
material, dumpster or roll-off container, construction or storage
trailer, portable toilet or other material, item or substance that
shall impede or prevent the free access of water, air or fertilizer to
the roots of any tree. No contractor shall disturb the soil within a
tree protection zone.
(2) A contractor shall be required to use fencing to protect areas
identified as tree protection zones for every tree on site the
removal or destruction of which is regulated under this chapter and
for which the contractor has not received a permit allowing its
removal or destruction.
(3) The fence required by this section shall be a four-foot tall woodenslat
snow fence with five-strand metal wire installed with metal
posts at intervals of six feet.
§ T22-20 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § T22-20
BAO:1683
Chapter T23
BOARD OF HEALTH
Chapter T24
(RESERVED)
Chapter T25
(RESERVED)
Chapter T26
(RESERVED)
Chapter T27
(RESERVED)
Chapter T28
(RESERVED)
Chapter T29
(RESERVED)
Chapter T30
(RESERVED)
Chapter TDL
TOWNSHIP DISPOSITION LIST
§ TDL-1. Township Disposition of Legislation
Ord. No. Code Sections
91-13 Not Codified
91-14, § 1 15-8
§ 2 15-9
91-15, § 1 18-8.2(a)-(c)
91-16 Not Codified
§ T22-20 PRINCETON CODE § TDL-1
BAO:1684
Ord. No. Code Sections
91-17, § 1 17-7 — 17-15.4
91-18 Not Codified
91-19 Not Codified
91-20 Not Codified
91-21 Not Codified
91-22 Not Codified
91-23 Not Codified
91-24 Not Codified
91-25 Not Codified
91-26, § 1 10B-133
91-27, § 1 18-20
91-28 Not Codified
91-29 Not Codified
91-30, § 1 5A.1-7
§ 2 8-5.1.7
§ 3 10-34.1
91-31 § 1 11-23.14 — 11.23.17
§ 2 11-23.9.1
§ 2 11-23.13
91-32, § 1 13-6, 13-7
91-33, § 1 17-6.2 — 17.6-4
91-34, § 1 11-5.1
91-35 Not Codified
92-1 Not Codified
92-2 21-5
92-3, § 1 11-47 — 11-53
92-4 Not Codified
92-5 Not Codified
92-6, § 1 18-22
92-7, § 1 10B-36
§ 2 10B-55
92-8, § 1 5A.1-7
92-9, § 1 13-10.2(c), (cc)
92-10, § 1 7-3 — 7-9
§ TDL-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § TDL-1
BAO:1685
Ord. No. Code Sections
92-11 10B-258
92-12 Not Codified
92-13 18-22
92-14 18-36(l)
92-15 Not Codified
92-16 Not Codified
92-17 Not Codified
92-18 Not Codified
92-19 Not Codified
92-20 Not Codified
92-21 Not Codified
92-22 Not Codified
92-23, § 1 10A-1
§ 2 10A-2
§ 3 10A-3
92-24, § 1 5A.1-7(b)(1)f
92-25, § 1 13-10.2(c), (cc), (ccc)
92-26, § 1 11-11.1
§ 2 11-23.1.2
§ 3 11-54, 11-55
§ 4 11-38.1
§ 5 11-4
92-27, § 1 10B-242
§ 2 10B-270.1
92-28, § 1 10B-246
§ 2 10B-276.1
§ 3 10B-270(a)
92-29 Not Codified
92-30, § 1 17-18
§ 2 17-18(b)(5)
§ 3 17-18(b)(10), (11), (12), (13)
§ 4 17-18(c)
§ 5 17-19
§ 6 17-22
§ TDL-1 PRINCETON CODE § TDL-1
BAO:1686
Ord. No. Code Sections
§ 7 17-23
92-31, § 1 18-8.2(a)
92-32, § 1 10B-36
92-33, § 1 10B-2
§ 2 10B-242
§ 3 10B-272.4(d)
92-34, § 1 10B-242
92-35 Not Codified
92-36 Not Codified
92-37, § 1 10B-192(a), (b)
§ 2 10B-192.1
§ 3 10B-193(a)
§ 4 10B-240.4 — 10B-240.13
§ 5 10B-242
§ 6 10B-246
§ 7 10B-253(c)
§ 8 10B-263.2
§ 9 10B-272.10 — 10B-272.15
§ 10 10B-320
93-1, § 1 3-18(b)(1)c
93-2, § 1 10B-2
§ 2 10B-41.1
93-3, § 1 3-18(b)(1)c
93-4, § 1 11-37.1
§ 2 11-12
93-5, § 1 15-5
93-6, § 1 10A-1 — 10A-6
93-7, § 1 19-32
93-8, § 1 5A.1-12
93-9 Not Codified
93-10, § 1 10B-340 — 10B-341
93-11, § 1 10B-350(a)(2)c
§ 2 10B-350(c)(3), (d)
93-12 Not Codified
§ TDL-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § TDL-1
BAO:1687
Ord. No. Code Sections
93-13 Not Codified
93-14, § 1 6-8
§ 2 6-9
§ 3 6-10
93-15, § 1 18-22
§ 2 18-25
93-16, § 1 10B-340.3
93-17 Not Codified
93-18 Not Codified
93-19, § 1 10B-36(b)
§ 2 10B-246
§ 3 10B-288(b), (c)
§ 4 10B-304 — 10B-310
93-20, § 1 11-38.1
93-21, § 1 10B-4
93-22 Not Codified
93-23 Not Codified
93-24, § 1 11-2(a)
§ 2 11-2(b)
93-25, § 1 2A-5
§ 2 2A-9
93-26, § 1 2-54.1
93-27, § 1 6-3
§ 2 6-3.1
93-28, § 1 5AA-1 — 5AA-22
93-29, § 1 11-19.4 — 11-19.7
93-30, § 1 19-2
93-31, § 1 8-5.19
94-1, § 1 11-52
§ 2 11-19.3
§ 3 11-19.2
94-2, § 1 10B-254
94-3 Not codified
94-4 Not codified
§ TDL-1 PRINCETON CODE § TDL-1
BAO:1688
Ord. No. Code Sections
94-5, § 1 5B-1–5B-6
94-6, § 1 5A-1.12
94-7, § 1 2-48.1–2-52.1
94-8, § 1 10B-136.1–10B-136.2
94-9, § 1 10B-241
94-10, § 1 10B-2
§ 2 10B-205
§ 3 10B-241
§ 4 10B-319.1, 10B-319.2
94-11, § 1 10B-226 (c)
§ 2 10B-226 (p)
94-12, § 1 13-10.2 (cc), (ccc)
§ 2 13-10.3b
94-13, § 1 10B-191(d)
§ 2 10B-8.1
94-14, § 1 17-22
94-15 Not Codified
94-16, § 1 5A.1-7
94-17, § 1 18-22
94-18 Not Codified
94-19, § 1 10B-241
§ 2 10B-272.20 — 10B-272.25
§ 3 10B-304
§ 4 10B-320
94-20, § 1 6-10
94-21 Not Codified
94-22, § 1 10B-241
§ 2 10B-272.26 — 10B-272.29
§ 3 10B-320
94-23 Not Codified
94-24, § 1 2-54.1
94-25, § 1 14A-3
94-26 Not Codified
94-27 Not Codified
§ TDL-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § TDL-1
BAO:1689
Ord. No. Code Sections
94-28 Not Codified
95-1 Not Codified
95-2 Not Codified
95-3 Not Codified
95-4, § 1 10-14(a)
95-5, § 1 10B-241
§ 2 10B-272.30 — 10B-272.31
§ 3 10B-32O
95-6, § 1 11-19.4 — 11-19.8
95-7, § 1 5AAA-1 — 5AAA-9
95-8, § 1 10-1
§ 2 10-2
95-9, § 1 5A-1.4
95-10 Not Codified
95-11, § 1 2-54.2
§ 2 2-54
95-12 Not Codified
95-13 Not Codified
95-14, § 1 8-1 — 8-5
95-15 Not Codified
95-16, § 1 19-6
§ 2 19-7
§ 3 19-8
§ 4 19-10
§ 5 19-11
§ 6 19-12
95-17, § 1 11-2(a)
§ 2 11-2(e)
§ 3 11-5.1
§ 4 11-12
§ 5 11-45
95-18, § 1 10B-340 — 10B-340.10
95-19, § 1 5A-1.7(b), (2), (3), (4)
95-20, § 1 10B-191.2
§ TDL-1 PRINCETON CODE § TDL-1
BAO:1690
Ord. No. Code Sections
95-21 Not Codified
95-22 Not Codified
95-23, § 1 10-1 — 10-33
§ 2 10-34 — 10-42
95-24, § 1 10-4(e)(3)
95-25, § 1 8-5.1.4
95-26, § 1 10B-257(a)
95-27, § 1 6-5
§ 2 6-5.1
95-28 Not Codified
95-29, § 1 11-23.6.1
§ 2 11-23.6.2
95-30, § 1 11-56 — 11-63
95-31 Not Codified
95-32, § 1 16-13(c)(1)
95-33, § 1 10B-257
95-34 § 1 11-11
96-1 § 1 10B-348(a)-(c)
96-2 Not Codified
96-3 Not Codified
96-4, § 1 18-22
96-5 Not Codified
96-6 Not Codified
96-7 5A.1-1
96-8 Not Codified
96-9 Not Codified
96-10 Not Codified
96-11, § 1 2-54.2(p)
96-12, § 1 10B-340.1
§ 2 10B-340.3
§ 3 10B-340.4
§ 4 10B-340.5
96-13, § 1 13-1
96-14, § 1 11-11.1
§ TDL-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § TDL-1
BAO:1691
Ord. No. Code Sections
96-15, § 1 11-11
96-16, § 1 Not Codified
96-17, § 1 5A.1-12
96-18 10B-241, 10B-255, 10B-272.40 — 10B-272.44,
10B-320
96-19 10B-360 — 10B-364
§ 2 10B-242
§ 3 10B-244
96-20 10B-365, 10B-366
§ 2 10B-242
§ 3 10B-244
96-21 Not Codified
96-22, § 1 14A-3(a)
96-23, § 1 11-23.9.1
96-24, § 1 10-13A
96-25, § 1 11-2(a)
§ 2 11-2(f)
97-1, § 1 2-60–2-63
97-2, § 1 10B-241
§ 2 10B-330
97-3, § 1 14A4(f)
§ 2 14A-4(h)
97-4 Not Codified
97-5 Not Codified
97-6 Not Codified
97-7 10B-23
97-8 18-49–18-52
97-9, § 1 2-54.2 (q) — (s)
97-10, § 1 Not Codified
§ 2 10B-337, 10B-350, 10B-350A
97-11, § 1 5A-1.7(g)
97-12 Not Codified
97-13 Not Codified
97-14 Not Codified
§ TDL-1 PRINCETON CODE § TDL-1
BAO:1692
Ord. No. Code Sections
97-15 Not Codified
97-16, § 1 10B-337(g)
97-17, § 1 11-6
97-18 Not Codified
97-19, § 1 10B-205
§ 2 10B-206
97-20, § 1 10B-36
§ 2 10B-157
§ 3 10B-158
§ 4 10B-159
§ 5 10B-206.1
§ 6 10B-207.1
§ 7 10B-230
97-21, § 1 10B-27.1
§ 2 10B-27.3(h), (i)
§ 3 10B-27.4
§ 4 10B-27.5
§ 5 10B-41.4
97-22 Not Codified
97-23, § 1 10B-226(c)
§ 2 10B-317.1
97-24 Not Codified
98-1 Not Codified
98-2 Not Codified
98-3 Not Codified
98-4, § 1 6-3
§ 2 6-3.1
§ 3 6-7
§ 4 6-8
§ 5 6-10
98-5, § 1 2-69 — 2-73
§ 2 12-6
98-6, § 1 19-32
98-7 Not Codified
§ TDL-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § TDL-1
BAO:1693
Ord. No. Code Sections
98-8 Not Codified
98-9 Not Codified
98-10 Not Codified
98-11, § 1 10-3
§ 2 10-4
98-12, § 1 3 — 10B-85
98-13, § 1 12-1 — 12-11
98-14, § 1 18-22(a)
98-15, § 1 5A.1-7(b)(3)
98-16, § 1 2-52.2
98-17, § 1 22-1 — 22-4
§ 2 22-5 — 22-15
98-18, § 1 10A-1 — 10A-6
98-19, § 1 10B-76 — 10B-83
98-20, § 1 10B-272.50 — 10B-272.60
§ 2 10B-320(b), (q)
98-21, § 1 11-6(b)
98-22 Not Codified
98-23 Not Codified
98-24 Not Codified
98-25, § 1 11-2(e)
98-26 Not Codified
98-27, § 1 13-1a
98-28 Not Codified
98-29 Not Codified
98-30, § 1 2-54.1
§ 2 2-54.2
98-31, § 1 10-29
§ 2 10-30
§ 3 10-31
98-32, Not Codified
98-33, § 1 10B-272.6
§ 2 10B-272.9
98-34, § 1 18-37 — 18-42
§ TDL-1 PRINCETON CODE § TDL-1
BAO:1694
Ord. No. Code Sections
§ 2 18-37 — 18-42
98-35, § 1 11-12
98-36, § 1 11-5
98-37, § 1 18-22
98-38, § 1 2-74 — 2-80
99-1, § 1 11-2(a)
99-2 Not Codified
99-3 2-81 — 2-83
99-4 14-1 — 14-13.2
99-5 Not Codified
99-6 Not Codified
99-7 2-83
99-8 Not Codified
99-9 Not Codified
99-10 Not Codified
99-11 Not Codified
99-12 18B-7 — 18B-12
99-13 11-2(e), (f), 11-3.1
99-14, § 2 11-2(e)
99-15 19-4
99-16 Not Codified
99-17, § 1 11-17.1
99-18, § 1 11-6(b)
99-19 2-53.3
99-20, § 1 11-2(e)
§ 2 11-2(f)
99-21 Not Codified
2000-1, § 1 15-11
2000-2 Not Codified
2000-3 Not Codified
2000-4 11A-1 — 11A-28
2000-5 Not Codified
2000-6 Not Codified
2000-7, § 1 6-8
§ TDL-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § TDL-1
BAO:1695
Ord. No. Code Sections
§ 2 6-9
§ 3 6-9.1
§ 4 6-9.2
§ 5 6-9.3
§ 6 6-9.4
§ 7 6-9.5
§ 8 6-9.6
§ 9 6-9.7
§ 10 6-9.8
§ 11 6-9.9
§ 12 6-9.10
§ 13 6-9.11
§ 14 6-9.12
§ 15 6-9.13
§ 16 6-9.14
§ 17 6-9.15
§ 18 6-9.16
§ 19 6-9.17
§ 20 6-10
§ 21 6-13
§ 22 6-14
2000-8 Not Codified
2000-9 Not Codified
2000-10, § 1 117-7
2000-11 Not Codified
2000-12 Not Codified
2000-13 Not Codified
2000-14, § 1 111-4
2000-15, § 1 11-2(b)
§ 2 11-2(a)
2000-16, § 1 111-2(a)
§ 2 111-2(b)
2000-17, § 1 111-2(e)
2000-18 Not Codified
§ TDL-1 PRINCETON CODE § TDL-1
BAO:1696
Ord. No. Code Sections
2000-19 Not Codified
2000-20, § 1 13-2, 13-3, 13-4
2000-21 Not Codified
2001-1, § 1 11-12
2001-2, § 1 19-32
2001-3 Not Codified
2001-4, § 4 11-42
2001-5 Not Codified
2001-6 Not Codified
2001-7 Not Codified
2001-8 Not Codified
2001-9, § 1 18-22
2001-10 Not Codified
2001-11 Not Codified
2001-5 Not Codified
2001-12, § 1 11-23.7
§ 2 11-23.8
§ 3 11-23.8.1
§ 4 11-23.9
§ 5 11-23.9.1
§ 6 11-23.9.2
§ 7 11-23.14
§ 8 11-23.15
§ 9 11-23.16
§ 10 11-23.16.1
§ 11 11-23.16.2
§ 12 11-23.17
§ 13 11-23.18.1
§ 14 11-23.18.2
§ 15 11-23.18.3
§ 16 11-23.18.4
§ 17 11-23.18.5
§ 18 11-23.18.6
§ 19 11-23.18.7
§ TDL-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § TDL-1
BAO:1697
Ord. No. Code Sections
§ 20 11-23.18.8
§ 21 11-23.18.9
§ 22 11-23.18.10
2001-13 Not Codified
2001-14, § 1 11-12
2001-15 Not Codified
2001-16, § 1 11-2(b)
§ 2 11-2(a)
2001-17, § 1 11-12
§ 2 11-17
§ 3 11-19
§ 4 11-17.2
§ 5 11-17.3
§ 6 11-17
2001-18 Not Codified
2001-19, § 1 11-23.2.1
§ 2 11-21
2001-20, § 1 16-4
§ 2 6-8.1
§ 3 6-8.2
§ 4 6-8.3
§ 5 6-8.4
§ 6 6-8.5
§ 7 6-14
§ 8 13-1a
§ 9 16-13
2001-21 Not Codified
2001-22, § 1 8-5.1, 8-5.1.2, 8-5.1.3, 8-5.1.6, 8-5.1.7
2001-23 Not Codified
2001-24, § 1 11-1.1(a)
2001-25, § 1 13-2
2001-26 Not Codified
2001-27 Not Codified
2001-28, § 1 10B-244
§ TDL-1 PRINCETON CODE § TDL-1
BAO:1698
Ord. No. Code Sections
§ 2 10B-242
§ 3 10B-272.61 — 10B-272.64
2001-29, § 1 10B-244
§ 2 10B-242
§ 3 10B-272.65 — 10B-272.68
2001-30, § 1 11-2(e)
§ 2 11-6(b)
2002-1 Not Codified
2002-2, § 1 11-50(a), 11-52
§ 2 11-2(e)
§ 3 11-12
2002-3, § 1 14A-8
2002-4, § 1 1-6
2002-5 Not Codified
2002-6, § 1 10B-272.64(c)
§ 2 10B-272.68(c)
2002-7, § 1 11-54
§ 2 11-55
2002-8, § 1 10B-272.69
§ 2 10B-272.70
§ 3 10B-320
2002-9 Not Codified
2002-10, § 1 13-7(i)
2002-11, § 1 13-11
§ 2 13-12
2002-12, § 1 3-18(b)(1)c
2002-13, § 1 11-12
2002-14 Omitted
2002-15 Omitted
2002-16 Omitted
2002-17, § 1 11-12
§ 2 11-12
2002-18 Omitted
2002-19, § 1 6-9.5
§ TDL-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § TDL-1
BAO:1699
Ord. No. Code Sections
2002-20, § 1 5A.1-7(aa)
§ 2 5A.1-7(b)(2)l
§ 3 5A.1-7(b)(3)a
§ 4 5A.1-7(b)(4)a
§ 5 5A.1-7(g)
§ 6 5-29(e),(f)
2002-21 Omitted
2002-22, § 1 13-15
§ 2 13-16
§ 3 13-17
§ 4 13-18
§ 5 13-19
§ 6 13-20
2002-23, § 1 10B-256
2002-24, § 1 17A-1
§ 2 17A-2
2002-25 Omitted
2002-26, § 1 2-54, 2-54.1, 2-54.2
2003-1, § 1 11-5.2
2003-2, § 1 10B-244
§ 2 10B-365, 10B-366
2003-3, § 1 11-12
§ 2 11-23.1
2003-4 Omitted
2003-5, § 1 10B-242
§ 2 10B-272.61
§ 3 10B-272.62
§ 4 10B-272.64
§ 5 10B-272.68(a)
2003-6 § 1 5A.1-7(b)(1)(a), (b), (e)
§ 2 5A.1-7(b)(1),c
§ 3 5A.7-1(b)(3)a, 9, 10
2003-7, § 1 Amend footnote for chapter title
§ 2 15-1
§ TDL-1 PRINCETON CODE § TDL-1
BAO:1700
Ord. No. Code Sections
§ 3 15-2
§ 4 15-3
§ 5 15-4
§ 6 15-5
§ 7 15-6
§ 8 15-7
§ 9 15-8
§ 10 15-9
§ 11 15-10
2003-8 Omitted
2003-9 Omitted
2003-10 Omitted
2003-11, § 1 18-18.1
2003-12 5AA-1 — 5AA-23
App. A, App. B
2003-13 Omitted
2003-14, § 1 5A (b), (1)
2003-15, § 1 13-2
2003-16, § 1 19-32
2003-17 Omitted
2003-18, § 1 16-13(c),(3)
§ 2 16-15
2003-19 Omitted
2003-20 Omitted
2003-21 5AA-5, 5AA-9(c)
2003-22 Omitted
2003-23, § 1 11-11.1(c)
§ 2 11-38.1(b)
§ 3 11-48
2003-24, § 1 22-1
§ 2 22-5
§ 3 22-6
§ 4 22-8
§ 5 22-9
§ TDL-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § TDL-1
BAO:1701
Ord. No. Code Sections
§ 6 22-10
§ 7 22-11
§ 8 22-12
§ 9 22-13
§ 10 22-16
§ 11 2-23, 2-24
2003-25, § 1 11-6(b)
2003-26 Omitted
2004-1, § 1 3-4
2004-2 Omitted
2004-3, § 1 11-12, 11-19.3.1
2004-4 Omitted
2004-5 Omitted
2004-6 Omitted
2004-7 Omitted
2004-8, § 1 5A.1-10
2004-9, § 1 11-31.8
§ 2 11-31.9
§ 10 11-31.10
2004-10 Omitted
2004-11, § 1 10B-272.51
§ 2 10B-272.54
§ 3 10B-272.55
§ 4 10B-272.56
§ 5 10B-272.57
2004-12, § 1 10B-242
2004-13 Omitted
2004-14 11-11.1
2004-15, § 1 10B-272.10 — 10B-272.12
2004-16, § 1 11-19.9 — 11-19.9.6
§ 2 11-8.1
§ 3 11-11
§ 4 11-17.1
§ 5 11-17.2
§ TDL-1 PRINCETON CODE § TDL-1
BAO:1702
Ord. No. Code Sections
2004-17 Omit
2004-18, § 1 11-11.1
2004-19, § 1 5A-1.7(b)(4)a
2004-20 Omit
2004-21, § 1 11-3.1
2004-22 6-2.1, 6-2.2
2005-1, § 1 10B-36(a)
2005-2 Omit
2005-3 Omit
2005-4, § 1 11-6(b)
2005-5 Omit
2005-6, § 1 10B-340.3
2005-7 Omit
2005-8 Omit
2005-9 Omit
2005-10 Omit
2005-11 Omit
2005-12 Omit
2005-13, § 1 19-1
§ 2 19-1.1 — 19-1.2
§ 3 19-1.3 — 19-1.7
§ 4 17-3
§ 5 17-6
§ 6 10C-1 — 10C-6
2005-14, § 1 16-20
2005-15 Omit
2005-16 Omit
2005-17 Omit
2005-18, § 1 3-5
2005-19, § 1 19-1.5(b), 19-1.6(b),(c)
Schedule B
2005-20, § 1 22-1
§ 2 22-8
2005-21, § 1 18-22(a)
§ TDL-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § TDL-1
BAO:1703
Ord. No. Code Sections
2005-22, § 1 8-5.1.3.1–8-5.1.3.3
§ 2 8-5.1.4
§ 3 8-5.1.7.1
§ 4 8-5.1.7.2
2005-23 Omit
2005-24 Omit
2005-25 Omit
2005-26 Omit
2005-27 Preamble 15-12
§ 1 15-13
§ 2 15-14
§ 3 15-15
§ 4 15-16
§ 5 15-17
§ 6 15-18
§ 7 15-19
§ 8 15-20
§ 9 15-21
§ 10 15-22
2005-28 Omit
2005-29 Omit
2005-30 Omit
2005-31 Omit
2005-32 Omit
2005-33 Omit
2005-34, § 1 9A-2
§ 2 9A-4.2
§ 3 9A-4.4-2
2005-35, § 1 2-54.1(a)
2005-36 Omit
2005-37, § 1 2A-9(b),(c),(d),(e)
2005-38, § 1 11-2(b)
2205-39, § 1 10B-36(a)
2205-40, § 2 5A.1-13–5A.1-18
§ TDL-1 PRINCETON CODE § TDL-1
BAO:1704
Ord. No. Code Sections
2005-41, § 1 16-14(aa)
§ 2 16-15.1
2005-42, § 1 10B-241
§ 2 10B-246.1
2006-1 Omit
2006-2 Omit
2006-3 Omit
2006-4 1-6
2006-5 10-36(a)
2006-6, § 1 10B-351
2006-7, § 1 6-1.1
§ 2 6-6.1
§ 3 6-7.1
§ 4 6-5.1
§ 5 6-2.5
§ 6 6-14
2006-8, § 1 5AAA-1
§ 2 5AAA-2
§ 3 5AAA-3
§ 4 5AAA-3.1
§ 5 5AAA-4
§ 6 5AAA-5
§ 7 5AAA-6
§ 8 5AAA-7
§ 9 5AAA-8
§ 10 5AAA-9
2006-9 10B-227
2006-10, § 1 10B-36(a)
2006-11, § 2 Declared Invalid
2006-12 Omit
2006-13 Omit
2006-14 Omit
2006-15 Omit
2006-16, § 1 10B-367 — 10B-372
§ TDL-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § TDL-1
BAO:1705
Ord. No. Code Sections
2006-18, § 1 18-22(a)
2006-19 Omit
2006-20 Omit
2006-21 Omit
2006-22 Omit
2006-23, § 1 11-12
2006-24 11-45
2006-25 Omit
2006-26, § 1 2-84 — 2-86
2006-27 Omit
2006-28, § 1 5B-5
2006-29, § 1 11-45
§ 2 11-3.1
§ 3 11-23.10
§ 4 11-23.12
2006-30, § 1 8-5.18.1
2006-31, § 1 13-5, 13-5.1
2006-32 Omit
2006-33 Omit
2006-34 Omit
2006-35, § 1 10B-246
§ 2 10B-272.1 — 10B-272.3
§ 3 10B-226.1
§ 4
§ 5 10B-272.71, 10B-272.71.1
2006-36 Omit
2006-37, § 1 11-39
2007-1, § 1 10B-36
2007-2 Omit
2007-3 Omit
2007-4, § 1 10B-242
§ 2 10B-272.71.1
2007-5 11-61.1
2007-6, § 1 11-2(e)
§ TDL-1 PRINCETON CODE § TDL-1
BAO:1706
Ord. No. Code Sections
2007-7 Omit
2007-8, § 1 11-2(e)
§ 2 11-2(f)
§ 3 11-2(f)
§ 4 11-2(e)
2007-9, § 1 11-5
2007-10 Omit
2007-11, § 1 2-87 — 2-92
2007-12, § 1 4-13 — 4-19
2007-13 Omit
2007-14 Omit
2007-15 Omit
2007-16 Omit
2007-17, § 1 11-5
§ 2 11-5.2
2007-18 Omit
2007-19 Omit
2007-20, § 1 10B-333.1
2007-21, § 1 6-9.13
2007-22 Omit
2007-23 Omit
2007-24, § 1 11-19
§ 2 11-12
2007-25 Omit
2007-26 Omit
2007-27, § 1 11-45
2008-1, § 1 10B-272.65 — 10B-272.68
2008-2 Omit
2008-3 Omit
2008-4 Omit
2008-5, § 1 10-34 — 10-42
2008-6 Omit
2008-7 Omit
2008-8 Omit
§ TDL-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § TDL-1
BAO:1707
Ord. No. Code Sections
2008-9 Omit
2008-10, § 1 11-12
2008-11, § 1 11-12, 11-18
§ 2 11-9
2008-12 Omit
2008-13, § 1 11-17.3
§ 2 11-17.4
2008-14, § 1 11-6.1
2008-15 Omit
2008-16 Omit
2008-17, § 1 11-7
2008-18, § 1 18-18.1(f)
2008-19 Omit
2008-20 Omit
2008-21 Omit
2008-22, § 1 16-10
§ 2 16-13(z)
§ 3 16-52.2
2008-23 Omit
2008-24, § 1 5A.1-7(e)
2008-25, § 1 10B-36
2008-26 Omit
2008-27, § 1 10B-211
2008-28, § 1 10B-317(c)
2008-29, § 1 11-2(e)
§ 2 11-6.2
2008-30, § 1 14A-09
§ 2 14A-10
§ 3 14A-11
§ 4 14A-12
§ 5 14A-13
§ 6 14A-14
2008-31, § 1 5A-1.7(b)
2009-1 Omit
§ TDL-1 PRINCETON CODE § TDL-1
BAO:1708
Ord. No. Code Sections
2009-2 Omit
2009-3 Omit
2009-4 Omit
2009-5 Omit
2009-6, § 1 11-2(a)
2009-7, § 1 11-30
§ 2 11-31.5.1
2009-8 Omit
2009-9, § 1 10B-333.1
2009-10, § 1 11-23.1
§ 2 11-8.1
2009-11, § 1 11-2(a)
§ 2 11-2(b)
§ 3 11-2(c)
2009-12, § 1 11-23.11.11–11-23.11.14
2009-13 Omit
2009-14 Omit
2009-15, § 1 6-4, 6-4.1
2009-16 Omit
2009-17 10B-36
2009-18, § 1 11-2(f)
§ 2 11-2(e)
2009-19 Omit
2009-20, § 1 14A-4(f)
§ 2 14A-5
2009-21 Omit
2009-22 Not codified
2009-23, § 1 11-2e
2009-24, § 1 10-33A
2009-25, § 1 2-24.1
§ 2 10B-2
§ 3 10B-158(c)(11)
§ 4 10B-207.1(c)
§ 5 10B-219.1
§ TDL-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § TDL-1
BAO:1709
Ord. No. Code Sections
§ 6 10B-226(b)
§ 7 10B-227A
§ 8 10B-230(c)
2009-26, § 1 5A.1-7, 5A.1-8
2009-27, § 1 8-5.1.3.3, 8-5.1.7, 8-5.1.7.1
2010-1, § 1 14-13(i)
2010-2 Not codified
2010-3 Not codified
2010-4, § 1 10B-340
2010-5, § 1 11-19.2.1
2010-6 Not codified
2010-7 Not codified
2010-8 Not codified
2010-9, § 1 17A-1
2010-10, § 1 11-64–11-73
2010-11, § 1 10B-256.1(c)
§ 2 10B-272.40(k)
§ 3 10B-320(h)
2010-12, § 1 10B-272.65–10B-272.68
2010-13 Not codified
2010-14 Not codified
2010-15, § 1 7-10
2010-16, § 1 13-1a
§ 2 13-5
2010-17, § 1 15-4
2010-18, § 1 19-2
2010-19 Not codified
2010-20, § 1 2-54(c)(1)
2010-21 Not codified
2010-22 Not codified
2010-23 Not codified
2010-24, § 1 11-56
§ 2 11-61
2010-25, § 1 11-12
§ TDL-1 PRINCETON CODE § TDL-1
BAO:1710
Ord. No. Code Sections
2010-26, § 1 10B-36
2010-27 Omit
2010-28, § 1 10B-27.3(j)
§ 2 10B-27.6
§ 3 10B-226(d)
§ 4 10B-272.4(b)(4)
§ 5 10B-272.4(c)(3)
§ 6 10B-272.5(d)
§ 7 10B-227A(b)(2)
2010-29 Omit
2010-30 Omit
2010-31, § 1 5A.1-7(b)(4)a
2010-32, § 1 10B-246.2
2010-33, § 1 10B-227.2(b)
2010-34 Omit
2010-35, § 1 10B-247.1
2010-36, § 1 17-6.2.1
2010-37, § 1 10-7
2010-38 Omit
2010-39, § 1 2-54(c)
§ 2 2-54.1(a)
2011-1, § 1 11-1.1
2011-2 Not codified
2011-3 Not codified
2011-4 Not codified
2011-5 Not codified
2011-6 Not codified
2011-7, § 1 13-21–13-21.5
2011-8 Not codified
2011-9 Not codified
2011-10 Not codified
2011-11 11-11.1
2011-12, § 1 8-5.1.1
§ 2 8.5.1.3.1
§ TDL-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § TDL-1
BAO:1711
Ord. No. Code Sections
§ 3 8.5.1.4
§ 4 8.5.1.5
§ 5 8.5.18.1(e)
2011-13 Omit
2011-14, § 1 11-2(b)
§ 2 11-2(a)
2011-15 Omit
2011-16, § 1 10B-244
§ 2 10B-263.3, 10B-263.4, 10B-263.5, 10B-263.6,
10B-263.7
§ 3 10B-263.3
2011-17, § 1 16-15.3
2011-18, § 1 10B-272.65
2012-1, § 1 21-2
§ 2 21-5
§ 3 21-6
2012-2, § 1 11-12
2012-3 Not codified
2012-4 Not codified
2012-5 Not codified
2012-6 Not codified
2012-7, § 1 22-6
§ 2 22-8
2012-8 Not codified
2012-9, § 1 11-12
2012-10 Not codified
2012-11 Not codified
2012-12 Not codified
2012-13 Not codified
2012-14 Not codified
2012-15 Not codified
2012-16 Not codified
§ TDL-1 PRINCETON CODE § TDL-1
BAO:1712
Ord. No. Adoption Description Supp. No.
2012-17 8-20-2012 Establish noise levels for
generators during power outages
between 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.,
Section 13-10.3a, Princeton
Township Code; repealed by
Princeton Ord. No. 2014-35
2012-18 9-10-2012 Bond, Special
2012-19 9-10-2012 Bond, Special
2012-20 11-19-2012 Emergency services provider
facility, Section 10B-272.72
2012-21 11-19-2012 Easement, Special
2012-22 12-27-2012 Amends agencies, boards and
commissions: Municipal Court of
Princeton, Section 2-93; Housing
Authority, Section 2-94;
Environmental Commission,
Section 2-95; Human Services
Commission, Section 2-96;
Princeton Public Library, Section
2-97; Board of Health, Section
2-98; Planning Board, Section
2-99; Site Plan Review Advisory
Board, Section 2-100; Construction
Board of Appeals, Section 2-101;
2012-23 12-27-2012 Amends miscellaneous fees: Alarm
system registration fees, 2-118;
Amusement license fees, 2-119;
Animal/dog license fees (per year),
2-120; Fire safety permit fees,
2-121; Government and police
records fees, 2-122; Housing
inspection fees, 2-123; Occupation
of right-of-way fees, 2-124;
Peddler, solicitor, transient
merchant license, 2-125; Street
and sidewalk opening fees, 2-126;
taxicabs and other vehicles for
hire, 2-127; Land use application
and escrow fees, 2-128
2012-24 12-27-2012 Amend Construction Code fees,
5A. 1-7
2013-1 1-28-2013 Municipal food waste recycling
registration fee, Section 2-129,
Princeton Township Code
§ TDL-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § TDL-1
BAO:1713
Ord. No. Adoption Description Supp. No.
2013-2 1-28-2013 Police extra duty pay, Section
2-130, Princeton Township Code
2013-3 2-25-2013 Animal/dog license fee, Section
2-120, Princeton Township Code
2013-4 4-1-2013 Green Development Information/
Checklist; Preliminary major
subdivision checklist, 10B-158;
Major site plan checklist, Section
10B-230, Princeton Township
Code; Preliminary major
subdivision checklist, Section
17A-162; Major site plan checklist,
17A-197 Princeton Borough Code
2013-5 4-1-2013 Historic Preservation Plan
application fee, Section 10B-36,
Princeton Township Code; Section
17A-36, Princeton Borough Code
2013-6 4-22-2013 Parking regulations for Community
Pool Parking Yard and Police
Department Parking Yard, Sections
11-23.8.1; 11-23.10, 11-23.11,
Princeton Township Code
2013-7 4-22-2013 Fire Prevention Code — Repeal
Section 14-11-14-13 Princeton
Borough Code; repeal Section 8-1
— 8-5.1.7.2 Princeton Township
Code; add new Sections 14-11 —
14-13 to Princeton Borough Code
2013-8 4-22-2013 Vacate right-of-way, Special
2013-9 4-22-2013 Refund bond, Special
2013-10 4-22-2013 Bond, Special
2013-11 5-28-2013 CAP, Special
2013-12 5-28-2013 Refund bond, Special
2013-13 5-28-2013 Sewer easement, Special
2013-14 5-28-2013 Handicapped parking, Section
11-61.1, Princeton Township Code
2013-15 5-28-2013 Right-of-way dedication, Special
2013-16 6-24-2013 No parking zone, Section 11-12,
Princeton Township Code
§ TDL-1 PRINCETON CODE § TDL-1
BAO:1714
Ord. No. Adoption Description Supp. No.
2013-17 6-24-2013 Rental housing registration repeal
Sections 16-1 — 16-32, Princeton
Borough Code; repeal Sections
10-1 — 10-15, Princeton Township
Code; add new Sections 16-1 —
16-32 to Princeton Borough Code
2013-18 6-24-2013 Easement, Special
2013-19 7-8-2013 Sewer service charges, Section
18-22, Princeton Township Code;
Section 34-30, Princeton Borough
Code
2013-20 7-22-2013 Bond, Special
2013-21 7-22-2013 Bond, Special
2013-22 7-22-2013 Salaries, Special
2013-23 8-26-2013 Bond, Special
2013-24 8-26-2013 Bond, Special
2013-25 9-9-2013 Authorize lease of Monument Hall,
Special
2013-26 9-23-2013 Police Department - Line of
authority - repeal Sections 26-3,
26-4 Princeton Borough Code;
repeal Section 15-4 Princeton
Township Code; add new Section
26-3 to Princeton Borough Code
2013-27 10-14-2013 Animal Control Advisory
Committee, Section 2-116,
Princeton Township Code
2013-28 10-28-2013 No parking certain hours, 11-11.3;
no parking zones, Section 11-12,
Princeton Township Code
2013-29 11-12-2013 Appropriation, Special
2013-30 12-9-2013 Sidewalk, curb and gutter repairs,
Section 28-13, Princeton Borough
Code; Chapter 19, Editor's Note,
Princeton Township Code
2013-31 12-9-2013 Bond, Special
§ TDL-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § TDL-1
BAO:1715
Ord. No. Adoption Description Supp. No.
2014-1 2-18-2014 Amends Princeton Borough Code
traffic-No stopping or standing; No
parking anytime; Metered onstreet
parking zones; Metered
parking yards; General permit
parking yards; Handicapped
parking-parking yards; Overnight
parking permits, Sections 19-17,
19-22, 19-24, 19-25, 19-28, 19-30,
19-31
2014-2 2-18-2014 Amends Princeton Township Code
traffic: Handicapped parking
zones, Section 11-11.1
2014-3 3-10-2014 Amends Princeton Borough Code
traffic: No parking anytime,
Section 19-22
2014-4 4-28-2014 CAP, Special
2014-5 4-28-2014 Bond, Special
2014-6 4-28-2014 Acceptance of deed for easement,
Special
2014-7 5-27-2014 Consolidates portions of Chapter I
of the Princeton Borough Code,
1974 by repealing Sections 1-1 —
1-7 and replacing in the Princeton
Borough Code new Sections 1-1 —
1-6 and 2-102 and repealing
Sections 1-1 — 1-6 in the Princeton
Township Code, 1968
§ TDL-1 PRINCETON CODE § TDL-1
BAO:1716
Ord. No. Adoption Description Supp. No.
2014-8 5-27-2014 Consolidates portions of Chapter 2
of the Princeton Borough Code,
1974 by repealing Sections 2-1 —
2-50 and the Princeton Township
Code, 1968 by repealing Sections
2-1 — 2-19.2; 2-43 — 2-53.2; 2-60
— 2-68; 2-74 — 2-80 and revising
the Princeton Borough Code as
follows: Article I Municipal
Governing Body; Article II
Municipal Departments and
Offices; Division 1 - Department of
Administration and Finance;
Division 2 - Municipal Attorney;
Division 3 - Municipal Prosecutor;
Municipal Public Defender;
Division 4 - Office of Municipal
Clerk; Division 5 - Division of
Finance; Division 6 - Dept. of
Engineering; Division 7 -Dept. of
Infrastructure and Operations
2014-9 5-27-2014 Parades - Repeal Chapter 24, add
new Chapter 24, Princeton
Borough Code
2014-10 5-27-2014 Pay-to-Play - repeal Sections Art.
XIX Sections 2-81 — 2-83 and Art.
XXI Sections 2-87 — 2-92 of the
Princeton Township Code 1976;
add Article XXI, Sections 2-87 —
2-93 to the Princeton Township
Code
2014-11 5-27-2014 Municipal Court - Repeal Section
2-66 and Chapter 20 of the Code of
the Borough of Princeton and
Section 2-93 and Chapter 12 and
Chapter 2 Article XVII (Sections
2-69 — 2-73) of the Princeton
Township Code and add new
Chapter 12, Municipal Court to the
Princeton Township Code
§ TDL-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § TDL-1
BAO:1717
Ord. No. Adoption Description Supp. No.
2014-12 5-27-2014 Peddling and soliciting - Repeal
Sections 25-1 — 25-38 and Section
2-98 of the Code of the Borough of
Princeton; repeal Sections 14-1 —
14-13.2 and amend Section 2-125;
fees of Princeton Township Code;
add new Chapter 14 - Peddling,
Soliciting and Related Activities to
the Princeton Township Code
2014-13 5-27-2014 Corner House - Repeal Sections
27A-1 — 27A-3 and 2-77 of the
Princeton Borough Code and
Sections 2-84 — 2-86 and 2-104 of
the Princeton Township Code; add
new Chapter 27A, Corner House to
the Princeton Borough Code
2014-14 5-27-2014 Hotel Usage Tax - Amend Chapter
15 A of the Princeton Borough
Code
2014-15 5-27-2014 Jogging - Repeal and replace
Princeton Township Code Chapter
10A.1
2014-16 5-27-2014 Princeton Public Library - Repeal
Chapter 18 and Section 2-70 of the
Princeton Borough Code and
Section 2-33 and 2-97 of the
Princeton Township Code; add
Chapter 18 Libraries to the
Princeton Borough Code
2014-17 5-27-2014 Environmental Commission -
Repeal Section 2-68 and Chapter
12 of the Princeton Borough Code
and Sections 2-95 and 2-31 —
2-32.6 of the Princeton Township
Code; add new Chapter 12 to the
Princeton Borough Code
2014-18 6-9-2014 Amend Princeton Borough Code
certificates of compliance
16-7(a)(1)
2014-19 6-23-2014 Amend Princeton Borough Code -
Traffic Sections 19-17, 19-22 and
19-24
2014-20 6-23-2014 Acquisition of property, Special
§ TDL-1 PRINCETON CODE § TDL-1
BAO:1718
Ord. No. Adoption Description Supp. No.
2014-21 7-14-2014 Landscape regulations - Repeal
Chapter 10C, Princeton Township
Code
2014-22 7-14-2014 Amend Environmental Commission
- Section 12-6 of the Princeton
Borough Code
2014-23 7-14-2014 Accept sanitary sewer easement,
Special
2014-24 7-14-2014 Bond, Special
2014-25 7-14-2014 Bond, Special
2014-26 7-21-2014 Repeal Section 2-83 — Shade Tree
Commission and Chapter 33 Trees
and Shrubs, Princeton Borough
Code; repeal Sections 2-23 — 2-25
and 2-110 — Shade Tree
Commission and Chapter 22 -
Trees and Shrubs - Princeton
Township Code; add new Chapter
22 - Trees and Shrubs - Princeton
Township Code
2014-27 7-28-2014 Repeal Yard Waste Collection - Art.
III - Chapter 15, Princeton
Borough Code; repeal Chapter 19
Art. 1A (except Schedules B&C)
Princeton Township Code; add new
Chapter 19 Art. 1A Leaf, branch
and log collection with Schedules
B and C now Schedules A and B of
the Princeton Township Code
2014-28 7-28-2014 Bond, Special
2014-29 7-28-2014 Amend No parking zones - Section
11-12, Princeton Township Code
2014-30 8-25-2014 Salaries, Special
2014-31 8-25-2014 Parking prohibited, Section 11-61,
Princeton Township Code
2014-32 8-25-2014 Vacate sewer line, Special
2014-33 8-25-2014 No parking zones, Section 19-22,
Princeton Borough Code
2014-34 8-25-2014 Bond, Special
§ TDL-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § TDL-1
BAO:1719
Ord. No. Adoption Description Supp. No.
2014-35 8-25-2014 Noise - Repeal Chapter 21 of the
Princeton Borough Code and
Sections 13- 101 — 13-10.4 of the
Princeton Township Code and
reenact Chapter 21 of the
Princeton Borough Code
2014-36 9-22-2014 Mid-block crosswalks, 19-5
Princeton Borough Code;
consolidates Section 11-5.1 of the
Princeton Township Code into the
Princeton Borough Code
2014-37 9-22-2014 Ban use of hydraulic fracturing
(fracking), 10B-254 of Princeton
Township Code; 17A-364 of the
Princeton Borough Code
2014-38 9-22-2014 Acquisition of property, Special
2014-39 10-13-2014 Amends Borough Code § 19-22, no
parking zones
2014-40 10-27-2014 Bond, Special
2014-41 10-27-2014 Repeals 2-79, Recreation Board;
Ch. 17, Joint Recreation Board; Ch.
24A, Parks and public plazasregulation
of conduct from
Borough Code; repeals 2-106,
Recreation Board; Ch. 16, Parks
and Recreation from Township
Code; add Ch. 16, Recreation and
Parks and Similar Public Places to
Township Code
2014-42 11-10-2014 Amends Borough Code § 19-22, no
parking zones; 19-23, nonmetered
on-street parking zones; metered
on-street parking zones, 19-24,
add 19-37 Princeton High School/
Westminster College
Neighborhood Permit Parking
District
§ TDL-1 PRINCETON CODE § TDL-1
BAO:1720
Ord. No. Adoption Description Supp. No.
2014-43 11-24-2014 Deletes Chapter 10B, Art. XI,
Subdivision XXI
(10B-272.61-10B-272.64)
Residential Senior Community-1
Overlay Zone (RSC-1) District;
renumber: subdivision XXII RSC-2
District, subdivision XXIII,
Environmental Education, Land
Preservation and Educational
Uses; Subdivision XXIV, G-1
Overlay Zone, amend Zoning Map
2014-44 12-8-2014 Delete 2-102, Historic
Preservation; amends 10B-2,
definitions; deletes
10B-41.1-10B-41.4; 10B-230
(a)(11); 10B-240-1-10B-240.3,
10B-272.4, 10B-272.5 of the
Township Code; deletes
17A-27.1-17A-27.4,
17A-118.6-17A-118.8;
17A-162(a)(11); 17A-174.1,
17A-177.1-17A-178.1, 17A-193A;
amends 17A-201 add to Chapter
10B of Township Code Article IA,
definitions; amends 10B-36; adds
Article XIII, Historic Preservation
2014-45 12-15-2014 Amends Borough Ch. 22, adds
hours of operation for restaurants
and eating and drinking
establishments, retail food
establishments, retail sales and
personal services businesses
2015-1 2-10-2015 Amend 11-23.2, Stopping or
standing prohibited-Township
Code
2015-2 2-10-2015 Acceptance of deed of
conservation easement, Special
2015-3 3-9-2015 Amends 19-22 no parking zones-
Borough Code; 19-23, nonmetered
on-street parking-Borough Code
2015-4 3-23-2015 Appropriation, Special
2015-5 3-23-2015 Amends 2-130, police extra duty
pay-Township Code
2015-6 4-27-2015 COLA, Special
§ TDL-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § TDL-1
BAO:1721
Ord. No. Adoption Description Supp. No.
2015-7 4-27-2015 Capital, Special
2015-8 4-27-2015 Parking Utility
2015-9 4-27-2015 Sewer trust, Special
2015-10 4-27-2015 Bond, Special
2015-11 4-27-2015 Bond, Special
2015-12 4-27-2015 Repeals 17A-205.4(a)(b) of
Borough Code; amends
10B-340.3(a)(1), 10B-340.4(a)(1)-
of Township Code-affordable
housing development fees
2015-13 4-27-2015 Salary, Special
2015-14 4-27-2015 Purchase property-9 Hilltop
Ordinance, Special
2015-15 4-27-2015 Bond-Sidewalk Ordinance, Special
2015-16 5-11-2015 Mutual Aid Agreement, Special
2015-17 6-8-2015 Amends 19-14, Speed limits
2015-18 6-8-2015 Amends 19-22, no parking zone
2015-19 6-8-2015 Amends 34-30, Princeton Borough
Code and 18-22, Princeton
Township Code-sewer service
charge
2015-20 6-22-2015 Merges Articles I-III, V, VI and VII
and Article V, Divisions 1-13 of
Princeton Borough and Township
Land Use Codes-delete Articles I,
II, III, V, VI, VII and Division 1-13
of Ch. 17A of Borough Code;
deletes sections 2-99, 2-100,
2-102, 2-128 and Ch. 10B-Articles
I, IA, II, III, V, VI, VII and Article IV,
Divisions 1-13 of the Township
Code-Add Articles I-VII to Ch. 10B,
Princeton Township Code which
will apply to all lands in Princeton.
2015-21 7-13-2015 Amends Borough Code, Ch. 19,
Traffic, 19-5, Mid-block crosswalks
2015-22 7-27-2015 Bond, Special
§ TDL-1 PRINCETON CODE § TDL-1
BAO:1722
Ord. No. Adoption Description Supp. No.
2015-23 8-10-2015 Repeals, 14-1, 14-1.1, 14-6, 14-7,
14-7.1, fire alarms from Borough
Code; Repeals Ch. 2A, Alarm
Systems from Township Code, add
Ch. 2A Alarm Systems Regulations
to Township Code
2015-24 8-10-2015 Repeals Ch. 4 of Borough Code
and Chapter 3 of Township Code,
repeals 13-5 of Township Code,
alcoholic beverage consumption
adds Ch. 3, Alcoholic Beverages
2015-25 8-10-2015 Repeals Ch. 26 of Borough Code
and Ch. 15 of Township Code,
Police Department add Ch. 15,
Police Department to Township
Code
2015-26 8-10-2015 Repeal Ch. 31 of Princeton
Borough and Ch. 21 of Princeton
Township Code, Taxicabs and
Other Vehicles for Hire, add Ch. 31
to Princeton Borough Code,
Taxicabs and other Vehicles for
Hire
2015-27 8-10-2015 Accept donation of property,
Special
2015-28 8-24-2015 Salary, Special
2015-29 8-24-2015 Amends Princeton Township Code
Ch. 11, Traffic; 11-23.1, parking
prohibited anytime
2015-30 8-24-2015 Amends Princeton Borough Code
Ch. 19, Traffic; 19-12, bus stops
2015-31 9-15-2015 Authorizes acceptance of property,
Special
2015-32 9-15-2015 Amends Princeton Township Code
Ch. 11, Traffic; 11-12 parking
prohibited anytime
2015-33 9-28-2015 Amends Princeton Township Code
Ch. 10B, Land Use; 10B-11, Zoning
Board of Adjustment-increase
number of alternates
2015-34 10-12-2015 Easements, Special
2015-35 12-7-2015 Bond, Special
§ TDL-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § TDL-1
BAO:1723
Ord. No. Adoption Description Supp. No.
2015-36 12-7-2015 Amends Princeton Borough code
Ch. 17A, Land Use; 17A-368,
accessory signs-permitted in
business districts
2015-37 12-7-2015 Amends Princeton Township Code,
Ch. 2, Administration; 2-128, Land
Use Application and Escrow fees;
10B-32(a), application fees;
educational fees; escrow deposits
and inspection fees
2015-38 12-7-2015 Amends Princeton Borough Code,
Ch. 17A, Land Use; deletes
17A-403, reconstruction
2015-39 12-7-2015 Amends Princeton Township Code
Ch. 10B, Land Use; 10B-247,
minimum lot dimensions and
Schedule of Regulations
2015-40 12-7-2015 Acceptance of right-of-way, Special
2015-41 12-7-2015 Amends Princeton Borough Code
Ch. 2, Administration; repeals
2-92, amusement license fees;
repeals Ch. 5, Amusements;
amends Princeton Township Code
Ch. 2, Administration; 2-119,
amusement license fees; amends
Ch. 4, Amusements; repeals
Articles I and II; amends Article III
and renumbers it as Article I,
Legalized Games of Chance
2015-42 12-7-2015 Amends Princeton Borough Code
Ch. 19, Traffic; 19-12, bus stops
2015-43 12-21-2015 Amends Princeton Borough Code
Ch. 34, Water and Sewers; Article
VI (Sections 34-42-34-45), sewer
connection fees
§ TDL-1 PRINCETON CODE § TDL-1
BAO:1724
Ord. No. Adoption Description Supp. No.
2015-44 12-21-2015 Amends Princeton Borough Code;
repeals Ch. 2, Administration,
2-93, animal dog license fees;
repeals Ch. 6, Animals and Fowl;
adopts new Princeton Borough
Code Ch. 6, Animal Control;
Princeton Township Code; amends
Ch. 2, Administration 2-120,
animal dog license fees; repeals
Ch. 6, Dogs; amends Ch. 13,
Offenses-Miscellaneous; repeals
13-2, 13-3, 13-4, feeding of deer
2015-45 12-21-2015 Amends Princeton Borough Code
Ch. 2, Administration; repeals
2-78, Cable Television Committee;
repeals Ch. 7, Auctioneers;
amends Princeton Township Code
Ch. 2, Administration; repeals
2-105, Cable Television
Committee; repeals Ch. 5AAA,
Joint Cable Television Committee
2015-46 12-21-2015 Amends Princeton Borough Code
Ch. 16, Housing Articles I, II and
III in entirety
2015-47 12-21-2015 Amends Princeton Borough Code
Ch. 14, Fire; Article II, Fire
Prevention Code
2015-48 12-21-2015 Amends Princeton Borough Code
Ch. 17A, Land Use; 17A-201,
definitions; amends Princeton
Township Code Ch. 10B, Land Use;
10B-241, definitions
2016-01 1-25-2016 Salary, Special
2016-02 2-8-2016 Bond, Special
2016-03 2-8-2016 Amends Princeton Township Code,
Ch. 11, Motor Vehicles and Traffic;
11-12, parking prohibited at any
time
2016-04 2-8-2016 Amends Princeton Borough Code,
Ch. 19, Motor Vehicles and Traffic;
19-22, no parking zones
§ TDL-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § TDL-1
BAO:1725
Ord. No. Adoption Description Supp. No.
2016-05 2-29-2016 Amends Princeton Township Code,
Ch. 2, Administration; creates
Article XXIV, Paperless Payroll,
2-140, Direct Deposit for Employee
Net Pay Required
2016-06 2-29-2016 Amends Princeton Borough Code,
Ch. 2, Administration; creates
2-90A, Youth Advisory Committee
2016-07 2-29-2016 Amends Princeton Borough Code,
Ch. 19, Motor Vehicles and Traffic;
19-22, no parking zones; 19-24,
metered on-street parking zones
2016-08 2-29-2016 Acquisition of easement, Special
2016-09 2-29-2016 Amends Princeton Borough Code,
Ch. 26, Police Department;
26-2(d), Public Safety Committee
2016-10 3-28-2016 Bond, Special
2016-11 3-28-2016 Amends Princeton Township Code,
Ch. 10B, Land Use; 10B-242,
Zoning Map amendment
2016-12 3-28-2016 Amends Princeton Borough Code,
Ch. 10A, Construction Site
Maintenance
2016-13 3-28-2016 Amends Princeton Township Code,
repeals Ch. 5A.1, Construction
Code Enforcement; Amends
Princeton Borough Code, repeals
Ch. 10, Construction Code
Enforcement; Amends Princeton
Township Code, establishes Ch.
5A.1, Construction Code
Enforcement and Princeton
Borough Code, Ch. 10
Construction Code Enforcement;
Amends Princeton Township Code,
Ch. 2, Administration, repeals
2-101 Construction Board of
Appeals; Amends Princeton
Borough Code, Ch. 2,
Administration, repeals 2-74,
Construction Board of Appeals
§ TDL-1 PRINCETON CODE § TDL-1
BAO:1726
Ord. No. Adoption Description Supp. No.
2016-14 3-28-2016 Amends Princeton Borough Code,
Ch. 2, Administration; 2-80,
Bicycle Advisory Committee; 2-88,
Complete Streets Committee;
creates 2-90B, Public Transit
Advisory Committee; amends
Princeton Township Code; repeals
2-107, Pedestrian and Bicycle
Advisory Committee; 2-115, Traffic
and Transportation Committee
2016-15 3-28-2016 Amends Princeton Borough Code,
Ch. 31, Article III, Valet Parking;
amends Ch. 19, Motor Vehicles
and Traffic; creates Article XII,
Valet Zones
2016-16 4-11-2016 Amends Princeton Township Code,
Ch. 10B, Land Use; 10B-2,
definitions; 10B-242, Zoning Map
2016-17 4-11-2016 Amends Princeton Township Code,
Ch. 11, Motor Vehicles and Traffic;
11-11.1, handicapped parking
zones
2016-18 4-11-2016 Amends Princeton Borough Code;
Ch. 19, Motor Vehicles and Traffic;
19-24, metered on-street parking
zones
2016-19 4-25-2016 CAP, Special
2016-20 4-25-2016 Bond, Special
2016-21 4-25-2016 Bond, Special
2016-22 4-25-2016 Bond, Special
2016-23 4-25-2016 Appropriation, Special
2016-24 5-9-2016 Bond, Special
2016-25 5-23-2016 Amends Princeton Township Code,
Ch. 10B, Land Use; 10B-242,
amends Zoning Map
2016-26 5-23-2016 Amends Princeton Township Code,
Ch. 2, Administration; 2-128, Land
Use Application and Escrow Fees;
Ch. 10B Land Use; 10B-32,
application fees; educational
training fees; escrow deposits and
inspection fees
§ TDL-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § TDL-1
BAO:1727
Ord. No. Adoption Description Supp. No.
2016-27 — Not adopted
2016-28 5-23-2016 Bond, Special
2016-29 6-27-2016 Easement, Special
2016-30 6-27-2016 Salary, Special
2016-31 6-27-2016 Amends Princeton Borough Code,
Ch. 34, Water and Sewer; 34-30,
sewer rates; amends Princeton
Township Code, Ch. 18, Sewers
and Sewage Disposal; 18-22,
sewer service rates
2016-32 6-27-2016 Amends Princeton Township Code,
Ch. 22, Trees and Shrubs; 22-6,
approval required for certain
actions concerning trees and
shrubs on public streets, highways
and right-of-ways and property
under municipality's jurisdiction
2016-33 7-11-2016 Amends Princeton Township Code,
repeals Ch. 9A, Flood Damage
Prevention; amends Princeton
Borough Code, Ch. 14A, Flood
Damage Prevention
2016-34 9-12-2016 Amends Princeton Township Code
Ch. 22, 22-1-22-20 Trees and
Shrubs in entirety; amends
Princeton Borough Code Ch. 10A
Construction Site Maintenance,
adds 10A-7A Tree Protection and
Tree Maintenance
2016-35 9-12-2016 Amends Princeton Township Code
Ch. 5AA, 5AA-1 — 5AA-22 and
Princeton Borough Code Ch. 9A
Cable Television in entirety
2016-36 9-26-2016 Bond, Special
2016-37 9-26-2016 Easements, Special
2016-38 10-24-2016 Amends Princeton Borough Code
Ch. 2, Administration; adds 2-90C
Civil Rights Commission
2016-39 — Not adopted
§ TDL-1 PRINCETON CODE § TDL-1
BAO:1728
Ord. No. Adoption Description Supp. No.
2016-40 10-24-2016 Amends Princeton Township Code
Ch. 22, Trees and Shrubs; adds
22-12g. Emerald Ash Borer
infested tree removal
2016-41 — Defeated
2016-42 12-19-2016 Amends Princeton Township Code
Ch. 10B Land Use; 10B-241
amends Definition of Floor Area;
10B-246 Schedule of Regulations
and add footnote (t); adds
10B-252.1 Mean Prevailing Front
Setback; adds 10B-255.1
Residential design regulation; adds
17A-377.1 Residential Design
Regulation; amends Princeton
Borough Code Ch. 17A Land Use;
17A-201 amends Definition of
Floor Area; amends 17A-376.1
Mean Prevailing Front Setback;
17A-377 Projections into yards,
fences walls; paved area, deletes
subsection (d) adds 17A-377.1
Residential Design Regulation
2017-01 2-13-2017 Amends Princeton Township Code
Ch. 2, 2-116 Animal Control
Advisory Committee
2017-02 2-13-2017 Amends Princeton Borough Code
Ch. 2, Administration; repeals 2-86
General Board for Making
Assessments for Local
Improvements; amends Princeton
Township Code Ch. 2
Administration; repeals 2-113,
General Board for Making
Assessments for Local
Improvements
2017-3 2-13-2017 Amends Princeton Borough Code
Ch. 19 Motor Vehicles and Traffic;
19-22 No Parking Zones, 19-23
Nonmetered On-Street Parking
Zones
2017-4 2-13-2017 Amends Princeton Township Code
Ch. 11 Motor Vehicles and Traffic;
11-12 No Parking Any Time
§ TDL-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § TDL-1
BAO:1729
Ord. No. Adoption Description Supp. No.
2017-5 2-13-2017 Amends Princeton Borough Code
Ch. 19 Motor Vehicles and Traffic;
19-22 No Parking Zones; 19-23
Nonmetered On-Street Parking
Zones; 19-24 Metered On-Street
Parking Zone
2017-6 2-13-2017 Amends Princeton Township Code
Ch. 11 Motor Vehicles and Traffic;
11-11 Parking Prohibited 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00 p.m., 11-12 No Parking
Anytime
2017-7 2-13-2017 Amends Princeton Borough Code
Repeals and Replaces Ch. 15
Garbage and Refuse; Amends
Princeton Township Code; Repeals
Ch. 17 Refuse, Garbage and
Obnoxious Growths
2017-8 2-27-2017 Amends Princeton Township Code
Ch. 10B Land Use; 10B-241
Definition of Accessory Use and
Home Occupation, 10B-255
Permitted Uses in R-A through R-H
Districts, 10B-320 Table of
Conditional Uses Allowed by
Approval of Planning Board,
deletes home occupations from
Table; amends Princeton Borough
Code Ch. 17A; 17A-201 Definition
of Home Occupation, 17A-228(c)
Uses Permitted as a Right,
Accessory Uses
2017-9 3-27-2017 CAP Bank, Special
2017-10 — Not Adopted
2017-11 3-27-2017 Amends Princeton Borough Code
Ch. 22 Offenses and
Miscellaneous; 22-15 deletes
Sunset Provision and Task Force
Established the rest of Ordinance
2014-45 codified as Section 22-15
remains in effect
§ TDL-1 PRINCETON CODE § TDL-1
BAO:1730
Ord. No. Adoption Description Supp. No.
2017-12 3-27-2017 Amends Princeton Borough Code
Ch. 19 Motor Vehicles and Traffic;
19-37 Princeton High School/
Westminster Choir College
Neighborhood Permit Parking
District; amends Princeton
Township Code Ch. 11 Vehicles
and Traffic; repeals Article II,
Division 3B, 11-19.9 — 11-19.9.6
Princeton High School/
Westminster Choir College
Neighborhood Permit Parking
District
2017-13 — Not Adopted
2017-14 4-3-2017 Amends Princeton Township Code
Ch. 2 Administration; 2-118 Alarm
System Registration Fees
2017-15 4-24-2017 Easement, Special
2017-16 4-24-2017 Acceptance of Dedication of Open
Space, Special
2017-17 4-24-2017 Amends Princeton Borough Code,
Reserves Ch. 25 Littering, repeals
25-39-25-45, Littering; amends Ch.
28 Streets and Sidewalks; repeals
28-4-28-7.1 all pertaining to Litter
Control; amends Princeton
Township Code; amends title of
Ch. 14 Peddling, Soliciting and
Related Activities to add Anti-
Litter Regulation; Article III
Littering Commercial Property
14-14-14-17; deletes Article IV
Littering 14-18-14-24; deletes
Article V Littering Recycling Shed
14-25-14-26; Adds Article II Anti-
Littering Regulation 14-14 —
14-26
2017-18 Not adopted
2017-19 5-22-2017 Amends Princeton Borough Code,
Ch. 34 Water and Sewers; Article
VI Sewer Connection Fees
34-42-34-45
§ TDL-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § TDL-1
BAO:1731
Ord. No. Adoption Description Supp. No.
2017-20 5-22-2017 Amends Princeton Borough Code,
Ch. 19 Motor Vehicles and Traffic;
Article XI Parking, adds 19-37B
Griggs Corner Parking Yard; 19-25
Metered Parking Yards; 19-30
Handicapped Parking
2017-21 5-22-2017 Amends Princeton Borough Code,
Ch. 19 Motor Vehicles and Traffic;
19-32 Parking Fees; adds 19-37A
Public Parking Spaces for
Charging of Electric Vehicles
2017-22 5-22-2017 Amends Princeton Township Code,
Ch. 11 Motor Vehicles and Traffic;
11-2 Speed Limits
2017-23 5-22-2017 Amends Princeton Township Code,
Ch. 11 Motor Vehicles and Traffic;
11-2 Speed Limits
2017-24 6-26-2017 Amends Princeton Borough Code,
Ch. 19 Motor Vehicles and Traffic;
19-24 Metered On-street Parking
Zones; 19-32 Parking Fees
2017-25 5-22-2017 Amends Princeton Township Code,
Ch. 11 Motor Vehicles and Traffic;
11-12 At any time
2017-26 6-12-2017 Cancels special assessment from
Ordinance No. 2013-23, Special
2017-27 6-12-2017 Cancels special assessment from
Ordinance Nos. 2014-40 and
2014-28
2017-28 6-12-2017 Amends Princeton Borough Code,
Ch. 2 Administration; 2-88
Complete Streets Committee
2017-29 6-12-2017 Amends Princeton Borough Code,
Ch. 19 Motor Vehicles and Traffic;
19-12 Bus Stops Designated
§ TDL-1 PRINCETON CODE § TDL-1
BAO:1732
Ord. No. Adoption Description Supp. No.
2017-30 6-12-2017 Amends Princeton Township Code,
Ch. 10B Land Use; repeals
10B-227-10B-227.20 Stormwater
Management; amends Princeton
Borough Code Ch. 17A Land Use;
repeals 17A-193.1-17A-193.1J;
adds new 10B-227-10B-227.21
Stormwater Management; amends
10B-246.1 Maximum Permitted
Residential Lot Coverages; amends
10B-241 Definitions
2017-31 6-12-2017 Appropriation, Special
2017-32 6-12-2017 Bond, Special
2017-33 6-12-2017 Bond, Special
2017-34 Not adopted
2017-35 6-12-2017 Conservation Easement, Special
2017-36 6-12-2017 Acceptance of Property, Special
2017-37 6-26-2017 Bond, Special
2017-38 7-10-2017 Bond, Special
2017-39 6-26-2017 Pocket Park Easement, Special
2017-40 6-26-2017 Amends Princeton Township Code,
Ch. 11 Motor Vehicles and Traffic;
11-61.1 Handicapped Parking
Zones
2017-41 6-26-2017 Amends Princeton Township Code,
Ch. 11 Motor Vehicles and Traffic;
11-6(a) Trucks Over 5 Tons and
11-6(b) 4 Tons excluded on Certain
Streets
2017-42 6-26-2017 Amends Princeton Borough Code,
Ch. 19 Motor Vehicles and Traffic;
19-22 No Parking Zones; amends
Princeton Township Code, Ch. 11
Motor Vehicles and Traffic;
rescinds 11-19.3 in its entirety
2017-43 6-26-2017 Amends Princeton Township Code,
Ch. 11 Motor Vehicles and Traffic;
11-11 Same-8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.;
11-12 At any time
§ TDL-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § TDL-1
BAO:1733
Ord. No. Adoption Description Supp. No.
2017-44 6-26-2017 Amends Princeton Borough Code,
Ch. 34 Water and Sewers; 34-30
rates; amends Princeton Township
Code, Ch. 18 Sewers and Sewage
Disposal; 18-22 Sewer Service
Rates
2017-45 6-26-2017 Amends Princeton Township Code,
Ch. 10B Land Use; 10B-271
Permitted Uses; 10B-282 Off-street
parking required; schedule
2017-46 8-21-2017 Amends Princeton Township Code
Ch. 10B Land Use; Division 9
Residential Clusters
10B-189-10B-197
2017-48 7-10-2017 Authorizes a Contribution from the
Affordable Housing Trust Fund to
Community Options Inc.
2017-49 7-10-2017 Salaries, Special
2017-50 8-21-2017 Amends Princeton Borough Code
Ch. 19 Traffic; 19-17 No Stopping
or Standing
2017-47 7-10-2017 Acquisition of Parking Lot, Special
2017-51 10-23-2017 Amends Princeton Township Code,
Ch. 10B Land Use; Zoning,
10B-320 Conditional Uses Table;
amends Princeton Borough Code,
Ch. 17A Land Use; 17A-229
Conditional Uses in R-1 District
2017-52 10-23-2017 Amends Princeton Township Code,
Ch. 10B Land Use; Zoning,
10B-241 Definitions, Floor Area;
amends Princeton Borough Code,
Ch. 17A Land Use; 17A-201
Definitions, Floor Area
2017-53 10-23-2017 Amends Princeton Township Code,
Ch. 10B Land Use; 10B-32
Application Fees; Educational
Training Fees; Escrow Deposits
and Inspection Fees
2017-54 10-23-2017 Easements for Traffic Signal,
Special
§ TDL-1 PRINCETON CODE § TDL-1
BAO:1734
Ord. No. Adoption Description Supp. No.
2017-55 11-13-2017 Amends Princeton Borough Code,
Ch. 2 Administration; adds Article
II; Division 8 Department of
Emergency and Safety Services,
2-8.1 — 2-8.3; amends Princeton
Borough Code, Ch. 14 Fire;
repeals 14-38.2 Director of
Emergency and Safety Services;
Duties and Responsibilities
2017-56 Not adopted
2017-57 11-13-2017 Conveyance of Property, Special
2017-58 11-13-2017 Amends Princeton Township Code,
Ch. 11 Motor Vehicles and Traffic;
11-11.1 Handicapped Parking
Zones; amends Princeton Borough
Code, Ch. 19 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic; 19-23 Nonmetered On-
Street Parking Zones
2017-59 12-18-2017 Amends Ch. 2 Administration;
repeals 2-20 Adoption of
Subdivision B, Article I, Title 26 of
Revised Statutes of New Jersey
(pertains to Board of Health),
repeals Ch. 24 Boarding Homes for
Children; Ch. 25 Food
Establishments; Ch. 26 Plumbing;
Ch. 28 Sewers and Sewage
Disposal; Ch. 29 Solid Waste; Ch.
30 Swimming Pools of the
Princeton Township Code; repeals
Ch. 9 Board of Health; Ch. 30
Swimming Pools of the Princeton
Borough Code
2017-60 12-18-2017 Repeals and replaces Ch. 11A
Towing and Storage 11A-1 —
11A-28 of the Princeton Township
Code
2017-61 12-18-2017 Repeals Ch. 18 Sewers and
Sewage Disposal, Articles I — VII,
18-1 — 18-52 of the Princeton
Borough Code; repeals and
replaces Ch. 34, Water and
Sewers, Articles I — VI; 34-1 —
34-55 of the Princeton Borough
Code
§ TDL-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § TDL-1
BAO:1735
Ord. No. Adoption Description Supp. No.
2017-62 12-18-2017 Repeals Ch. 5A, 5A-1 — 5A-5, Civil
Disturbances-Emergency
Regulations of the Princeton
Township Code
2017-63 12-18-2017 Repeals 14-14 — 14-57, 14-59 —
14-63 pertaining to Fire
Department of the Princeton
Borough Code; amends Ch. 8,
Princeton Fire Department of the
Princeton Township, Code Article I
Organization, 8-1 — 8-3; Article II
Membership, Membership
Approvals; 8-4 — 8-8; Article III
Line Officers, 8-9 — 8-11; Article
IV Discipline of Officers and
Members, 8-12 — 8-14; Article V
Appointment of Fire Chiefs; Duties
8-15 — 8-22; Article VI Fire Chief
Appointments to Fill Vacancies for
Reasons Other than Expiration of a
Term, 8-23 — 8-25; Article VII
Junior Firefighters, 8-26 — 8-28;
Article VIII Drivers, 8-29 — 8-30;
Article IX Fire Department
Apparatus, Vehicles and Property,
8-31 — 8-32; Article X Fire Police,
8-33 — 8-36; Article XI
Interference with Fire Department
Activities 8-37 — 8-45
2018-1 2-12-2018 Amends Citizen Finance
Committee, Township - Section
2-111, Borough - Section 2-84
2018-2 2-12-2018 Street Vacation, Special
2018-3 3-12-2018 Amends Traffic, 4 Ton Weight
Limit, Township Section 11-6
2018-4 3-12-2018 Bond, Special
2018-5 3-12-2018 Property Transfer, Special
2018-6 3-26-2018 CAP Bank, Special
2018-7 4-9-2018 Bond, Special
2018-8 4-9-2018 Bond, Special
2018-9 4-9-2018 Bond, Special
2018-10 4-9-2018 Bond, Special
§ TDL-1 PRINCETON CODE § TDL-1
BAO:1736
Ord. No. Adoption Description Supp. No.
2018-11 5-21-2018 Amends Zoning Township - amends
10B-2 Definitions, replaces
10B-109.1 through 10B-109.4
Replaces Articles VIII through XB,
10B-127 through 10B-240.13
Borough-repeals 17A-118.1
through 17A-118.5 (Article IV. Div
14), 17A-131 through 17A-199
(Articles VIII through X)
2018-12 5-21-2018 Streets and Sidewalks, Township -
repeals Township 2-126 street
opening fees, replaces Township
Ch 19 with Streets, Sidewalks,
Bike Lanes and Shared User Paths,
retains Schs A and B; Borough -
repeals Ch 28 Streets and
Sidewalks, repeals 2-97, fees for
occupation of right-of-way, amends
2-99, Street and Sidewalk Opening
and Occupation Fees
2018-13 7-9-2018 Acquisition of Property, Special
2018-14 7-23-2018 Solar panels in residential
districts, Township - 10B-255
Permitted uses; Borough - 17A-228
Uses permitted as of right
2018-15 8-13-2018 Bond, Special
2018-16 8-13-2018 Amends Speed Limits, Township
11-2
2018-17 8-27-2018 Wedding fees, Borough 2-91
2018-18 8-27-2018 Salaries, Special
2018-19 9-11-2018 Property conveyance, Special
2018-20 9-24-2018 Comcast Franchise Agreement,
adds Comcast letter, 5AA-14(e),
Exhibit A
2018-21 10-22-2018 Easement, Special
2018-22 10-22-2018 Easement, Special
2018-23 10-22-2018 Amends Traffic - loading zones,
parking, parking rates, Township -
11-19.2, 11-19.2.1 Borough -
19-10, 19-20, 19-21, 19-24, 19-25,
19-32
§ TDL-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § TDL-1
BAO:1737
Ord. No. Adoption Description Supp. No.
2018-24 11-19-2018 Amends Zoning Township -
10B-255.2 Neighborhood
Residential Zoning Standards,
10B-241 Definitions, 10B-246
Schedule of Regulations, 10B-251
Buildings height-setback ratio,
10B-255.1 Residential front
porches.
Borough - 17A-201 definitions,
Deletes coverage limitations
applicable to one-family and twofamily
dwellings - 17A-232(a),
17A-240(a), 17A-265, 17A-266,
Amends height limit - 17A-246,
Amends heights limit and coverage
at 17A-258, Amends 17A-373(a)(1)
Exceptions to lot size requirements
— Existing small lots, Amends
17A-376 Side and rear yards,
Amends 17A-377 Projections into
yards; fences or walls; paved
areas, Amends 17A-377.1
Residential design regulation,
Amends 17A-402 (Noncomplying
building) enlargement, Adds
17A-403 Neighborhood Residential
Zoning Standards.
2018-25 12-17-2018 Salaries, Special
2019-1 — Not adopted
2019-2 — Not adopted
2019-3 2-11-2019 Amends Public Transit Advisory
and Corner House Board, alternate
members, Borough - 2-90B, 27A-1
2019-4 2-11-2019 Amends Civil Rights Commission,
Borough - 2-90C
2019-5 2-25-2019 Abolishes Complete Streets
Committee, amends Bicycle
Advisory membership, Borough -
2-80
2019-6 2-25-2019 Amends permitted FAR for
Laboratory research in OR-2 zone,
Township - 10B-241
§ TDL-1 PRINCETON CODE § TDL-1
BAO:1738
Ord. No. Adoption Description Supp. No.
2019-7 2-25-2019 Amends Traffic - metered parking
and parking rates, Borough -
19-20, 19-21, 19-32
2019-8 3-25-2019 Right-of-Way permits, Township -
adds Article X, Section 19-10
2019-9 4-8-2019 CAP Bank, Special
2019-10 4-8-2019 Amends Affordable Housing,
Township - 10B-242 Zoning map,
10B-244 Zoning districts, 10B-246
Regulations included: Schedule,
10B-256.2 Affordable Housing 3
Residential Zone
2019-11 3-25-2019 Bond, Special
2019-12 3-25-2019 Street vacation, Special
2019-13 3-25-2019 Amends Uniform Fire Code,
Borough - replaces Ch 14, 14-1
through 14-25
2019-14 4-8-2019 Amends sidewalk cafes, Township -
3-25 Alcoholic beverage
consumption and possession in
public places
Borough - replaces Ch 29 Sidewalk
Cafes, 29-1 through 29-10
2019-15 — Not adopted
2019-16 4-22-2019 Property donation, Special
2019-17 5-6-2019 Bond, Special
2019-18 5-6-2019 Bond, Special
2019-19 5-6-2019 Appropriation, Special
2019-20 5-6-2019 Bond, Special
2019-21 5-6-2019 Bond, Special
2019-22 5-28-2019 Bond, Special
2019-23 5-28-2019 Amends Traffic - Loading zones,
Parking and Parking rates,
Borough - 19-10, 19-24, 19-32,
19-37A
2019-24 5-28-2019 Easement, Special
2019-25 6-10-2019 License Agreement, Special
2019-26 7-8-2019 Unisex Single Occupancy
Restrooms, Borough - 11-9
§ TDL-1 BOROUGH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § TDL-1
BAO:1739
Ord. No. Adoption Description Supp. No.
2019-27 6-10-2019 Amends sewer connection fees,
Borough - 34-42 through 34-45
2019-28 — Not adopted
2019-29 6-10-2019 Amends Traffic - Borough - amends
19-24 metered on-street parking,
19-32, parking fees, adds Article
XIII 19-39, Omnibus Parking (tour
buses)
2019-30 8-5-2019 Agreement DWM Holdings,
Special
2019-31 8-26-2019 Agreement, Special
2019-32 7-22-2019 Amends Police Department,
Borough - 26-1 Establishment of
Police Department, 26-3
Appointment; Promotion;
Qualifications Generally
2019-33 8-26-2019 Establishes Government Energy
Aggregation Program, Special
2019-34 8-26-2019 Agreement, Special
2019-35 9-9-2019 Salaries, Special
2019-36 10-28-2019 Amends Traffic - parking at the
Princeton Station Metered parking
yard, Borough - 19-25, 19-32
2019-37 10-28-2019 Amends Noise, Borough - 21-2
2019-38 11-12-2019 Easement, Special
§ TDL-1 PRINCETON CODE § TDL-1
BAO:1740